EPISTLES PHILOSOPHICAL AND MORAL.


LONDON: Printed for T. WILCOX, opposite the New-Church, in the Strand,
M.DCCLIX.

To The First Minister of STATE, for the Time being.
HAIL mighty Pam! if song without offense
Thus hail the first court card in eminence,
Thou in whom kings find often the sovereign sway;
For kings at loo the leading knave obey:
Or if, content to play an humbler game,
Plain Jack we style thee, more familiar name,
Thou, whose sly blows the lower party feels,
While bent the high to catch thy tripping heels;
Great in thyself, whatever thou art called,
Nations by thee enfranchised or inthrall'd,
Holla'd to day to Palace-yard along,
Flattered at once in metzotint and song;
Or piqu'd, perhaps, while chimes the present line,
Ere yet turned out, as usual, to resign;
Branded by the honest satire of the times
With all a minister's mysterious crimes!
To thee I pay my court, till in disgrace,
And then as humbly to the next in place.
For know, what private worth soever thy boast,
I not address thy person, but thy post;
Is there a time when statesmen, good or great,
Look down with pity on the toils of state;
Superior to the boast of boasted things,
The pomp of titles, and the smile of kings:
When, in the private hour of social ease,
Ambition sleeps, and truth itself may please?
At such an hour, when even politeness deigns
To taste the rudeness of familiar strains,
Presuming thou, in honor to the muse,
Indulgent once her labors may peruse,
To thee those honest labors she commends:
At court while honest doubtless finding friends.
But, through thy levee if forbid to press,
In freedom's plain and anti-courtier's dress,
Light of her rhimes as of petitions made,
Should they be lost, forgotten or mislaid,
If not so vain to think thou should commend,
In either case permit me to defend.
Too well I know imputed as a crime
The gift of reason to the man of rhyme;
To childish Fiction gingling numbers tied,
As bells that dangle by its infant side;
To useless whims poetic worth confined,
To strike the sense but not improve the mind.
Should on the daring verse, then, censure fall,
From priest or prelate, wakened in the stall;
Or should the learned jurors take in hand
To burn the books they may not understand;
Scorned the loud torrent of the mob's abuse,
With thee I leave my error and excuse.
Know then, my patron, once upon a time,
While yet a boy, I caught the itch of rhyme:
But, born with hatred to the sing-song train,
Whose numbers charm, like empty notes, in vain,
While strange to themes to employ the muse about,
The peccant humor broke but little out;
Till late, in waking dreams that trouble youth,
On one side prudence urged, on the other truth:
Prudence, a worldly-minded dame, and sly,
Who fixed on earth still kept her cautious eye;
While truth, whose open breast did mine inflame,
Looked up to Heaven; to heaven, from whence she came.
When now my eager heart her power confessed,
And thus her willing captive truth addressed.
"Art thou, my friend, that enterprizing youth
"Who make pretensions to the song of truth;
"By reason taught to leave, in early life,
"The wanton mistress, for the faithful wife?
"Among the sciences thy subject choose.
"Philosophy's the sister of the muse.
Prudence, who heard, made various hems and haws;
And, after due, deliberating pause,
Shaking her head, "beware rash youth," she cried,
"Let prudence here your early footsteps guide.
"Art thou so ignorant as not to know
"Truth leads us often to poverty and woe?
"Let me advise -- would thou succeed in rhyme?
"Mark, at the proper season, well thy time;
"Taking this maxim as a general rule,
"The knave is honest till he plays the fool:
"For times there are of such malignant face,
"That sharpers only rise to power and place;
"Times, when the mere huzza for public good
"Breaks down all ranks of honor and of blood;
"When sacred characters like bawds are used,
"And princes with impunity abused:
"The throne of majesty a vulgar thing;
"While George, the cobbler, damns great GEORGE, the king.
"In times like these, behold on every side
"What pains we take offensive truth to hide:
"Ashamed to show her bashful face at court,
"See her simplicity the mob's rude sport;
"Her lovers stigmatized by general hate,
"As bold disturbers of the church and state.
"Would thou to this abandoned tribe belong?
"What bard ever heeded yet the TRUTH of song!
"Again, it is certain there may come a time,
"When impudence finds no excuse in rhyme;
"When even prudence may herself be just;
"Her interest more to keep than break her trust;
"When crowns are honored, and, in proper season,
" Sh-bb-re, dread patriot, may be hanged for treason:
"A time, perhaps (years work the strangest things)
"When the brave Scots may love their best of kings;
"When slighted science may approach the throne;
"And Britons make true policy their own.
"What though their patriot hearts are known to fail,
"When dearth of barley threatens want of ale
"What though religion, armed by common-sense,
"Breaks but its weapons in its own defense;
"Even yet may piety be kept alive,
"And half expiring patriotism revive.
"At such a season, should the muse inspire,
"If touched with caution, may thou strike the lyre,
"Perhaps uncensur'd; but to look for praise!
"Know these, young bard, are no poetic days.
"But should the age, as probably it may,
"Turn its loose politics another way;
"While, in religious mood, far pushed the schemes
"Of true born Britons, always in extremes,
"The times may yet return when frantic zeal
"Shall give its wooden sword an edge of steel;
"When convocations shall in judgment sit,
"To canvass the infidelity of wit;
"On wicked KNOWLEDGE Britain's guilt to lay,
"And drive the destined victim far away.
"O, thus if ignorance should rule, in turn,
"Bards lose their ears, and martyr theists burn;
"Ready reforming constables, at hand,
"Of scientifick vice to cleanse the land;
"Have thou with truth nor morals aught to do.
"Things are not always fit that may be true."
Here Prudence ended -- her advice was good:
But Truth had charms that could not be with stood.
Hers then the muse -- how far success will show
In times like ours her song be a propos.
So much indeed of prudence did I learn,
My fingers never in politics to burn.
Silent I sat, amidst the party rout,
When late the ministry turned in and out;
When raged the furious goose-quills of the times,
To shame their country with their shameless rhimes.
Careless what turtle-eating son of White's
Might set the blunders of the state to rights,
If Pollio, Gallus, Tully, or his grace,
Should all keep out, or who get into place.
I cared not, I, though these, or none of these,
The king, the house, or mightier mob might please.
Blamed I the peer, whom adverse winds had blown
Round the wide world, to prop a monarch's throne;
Taught, in the hurricanes of southern seas,
The statesman's wisdom and the courtier's ease;
By plundered Spaniards, the consummate skill
To steer a kingdom, like a bark, at will?
Though made too plain the lee-way of the realm,
Did I presume to bid him mind the helm?
Nay, when the guardian genii of the land
To save our desperate fortunes took in hand;
I sung them not, though crowned, by half the nation,
With civick wreaths, from town and corporation.
I never, officious, cracked my brains t'amend
Errors, the great alone might comprehend;
Plagued, with no songs of praise, our Lord the King;
Nor gave one faggot to the blaze of Byng:
But, free from panegyric as abuse,
Put all my little wit to private use.
Thus far of temp'ral politics I Am clear;
Nor has the spiritual had more to fear.
Since gospel witnesses in form were tried,
Their valid evidence I never denied;
Never intermeddled with the jury's quest,
Nor contradicted Littleton or West.
When church and state learned Warburton would join,
Though sad th'affair, I made it none of mine:
Nor did I ever, against Leland's pen, presume
To vindicate Lord Bolingbroke or Hume:
Made no pretense to freedom of debate;
Nor risk'd, like harmless -- n -- t, Woolston's fate.
And though for once, in this, a trick of youth,
Prudential views are sacrificed to truth;
Could I shake off those vices rhyme and sense;
This first might likely prove my last offense;
Or, in thy cause enlisted once my pen,
I never more might trouble truth again:
But to thy purpose turn my ready hand,
True to the law and gospel of the land.


ADVERTISEMENT.
THE ground work of the following Epistles being the fruit of a private
correspondence, it was found necessary, in preparing them for the press; to
adapt them to more general use and amusement. It may not, therefore, be
improper to observe that, whatever theological subjects have fallen in the
author's way, he has purposely avoided taking part with divines of any sect or
party: leaving it to the ingenuous, of every persuasion, to determine how far
their particular sentiments may be supported by authorities, superior to
common-sense and simple demonstration. -- As to his poetry; having no
reputation to lose, he is little anxious about what he may acquire. Indeed, it
must be confessed that perspicuity and argument have been frequently consulted,
at the expense both of the dignity and harmony of his numbers, Elegance,
however, would have been more attended to, had the author's leisure permitted;
or, had his design been to distinguish himself as a poet; a character he is
much less ambitious of than that of a philosopher. -- Unmoved by sophistry,
unawed by name,
No dupe to doctrines, and no fool to fame.




CONTENTS.
EPISTLE THE FIRST -- Page 5 -- 42 OF truth in general. Its criterion. Its
relation to opinion. The uncertainty of the latter. Necessary that both should
concur in Science.
EPISTLE THE SECOND -- page 47 -- 88 On Science, as our guide to truth. The
criterion best adapted to the opinion of individuals. The absurdity of
persecution. Our pretensions to divine, and the bounds of human knowledge.
EPISTLE THE THIRD -- page 93 -- 126 On the infatuation of mankind, respecting
paradox and mysteries. The effects and causes of such infatuation. The
absurdity of supposing ignorance and folly the means to promote the cause of
truth; or that the freedom of scientifick inquiry is incompatible with the
political welfare of society.
EPISTLE THE FOURTH -- Page 131 -- 154 On the weakness of the human
understanding The abstract existence of the Deity The incomprehensibility of
the divine nature, and the incongruity of pretended atheism.
EPISTLE THE FIFTH -- page 159 -- 202 On happiness. The apparent incapacity of
mankind for its enjoyment. The comparative pain and pleasure of human
sensations; and their relation to our physical and moral constitution.
EPISTLE THE SIXTH -- page 209 -- 256 On abstract good and evil. The physical
perfection of the material universe, and the moral harmony observable in the
dispensations of Providence.
EPISTLE THE SEVENTH -- page 263 -- 298 On moral principles The respective
influence of reason and the passions The immorality of ignorance and the
indispensable duty of seeking knowledge.
EPISTLE THE EIGHTH -- page 303 -- 336 On the immortality of the soul; and the
arments for, and against, a future state.

EPISTLE THE FIRST.

ARGUMENT.
Of truth in general. -- Its criterion. -- Its relation to opinion. -- The
uncertainty of the latter. -- Necessary that both should concur in Science.

SUMMARY.
UNiversal belief being, in fact, an undisputed criterion of truth, and all
mankind necessarily believing those positions which they conceive demonstrable;
science, or demonstrative knowledge, is supposed to be the least exceptionable
test of what is true or false, in general. -- The abstract certitude of the
schools is, therefore, exploded. But, as particular opinions are not always the
effect of knowledge, nor are systems constantly founded on scientifick
principles, it is inquired if there be no other criterion, sufficiently obvious
to relieve the doubts and reconcile the opposite sentiments of mankind. -- The
dispensations of providence, as well as the dictates of revelation, appear
inadequate to the purpose; theologists being found too unsucceessful, in
clearing up the sacred page, and phisiologists too ignorant of the system of
nature, for either to form opinions, equally adapted to the credulity of
individuals. -- Divines and philosophers are censured, indeed, rather as,
mercenary wranglers, or bigots to particular systems, than fair inquirers
after, or teachers of, the truth. -- A fair and ingenuous inquirer
uncharacterized. -- Such not frequently to be found; few being capacitated for so
arduous a task. -- Fortitude and moderation the grand requisites: the scarcity
of which in the minds of men, in general, serves to account for their want of
success in the attempt; as well as for their promptitude either to embrace
skepticism, as an antidote to error, or conformity, to avoid the trouble of
thinking. -- Dogmatists and Skepticks censured: The former on account of their
absurd dependence on tradition and futile authorities: the latter for
superciliously rejecting, on the other hand, all authority and tradition,
without distinction. -- In our inquiries after truth, however, our belief is to
be suspended in regard to points beyond our knowledge. -- In scientifick
researches, also, the subtilty of metaphysical arguments should be with caution
trusted, as insensibly leading us into error and perplexity.

EPISTLE THE FIRST.
WHILE zeal, beyond the grave, pursues
Whom priest and patriot abuse,
With some the foster-sire of lies,
Extolled by others to the skies,
St. John The late Lord Viscount Bolingbroke.
, thus saved and damned by fame,
An honored and a blasted name!
Lorenzo asks, ingenuous youth,
What is, and who believes, the truth.
The truth my friend, would learn of me?
It Is that wherein mankind agree.
At least no safer truth we know
Than that the world will grant us so.
"But when and where?" -- the sages tell,
Of yore 'twas buried in a well, A trite saying of Democritus.

So deep, that hid, for want of light,
From every peeping mortal's sight,
The more suspicious than the rest
Conceived the story was a jest;
And, as no soul could find it out,
That truth itself was all a doubt.
Philosophizing train of thought!
Since by improving moderns caught;
Who tell us nature tricked mankind,
When giving eyes she left us blind:
Heaven making fools, and thinking fit We know not, says Descartes, whether God
has not created us in such a manner, that we are constantly deceived, even as
to things the most palpable and evident.

To play upon their want of wit.
But sure we boldly may receive
As truth what all mankind believe:
Such universal faith a guide
In skepticism itself implied.
"Yet say in what the world unite,
"Else useless this our rule of right;
"Else still inquiry's at a pause;
"Still vague investigation's laws."
Lorenzo, all, with you and me,
In points demonstrable agree:
Conviction, right, or wrong, the test As the supposed demonstration may be
either false or true: it being sufficient, to our argument, that all mankind
agree to call that truth which but appears to be demonstrated.

Of truth in every human breast:
While truths, demonstratively so,
Who once believe profess to know.
On Science hence our search must rest;
That universal rule confessed.
Laid then those subtilties aside
Where human certitude's denied,
Inquiry safely may proceed
To form its scientifick creed.
Does Solomon himself profess
His science all uncertain guess, Forced by reflective reason, I confess, That
human science is uncertain guess. PRIOR's Solomon.

Th'egregious sophister affirms
A contradiction, even in terms.
Who can his ignorance suppose
Of that he is conscious that he knows? Or, according to Monsieur Huet, if we do
not allow that to be evident which actually appears so, truth and falsehood are
equally demonstrable: and we may add, knowledge and ignorance synonymous terms.

Say thou slow knowledge faith outflies;
Believers spurning at the wise;
Opinion, winged, feet, hand and head,
In haste, without her errand, sped;
Or driven, inactive, here and there,
With every vagrant breath of air.
Would, therefore, know what systems err,
To whom opinions to refer,
Where trembling doubt and error blind
At once a guard and guide may find;
At once successfully apply,
And give to falshood's face the lie?
No sect, alas! profess the rule
That reconciles the knave and fool;
Unites the ignorant and wise:
Revering these what those despise.
Whether from nature's general law
The outlines of our creed we draw,
Or think the truth be only given
In revelation pure from Heaven,
It matters not; unless we find
Some active index in the mind,
Some ray of Heaven's unerring light,
To point, or here or there, aright.
Let Christianity display
Its wondrous volume to the day;
The sacred lines, however true,
Alike affect not me and you:
The accepted sense of holy writ
Still resting on the accepting wit.
For who that read but comprehend
As taught by father, priest or friend,
Or tenets new, more nice than wise,
Peculiar to themselves, devise.
How then prevails the sacred text,
If by the comment thus perplexed;
If heretics, of every kind,
Their tenets in the gospel find;
If thus the spirit hide the flaw
That mars the letter of the law!
Let Nature's striking scenes engage
The lettered and unlettered age;
Various as every varied tribe
The notions hence the world imbibe.
When meteors glow and comets blaze,
How wondering ignorance does gaze;
Foretelling, even in error wise,
The judgments gathering in the skies!
The aurora Borealis.
streaming from the pole,
What groundless fear sthe weak control
Hear them address their angry God,
And take his mercies for his rod:
Whilst thine, or Bradley's curious, eyes
As calmly view the threatening skies,
The plagues, the famines, wars they yield,
As Colin drives his team a-field.
Rolls the big thunder over the plain,
Melt the fierce lightenings clouds to rain,
Ah me! how impious, Crito cries,
To lift thy hand against the skies;
Thy lines of magic steel to form,
To brave the fury of the storm;
With Franklin, B. Franklin, Esquire of Philadelphia.
madly to defy
The thunderer's red right-arm, on high,
Bold Titan! to erect thy stand
To wrest the lightenings from his hand! Alluding to the manner of preventing
the damage apprehended from thunder-clouds, discovered by our late improvements
in electricity.

Yet those in physics better read
At honest Crito shake the head;
In pity, or derision, smile;
Nature and truth their guard the while.
Thus, by unlike experience taught,
Peculiar are our modes of thought;
Explained, by Custom's partial nod,
The voice of nature and of God.
Do thou apply to saint or sage,
The guides of each believing age,
The truths, which mysteries conceal,
Or those of science to reveal?
From far and near, what tales absurd
Adulterate the written word!
How often the pure, and perfect, text
Have base Theologists perplexed!
What transcripts! what interpolation!
Eternal source of disputation!
Alas, Lorenzo, few believe,
In fact, the doctrines they receive.
How few of even the reverend tribe
The very canons they subscribe!
Do such their mother church defend?
On her pluralities depend:
The mitre and the sine-cure
Preserving best her tenets pure.
For, rob the priesthood of its gain,
What pillar will the church sustain.
What cement binds the crazy wall,
Whose sapt foundation threats its fall.
Do such profess to turn the key
On myst'ries, hid from you and me;
Or of the oracles of old
The dubious phrases to unfold;
To teach the truth to vulgar minds,
Which Heaven's own blaze of rhetoric blinds?
Ah, think not these will ever display
Their secrets to the eye of day.
Tell me what artist will impart
To thee the arcanum of his art.
Not one -- but all, reserved and sly,
Affect to cheat the observer's eye:
Their slightest knacks important made,
To raise the wonder of their trade.
Thus often the reverend tiro, taught
That none may serve their God for naught,
Casts over his ignorance a veil,
Or masks the moral of his tale;
Securely laughing in his sleeve,
When fools the tale itself believe.
To save his calling from abuse
His caution here, in fact, of use.
For once his art and mist'ry Mystery not Mystery. See Johnson's Dict, fol.
edit.
known
Who church authority would own?
As, when sublime conundrums hit,
We laugh to scorn the quibbler's wit;
So, in revered enigmas wise,
His riddling reverence we despise.
Say thou, since reformation's hand
From spiritual slavery freed the land,
The sacerdotal hydra chained,
By truth opinions are restrained?
Look round, believing friend, and see
How pious Protestants agree.
In what less fickle do we find
The daughter's than the mother's mind!
For know the abandoned scarlet whore The church of Rome -- of which all the
reformed churches may be called the descendants: at least, so far as they usurp
an ecclesiastical authority and require implicit obedience: in which light
only, such presumption being destructive of their institution as seminaries of
truth and religion, they are censured in the text.

Our present alma-mater bore;
Whose beauty, modesty and truth
Were all debauched in early youth,
While in seraglio, close confined,
Sly priests concealed her from mankind.
And though, when zeal to hide her sin
Had almost stripped her to the skin;
To skreen her battered charms from shame,
She laid to truth her artful claim;
Yet, once secure, the cunning jade
Gave up its temporary aid;
Playing again her mother's game
With priests of every church the same. As the word priest is not frequently
used in common discourse to signify a Protestant divine, so neither has it
here such an indiscriminate implication; meaning such only as lay claim to that
title by their maintaining the tenets of church authority, and their endeavors
rather to keep the world in ignorance than to diffuse the knowledge of the
truth.

For though, in pure excess of grace,
Miss perk'd it in her mother's face,
Her disobedience felt the smart,
When stabbed her interest to the heart.
What though she flaunt no longer gay;
Her tawdry trappings cast away;
Her trim simplicity, at best,
Is vanity but sprucely dressed.
What though forbid to patch and paint,
And pass the sinner for a saint,
Yet still the holy dame, afraid
That truth and reason spoil her trade,
Her pulpit-trumpet sounds to arms,
And fills the zealot with alarms.
Awakened by her fearful cries,
Behold her doughty champions rise;
Armed cap-a-pie each mother's son,
To save their parent, roaring run;
Conscious how greatly to their cost
Might church authority be lost.
While thus the orthodox in grain,
In spite of fate, their church maintain;
The truth, a term of meaning wide,
To all the priest affirms applied;
No less the het'rodox than they,
From pride or avarice, go astray:
As motives similar prevail
With those who brew or broach the tale.
Say, else, if self-conviction true
The conscientious Henley knew;
Fired by a pure religious zeal,
That champion of the public weal,
For pence, the primacy to slight, If I would have changed my principles for
interest, I might have been Archbishop of Canterbury before now. HENLEY, viva
voce.

To jest with every sacred rite,
To trample, with avowed design,
On laws both human and divine.
Say what his aim, whose dread rebukes
Crazed his poor neighbors of St. Luke's; St. Luke's hospital, for lunaticks,
in Moor-Fields, near the Tabernacle and Foundery.

Who, godly warfare proud to seek,
In suff'rance turns the smitten cheek:
As knavish Jews, to sell their ware,
Abuse and insult tamely bear.
No worldly gain to Whitfield yields
The plenteous harvest of Moor-Fields;
While from the gift of sterling gold,
Like offerings to the Lord of old, See Exodus chapter 35.

The coatless priest with Aaron vies, Alluding to their admitting cobblers,
porters, and beggars as well as regular divines, to the ministry.

And modern tabernacles rise?
Or, are fanatic weavers led
Because his vanity is fed;
A tickling transport that he feels,
To find his thousands at his heels;
To hear the Io poeans ring,
Due to the hero, saint or king;
Which, ne'ertheless, the mob bestow,
On sainted pick-pockets, below.
If then, by poverty or pride,
The priest and parson led aside;
While these, the instructors of mankind,
Our ignorance their interest find;
O shun, Lorenzo, shun the street
Where disputant theologues meet.
See the winged cork, from side to side
Rebound, the truant school-boy's pride,
With equal warmth, with equal noise,
So these, by turns, like truant boys,
Between what saint or father says,
Bang the light shittle-cock of faith.
But hark! what jargon strikes our ear?
What hebrew madmen have we here?
What pen the frenzy shall describe
Of Hutchinson's or Behmen's tribe; Two of the most incomprehensible writers
that ever reflected scandal on the science of divinity.

Who, scorning reason's vain pretense,
Make war, a dire croisade, on sense?
If reason, then, reprizals make,
At once their cause and them forsake,
What wonder? yet, in truth, 'twere well
Might Bedlam spare one vacant cell;
Since no good christian, yet, for Law, The Reverend Mr. William Law -- a
writer little inferior to Bebmen himself.

Has strown his darkened room with straw.
Theologists so prone to err,
Do thou philosophers prefer?
These often, an interested sect,
Like poverty or pride affect.
Logicians, casuists by trade,
At random draw their furious blade;
Taking, in gladiatorial pride,
The cudgels up on either side.
To them indiff'rent wrong or right;
Swiss champions! theirs the task to fight:
And share, with venal art, the prey;
The golden gettings of the day.
So Broughton's A famous boxer.
heroes bruised and bled,
At once for honor and for bread:
And Powel's An eminent toad-eater.
virtuous thirst of fame
Inured his iron lips to flame.
The learned, prodigious wise indeed
The man by Heaven inspired to read!
Affecting merely to decide,
Indulge their magisterial pride,
And, deigning scarce on sense a look,
Profoundly dogmatize by book:
Save here those champions of the gown,
Meek A fine genius and polite critic.
Warburton and modest Brown. A most exemplary divine and patriot.

To real merit never allied
The pedant's, or the parson's pride,
By singularity of taste
Good sense and lit'rature disgraced,
See wrangling Sophisters, intent
On cross-grained paradoxes bent;
As if to truth they made pretense
By wandering but from common-sense.
Among the witty and the wise,
Hence often in words their difference lies;
While empty terms, for years, engage
The scholar's and the skeptick's rage:
Till, wearied out, they stare to see
In fact how nearly all agree.
So, poised between two empty scales,
Now here, now there, the beam prevails,
That, as their false vibrations cease,
In equilibrio rests in peace.
Nor seldom, when in fact dissent
These slashing sons of argument,
The subject matter in debate
Beneath the pains t'investigate.
Philosophy at Arthur's An academy well known to students in the politer
sciences of pitting, betting and whist.
taught,
So Bond and Brag, disputing, fought,
Whether as near, from Change to Kew, Brundisium minuci melius via ducat, an
Appi. HOR.

To cross the old bridge or the new.
"Could neither wheel nor chain decide?"
Alas, my friend, they never tried.
For neither of these learned youth
Cared one brass farthing for the truth:
But each, to make his judgment out,
Would drive full-speed ten miles about.
The first-philosophy A term in vogue, given, by way of eminence, to the
philosophy of the present age.
in use
Thus argumentative abuse:
While truth and falsehood, right and wrong,
Serve as the burden of a song:
With sophists, as with scolding wives,
Quarrel the business of their lives.
Leave then; Lorenzo, vain dispute.
Empty the triumph to confute.
Nor those for truth's defenders take,
Who cavil but for cavil's sake.
But is there, layman or divine,
In whom good sense and temper join;
A priest of honest The late Bishop of Clogher; an honor to his profession, as
well as to the age and country in which he lived.
Clogher's mould,
Or theist moderate as bold,
To whom indulgent Heaven assigned
A truly ethick turn of mind;
Who dares the mob in scorn to hold;
Has weighed the happiness of gold;
Has found the ponderous cheat so light,
That avarice gets nothing by it;
Who rates the value of a name
From the insignificance of same;
Not vainly seeking more to know
Than God, has given to man, below;
Yet, wheresoe'er displayed her charms,
Embracing truth with open arms.
On such Lorenzo may depend,
For guide, philosopher and friend.
"But where such friend and guide" you cry.
Know thou no such? alas, nor I.
For O, the truth, in fact, how few
Have power or talents, to pursue.
Alike the abilities unfit
Of pedant dull or sprightly wit,
Of captious critics, scholiasts vain,
Of every superficial brain.
Indeed too often even genius gains
Its labor only for its, pains:
Immortal bards not seldom here,
Dupes, from their mother's milk, to fear.
Though smoothly run the hackney'd lay
Along the beaten, moral way;
Should truth on custom turn its back,
Or deviate from the vulgar track,
Like crabs, with retrogressive feet,
Such temporizing bards retreat;
Humming, their credit to maintain,
To worn-out tunes the old catch again.
Even thus thy favorite bard retired,
Whom every muse at once inspired,
Whose strains immortalize the guide.
His scholiast piously decried,
Thy Pope, who, like a forward child,
In leading-strings, ran bold and wild;
But, fearful of himself to stand,
Seized his old, tottering mother's hand. The church of Rome, to which Mr. Pope
returned, after having written his essay on man: for, that he was a true
roman catholic at the time of his writing that essay is a tale, adapted merely
to the credulity and ignorance of a Racine. Unless indeed we have as little
opinion of his judgment as his friend Bolingbroke had: who is said to have
ridiculed him as one who understood nothing of his own principles, nor saw to
what they naturally led.

Look back, Lorenzo, never thou,
When set thy hand unto the plough.
In vain we sacrifice to truth
The sportive giddiness of youth,
If falshood's painted charms engage
The doting levity of age.
Truth's thorny paths who fear to run,
Should ever her dangerous portal shun:
Nor set like heroes boldly out,
To founder in the deeps of doubt.
Yet never forget -- though boldness thine,
Temperance that boldness must refine.
True temperance, rational and brave;
To stoic pride no sullen slave:
Not such as, gently meek and mild,
Betrays the weakness of a child;
Nor that, without or fear or wit,
By chance, even blunderers may get.
The rash, too angry to be bold,
By falsehood often are bought and sold.
The proud, too haughty to be wise,
See not where groveling error lies.
The heedless counts without his host,
Or runs his nose against the post:
And often their timorous indolence
The meek indulge, at truth's expense.
So hard to keep that middle way,
From which inquiry never should stary;
While, for the task, as hard to find
A truly firm, capacious mind;
No wonder fools, the would-be-wise,
Suppose in doubt that wisdom lies:
Or that, because so short their sight,
Truth may be error, wrong be right. Cicero somewhere observes, there is no
opinion, however absurd, which has not been espoused by some or other of the
philosophers. And nothing surely can be more so than the famous inserence drawn
from the weakness of the human understanding, i. e. that, because we do not
comprehend every thing, we in reality, know nothing. Agrippa, it is true, has
declaimed prettily, and the ingenious Bishop of Avranches chopp'd logic as
dexterously on the subject. Yet, alas, such is the perverseness of common-sense
that the greatest part of mankind, even to this day, do insist on the certainty
of their knowing the right hand from the left.

For ignorance, to sooth its pride,
Must seek its own defects to hide.
Affecting, hence, all unbelief,
Is Scoto infidel in chief;
His hand and heart, his ears and eyes
Confessing what his tongue denies?
To truth in every system blind,
Yet seeking it where none shall find;
Lorenzo, here his wit a cheat,
That mocks his judgment with deceit.
Wherever opinion gaily dressed,
Runs gadding in her rainbow vest,
Among her sisterhood, a crew
Of motley wives black, red or blue;
See skeptic faith, the truth in chase,
Run giddily, from face to face;
Now this, now that, by turns, enjoy;
Nor find them false till found to cloy.
Thus, with the fair he most admires,
Full soon the wavering lover tires.
At morn, her smiles with joy he meets;
At night, affronts her in the streets;
By loose suspicion wandering led,
Or spider fancy's flimsy thread;
Till, on some lying whore, at last,
He lights, and holds her dogmas fast.
Opposed to these, nor strange to find,
In uniformity combined,
Believing thousands; who suppose
Truth with a mob for ever goes:
As if convinced the rabble rout,
Because too obstinate to doubt.
Yet customs old or fashions new
Are all the unthinking herd pursue.
The orthodox in dress and song
As modish as to right and wrong. Whatever country you go into, let the
religion be what it will, the unthinking part thereof are always the reputed
orthodox. DED. to Essay on SPIRIT.

Of custom born, to fashion bred,
Thus blind credulity is led:
While modes of faith, like modes of dress,
Mankind capriciously profess.
Yet all agreed, through shame or pride,
Nature's simplicity to hide,
Whatever the fashion of the time,
It holds the naked truth a crime.
Thus, to a man, we find the crowd,
To doubt too bashful, or too proud,
In error rather choose to fall,
Than boast no scheme of faith at all.
Impatient, hence, of stop or stay,
They blunder on the broadest way;
Or make a guide, in every street,
Of fool or knave, the first they meet.
Authorities how blind and lame
Hence bring the credulous to shame;
While all revere the mouldering page,
Where moths have spent their gothic rage.
Tales half destroyed, the rest so true!
So much inspired the Lord-knows-who! There is nothing so contemptible, says
Glanville, but antiquity can render it august and excellent.

Could thou, Lorenzo, build thy hopes.
On muftis, patriarchs or popes;
On names implicitly depend,
And mere authorities defend?
Split on this rock, mistaken youth,
Lost were thy voyage to the truth:
'Twere best to give thy labor over,
Nor urge in vain thy genius more.
Lorenzo, credit not too soon
Fine tales and tidings from the moon:
Nor, howsoever learned or just;
In priest or prophet put thy trust.
By Paul or by Apollos taught,
Still to one test their tenets brought,
Their doctrines, howsoever true,
Adopt not till they are so to you.
For often, when stripped of its disguise,
Folly the wisdom of the wise.
Yet superciliously reject
No dogmas that the world respect.
Against such too rashly never inveigh;
Nor cast thy grandsire's wit away.
Disdaining at the lamp to pore,
That lights us to the classick lore,
The half-taught deist thus exclaims
At texts revered and hallowed names,
Damning profane or sacred writ,
That squares not with his shallow wit.
But while, through ignorance or pride,
Opinions thus the world divide;
Faith made the priest's and statesman's tool;
By turns while truth and falsehood rule,
Or, with some temporizing view,
Nonsense, that is neither false nor true;
Can thou, at ease in doubt, my friend,
On points too dark thy faith suspend?
Can thou the world's esteem forego;
And burns thy bosom but to know?
Is truth thy only creed professed?
Can leave to providence the rest?
Throw partial systems all aside,
And take thy knowledge for thy guide.
See where the stream of Science flows
From nature's fountain, whence it rose;
Through hills and dales meand'ring led,
As clear as at the fountain head.
Stand thou not shivering on the brink,
Once well embarked thou can not sink:
Nor can the current falsely guide,
While reason's banks enclose the tide;
Whence truth, in sight, on either hand,
Smiles on thy voyage through the land.
But, O, with caution, hoist thy sail,
To court the metaphysick gale;
Lest, hurried on, thy heedless youth
Should lose, with land, the sight of truth:
Turned forth adrift, thy lot to take,
On errour's broad unfathomed lake;
Among struck leviathans, in vain,
To plunge and flounder through the main:
Where tides nor set, nor currents steer;
But winds all round the compass veer;
While floating isles, that cheat the sight,
To faithless anchorage invite:
Hobbes, St. John, Hume and hundreds more,
Rich barks! all wrecked upon the shore.


EPISTLE THE SECOND.

ARGUMENT.
On Science, as our guide to truth -- The criterion best adapted to the opinion
of individuals -- The absurdity of persecution -- Our pretensions to divine,
and the bounds of human knowledge.

SUMMARY
SCience, though admitted as the rule of faith in matters relating to the
investigation of truth, is neither exclusive nor universal, affecting only our
opinion in speculative points. For, however refined are our credenda, we
insensibly join, in our practical notions, with the rest of mankind. --
Whatever objection, therefore, scientifick inquirers may make to the systems of
others, none can be made to their fixing the criterion of truth on knowledge:
the certainty of which is, by implication, admitted in the general pretensions
of mankind to common-sense. -- This is the privilege of every mind, without
distinction; enabling us equally to draw like conclusions from like premises.
-- All actual dispute, therefore, arises from some misunderstanding, or
different acceptance, of the matter in question: as the most ignorant peasant
is equally certain of the proofs he comprehends with the greatest philosopher.
-- For the same reason, nevertheless, those would be engaged in a desperate
undertaking, who should attempt to reconcile mankind to any one system of
opinion; the capacity and credulity of individuals being so very different, in
consequence of their diversity of temperament, education and experience. -- It
is injurious and ridiculous, therefore, to insult others, for thinking in the
manner we ourselves should have done, under the same circumstances. -- It is
still more absurd to reprobate the rest of mankind for not believing what we
ourselves do not, nor can possibly be made to, believe: as is the case when we
would impose tenets, that either contradict themselves, or are, in fact,
downright nonsense -- For it is impossible to believe apparent falsehood, or to
be convinced of any thing, by a set of words, that convey no determinate
meaning -- Mysterious or unintelligible propositions cannot, therefore, be
believed -- If the truth of revelation, in general, be admitted, as what is
revealed from Heaven must undoubtedly be true, the difficulty of knowing what
is particularly so, or who are the truly inspired, is yet inexplicably great.
-- Though the power of working miracles also be allowed a proof of inspiration,
in the agent; the fallacy of pretended ones, and the supposed inspiration of
impostors, are almost invincible obstacles to our discovery of the truth. --
The supposition, also, that real miracles are transgressions of the laws of
nature is not at all necessary to support their veracity; but argues the
contrary; and implies an injurious reflection on the omnipotence and prescience
of the Deity. -- Whatever reasonable objections, however, we may have against
putting implicit faith in either pretended miracles or revelation; yet as the
utmost extent of scientifick discovery falls so infinitely short of a perfect
knowledge of the designs and operations of Nature; we cannot philosophically
deny that God sometimes produces effects, for ends best known to himself, by
means wholly unknown to us. -- To proceed, nevertheless, in our inquiries on
the most certain grounds, the criterion of Science is to be neglected only in
points indisputably and intelligibly revealed.

EPISTLE THE SECOND.
NOR to the fount of Hippocrene,
Nor groves of laurel ever green,
Nor where the wanton graces stray,
With flowers is strown the muse's way.
Lorenzo, no, I more rejoice
At reason's bold, and manly, voice
Than at the softest, sprightliest air
Mirth ever sung to lighten care:
Truth's sober tale more pleased to hear
Than all that tickle fancy's ear;
Though such, to babbling echo sweet,
Aloud the public voice repeat.
Our numbers, then, let truth excuse,
If rudely sing the unpolished muse;
Careless of ornament, and proud
To differ from the sing-song crowd,
So boastful of their poor pretense
To swell with sound their starveling sense.
Truth hopes not for poetic praise:
To fiction sacred are the bays.
Do thou, Lorenzo, still demur:
So fearful in thy search to err,
If placed thy faith on points alone
Whose truth demonstratively known;
These much too few, and too confined,
To serve the purpose of mankind.
Let a trite moral here advise.
"Be not more credulous than wise."
Whatever doubts thy course impede,
Seek not to amplify thy creed,
By myst'ries dark or dogmas old,
Because to son from father told;
Severely to known truth confined,
Of little faith were all mankind.
Thy present, arduous task, my friend,
No vague determinations end.
Of practice speculation wide,
Demands for thee a surer guide,
If in the former prone to stray,
The justling world oppose our way:
While, in the last, are thousands flown
Past the world's knowledge or their own.
"But has this scientifick choice
"The suffrage of the general voice:
"The means consistent with the end;
"That truth which you, yourself, commend? See the beginning of the first
Epistle.

Lorenzo, see to common-sense By common-sense is not meant any set of
principles, or method of logicizing established by custom. But an innate
capacity in all mankind to reason, or draw conclusions, from what they hear and
see.

How just, how general the pretense.
To nation, climate, age or sect,
Unlimited without respect:
Whence, howsoever wide we stray,
When church, or system, lead the way,
All, of necessity, agree
In what, alike, they hear and see.
For not a son of Adam's race
Innate conviction can efface
The highland loon, the lowland lout,
Wild Irish fierce, and Cambrian stout,
The boor that Rhynland's polder drains,
Though reason slumber in his brains,
All, all, like premises in view, Premises not only alike in terms, but whose
terms are alike understood.

The like conclusions ever drew.
For know that like our mother earth
Its human offspring, at its birth.
Where fertile clay and barren sand
Compose the variegated land,
The unequal strata of the soil
Unequally demand our toil:
The rich that toil with gain repay;
Thrown on the poor our pains away.
In man's uncultivated mind
So varied is the soil, in kind.
The flowers of science, fresh and fair,
On some expand, without our care;
On others scarce, by culture, grow
The buds, that wither as they blow.
Yet here essentially allied,
However else diversified.
The fertile marl, the steril sand
Alike the seed or plant, demand:
Denied no more spontaneous grain
To Bergen's rocks than Baioe's plain The country near Baioe, celebrated by
Pliny and others, as the most fruitful part of Italy, Nullus in orb locus,
says Horace, Baiis praelucet amoenis. Agreeable to the above sentiment, it is
at present called Terra di Lavoro

So, not a truth innate our own, Though we have not, all, by nature, an equal
capacity to acquire knowledge, our minds may, nevertheless, be justly
considered as originally tabuloe rasoe; in which there may be a very essential
difference, however, as to their aptitude for impression.

The seeds of knowledge must be sown.
Experience slow must swell the root,
And tend the fibers as they shoot;
Or speedier aid instruction grant,
And slips of foreign growth implant.
The mental and material claim
Here too essentially the same:
Grow seed or plant wherever it will
In kind it is propagated still.
No soil nor climate can produce
In tares the barley's potent juice:
To thorns no culture can assign
The purple honors of the vine.
Thus when, by simple nature's aid,
Put forth sensation's tender blade;
If, to perfection nearer brought,
It bloom and ripen into thought,
Wherever situate the root;
The same its intellectual fruit.
Its taste, its form, perhaps, we blame,
But still its genus is the same:
In this no poverty of soil,
No dullness ever mocked our toil.
If vainly, then, in lettered pride,
The scholar deep is dignified;
So false, so empty the pretense
Of wits to more than common-sense;
If plain to the idiot as to you
The immediate object of his view;
While even the blockhead truly knows
Far as his little science goes;
Consistent, sure our confidence,
In search of truth, on common-sense:
That general index to mankind, See Epistle the first.

To taste and genius unconfined;
Pointing in all one common way;
By dullness shortened but its ray;
Of wit and knowledge all the end
In length that radius to extend:
In stubborn age, or pliant youth,
Its bearing in the line of truth;
A needle constant to the pole,
Whence beams true faith upon the soul.
Do thou object "if common-sense
"So plausible an evidence,
"And all mankind of this possessed,
"That any differ from the rest."
Know thou when honest minds dissent,
Misunderstood their argument:
Different the premises appear,
Else were the fixed deduction clear.
Hence half our numerous quarrels rise.
We see not with each others eyes:
So that precisely all alike
Nor terms, nor things conception strike.
For every individual draws
His plan by mere perspective laws;
Fixed to one station, time and place,
In power no full survey to trace;
The false mistaking often for true,
Observed at different points of view.
So, when to cheat the partial sight,
And prove in mirth that black is white,
With lights disposed the shades between,
In folds is spread the artful scene;
Opposed, the colors strike the eye,
And he affirms what you deny.
Here spotless all appears and fair;
Perceived a total blackness there.
The demonstration of his sight
Who doubts? who knows not black from white?
Thus evidence supports dispute;
Nor one the other can refute.
And yet is common-sense to blame?
The premises were not the same.
Were these alike, though say you err,
Both would infallibly concur:
For take each others point of sight,
And set, at once, the matter right. From the consideration of the different
appearances of circumstances and things to different minds, many of the
Academicks fagaciously concluded there was no criterion, whereby we might
distinguish between reality and appearance; truth and falsehood. A deduction
ridiculous enough. For, in the words of Mr. Pope, If black and white blend,
soften and unite
A thousand ways; is there no black or white?


Conceive not, then, because we find
One source of truth in every mind,
We individuals think to see,
At every time and place, agree.
As well, amidst yon grove of trees
While plays a constant eastern breeze,
Each single spray we hope to find
In one direction, west, reclined.
For, though to truth alike our claim,
Our taste nor sentiments the same.
For dusky green the jaundic'd eye
Mistakes the clear-blue summer sky;
The distant scene, however bright,
Is darkness to the short of sight;
To loaded ears as whispers still
The clack and thunder of the mill.
Thus lost, as colors on the blind,
On dullness qualities refined;
Than music to the deaf no more,
To ignorance the abstracted lore.
Hence often objection calls us out,
To satisfy the blockhead's doubt;
Who not one proof, whereon depends
His sought solution, comprehends: Tous ceux, says a certain French author, qui
sont capable de fair des objectons, ne sont pas toujours en etat de comprendre
tous les principes, don't depend la resolution de leurs objections.

The tritest arguments, of yore,
In vain repeated over and over,
Proving how fruitless were the toil,
The jarring world to reconcile.
And yet, as but from time and place
Our several modes of thought we trace,
Alas! how blindly do we run
Each others heresy to shun;
Our own our glory and our pride,
While curses all the rest betide:
By pious children doomed their sire,
By sires, their children to hellfire:
Heirs to salvation's brighter sphere
So strangely damned, and damning here!
Thus Calvin ignorantly raves
At souls which, therefore, Luther saves;
To both denied Lord Peter's keys;
Who shuts out heretics like these.
And yet even those, who boast to feel
Their bosoms burn with christian zeal;
Who dooming mussulmen to hell,
With pride uncharitable swell;
In Naz'reth bred, or Bethle'm born,
Had laughed our Savior's birth to scorn;
Mere Turks, denounced for you and me,
The bitter fruit of Zacon's tree
To eat with fiends below: the doom
Of Anti-Mahomet and Rome!
Yet, blind as Sampson, when despair
Had sunk his life below his care,
The numbers wanton Gaza lost
Destroyed but at his proper cost,
Half-witted Zeal, of all the test,
Itself condemns among the rest;
For, if required by gracious Heaven
Our service but as knowledge given,
Should I in Pope or Mufti, trust;
For proving to their tenets just,
Your rule to censure me, or mine,
Holds the like condemnation thine. Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man,
whosoever thou art, that judge: for wherein thou judge another thou
condemnest thy self.

Yet still more wicked, weak and blind
This reprobating, zeal we find;
When, void of truth, absurd and vain
The tenets zealots thus maintain.
Oh! how ridiculous and odd
That zeal precipitate for God,
So short of knowledge, I bear them record, says ST. PAUL, of the Jews, that
they have a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge.
that, indeed,
It understands not even its creed.
For know, whatever the world pretend,
But few believe what they defend.
In modes of faith, though falsehood taught,
Nonsense is equally their fault:
Thousands by forms of speech deceived
Never yet by mortal man believed;
Creeds penned, as said, at Heaven's command,
In terms no soul can understand;
Or such, though thundered from on high,
That plainly give themselves the lie.
But sure, if words no sense convey,
Faith in their utt'rance dies away;
Nor can a single son of Eve
Apparent falsehood ever believe. A man may perhaps believe a proposition to be
true, though he cannot conceive how it can possibly be so: but he never can
sincerely believe a position that contradicts itself, or is evidently false. --
Thus I may believe that one man has raised another from the dead, though I cannot
understand by what means it can possibly be true; but I can never actually
believe that two are but one, and that the same one is, at the same time, two;
because it is a contradiction in terms, and apparently impossible.

Belief no vague declaimer's rant,
No bigot's creed, no sophist's cant;
It Is not the scripture text to quote;
To get our catechism by rote;
Over homilies to spend the day;
At midnight, half asleep, to pray;
To chatter matins at the dawn,
Or gabble with the man of lawn:
True faith that consciousness of soul,
That times nor accidents control;
Save those adapted and combined
To root conviction from the mind.
For know that neither threats nor blows
Sincere belief can ever impose.
The monk's hot zeal, the jesuit's skill
Lead not conviction as they will.
Go, turn inquisitor and burn
The heretics, all round, in turn;
The Turk, refusing to resign
His sensual paradise for thine;
The Indian, that in death pretends
To visit but his former friends;
Unless his faith what you may tell,
Of joys in Heaven and pains in Hell.
Not one of all the suffering tribe
Thy sentiments per-force imbibe.
However induced by hope or fear,
The mind is no free agent here:
To change their faith beyond the power
Of martyrs at their dying hour.
How idly, then, enthusiasts rave
Of systems, that will damn or save;
Or think true proselytes to gain
By torture, gallows, whip or chain:
Since, ever constant to its cause,
True faith depends on nature's laws;
By nonsense nor caprice misled,
The honest heart and sober head.
How idly wild fanatics preach,
While ignorant of what they teach.
The spirit never affects the mind,
Unless with the understanding joined;
Nor has the word, if void of sense,
To gospel power the least pretense. The nonsense of our modern saints is,
therefore, equally reprehensible with the affectation of speaking in unknown
tongues, so severely censured, in the Apostle's first letter to the Cor. chap.
14.

Some certain meaning, hence, and plain
A saving faith must needs contain:
If fixed its object, sure, no less
The sense of terms our creed express:
A parrot, else, if none deceive her,
A sound and orthodox believer;
Convinced as much as ever yet
The Athanasian paroquet. That the Athanasians believe nothing by the creed
they profess, might be perhaps too harsh to say, as we confess that, after the
way which they call heresy, we believe it ourselves: but that they deceive
themselves, in supposing they really believe what they say, is, for the above
reasons, very evident.

Let not fanaticism deceive.
None can a mystery believe. That is, a mysterious or non-intelligible
proposition; as the real assent, or dissent, of the mind must necessarily
succeed some determinate conception of the premises laid down: so that no man
can possibly believe a position he does not understand.

Though plunged by zeal in error deep,
While common-sense lies fast asleep,
Their faith rash bigots strangely boast;
The strongest his who is cheated most;
Who least for truth presumes to search;
But headlong runs into the church.
For, laid thy hand upon thy heart,
The formule of thy creed impart;
Do thou its substance comprehend?
Lo! all its mystery's at an end.
In spite of their misguiding zeal,
Here to their hearts let all appeal:
Enough if just be their pretense
To honesty and common-sense:
Here rests that umpire of mankind,
Conscience, the God within the mind.
At eastern temples as, of yore,
Without the threshold of the door,
In reverence, did the zealot use
To doff, and leave, his dirty shoes:
Like him, the modern faithful, taught
That reason is a thing of naught,
Lest they should soil the church with doubt,
Their understandings leave without.
For ask who thus in mystery trust,
If Euclid's demonstration's just;
If truth the geometrick art,
Or subtle algebra, impart.
Unknowing what precisely meant,
They honestly resuse assent;
Consess they first must comprehend,
Before they credit or contend.
O self condemned! O dead to shame!
Have these a conscience void of blame;
Who take no worldly points on trust,
But scruple till they know them just;
Yet their supreme concerns will rest
On tenets half the world contest;
Conviction openly defy,
And with their tongues their hearts belie!
These the true faithful shall we call?
These have, alas, no faith at all.
For, howsoe'er with art they strive
To keep absurdity alive,
Clothed in equivocal disguise,
Or garb of truth, their specious lies,
Still common-sense, unrooted out,
Will find a flaw to fix a doubt:
And where one doubt is left behind
No firm belief informs the mind.
Yet is there whose officious zeal
Pretends a consciousness to feel,
A fixed internal evidence
Of axioms, hid from common-sense;
A stronger testimony given,
By inspiration breathed from Heaven?
Lorenzo, neither you, nor I,
What God reveals can ever deny.
But here how needful to be wise
To know where revelation lies.
Art thou thyself inspired by Heaven?
Tell me what certain proof is given.
Do thou intuitively view
What reason tells thee must be true?
No revelation here required;
How proves such truth that you are inspired?
For why inspired, if but to tell
What reason might have told as well.
As truth beholds thy mental eye
What seems to all the world a lie;
Thy proof imagination strong?
Here also may thou still be wrong.
From Heaven if ever fired conceit,
Brandy has also done the feat.
Nay often the infatuate of brain,
Of Heaven's presumed injunctions vain,
Have madly broke its dread commands.
And dipped in blood their murdering hands.
If God or devil then inspire,
Of reason still we must inquire:
And reason doubtless would reply,
"Heaven never yet revealed a lie."
On others gifts confiding more,
Do give thine own pretensions over?
Do from the inspired thy faith receive,
And pin it on thy neighbor's sleeve?
Reason or Heaven must tell thee too,
If such be more inspired than you.
"Where then the proof?" I frankly own,
To me, yet uninspir'd, unknown:
Such guides, to me, by madness fired,
As madmen, More properly perhaps idiots. The sentiment as it thus stands is
Dr. Whichcote's.
with the Turks, inspired.
In spite of Middleton and Hume,
Do thou on miracles presume?
To revelation these thy guide;
Thy faith by wonders verified.
Go thou, and, easy of belief,
My comrade ask if I Am a thief.
If inspiration false and true,
Sure miracles suspicious too:
And, hence, thy conduct most absurd,
To take for one the other's word.
Our souls how long to damn and save,
Has subtle priestcraft played the knave!
Its pupils trained, from early youth,
T'equivocate and hide the truth;
To practice the deception nice,
Of tricking hand, or quaint device;
To cheat the palate, nose and eye;
And gild that dirty pill, a lie.
Yet do thou miracles maintain?
Be here thy definition plain:
The muse disdaining to reply
To such as shock the naked eye. i. e. palpable impostures.

Events as miracles do own,
Whose cause immediate is unknown;
Or is thy faith established more
On actions never performed before?
Alas, my much believing friend,
The times of yore might these defend;
When heretic free-thinkers rose,
That dared the holy church oppose;
For infidelity renowned,
Asserting that the globe was round;
Vile heresy! whence, doomed to hell,
Upsal's good bishop martyr fell:
Wretches, so impious as to hold,
The earth about its axis rolled,
And, as the years their courses run,
Still took its journeys round the sun;
Vile heresy! for which, it is said,
Old Galileo too had bled,
Had not the sage, more loath to die,
Recanting, damned it for a lie. According to the terms of Abjuration. Ego,
Galileo, cord sincero et fide non ficta, abjuro, maledico et detestor
supradictos errores et baereses.

In days of ignorance like these,
When legends had the power to please;
While love of wonder salv'd deceit,
And gudgeons swallowed whole the cheat;
How little strange that monks and friars
Should prove miraculously liars;
Or converts to divines so sad
Turn out miraculously mad!
But now, a century worn away,
Time working wonders every day,
The vast discov'ries years have made
Have spoilt the wonder-monger's trade.
Say thou, events so strange of yore
Since now miraculous no more,
True miracles thou would define
As real acts of power divine,
The effects of some immediate cause,
In fact transgressing nature's laws. This is Mr. Hume's definition of a
miracle, to which, however, we do not subscribe; as it appears to us to
supersede the very possibility of miracles: the reality of which cannot be
philosophically denied: As, from several late discoveries it appears, that the
knowledge of mankind, in physical causes and effects, is not sufficiently
extensive to establish a negative against any pretended phenomenon whatever. It
should be considered, also, that the truth of miracles does not depend on the
reality of the facts represented, but on the veracity of that representation.
Neither does the certainty of the fact appear at all needful to the end for
which miracles were confessedly intended; for the apparent effect of a
supernatural power would have the same influence on the spectator as a real
one: as it is by appearance only we judge of reality.

How! -- did the omnipotent, on high,
Let those, his laws, at random fly:
Or was his providence so blind
To what omnisciency designed,
That still his sovereign will attends
To strike his foes or skreen his friends;
That power beyond the Almighty's art
To nature's system to impart:
Needful Heaven's arbitrary fire
To blast a fig tree or a liar?
Lorenzo, be not thou so vain,
To think thus brittle nature's chain;
From which whatever link we strike,
Tenth or ten thousandth, broke alike, See Pope's essay on man. Epis. I. Ver.
246.

Connecting systems all destroyed,
Unballanc'd worlds would strew the void,
To atoms burst; restored again
Old Chaos to his ancient reign:
Unless, in time, the God attend
The works of his own hand to mend.
Alas, how blasphemous to say
That Heaven can save no other way;
Or that, for trifles or in joke,
Creation's sacred order's broke. The accounts, given us of the miracles of our
Savior and his Apostles, cannot, however, be denied, whether we suppose the
facts really, or only apparently, to have happened: as in either case, the
perceptible effects might flow from natural causes, unknown to philosophy; yet
adapted in the general system of things to answer the ends of providence.

For do we not, in fact, confess,
If God may nature's laws transgress,
The wise creator wanted skill
His vast intentions to fulfill,
Or that the intention, though his own,
Was in the extent to him unknown:
Or, still more impiously, imply
That Heaven can give itself the lie.
Say, then, that miracles there be;
They Are but miraculous to thee:
So many links concealed remain,
Which form the complicated chain,
True causes and effects between,
In Nature's providential scene.
What though without an obvious cause
We see inverted custom's laws,
Must we immediately infer
That nature from itself can err?
Commanded by the word divine,
Say water changed itself to wine;
Graves opened wide their ponderous jaws;
A breath the sole apparent cause.
Ah, who shall boast, that God revere,
Creation's laws were broken here? It cannot be denied, indeed, but God may act
praeter though not contra scientiam naturae; the supposition, however, is not at
all necessary to justify our belief in miracles.

Might not ten thousand springs unite,
Causes too fine for mortal sight,
Such varied wonders to produce;
To providential ends of use:
Formed when by Heaven, its power displayed,
The earth's foundation first was laid:
Or when that Logos The word. St. John chap. I.
was designed
By miracles to save mankind.
Think not, Lorenzo, nature strays
Whenever the world is in amaze.
Extend thy view from pole to pole:
See one great miracle the whole;
Where all events their cause succeed,
As once the great, first cause decreed;
Where order still from order flows,
And never interruption knows;
Capricious but to mortal sense
The harmony of providence.
How strangely, therefore, bigots err
Who wonders to plain facts prefer;
With listening ear, who love to range,
And greedy eye, for all that is strange;
Rejecting their creator's plan,
The voice of God for that of man.
Besides, thy miracles confined
To former ages of mankind,
Nature in these our latter days
Unmoved by prayer, and deaf to praise,
Never turning back, nor led aside,
To help our wants, or sooth our pride;
But keeping, pack-horse like, its track,
Bearing the world upon its back:
Say such to revelation guide;
For these on hearsay we confide:
In want of proof, on trust must take
For honest jew or gentile's sake;
Since, howsoe'er the truth concealed,
None trust in miracles revealed;
Unless learned Jortin's Or rather that of Maimonides, a Jew, of whom Dr.
Jortin says, he borrowed it. The interpretation, however, is ingenious, and the
Dr. has made the best on it. He supposes Balaam was in a trance or vision.
scheme may pass
Of dreaming Balaam's talking ass.
Do thou, secure, historians trust?
How know we if their tale be just.
From numerous causes prone to err,
Dubious, alas, what these aver.
What from deception ever can save
The man whose trust is in a knave;
To falsehood he how often a tool
Whose confidence is in a fool:
And should, themselves, the honest speak;
The honest may be blind or weak;
Be led a visionary dance,
Like Peter, in prophetic trance, See Acts Chap. 11. and 12.

Or good St. Paul, that seldom knew
If what he said was false or true;
Forgetful, if his word we take,
When fast asleep or wide awake. Cor. 2 Ep. Chap. 12. et passim.

My friend, no wonder, then, at all,
Adventures strange should such befall;
Or that, by wild opinions, they
From truth are blindly led astray;
Who, like old wives in winter nights,
Hear, see, and feel, and chat with sprights.
Their prudent caution, therefore, just
Who waking dreamers seldom trust;
To whom light visions fact may seem,
And fact itself an idle dream.
In reverence, yet, we all must own
The power and will of God unknown;
Confined not to the narrow bound
Of reason's most extensive round;
Active a thousand ways beside; Providence, says South, acts by methods beside
and beyond the discoveries of man's reason.

Beyond unknown how far and wide.
From gray experience, hence, concealed
The gifts of grace to babes revealed;
From Science hid that sacred fire
Heaven's chosen servants does inspire;
Who, highly favored from above,
Behold descend the all-quickening dove,
Or cloven tongue; the spiritual boast
Of brethren in the Holy Ghost.
Lorenzo, then let you, nor I,
Unless we can disprove, deny.
And yet, in search of truths unknown,
Experience be thy guide alone;
Nay held perception in suspense
Till reason may confirm the sense:
To Science only unconfined
When God, himself, informs the mind.


EPISTLE THE THIRD.

ARGUMENT.
On the infatuation of mankind, respecting paradox and mysteries. -- The
effects and causes of such infatuation. -- The absurdity of supposing ignorance
and folly the means to promote the cause of truth; or that the freedom of
scientifick enquiry is incompatible with the political welfare of society.

SUMMARY.
IT is remarkable that, notwithstanding the universality of those truths which
are founded on common-sense, mankind have ever been so infatuated as to reject
this general and obvious criterion, for the more particular dogmas and
mysterious paradoxes of pretended revelation. -- The moral effects of this
infatuation exemplified in our superficial attachment to religion, our indolent
security in time of prosperity, and our transitory astonishment and penitence
under the immediate weight of misfortune. -- An absurd scheme of education the
grand cause of that cowardice and imbecility of mind, which render us so
ridiculous in speculation and inconsistent in practice. -- The misapplication
of their talents, therefore, who think by increasing such weakness to promote
the cause of truth, or the interest of religion and morality, is placed in a
ridiculous light; as the just object of censure. -- The supposition, also, that
ignorance and implicit subjection to authority are necessary to the well-being
of society, or the political happiness of mankind, is exploded; and shown to be
exemplarily false and absurd: polity in general, as well as religion and
private virtue in particulars, being founded on truth and nature, and not
dependant on the chimerical productions of fancy, the low artifices of faction,
or the knavish cunning of designing falsehood.

EPISTLE THE THIRD.
IF truth in science we may find;
Its root implanted in the mind;
To this so just the world's pretense;
On the plain rules of common-sense;
Our mental faculties to abuse,
How prostituted is the muse!
How long have childish bards too long,
Their hours employed in idle song;
Busied the lineaments to trace
Of withered fiction's painted face;
Where not a native beauty blows;
But cankers eat the budding rose!
Yet, captive to her smiles and wit,
Pleased with their chains, her slaves have writ;
And all the labored pomp of verse
Employed, her fables to rehearse;
While thou, O sacred truth! remain
The theme of every humbler strain.
And yet, if true what each pretends,
How numerous are her rhyming friends!
While such her fond admirers prove,
And tune their rival songs to love.
But, fools in fondness as in awe,
The truth, it is plain, they never saw;
And but themselves her lovers boast,
Because her name the public toast.
So smit with sacred truth and rhyme,
The bard and sophist of the time; Monsieur de Voltaire, remarkable for his
regard to truth; and the profundity of his philosophical speculations.

Long played, by turns, the wit and fool,
The monarch's and the printer's tool;
The jest the genius of the age,
Till hissed and pelted off the stage:
Whence now no more his lyre he strings
For tyrant booksellers and kings;
But, fired with vanity and spleen,
Dotes on the truth unsought, unseen;
Chaunting, so happy to be free,
Enraptured rhymes on liberty.
Such lovers truth must ever despise;
Who see her but with borrowed eyes,
Who only play the lover's part,
No real passion at the heart.
For say, what lover's passion true
For beauty that he never knew?
So eastern monarchs love their wives,
Though barren strangers all their lives.
So loved la Mancha's famous knight
The fair, for whom he swore to fight;
Fired by the enthusiastic rage,
With men and monsters to engage.
Yet, asked, for whom this martial strife;
"He never saw her in het life:
"Nor was he positive, God wot,
"Whether, indeed, she lived or not."
Thus bards too often in truth's defense,
Break through the rules of common-sense;
And; over his rival each t'aspire;
Strive which shall prove the greatest liar.
Strange to the liberty of thought,
Vile slaves! but seeking to be bought;
To lying faction early trained;
A purchase by the truth disdained.
Mean-time, as insolent as vain;
They freedom's sacred name profane;
And, boasting, hug the chains that bind
That worst of slaves, the servile mind.
Such, Dryden, thou, supreme in wit,
Immortal and unrivaled yet:
How honored; might not truth accuse
Thy venal, prostiuted muse.
Say thou it is strange the world should rest
Content, by falsehood thus depressed?
Alas, thou little know mankind,
That, seeing, imitate the blind;
In spite of truth and open day,
In darkness choose to grope their way;
Suspecting plainness of disguise,
The obvious sense of terms despise;
From sound or derivation gleaning,
Some hard-word, deuteroscope meaning:
While each impostor's word prevails
In mystic parables and tales;
Neglected even the voice of Heaven,
When rational instructions given.
Look back through each successive age:
How honored the mysterious page!
What millions have been made the tools
Of knaves, whose natural prey are fools!
How strangely tricked deluded crowds
Who, truth expecting from the clouds,
And therefore gaping up in the air,
On error stumbled unaware!
Thus an astrologer of old,
In learned history we are told;
Contemplating the milky way,
Neglected that before him lay;
And led by wandering planets, fell,
Unluckily into a well.
Yet ever with slander branding those
Who sought the naked truth to expose:
Short sighted mortals, in their pride,
Thus strove their ignorance to hide;
By holding all beyond their view
Beyond investigation too.
Lorenzo, our misfortune here
The effect of idleness and fear.
The sluggard shuns inquiry's task,
Because too great the pains to ask;
Stifling the emotions of his breast,
TO indulge his lazy brains in rest.
A paradox, yet such the fact,
"More fear to think than fear to act;
"In thought though danger we surmize,
"In act while real danger lies." Mr. Hume.

In truth, my friend, it is sad to find
Hence rise the zeal of half mankind;
Religion but the compound vice
Of indolence and cowardice.
Even pious christians, much I fear,
Often practically atheists here.
How deaf and blind to calls of grace
When nature wears a smiling face:
But when she frowns; in wild amaze,
Look how the affrighted cowards gaze.
When clouds drop fatness on the plains,
In mildly soft descending rains;
In their due season harvests smile,
And plenty crowns the peasant's toil:
As nothing rare, as nothing new,
We take the blessing as our due.
For O! prosperity's a lot
At ease enjoyed, with ease forgot.
In June's warm sun and April's shower
We trace not an Almighty power:
Ingrates! so light of Heaven we make,
Nor think the hand that gives may take.
But ah! when threatening storms arise;
When thunders rattle through the skies;
When the tall mountain bows its head,
And earthquakes vomit up the dead;
Behold whole nations prostrate fall
Before the mighty God of all.
TO appease his anger now their care,
Lo, all is fasting, sighs and prayer;
Till, the dread storm blown happily over,
They rise and revel as before,
Forget, or ridicule, the rod;
And laugh to scorn the fear of God.
Nor only, moved when danger's nigh,
Our fears awake the general cry;
Imaginary scenes, alike,
The dastard soul with terror strike;
While to the coward's optics seem
Light straws, as each a giant's beam.
In honor thus of God above,
So weakly draw the cords of love;
While nature's groans, or fancy's fears,
Drive, headlong, down the vale of tears.
Lorenzo, would thou freely trace
Whence grows a cowardice so base?
At the early dawn of moral sense
The infatuation did commence;
And, propagated since by art,
We all have more or less a part.
Ere hermit bald or pilgrim gray
Had worn the solitary way;
Ere yet the monk had told his beads;
Ere yet credulity or creeds;
To school, with sober Reason sent,
Young Genius to Experience went.
The latter, though, as yet, it is true,
No wiser than the former two,
In charge the tender pupils took,
And with them read in nature's book.
So pedagogues unlettered use
No class of blockheads to refuse;
But gravely undertake to explain
The arts themselves must first attain;
Sufficient if the master goes
Before his blund'ring pupil's nose.
Careful his vacant hours t'employ,
Now Reason proved a hopeful boy.
But Genius, insolent and wild,
By nature an assuming child,
A treacherous memory his lot,
The little that he learned forgot;
Nor gave himself a moment's pain
To con his lessons over again:
But, trusting to his forward parts,
Debauched with wit the sister- arts;
Who, yet unsettled, young and frail,
Enamored, listened to his tale;
And, since the cause of dire disputes,
Turned out abandoned prostitutes:
By priest and prophet, once enjoyed,
To basest purposes employed;
For ages past, their only use
To vitiate reason or traduce.
For this, Tradition foremost came,
Instruction was her maiden name,
Now grown a smooth-tongu'd slippery jade,
An arrant mistress of her trade.
She told the stories, over and over,
That genius told the arts before,
Repeating lies, as liars do,
Till in the end they think them true;
And when detected in her lie,
"Mystery" -- the biter's arch reply.
By this fine dame our mothers taught,
Their scheme of education wrought;
So trained us early to deceit,
To look on reason as a cheat;
To lies first tuned the opening ear;
Awoke our earliest sense to fear;
With monsters and chimeras vain,
Filled the soft head and turned the brain;
Till the fond fools, to top their part,
Fixed the rank coward at the heart.
Nor with our growing years released;
The nurse but moulds us for the priest;
Who, lest his ward, grown sly or stout,
Should find the knavish secret out,
The bugbear from his reach removes,
And all the old woman's tale improves,
Passions more riotous to quell,
Changed the dark hole for darker hell;
The truant damned for naughty play,
Black monday now the judgment day;
Gay hopes for promised toys are given,
And endless holidays in Heaven.
The groundless fear and vain desire,
Which hence mankind in youth acquire;
How deeply rooted do we find,
How fixed the impressions on the mind;
The weakness of those childish fears,
Too often increasing with our years;
While every infant joy and strife,
Improved, is carried into life.
For see the idiot and the wise,
Each from his own fond shadow flies;
Like curs that run till nature fails,
A bladder fastened to their tails.
With idle fears the world to abuse,
Assistant here the inventive muse:
The tale of wonder early taught;
When playful, young and void of thought,
By stroling Fancy led astray,
The vagrant, troul'd the jovial lay.
Alas of mirth and pleasure cured,
To horrour's brownest shade inured;
By love of wonder since betrayed,
To lend fantastic Spleen her aid:
For whom her numbers, sad and slow,
In dismal melancholy flow;
Condemned to murmur all the day,
To sigh and groan the midnight lay;
The skull, the spade, the shroud, the hearse,
The doleful implements of verse;
Or doomed prepost'rous tales to tell,
By brainsick Fiction brought from hell.
For know the unwary muse was caught
While Fiction yet her friend was thought;
A hag, by Ignorance badly nursed,
With craving appetite accursed,
To Spleen's embrace, while yet a maid,
The dire chlorosis had betrayed.
Since when, the wretch has roam'd abroad,
Her sullen tyrant's willing bawd;
A vile procuress, to supply
The love of wonder with a lie.
Hence bards, that reason less than rail,
Affect to tell the woeful tale;
Or vent their moralizing rage;
As bugbears of a fearful age;
To truth pretending to be led
by megrims in the sick-man's head;
As if with zeal prophetic burned
The wretch whose blister'd head was turned;
The fittest those the truth to teach,
By fevers half-depriv'd of speech;
Whose fault'ring tongues most loud complain,
When death or doctors shake the brain.
Nor seldom, by transition led
From dying moralists to dead,
Tristful, in hypocondres vexed,
The musing parson chews his text;
Some solemn scene of dullness sought,
To aid his rectitude of thought;
The murky vaults, the haunted cells,
Where moping melancholy dwells,
And fear, that kneels in piteous plight,
Her straggling hair all bolt upright.
Fit comrades these as ever could choose
The splenetick or maudlin muse;
Her doleful ditties proud to sing
Where sadness spreads her dusky wing;
Where croaks the siren of the lake
The light-of-heart from ease to wake;
And solemn owls, in concert grave,
Join hoot the worldly-wise to save.
'Twas thus enthusiastic Young;
'Twas thus affected Hervey sung; As I have professed to proceed on the
Horatian principle, Nullius addictus jurare in verba magistri, it may be
observed, that in this work, no scruple is made of treating some respectab1e
names with that freedom which becomes an advocate for the truth: the mention of
which is conceived a sufficient apology, if any be necessary, for such
occasional strictures, as the subject led me to make on cotemporary writers.

Whose motley muse, in florid strain,
With owls did to the moon complain;
Cleared at the morn her raven throat,
To sound the glibber magpye's note.
Meanwhile religion gravely smiled
To see grown piety a child;
In leading-strings to find her led,
By those her fost'ring hand had bred.
For why confined the moral muse,
To blasted oaks or baleful yews:
Over graves to make fantastic moan,
And deepen horrour's dismal groan?
Say, has alone the mouldering tomb
For pious meditation room?
Ah! wont with meek-eyed peace to rove,
Through church way path or silent grove;
Her grateful influence round her shed,
Where groan the sick, or sleep the dead;
With truth and soberness serene,
Enlivening every solemn scene;
Disarming terror of it is power,
To wander at the midnight hour;
Sweet philomel, harmonious spright,
The only spectre of the night.
Can love of truth impose the task,
To lurk beneath a gorgon mask;
To stalk, in garb terrifick clad,
And scoul the weak and wicked mad;
Or drive the wretch, overwhelmed with care,
In godly frenzy, to despair?
Is folly vice, fear makes it worse;
Reflection is the coward's curse:
Unless remorse in mercy given,
To damn self-murderers to heaven.
Why, then, is sought the midnight shade
From vice or falsehood to dissuade?
Is night less vicious than the day?
Does error guide the solar ray?
Or is exhaled, like morning dew,
The moral object or the true?
O, most ridiculous the scene,
Where super stition feeds the spleen;
Where the gray spectre stalks to view,
As burns the expirin taper blue;
Or dances over the dizzy sight
The form of many a dreadful spright:
Meanwhile a victim to his fears
The moon-struck moralist appears.
For when the brain wild fancy fires;
Reason most prudently retires.
As sober men from drunkards part,
For such companions grieved at heart.
Awes, then, with tremulous restraint
The painted urn or plaster saint?
Humbles the mutilated bust
The rotten sinner to the dust?
Lorenzo, here, no error make,
Nor cowardice for conscience take
Alas, repentance, void of root,
May blossom fair yet fail of fruit:
Attrition vain and insincere
Mere weakness all, unmanly fear.
In the dark grove what horror reigns
To chill the blood in Chiron's A modern Centaur -- See the preface to a book
entitled the Centaur not fabulous.
veins,
When the ignis fatuus glares, by night,
Terrifick witchcraft to his sight;
Or, animated by his fears,
Alive the fresh-lopp'd elm appears;
A giant ghost the nestling thrush,
That shakes the formidable bush;
Securely perching on whose breast,
The anxious blackbird builds its nest;
Or, on its arm-extending spray,
The nightingale repeats her lay:
The heroic titmouse or the wren
Less fearful than the sons of men;
Who yet to conscience give the lie,
And dare the power of truth defy.
For know, no tremour can impart
Conviction to the skeptick's heart:
Nor takes, like agues, in a fright,
Trembling impiety its flight.
Behold the tyrant's iron hand,
That holds in chains a captive land;
In whose firm grasp imprisoned lies
Bold freedom, struggling as it dies;
Crushed by whose weight, the monarch bleeds
And sceptres break like blighted reeds:
See this strong hand let fall the rod,
And tremble if the bulrush nod;
Belshazzar's like, enervate fall,
If laid a finger on the wall:
The wretch, of God nor man afraid,
Yet trembling at an empty shade.
Nor only fear the immoral crew;
The coward pious tremble too:
Philosophy herself a fool,
Attended by her nurse to school.
Such dupes to fear, at times, we find
The best, the wisest of mankind!
For Oh! what antidote so strong
As poison, that has worked so long!
What drug eradicates the pest,
Sucked from the mother's tainted breast?
In vain the doctor we may try:
No doctor's fee our cure can buy:
Though, tamp'ring with the dire disease,
Licentiates mock with present ease;
And emp'ricks, salving every sore,
With nostrums make, it rage the more.
Say thou, "in, policy, afraid
"To spoil the priest's and lawyer's trade,
"The statesman, topping the divine,
"Supports with power the same design;
"To keep the inquisitive in awe,
"Smacking his long-tail'd whip, the law;
"Or thundering in the vulgar ear
"Implicit faith and groundless fear:
"The nostrums these of church and state;
"To make a nation good and great."
Thus forfeit patriots that pretense
They make, as men, to common-sense?
Can ignorance be understood
As needful to the public good;
That free inquiry such decry;
And boast their salutary lie?
Or, are they here by habit led,
And innovation's tumult dread?
So sacred held the stated rules
Of custom, lawgiver to fools!
Yet custom's rules caprice has broke,
And turned her statutes into joke;
Nor boast her laws, however old,
Resistance to the power of gold.
Shall science, then, still drag her chain,
And sigh for liberty in vain?
Forbid it Heaven! that thus the mind,
By tyrant policy confined,
Should bow while falsehood bears the sway,
And give the cause of truth away.
Is this, Lorenzo, to be free?
Are these the sweets of liberty?
That glorious priv'lege yours and mine,
In our own sties, like sensual swine,
At will, to grumble, eat and drink;
But ah, prohibited to think!
Our, nobler appetites denied
Their proper feasts, and damned for pride;
Forbad our reason to employ;
Deprived of each sublimer joy;
Robbed of the privilege to know,
Man's chief prerogative below!
May Britons boast, of all mankind,
The nobler fortitude of mind;
To set blind prejudice apart;
To rend the old woman from the heart;
To laugh at blind tradition's rules,
The mother and the nurse of fools?
Have they with blood so dearly bought
Their boasted privilege of thought;
To throw like schoolboys, tired with play,
The long disputed prize away?
Ah! had not custom often failed,
What barbarism had still prevailed?
Deaf to the call of truth and grace,
Denying reformation place,
What lengths still stubborn faith had run,
To end what madd'ning zeal begun?
In honor still of Moloch's name,
Our children might have passed the flame;
By persecution's faggot raised;
Religious fires in Smithfield blazed;
Or now, as in a Stuart's reign,
Been died with blood Ierne's plain.
Nay still how prepossessed we find
With pious falsehoods half mankind.
Think from the stake how late reprieved
Wretches, no charity, relieved:
Oh horror! to the slaughter led,
For wearing rags and wanting bread;
Doomed by inhuman, legal rage,
Martyrs to poverty and age. The unhappy victims to an act of parliament, not
long since repealed, by virtue of which many hundreds of poor wretches were
formerly hanged, or burnt, for witchcraft.

See still the enthusiastic band
Cant, whine and madden over the land;
By scripture-craz'd fanatics led,
Westley, or partners at their head.
See even the learning of our schools
Perverted to bewilder fools;
The words of plainness to disguise,
And baffle reason with surprise;
While truth and nature plead in vain
Against the comment of Roman. A famous Hutchinsonian divine, of the church
of England.

Ah! think how fatal, soon or late,
Such crazy members to the state:
How dangerous to the public weal
Blind ignorance and foolish zeal.
Reflect in what a dreadful hour
Nonsense usurped the hand of power;
When puritans the land o'er-run,
And sacrilege was pious fun:
While wretches, for their country's good,
Dipped their vile hands in royal blood.
Is ignorance the curse of God? Shakespeare.

Avert good Heaven the impending rod!
O leave, ye patriots, leave the mind
In search of knowledge unconfined:
Lest truth your cunning should despise,
Returning to its native skies. If men were not to declare their opinions in
spite of establishments, either in church or state, truth would be soon
banished the earth. Ded. to Essay on Spirit.

Good policy to truth's allied;
By science guided not the guide.
Cease too, ye bards, so wondrous wise,
T'instruct by means you should despise.
In sober sadness, much too long
Mankind have listened to your song;
Have strained the mental eye, to see
Your false, fantastic imag'ry;
With gaudy colors glaring bright,
To captivate the vulgar sight;
The gaping idiot's grin of praise,
Or stare of ignorance to raise.
Nay, though approved your moral ends,
Ye still are truth's mistaken friends,
Ah! full as dangerous to her cause
As even those who spurn her laws.
No visionary fears intrude
Where triumphs moral rectitude.
Truth all the artifice disdains
Of dungeons deep, and clanking chains;
Skulks not in life's sequestered way;
But walks abroad in open day.
It Is Falsehood, her grim face to hide,
Shuffles on nature's darkest side;
Baffling, in terrour's murky den,
The scrutiny of honest men.


EPISTLE THE FOURTH.

ARGUMENT.
On the weakness of the human understanding. -- The abstract existence of the
Deity. -- The incomprehensibility of the divine nature, and the incongruity of
pretended atheism.

SUMMARY.
AS it is necessary to our success in scientifick researches that the mind
should be divested of its prejudices, in favor of tradition and custom; so,
however extensive be the freedom of enquiry, it is equally necessary that the
object of investigation be adapted to the limits of the understanding: mankind
always falling into error and confusion, in their attempts to discover the
knowledge of things beyond their capacity. However true, therefore, may be many
of our discoveries in the system of Nature; God, the author of that system, is
abstracted from it and above our comprehension. -- Hence our pretensions to
describe, or define, the Deity, are palpably absurd and ridiculous. For, though a
created Being may ascribe to its creator the most respectable of all known
perfections, yet, as all its ideas of perfection are relative to itself, the
attributes human beings ascribe to God are necessarily the superior qualities
of humanity. -- Notwithstanding, however, the Deity is so far removed from our
enquiries, and thereby confessedly no object of philosophical knowledge, yet
the actual disbelief of the existence of a God is denied: the arguments for and
against atheists composing, in fact, a very ridiculous dispute: as the
impossibility of denying the being of a first cause is evident; and the rest of
the controversy a mere cavil about words, of no determinate meaning.

EPISTLE THE FOURTH.
RULED by no giant hopes or fears,
Whose stature grows with length of years,
In search of truth expect to find
The labor suited to the mind;
With genius, nature bearing part,
The strict, yet gentle, nurse of art.
Then aim not thou a point to hit,
Above the reach of human wit;
As if mankind could judge of aught
Beyond the ability of thought.
Join not, Lorenzo, blindly those.
Who first would nature's God disclose;
Their moral and religious schemes
Building on theologick dreams;
Deduced the principles they own
From others equally unknown.
For, say the voice of reason true;
Be ours a just abstracted view:
Be it the privilege of man,
To trace exactly nature's plan;
The scale of beings in his hands,
To know the point at which he stands,
Compared with all he boasts to know,
As well above him as below:
Yet, if, of human logic vain,
He link to Heaven a kindred chain,
Conclusions idle soon he draws;
And Heaven prescribes by human laws.
Imagine thou in what degree
A seraph stands 'tween God and thee;
The neck how lowly do thou bend
Before thy bright seraphick friend?
But place thyself a mite unseen
And being infinite between;
In this comparison, says pride,
A seraph thou, to God allied.
Thy pride, Lorenzo, disbelieve;
Let Lock nor Addison deceive;
For though creation's varied plan
Assigns degrees respecting man,
Yet, bigot, know, and learn to fear,
God is beyond thy proper sphere.
Created beings, all his care,
Does he with them creation share?
Ah no! the system all our own,
God, the creator, stands alone:
At equal distance all his plan,
The mite, the seraph, or the man.
Is it not so, the passive clay
Of yon Corinthian column gay,
That gilt entablature or base,
Or marble of yon shining vase,
Resemble more the artist's mind
Than if to meaner use consigned.
Absurd! is Jones's genius known
By the great model or the stone?
The pile, erect to Trajan's name,
Affected not by empty fame,
The cross revered, the honored bust,
And trodden floor are kindred dust:
For all in one degree respect
Their sovereign lord, the architect.
How justly then soever we plead
That reason nature's book does read,
As by its known established laws
Of each effect we trace the cause,
Those laws can never, themselves, confine
The legislative power divine:
Whose will those very laws decreed
And bad the effect the cause succeed:
Agent, in some superior scheme,
Of which in this we can but dream.
Bear Atticus the critick's rod
In vain we, then, define a God;
In vain we attributes bestow;
Or reason, here, from what we know.
Though science teach, religion warm,
What wild ideas still we form?
Imperfect embrios of the brain,
That strive to scale the Heavens in vain.
Too short to reach beyond the sky
The focus of the mental eye;
Too cold our most transporting zeal
To paint what heavens and light conceal.
Yet will the skeptic ask me why?
Go, rise and to the dog star fly.
Thou can not: nor the cause unknown.
Central attraction holds thee down;
A power occult, which, ere thy birth,
Fast bound thee to thy native earth:
From which thou never can hope to rise
To lunar plains or solar skies.
Nor less, within it is sphere, confined
The subtle essence of the mind.
What though it boast the power to rove
In freedom through the plains above;
Though winged it is active feet to run,
With Merc'ry round the central sun;
Given it far distant worlds to explore;
And seas of space without a shore:
Yet, still, within creation's round,
Within our narrow system bound;
Of what is above or what without
We harbor universal doubt.
Say light prevails, no contrast shade
Outlines the void we would prevade:
If darkness reign no chearing ray
Delineates blind inquiry's way.
Hence, mortal man, must ever be
Thy author, God, unknown to thee;
Destined thy erring way to trace
Through nature's parti-colour'd space.
Let ignorance, then, her idol dress
In justice, love, and happiness;
Adorn with mercy's golden chain,
With all the virtues grace its train;
And then adore in humble plight,
Calling those fopp'ries infinite.
The pagan thus, despised as blind,
Creates his idol to his mind;
Thinking his deity expressed
By bird or beast he likes the best;
Then bows before the painted shrine;
And calls his wooden God divine.
Cast the presumptuous thought aside:
It Is not humility but pride;
Unless that truly humble we,
TO adore the God humanity.
And such it is: for whence arise
Our virtues but from moral ties;
Whose known relations thus define
That essence mortals call divine.
Lorenzo, ready for reply,
Lay not thy prompt objection by.
Thou say "thy friend himself deceives,
"Nor God adores nor God believes:
"For though the mind the power descry,
"If left its essence in the sky,
"If none imagined or displayed,
"To nothing adoration paid:
"In me no certain faith is found;
"My deity an empty found."
Not so: for, granting, I confess,
Thy attributes a God express;
Thou say thyself "still undefin'd
"The perfect, by the imperfect, mind."
And to thy attributes must join
Thy infinite or thy divine.
As jugglers, who, to enhance deceit,
To sacred science give their cheat,
While, with the curtain, still they hide
The slight of hand too closely eyed:
So sly theologues here impart
The hocus pocus of their art;
Holding religion's sacred veil,
Where slights of understanding fail.
For know, alas, their wisest plan
Displays but a superior man,
Whom infinite the conjurer's rod,
Presto, converts into a God.
Till, then, they solve our problem right,
And tell us what is infinite,
They still must be reduced to own
Their compound deity unknown:
To all, or reasoning or inspired,
This infinite a term required.
Differs Lorenzo, then, with me?
In terms alone we disagree:
Perfection infinite is thine,
Indefinite perfection mine.
Condemn not, then, half understood.
I not deny that perfect, good,
All-gracious, merciful, and wife,
God reigns, supreme, beyond the skies, For, to deny that the moral
perfections, ascribed to God, are, in no degree or affinity whatever, his
proper attributes, would be as unphilosophical as to assert, on the other hand,
that our ideas of goodness, justice, mercy, etc. are strictly applicable to the
deity.

Neither, it is true, my terms imply;
But, granting none, I none deny:
Requiring but to acquiesce
That thou thy infinite express.
Idly does Bolingbroke refine;
Granting that wisdom is divine,
While, as absurdly, he denies
Justice and goodness to the skies.
Ideas, equally our own,
Our goodness as our wisdom's known;
To both as hard to reconcile
Or nature's frown or nature's smile.
Alas! no attributes of thine
Can ever the deity define;
Impossible to judge, or know,
Of God above from man below: At least so far as to judge of his providential
designs or ultimate determinations, from our supposed knowledge of his
attributes: for how shall we know what may be consistent or inconsistent with
God's justice and goodness, when even moral goodness and justice between man
and man, are points in dispute.

Reserved the prospect of the skies
To gratify immortal eyes.
Lorenzo, let us reason right.
No finite spans an infinite;
Unless, with Matho, versed in arts,
We hold the infinity of parts.
But none the absurdity will plan,
That God can be contained in man;
Though, as absurdly, they suppose
Our partial gifts the God disclose.
Joinst thou, with Florio, the dispute,
TO enhance each moral attribute?
Pretending "these, however crude,
"Divine perfection does include:
"As species in a genus they,
"Or parts, which, joined, the whole display."
So, with the grandeur all t'inspire
Of the gay mansion of his fire,
An idiot heir, his mother's fool,
Taught his synecdoche at school,
Conceived by part the whole was shown;
And took a sample of the stone.
Convinced, does Polydore, with me,
That God's indefinite agree,
Yet argue "that our partial view
"May still be relatively true:
"For, if no abstract lights we gain,
"'It Is just our best to entertain;
"Our God to call that wondrous cause,
"In nature traced, by nature's laws."
Mistake not here nor God dethrone:
The first mechanic cause be known;
It Is of some prior cause the effect;
Which no known similars respect.
The God we, then, by this define
Nor self-existent nor divine.
Be known creation's various ties,
Whence physical relations rise;
Of each effect the various cause;
Attraction and repulsion's laws;
That primum mobile be found
That drove Des Cartes' whirlpools round;
Let matter, motion, either, join,
To form thy attributes divine;
Striving if possible to rise
To the first agent in the skies:
Be next explained to mortal sense,
The wondrous scheme of providence;
Down from those great important springs,
On which rebounds the fate of kings,
To those, so exquisitely small,
Destined to let the sparrow fall:
Say thou the knowledge hence derived
Of him those systems has contrived?
Alas! from hence we only trace
The features of creation's face;
The front it bears to human kind;
But not its self-existing mind.
Should we, presuming to display
The spirit of the golden day,
Thus, call its essence its result,
Attraction, fire, alike occult;
Or say it is vegetation green;
Who'd think it is the sun we mean?
So here to absurdity we fall
Nor thus define a God at all.
Yet while, to thee I freely own,
I reverence a God unknown;
Think not, through ignorance or pride,
A God was ever yet denied.
No atheist By an atheist is meant simply one that denies the existence of a
God -- Divines indeed give that name to skepticks and deists indifferenty. Dr.
South, if I remember right, seems to have thought it more easy to be a
speculative than a practical atheist: though, in the strict sense of the word,
whatever we conclude concerning the latter, the former appears to me impossible.
ever was known on earth
Till fiery zealots gave him birth,
For controversy's sake, their trade,
And damned the heretic they made.
Does Clody, impudent and vain,
Deny a God, in skeptic strain,
And yet in ignorance advance
That nature is the work of chance?
Theologists, absurdly wise,
With their anathemas despise;
For well may Clody these inflame,
Whose God exists but in a name;
A technick term, devised at school,
I pity Clody as a fool.
To Epicurus' strains belong
The censures of an idle song.
For say "united worlds might join
"By accident, and not design;
"Atoms might luckily contrive,
"And strangely find themselves alive;
"Or, by some other scheme as wild,
"The world be fortune's favorite child."
Explain the terms -- say what is meant
By atoms, fortune, accident.
What meanst thou but the efficient cause
Of nature's works and nature's laws?
O, think not, then, the eternal mind
To term or epithet confined;
But take away or change the name;
And Clody's God and mine is the same.
Say thou "in chance a power defined,
"Fortuitous, absurd, and blind,
"Unworthy that stupendous plan,
"Which nature's scenes display to man;
"Where grace, with harmony allied,
"And wisdom strike, on every side."
Alas! to Clody these unknown:
For wondrous wisdom's all his own.
In nature nothing he surveys;
That actuates his soul to praise:
In vain the planets ran their course,
Obedient to impulsive force;
The excentrick comets, far and wide,
Pursue the same unerring guide;
In vain describes their varied race,
In equal times, an equal space:
In vain through microscopick eyes,
Innumerable wonders rise;
On the green leaf whole nations crawl,
And myriads perish in its fall.
Ah me! what bears the barren mind!
What beauty can affect the blind!
Should Clody then his chance disclaim,
And own a deity, by name,
The blund'ring deist would advance
A God, no wiser than his chance.
Boasts nature, therefore, no design?
Say whence, Lorenzo, yours and mine.
Did wisdom's sons themselves create?
Their birth it is owned they owe to fate;
To fate capricious blind and dull;
Design locked up in the atheist's skull.
But say, my friend, how came it there?
Lit chance upon occasion fair,
From odds and ends of matter joined,
To form an intellectual mind?
Egregious blunder! gross surmize!
"Nature's a fool yet man is wise."
Is there a mortal, sound of brain,
Who such a tenet can maintain?
O, no -- for words let fools contest,
Atheism's a mere, though impious, jest.
How obvious is the truth! and yet,
What learned volumes have been writ;
How scholiasts labor to refute,
Where none do actually dispute!
Of the first-cause, or fools or wise,
The pure existence none denies;
But in it is essence Essential attributes.
disagree:
For who defines infinity!
Blush not, Lorenzo, then, to own,
The eternal God a God unknown;
Whose face, to mortal eye denied,
Can never gratify thy pride.
To him your votive altars raise,
As Athens did in ancient days;
Nor dare pollute his sacred shrine
With human sacrifice divine;
But humble adoration bring,
And silent praise; fit offering!
So the Peruvian, pure in heart,
Strange to the guile, or guilt of art,
Unawed by tenet, text, or tale,
Erects his temple in the vale,
Sacred to the universal mind,
The God and guide of human kind.
No firstlings here affront the skies,
Nor clouds of smoking incense rise:
No hypocrite with acid face;
No convert tortured into grace;
No solid skull, in wisdom's cowl;
No hooded hawk, nor solemn owl,
Nor blind, nor ominous invade
This spotless consecrated shade:
But, as the native of the spray,
Man hails his maker, with the day;
By nature taught, Heaven asks no more,
In spirit and in truth to adore.


EPISTLE THE FIFTH.

ARGUMENT.
On happiness. -- The apparent incapacity of mankind for its enjoyment. -- The
comparative pain and pleasure of human sensations; and their relation to our
physical and moral constitution.

SUMMARY.
NEXT to the absurdity of puzzling ourselves in the investigation of matters
beyond our capacity, and equally an obstacle to our inquiries after truth, is
the folly of our constant pursuit, and in spite of as constant disappointments,
our expectations of happiness -- The term is certainly left vague and
ill-defin'd even by those philosophers who, pretending it to be attainable,
affect to teach us how happiness may be acquired -- Its meaning is,
nevertheless, obvious; and is determined from the tenor of its acceptance
with the generality of mankind. In which sense, it is shown to be hitherto
unattain'd; and that, not only from the impossibility of externals to confer
happiness, but, from the evident incapacity of human beings to be made happy --
It is hence, also, declared unattainable; and even the most laudable means
whereby it is pursued, as those of knowledge, religion, and virtue are
experimentally, and logically, shown to be incapable of conferring happiness.
-- In fact, every state, age and condition of life having its several distinct
anxieties and consolations, it appears that a continued sense of either
happiness or misery is incompatible with our nature; as well as with the very
essence of pleasure and pain in general: our sensations of both which are
merely comparative and reciprocally necessary to that of each other. Whence
happiness and misery are evidently relative to, and dependant on, the
constitution of the human frame; with which abstract pain and pleasure are
totally inconsistent.

EPISTLE THE FIFTH.
BEyond the science of mankind,
In nature's fane our God enshrined;
Content, Lorenzo, let us trace
The lines, the shadow, of his face;
In humble boldness seek to know
Our heaven on earth; our God below.
To face the sun, to beat the sky
Demand an eagle's wing and eye.
Ah! let not, then, mere birds of night,
Whose wings, whose optics check their flight,
Encouraged by the morning ray
To risk the sunshine of the day,
Their feeble powers too highly rate,
And rush absurdly on their fate;
As in the noontide beams they gaze
Struck blind by Heavens meridian blaze,
For ever after to their cost
To grope; in endless error lost.
Adapted, then, inquiry's plan
To truths as relative to man,
Would thou, Lorenzo, comprehend
Man's physical and moral end,
To future, to immortal views
Conducted by the faithful muse?
Secure while yet in reason's sight,
For thee she takes her daring flight;
Born up on scientifick wing,
Attempts her boldest note to sing;
For thee those winding tracts t'explore;
Where seldom muse has dared to soar.
But, here, as truth we hope to find,
Be left each vain desire behind.
Be thrown those obstacles aside
Which expectation builds on pride;
While busy hope and bustling care
Erect their castles in the air;
Our fertile wishes safe to hold,
Fertile in pleasure, fame or gold,
A treasure valued at no less
Than man's consummate happiness.
For know, if bliss thy end and aim,
Truth but invalidates thy claim:
The exclusive privilege to know
The all we taste of Heaven below.
Is this a maxim wits profess?
"That man was born to happiness:
"Though towers of hope he fondly raise,
"Their structure lasts him all his days:
"In expectation even possessing
"The better half of every blessing,
"His bliss for ever in his view,
"Whenever he pleases to pursue."
My friend, with care such maxims weigh:
Nor run with giddy wits astray.
In search of truth may genius roam;
But bliss, if found, is found at home;
To region, clime nor soil confined
This boasted seed of Heavenly kind.
Ah! vainly boasted, if below
The plant celestial cannot grow!
Say sophists neither more nor less
Than happiness is happiness;
Yet will they boast this state unknown,
This bliss indefinite, their own?
The difference plain 'twixt bliss and woe,
Whatever we feel we surely know:
What state can, then, be ever thine
Which sense nor science can define.
That man, by others is it confessed,
Never is but always to be blessed?
Yet would they teach, in moral strain,
How all may happiness attain?
As well who never was blessed with light
May boast the happiness of sight,
The splendor of the solar ray;
Or teach his comrades blind their way;
As such to thee make ever known
A state of being never their own.
Do thou to prove my judgment wrong
In answer quote thy favorite song?
True bliss, thy Pope if we believe,
All hands can reach, all heads conceive: See Pope's essay on man.

The happiness of each confined,
In truth, to that of all our kind.
Know terms so general naught define.
The bliss of all nor yours nor mine:
As yet distinctly understood
The public and the private good.
Nor does it prove this maxim right
To say that both in one unite;
Unless their union be so plain
That, seeking one, we both obtain:
Since th'individual, for himself,
Applies to riot, fame or pelf:
In spite of all the wise can say,
We seek our bliss a separate way;
Just as the present maggots bite,
Take our own measures for the right;
Or, having no peculiar whim,
Along the tide of custom swim.
Meanwhile, of bliss though all dispute,
None leave their darling substitute.
How short of happiness is gold!
The miser cries; yet keeps his hold.
In women, sighs the battered rake,
What solid comfort can we take!
Ah! what in wine? Silenus asks.
Yet cart the whore; go, stave the casks;
"How shall the sons of Comus live,
"If wine nor women life does give!"
Thus public happiness our care
But for our own peculiar share:
While sons their father's schemes traduce;
And here all patriotism abuse.
However then the specious face
Of wit may countenance the case,
Bliss inconsistently we call
The happiness of one and all.
Nor is it yet precisely meant
By good, ease, pleasure or content.
Good might we variously explain.
Ease is deliverance but from pain.
Pleasure is actual joy confessed:
And mere content but patient rest;
A neutral state, at best and worst,
But negatively blessed or cursed:
That which our happiness we call,
Though that nor this, the sum of all.
The world's plain meaning plainly this,
Some constant state of actual bliss.
No matter whether in degree
Alike bestowed on you or me:
Enough, if, void of fear or pain,
No motive lead us to complain:
Enough, whatever the mode of joy,
If such that it can never cloy.
Look round the world, and tell me true.
Where is such happiness in view?
From monarchs fled, as sings the bard,
His patron's virtue to reward,
Tell me, in truth, was St. John blessed? See essay on man, Ep. 4.

Or did the bitter bard but jest;
Dipping his pen in worse than gall,
An outed statesman blessed to call?
With equal truth the muse might paint
My Lord of Bolingbroke a saint;
Run riot over his dubious fame,
And dub him with a patriot's name:
So worthy of his country's praise!
So meek! so holy all his ways!
Nor, though to him, to him alone
A state of perfect bliss unknown,
Of each complexion, age, degree,
Mankind as far removed as he.
Go, ask, my friend, from door to door,
The high, the low, the rich, the poor;
In court, or cot, if here, or there,
Reside the mortal free from care.
You ask in vain, for joy and strife
Diversify all states of life.
To wield the scythe with sweaty brow,
With wearied arm to guide the plough,
To sow in hope, to reap in joy,
Thine, labor, is the sweet employ.
A life of rest with pain to endure,
To seek in health disease's cure,
To eat the grape, unprun'd the vine,
Laborious idleness is thine.
Yet idleness of care complains
And labor quarrels with its pains.
Nor only found, or made, distress;
Because externals fail to bless:
Lodged in ourselves the taste, and will,
That make externals good or ill;
No earthly blessing, hence, we find
An equal good to all mankind.
Belmore, the sober'st thing on earth,
Dreads the broad laugh, and roar of mirth:
While Clerrio, with a length of chin,
Protracted by perpetual grin,
Though Socrates himself pass by,
Must laugh in ridicule or die.
How elegant, how high refined
The palate of Cardella's mind!
How low, how vulgar Cotta's soul,
That feels no rapture in a vole!
See thousands, as in love with strife,
Pursue it, fretting, all their life;
And darken, with the clouds of spleen,
The sky of providence serene:
Wretched to find another eased,
And most unhappy when they are pleased.
How strange! while some, with patient toil,
Raise comfort on a barren soil
Or pleasure strike, by native dint,
From cruel fortune's hardest flint;
The patriarch like, whose rod, we are told,
Earth's stubborn fetters burst, of old;
When gushed the stream from Horeb's rock,
To water Israel's thirsty flock.
Hence not on earth a blessing sent
Gives universally content.
For while so varied is our taste,
Manna itself were show'r'd to waste.
With reason, therefore, we profess
God meant not here our happiness:
Else in the various blessings given
Sure various minds might find their heaven. If, says Mr. Pope, -- To all men
happiness was meant,
God in externals could not place content.
To me, I must confess, the various conditions of humanlife seem so admirably
adapted to the several dispositions ofindividuals, that, if our happiness in
this life were intended, the unequal distribution of the gifts of fortune
affords themost plausible means to effect it.

But know, as different we find
Each individual's turn of mind,
As little with ourselves we see
Ourselves, at various times, agree.
So often our views, our tempers change,
As through life's varied scenes we range.
At times, so different from himself,
The prodigal will hoard his pelf;
Spend greedily the night at play,
To throw next morn his gains away.
At times even misers rob their store,
And give their sixpence to the poor.
At times even trembling cowards fight,
And, desperate, put the bold to flight:
While, sick of fighting and of fame,
The brave, like belgic lions, tame.
How often, my friend, in private life,
We love the maid we hate a wife.
How often the scene, that gives delight
At morn, offends the eye at night.
It Is not the want of that or this:
Possession is the bane of bliss:
And hence of happiness we see
On earth the impossibility.
Yet, with an interested view,
Does still Lorenzo truth pursue?
Do thou suppose th'enlighten'd mind
In truth's researches bliss may find?
That science fancy may restrain,
And fix that weathercock the brain?
Alas, deceive thy self no more;
But give thy vain pretensions over.
For, as a world of fruitless cost
In vain inquiries has been lost;
A world of labor spent t'attain
To knowledge man may never gain:
So millions all their lives have spent,
Searching for bliss in discontent:
For bliss, which but a little thought
Had told them never could be taught.
Yet still they ask; yet still they run
A race that never can be won.
Thus sought, of yore, projecting fools
The summum bonum of the schools;
And wiser heads than those of old
The stone converting all to gold;
Or vain adepts, much wiser still,
To wrest from nature's hand, at will,
Promethean theft, celestial fire;
To animate their wood and wire:
Madmen, that not Monro could cure
Of circles and their quadrature,
Of thinking drunken nature reels,
Like a slung coach, on springs and wheels!
Do thou, instructed in thy youth
To place consummate bliss in truth,
Conceive it somewhere hidden lies,
Among the learned and the wise;
That hence our bliss or misery flow,
The truth to know or not to know?
In vain the learned, in science deep,
In search of bliss, their vigils keep;
In vain the universe explore,
Swift as their search, it flies before,
Through every clime, on every wind,
And leaves the panting wish behind.
O, tell me, what connection ties
So close the happy and the wise.
Did ever the sage in wisdom find
The artless infant's peace of mind?
Proud, knowledge, ever, or boastful art,
Restore to joy the broken heart?
Ah! what avails the truth to know,
When truth's the frequent source of woe;
While gilded fiction's dazzling rays
With sunshine beautify our days,
Or, mildly shed, its silver beams,
Reflected, light our nightly dreams;
While pleasure and its laughing train
Dance, by the moonshine of the brain.
For what is knowledge, but to know
How ignorant our state below?
The more we learn, the more to find,
Beyond our learning, still behind:
Our fruitless wishes to increase,
Whenever our mental prospects cease?
So far from happiness, my friend,
Is science, in its means, or end.
Say thou that bliss the world affect
The smile of God on his elect;
Confined to Abr'am's faithful seed;
And made dependant on our creed?
Go, ask the saints, to whom are given
The best assurances of Heaven,
The few distinguished here on earth
As children of a spiritual birth,
"How gloomy often a state of grace;
"How often hid their Maker's face;
"How often, by satan and by sin,
"Sore buffeted the man within."
These all confess beyond the sky
Their blissful heritage does lie.
Say, is reposed this Heavenly trust
Within the bosom of the just,
While virtue, in itself, you call
The happiness of one and all?
Pretending still, "though yours and mine
"No partial mode of bliss define;
"Yet that our different tastes unite
"In meaning well and thinking right:
"An universal moral this,
"Conducting all mankind to bliss!"
Alas, what sophistry to tell
Of "thinking right, and meaning well:" Pope

Unless this rectitude of thought
With perspicuity be taught;
This honest meaning plainly shown;
So often admired! so little known!
At virtue if we are left to guess,
What is it to say it is happiness?
The way to virtue as to bliss;
If dubious that as doubtful this.
How fruitless therefore but to know
"Virtue is happiness below!"
Say thou, mankind are all agreed
That happiness is virtue's meed?
The service of the work inquire,
And by the labor rate the hire.
Now virtue some to fact confine,
While others place it in design.
These blessed but for the good they do;
And those for all they have in view.
But, if by virtue understood
The mere intent of doing good,
Those fully virtuous may be held,
Who never one lawless passion quelled;
Whom never temptation led astray,
Beyond the tenor of their way;
A sober path by stoics trod;
Nor friends to man, nor foes to God.
Consistent with a state of rest,
If virtue's centred in the breast,
As happy those may surely live
Who nothing give nor have to give,
As those who taste, in ey'ry sense,
The exertion of benevolence.
Some seeming difference yet we find.
What pangs affect the tender mind?
What exquisite sensations rise,
To hear the orphan's piteous cries;
To feel the widow's piercing woe;
When no relief our wants bestow?
Does virtue here rejoice the heart
As when the generous ease impart,
When purest transports warm the breast,
That glows to succor the distressed?
And yet, my friend, 'twere wondrous hard,
If bliss the virtuous rich reward,
In poverty that virtue's zeal
Should double all the pangs we feel;
Each generous sigh, each social tear,
But render want the more severe.
To virtue, therefore, if the deed
Our best designs must yet succeed,
Granting that happy every mind
In such proportion as its kind,
Here in externals do we place
The happiness of human race:
Enabled to relieve distress
As wealth, or power, ourselves possess;
For bliss capacitated more
As blessed with fortune's worldly store.
Fixed, by this scheme, the blissful state,
Exclusive, to the rich and great:
The virtuous poor, but innocent,
Claim, at the utmost, bare content.
Besides, if individuals blessed
As sharers only with the rest,
True happiness with thee to call
Not merely that of one but all,
What is inactive virtue's use?
Can it to social good conduce?
Can it, thus fruitless and confined,
Be called a blessing to mankind?
If then we judge so much amiss
Of virtue, and of virtuous bliss,
If faith, though crowned with alms and prayers,
Has all its pangs, has all its cares,
While, even from knowledge, prospects rise,
That make us miserably wise,
His perfect happiness to reach,
No morals mortal man can teach:
Still Heaven's best vot'ries must confess
No blessings here completely bless:
A compound strange of bliss and woe
Man's variable state below.
Some absent something ours to crave,
Even from the cradle to the grave!
How idly, then, employed the mind
In search of that we cannot find.
For human bliss stands never still;
Our good insep'rable from ill; Virtue, says Mr. Pope, is the -- Point where
human bliss stands still,
And tastes the good without the fall to ill.


Whilst all of pain and pleasure share,
Their hour of joy, their hour of care,
Adapted to each several state;
Fixed and determinate as fate.
The world my friend, an ample field,
Of such examples store does yield.
How throbs the infant's little breast,
Beneath a load of care oppressed;
The care that issues with a sigh;
The tear yet standing in the eye;
Or, caught in laughter's dimple sleek,
Dried up in stealing down the cheek.
See next, among, the sachel'd crowd,
Bold as a hero and as proud,
The little tyrant of his class;
How happy! till condemned to parse,
Or sob beneath the weightier curse
Of scanning Lily's crabbed verse. However puerile this example may seem, there
has been more than one instance of a school-boy's having actually been guilty
of suicide; in order to avoid the discipline of the rod, or the ferula.

In youth how glows the vital fire
'Tween expectation and desire;
Our sanguine hopes our awkard fears,
All suiting unexperienced years.
Still riper joys do manhood bless,
When full-blown fortune we possess?
We riot on the joyous store,
Till health and strength can charm no more;
When disappointment and chagrin
Retaliate all our joys with spleen.
Proportioned next to wasted age,
Insipid joys and peevish rage,
Though dim the exhausted passions burn,
Take, to our latest gasp, their turn.
Thus relative, my friend, we find
The pains and pleasures of mankind:
Adapted all, in due degree,
To human sensibility.
For see, no more alive to smart
Than dead to joy the hard-of-heart:
As far from rapture as despair
The fretful family of care.
Not sickness, pain, nor death itself
Avarus dreads like loss of pelf:
While Lavish offers an estate
To staunch a cut, ere yet too late,
Dispel the headache, or remove
The effects of his intemp'rate love.
Was ever yet the child of mirth
Intensely blessed, or cursed, on earth?
Ah no! how lightly feel a pain
The light-of-heart, or light-of-brain!
The man, so happy as to think,
Life's bitter potion born to drink!
Behold the foolish, weak and blind
The sprightliest, merriest of mankind;
While suffers often superior sense,
Even from its own pre-eminence:
Those follies that the wise: annoy
The destitute-of-wisdom's joy.
The blockhead naturally free
From cares thy knowledge brings on thee,
While Heaven your daily toil to seek,
Poor Ralpho works but once a week:
When left his plough and worldly cares,
He plies his sunday's task at prayers.
Nor puzzled he in truth's research,
Laid all his burden on the church;
The friendly church, by Heaven designed
To help the weak, to lead the blind,
To check the rash, to warm the cold,
T'engage the young, t'amuse the old,
The unthinking from themselves to save,
And bring them calmly to the grave.
Blessed ignorance! from care so free,
Has it, Lorenzo, charms for thee?
Would thou to science, empty name
If void of bliss resign thy claim?
Be like the ass, that plodding goes,
Nor looks beyond his bridled nose?
For me -- O, rather should I ask
Life's most laborious, abject task.
Would even the meanest lot sustain;
Bear every tolerable pain:
To emp'ricks would entrust my cure;
Even to be pitied might endure:
Nay, plague me, Heaven, in every sense,
Ere take my share of reason hence;
Of science ere my soul deprive,
My little portion, whilst alive.
Yet do thou ignorance despise?
The joys of knowledge hence arise.
So strange so little understood
The varied source of mortals' good!
To Heaven my grateful vows be paid
That man in human frailty's made;
That grief and ignorance my lot;
In joy and science since forgot;
Or best remembered in the taste
They give improvement's rich repast.
O say, industrious querist, say,
What raptures court you on the way;
What views delight, from time, to time,
As the steep hills of art you climb.
Such transports never had fired my breast,
If born of sciences possessed,
As when, by want of knowledge fired,
To nature's lore I late aspired;
By slow degrees enlightened grew,
Her volume opening to my view;
To the weak mind as knowledge given;
Knowledge, that wings the soul for Heaven.
Lorenzo, is this doctrine strange?
See thou not, while the seasons change,
How much, as each in contrast felt,
We freeze with cold, by heat we melt.
Thus exquisite our sense of woe
As more refined our pleasures grow:
Pleasure and pain, as light and shade,
By one the other still displayed.
Did never want? to thee denied
The bliss of being satisfied;
In constant fullness but enjoye'd
The insipid good of which we are cloyed.
Say, plenty gives thee bread more white,
It blunts the edge of appetite;
Or, giving wine, malignly first
Robs thee, distasteful, of thy thirst.
How sunk, and terrible, to thee
The hollow, eye of poverty!
While Villius meets her with, a smile,
And sings, or whistles all the while.
Though worn his hands, perplexed, his head,
He relishes the sweets of bread;
Nay patient sees, in want itself,
His crustless cupboard's vacant shelf:
Full many a time, in pleasant rue,
Dancing for joy without a shoe.
Is Fortunatus rich and gay?
Cursed with the modish itch of play;
Bubbled at White's, through lust of gain;
Or jockey'd round New Market plain;
See with his barb his manors fly;
His leaseholds totter with the die;
Braving the storm of many a cast,
His oaks a bet malignant blast,
His card-built villas, one and all,
Like infant architecture, fall.
From sharpers, creditors and duns,
Not half the peril Villius runs;
Whom all the world to trust refuse;
Who nothing owns he dreads to lose.
Ah me! what threatening danger nigh?
Why swells the tear in Delia's eye?
Eclipsed the fairest of the fair
By sad misfortune's drooping air;
Delia on whom kind Nature smiled,
Even at the birth her favorite child,
When, all the graces to combine,
She clothed them in one form divine;
Bestowing grandeur, wit and wealth,
And fortune's best of bounties, health:
Nay, adding, in her generous fit,
Goodnature even to her wit.
With all these blessings yet unblest,
Ah, tell me, fair one, why distressed.
Alas! alas! the belle's reply
"Of Brilliante's birthday suit I die.
You smile at misery like this.
Match it with Delia's sense of bliss.
In rapture ever, with the gay,
To shine at concert, masque or play;
Her greatest happiness to boast
Her name the fopling's reigning toast:
The all in life her wish regards
Summed up in fashions, routs and cards.
Ah, then, how powerful to distress
The important article of dress!
So deeply some may cares affect,
Those trifling cares that you neglect,
Half the solicitude we see
Ridiculous to you and me?
Others there are as lightly hold
Dangers, at which our blood runs cold.
Lo where, beneath the impending cliff
The Norway fowler moors his skiff;
Or, desperate, fifty fathoms high
Suspended, seems himself to fly;
While thus, from rock to rock, he swings;
And, blythe, his summer's ditty sings.
As blythe the sea-boy furls the sail,
Regardless of the blustering gale;
Nor winds, nor waves, disturb his sleep,
Amid the horrors of the deep.
The cordial draught, the downy bed
Had never revived the drooping head,
Had sickness pale, and fainting grief
Never wished for wearied nerves relief.
See Belmont on the sofa laid;
What racking pains his limbs invade!
Take half his gout, the respite given
He calls a blissful taste of heaven.
Give but a youth, dispersing wealth,
Who riots on the bloom of health,
That blissful part, which yet remains;
And his a mortal's bitter'st pains.
Pains which no aggravation know!
Yet, so comparative our woe,
Inflict them when Cleora's kiss,
Kind earnest of approaching bliss,
Has raised the glowing lover's fire
To flaming raptures of desire;
Lo, disappointment joins the curse,
And turns this worst affliction worse.
Correct ideas let us gain.
Our sense of joy we owe to pain;
So strange a paradox is this!
And misery to our sense of bliss;
While such our varying state below,
Even joy degen'rates into woe;
And pains, in sufferance, by degrees,
On their own pangs engender ease;
Their antidote, like scorpions, bring,
TO expel the poison of their sting.
The tension of the extended nerve,
Say Phisiologists, may serve,
The means of pleasure and of pain,
This seeming paradox to explain.
As strung the harp with trembling wire,
So braced with nerves the human lyre,
While such in tune, these sages say,
The smiling hours in concert play:
But if, in change, too lax or tense;
Health strikes no more the keys of sense:
But, tremblingly alive all over,
The tortured strings in discord roar:
While sickness, with her harpy claws,
Stranger to each harmonious cause,
Labors, benumbed, the jarring strain,
That stuns our ear with deaf'ning pain.
Nor yet can health too often repeat
Its music, howsoever sweet;
While, by degrees, lo, every string,
Deprived of its elastick spring,
In general lassitude, full soon
The whole machine grows out of tune.
Should, also, passion, sense or art
Wind up too high the nervous part;
With noise the notes tumultuous tire;
Or breaking strings unman the lyre.
Of pain or pleasure on our frame
The effects, hence, frequently the same;
Thus, full of gladness or of grief,
In tears we find the same relief;
Alike the feeble nerve destroy
Exquisite pain, extatick joy.
The bandit, stretched upon the wheel,
The extreme of torture never can feel;
But, cruelty disarming, lies
Or dead to sense, or really dies.
So, rapture never meant to bless,
Even joy grows pain when in excess.
Indulged to print the burning kiss
On Chloe's lips, how fierce the bliss!
How keen the torture of her charms,
Caressed, to pant within her arms,
Melting in fullness of desire,
Stretched on the rack of bliss, t'expire!
Thus constitutional, below,
Is all our bliss, is all our woe:
Each holding, intimately joined,
Alternate empire over the mind.
Like Persian monarchs, hardly known
Ere tumbled headlong from the throne,
Precarious and as short its sway,
Deposed and sceptred in a day,
Pleasure begins its fickle reign,
And tyrannizes into pain:
When, as to cruel pain we bow,
Its rod grows light we know not how.
Ah, cruel blow to human pride!
Is pain and pleasure thus allied,
That all the sweets of life grow sour
Within the transitory hour!
Complains, Lorenzo? darts behind
No ray of comfort on his mind?
If thus with varied joy and strife
Diversified all states of life;
If human being cannot know
A constant state of bliss or woe;
Worn by sharp misery to the bones,
While grief with intermission groans,
And meagre want, half fed, the while,
Grins forth her grateful, ghastly smile;
Though vain our hopes of bliss, as vain
Our fears of unremitting pain:
Absurd the mischief-making care
That leads us blindly to despair.


EPISTLE THE SIXTH.

ARGUMENT.
On abstract good and evil -- The physical perfection of the material universe,
and the moral harmony observable in the dispensations of Providience.

SUMMARY
THE inquiries, of philosophers into the abstract cause of evil have hitherto
been attended with little success. Indeed, no such abstract evil exists. For,
whatever calamities human life be subject to, their evil depends merely on our
own s;ensibility. Even physical evils, which are the least controvertible, are
evidently relative to their effects on the sufferings, or enjoyments, of
mankind. Whence they must not be accounted abstract evils, or real defects in
the general system of things: of which we have at present but a partial view;
and therefore cannot tell how far apparent imperfections may conduce to the
perfection of the whole. That human life is subject, nevertheless, to palpable
evils cannot be denied: but it should be considered that, as such evils are but
temporary, and are evil but in proportion to the pleasure, or good, by which
they are contrasted, we are not sensible of any abstracted evil, unless a state
of humanity, on the whole, be attended with a greater portion, of pain than
pleasure. This is asserted by many; but is experimentally false. Indeed, on a
fair and impartial estimate, our sufferings and enjoyments seem to stand on an
equal balance. Hence, also, if there be no abstract physical evil in the
universe, there is as little reason for us to hold the existence of physical
good; or to maintain that happiness is the privilege of human life. That
"whatever is is right," with respect to the whole, is allowed; but that it is
therefore good is another consideration: goodness being a term relative to the
happiness of mankind, and not applicable to that general system. The famous
principle of the BEST is therefore futile and frivolous -- As to moral good and
evil: we owe a sense of them purely to physical: for had mankind felt neither
pain nor pleasure, they would never, from the light of nature, have acquired
the ideas of moral good or ill. Those actions, therefore, are morally good
which give rise to more pleasure than pain; and morally bad, vice versa:
Innocence being, strictly speaking, neither good nor evil; and indeed
inconsistent with a state of action. Moral evil appears, hence, to be, also,
merely relative to man; and can by no means be considered as a defect in the
designs of Providence; unless we can be so absurd as to suppose it in the power
of created beings to counterwork the intentions of their supreme creator. On
the other hand, moral good is equally relative, and can have no effect on the
happiness of the first cause, or plead any abstract merit with the Deity. Moral
good and evil, however, in the agent, is necessarily attended with temporary
happiness and misery; in the distribution of which, also, agreeable to relative
merit, it is not improbable that impartial justice is done, even in this life,
in the perfect dispensations of Providence. Our hopes or apprehensions,
nevertheless, of a future state are not hereby cut off. On the contrary, this
life may only be preparatory to a future; where the virtuous and vicious may be
very differently disposed of in the scale of existence. But, whatever be our
lot hereafter, it rests on the good pleasure of our creator: into whose hands
philosophy calmly resigns the hidden concerns of futurity.

EPISTLE THE SIXTH.
IS there who teach that human woe
Must from a source abstracted flow;
Existing in creation's plan,
Some active ill the curse of man;
Some imperfection, or offense,
In physics or in providence?
The question old unanswered lies.
"Whence did the curse of evil rise?"
By Wolfius left and twenty more,
As puzzling as 'twas left before,
To God or devil still assigned
The cause of ill by human-kind.
In disobedience to his God,
Did man himself call down the rod?
Or did the arch-fiend, from Heaven that fell,
Inspire the mischief to rebel?
Yet, sure, if power preventive given,
No angel ever had fell from Heaven;
Man had no tempter known to vice;
Serpent, nor Eve, in Paradise.
Lorenzo, in the pride of sense,
Instruction's deemed impertinence.
She, therefore, daughter of the wise,
Has long been sheltered in disguise;
Entering, beneath the mask of sport,
The presence, though forbid the court:
So fond with young delight to stray,
And moralize the wanton's play,
That even her precepts still prevail
In every favorite, gossip's tale.
Yet so that those who seek to learn
With ease the naked truth discern;
To genius but a pleasing task
To sport with allegory's mask.
The moral, then, from tales deduct;
And let philosophy instruct.
Angelick truths let angels scan:
Ours is the scrutiny of man.
Ours but in reason's bounded course
Allowed to try our native force;
Confined within life's little space
The fleetest genius at the race,
In vain we urge beyond the goal
The ideal coursers of the soul.
Art thou, my friend, so ill at ease
That all thy prospects here displease?
Do thou, in peevishness or pain,
Of nature's system all complain?
Of blunders there, confusion here,
Too distant Heaven, and hell too near!
In mood so splenetick, my friend,
Say what those evils that offend:
Thy doubts propose, thy questions ask,
And take omnisciency to task.
Given thy sagacity offense
By all thou see of providence,
The constitution prone to blame
Of nature's universal frame,
Do thou Heaven's boasted care deny
When tempests sweep along the sky;
Thy feathered geese when whirlwinds bear
Aloft, and scatter, wide in air;
Or from the hills impetuous rains
Descend and strip the autumnal plains?
Concluding the machin'ry vile
When earthquakes shake our stable isle,
When Etna and Vesuvius flame;
To nature each a burning shame!
Finds thy philosophy as soon
Faulty the attraction of the moon,
When death resistless, roaring rides
In triumph over the swelling tides,
Or, bathing in destruction, drowns
Flocks, herds and men and helpless towns;
Or bears them off some mountain steep
All headlong down, to glut the deep?
Or is thy wiser censure bent
Against some comet's dire event?
In time to come, time out of mind,
To fall into the sun designed;
Suspicious that, if planets turn
To comets, ours at length may burn;
And we be doomed, some sultry day,
To his devouring flames a prey!
Lorenzo, is this strain admired,
Here may thou rail till sense be tired.
But judge not thou, as sophists vain,
Of general good by partial gain:
Thinking when crossed our stubborn will
Such is a providential ill.
For know, no abstract cause exists
And battles in creation's lists,
A formal enemy to man,
Since nature's tournaments began,
Inflamed with enmity and power
God's human likeness to devour.
No -- it is impossible a cause
Should counteract creation's laws,
The hand of providence arrest,
Or IIcav'n's determined power contest:
As one or other must prevail,
And one, or both together, fail.
But nature knows no real strife,
However jarring human life,
From evil and from error free;
These only relative to thee.
In icy chains let winter bind
The glebe untrod by human-kind,
Fierce lightenings flash, and thunders roll
Their horrors only round the pole;
Let Malstrooms roar, and Heclas blaze
Where fools nor cowards stand to gaze:
Let islands drown; let mountains melt;
These are no evils till they are felt.
'Mid southern seas and lands unknown
Should agonizing nature groan,
There only ease her future th^oes,
And harmless horrors. round disclose;
Earthquakes would lose their evil name,
And Heaven no longer bear the blame;
Though evils now we loudly call
Lima's, and Ulysippo's, Lisbon, so called from its supposed founder, Ulysses.
fall.
Lorenzo, of creation's plan
But parts are visible to man;
Whence, ign'rant of their separate use,
We think them subject to abuse:
Though all with art consummate join,
Conducive to Heaven's main design.
As parts to complex engines prove,
Inspired by mechanism to move,
This retrograde, and that direct,
In different modes to one effect,
So, howsoe'er they clash to sense,
The several springs of providence,
In concert, at their Maker's will,
Their ends harmoniously fulfill:
Upheld the weight, let fall the rod,
As urges the first mover, God.
How blind are, then, the smatt'ring fools,
Just taught their geometrick rules,
The simple use of rule and line,
To these who nature would confine;
Its laws who else capricious call,
Or say "it acts by none at all;
"The macrocosm's vast engine made
"By one that knew not half his trade;
"Its bungling engineer at hand,
"To help it forward, at a stand."
Impious! like Marli's, does it take
The pains to mend it did to make,
Requiring endless cost and care
To hold in tenable repair?
Ah! no, however to us it seem,
Creation is a perfect scheme.
Lorenzo, let not words deceive.
All imperfection's relative;
Since from conceived amendments came
The patch-work we perfection name;
A term for something understood
Productive still of mortals' good.
But, of perfection absolute
All nature is, beyond dispute.
For all from God is here derived,
And all is perfect God contrived.
"Man surely perfect then" you cry.
As man, most perfect, I reply.
The creature of his Maker's will,
Formed his good pleasure to fulfill,
Destined in the universal plan
To fill his space, and act, as man.
What though on earth the human mind
Involved in ignorance we find,
Impassioned, fickle, given to pride,
Nor resting ever self-satisfied,
Does power comparative t'improve
Perfection positive remove?
As well imperfect might we say
The rising sun at early day,
Since with superior heat and light
It blazes in meridian height.
Formed with progressive powers to rise
From out the dust to tread the skies,
Perfect as such humanity
However lowly in degree.
How ignorant and weak are those
Who nature's author, then, suppose
In providence remains a spy,
To guard his work with, watchful eye;
From fallen angels' base intent
The direful outrage to prevent;
To rescue, or preserve, his plan
From that prodigious creature, man.
Like the young steed, that scours the plain,
Its nature wild and needs a rein?
Or halts it like a foundered jade;
Lame by her frequent stumbling made?
Perhaps, Lorenzo, some mistake
Concerning providence we make;
The powers of nature to divide
From its imaginary guide:
For, if creation has, in fact,
Been long ago a finished act,
What end does laboring time pursue?
Or what has providence in view?
For sure thou will not take the side
Of those, whose ignorance and pride
Maintain the universe designed
Merely to gratify mankind:
A stage, as on a stroler's cart,
Where drolls itin'rant play their part,
In grinning mirth, or brawling strife:
The tragi-comedy of life!
Was, then, heaven's wondrous power displayed;
This system in perfection made,
Only to wear itself away?
Stupendous frame! for mere decay!
Its worlds to wander through the void,
Destroying till themselves destroyed;
Or, in some future, fabled, days,
To take imaginary blaze
At flames, that all to ruin turn,
Annihilating as they burn?
Risk'd, then, the censure of my wit,
I hold the world unfinished yet:
Time building what Heaven's wisdom planned,
Creation's work even yet in hand.
Through nature's scenes in order range;
See all things in continual change;
All to some point progressive run,
To do, as well as be undone.
Existing for so short a space,
Thousands we know but by their place,
Which changed, by changing form, we say
The things themselves are passed away.
No proofs of being objects bring,
Whose essence ever on the wing,
Flown from their forms, ere yet defined,
Leaves no identity behind.
But waving this, yet see we here
No abstract cause of ill, to fear:
Since on the feelings of mankind
Depends the every ill we find:
Whence, though our sufferings ill we call,
They Are no abstracted cause at all:
For, stripped creation of mankind,
No evil would be left behind.
To this will cavillers reply?
"We ask not where those causes lie;
"If in externals be the offense,
"Or in the pravity of sense:
"That real ill exists is plain,
"While man is sensible of pain."
In answer, my Lorenzo, here,
No vaunting stoicism fear:
Nor think thy friend so madly wise
T'affect his mis'ries to despise.
I never presume that point to teach,
Nor against the voice of nature preach:
None feel more tenderly than I:
Mine the soft heart and watery eye,
The sanguine hopes, the groundless fears;
Still unsubdued by sense or years;
Ah, too susceptible of pain
When vice, or folly, but complain!
Yet, even while tears of anguish flow,
I hold no abstract ill we know.
It Is true, my friend, no man alive
Could, in his senses, gravely strive
The wretch in torture to persuade
Of evil not to be afraid;
The murderer, mangled on the wheel;
To smile at harmless rope and steel;
Or that the blows, that loitering kill,
Cannot be physically ill.
Absurd the argument and vain!
Since all we know of ill is pain.
And yet, as, neither grieved nor pained,
Of evil man had never complained,
If, relative, our bliss and woe
Reciprocally ebb and flow,
It Is palpable that joy and strife
Are but the modes of human life;
Which varied with consummate skill
Proves, on the whole, nor good nor ill.
Say thou the learned are agreed
The ills of life the good exceed?
Lorenzo, peevish, sick, or vain,
How natural is it to complain!
But sure experience here denies
This threadbare maxim of the wife.
Behold the weak, the blind, the lame,
The sons of poverty and shame,
The wretch, expiring by degrees
By amputations or disease;
Such whose vile lot, the world their foe,
Contempt and beggary below:
Should thou to this, or that, propose
In death a cure for all their woes;
Tell 'em, "oppressed with human strife,
"Wide stand the numerous doors of life,
"With open arms, the wretch to save,
"Rest welcomes misery to the grave."
How few your recipe will try;
Though dying piecemeal loath to dye.
Nor merely from the fear of worse,
Tenacious of a present curse.
For say annihilation here
The all poor mortals have to fear:
How few would yet their ills incline
Their sense of being to resign;
To part, on terms like these, with pain,
With pleasure never to meet again;
Even nature shudd'ring at the thought,
To sink inconscious into naught.
In mere existence sure mankind
Must then intrinsic pleasure find;
Some good equivalent must feel
To such supposed excess of ill;
Since thus, by death, so loath to part
An aching head and bleeding heart.
May not, at least, all human woe
Be balanced with our joys below.
Do thou, Lorenzo, doubt of this?
How do thou measure earthly bliss?
It Is not by ecstasy alone
Thy actual share of joy is known:
Duration adds to the degree
As much as its intensity.
Joy for a moment's space how small!
Pain instantaneous, none at all;
Through life continued little less
Even bare content than happiness:
The joyous ecstasy of bliss
Dilating rarefied to this.
Be it on individuals tried;
Each needs but to be satisfied:
The longing wish, the sigh is over
When once content; we ask no more.
Thus equal joy we often taste
In short-lived pleasures, snatched in haste,
As others, or, when raptured less,
For years, even we, ourselves, possess.
Hence often asserted in dispute
That time ideas constitute;
Sense of duration so confined
To that which passes in the mind.
Th'expectant lover thinks, in rage,
His Stellia's absent hour an age;
While short and sweet the moments fly.
When love and she sit smiling by:
Nor given their epithets in vain.
To fleeting joy, and lingering pain,
In minutes flown, each joyful day,
Each sad one whiled in hours away.
Nay, though of life tenacious all,
Longevity no bliss we call.
In different animals, at least,
While even the less the greater's feast,
It Is probable their, joys and strife
Are suited to their term of life.
Whence equal pleasure, equal pain,
May long-lived elephants sustain
With young ephemerons, whose flight,
At noon beginning, ends at night:
During which momentary space,
They rise, love, battle and embrace,
Fluttering around, till, out of breath,
They drop into the arms of death.
From self-experience do thou rate
The real hardship of thy fate?
Art thou with every friend at strife?
See thou no gentle joy in life?
Do thou no favorite scheme possess,
To build contemplative success?
Have thou no hope; no good do choose,
A good thou would not die to lose?
Thy day, thus clouded at the dawn,
Will brighter shine, its clouds withdrawn:
Or, is thy morn of sunshine past,
With clouds thy ev'ning's overcast:
Would of its brightness know th'amount?
Bring morn and evening to account.
Stands nature then, so long abused,
Of abstract evil thus excused;
As little truth is understood
By those, who hold all nature good.
"Whatever is, is right." -- it may.
But therefore good we cannot say;
Unless some perfect bliss we see
Arise from partial misery.
In spite of truth, in reason's spite
When vexed, or pained, we all deny't:
Never, till the pain be over, confessing
That was, which never is, a blessing,
The term's, then, here misunderstood,
Right's not equivocal to good;
Goodness adapted and confined
To the appetites of human-kind;
The right, unknown to you or me:
Though sure what is is fit to be.
Let Plato, then, or Leibnitz prate
Of goodness influencing fate;
Or idle sophisters contest
Their boasted principle the best:
By disputants, on either side,
The partial term is misapplied. But should we even suppose the term to be used
with propriety in this case, it remains to be proved that two different systems
cannot be equally good, before we subscribe to the doctrine of Leibnitz or
Plato, viz. that out of an infinite variety of possible worlds, God has
chosen, or could not but choose, the best.

That God is good they know full well;
But what his goodness none can tell;
Unless to man, his kindness shown
Heaven's good depends upon our own.
Lorenzo, merely to mankind
Thus evil physical confined;
Of moral next, a puzzling task,
An explanation do thou ask?
Say thou "Heaven's care no more extends
"To physical than moral ends:
"The same the providential power,
"That rains the soft, refreshing shower,
"That, in the womb of teeming earth,
"Its atoms quickens into birth,
"Does in the moral scene connect
"The cause and consequent effect;
"On virtue peace of heart bestows;
"Softens the good man's casual woes;
"Abandons vice to fell despair;
"Or plagues with heart-corroding care:"
Concluding hence "that moral ill,
"Opposing nature's righteous will,
"Aloud for Heaven's dread vengeance calls,
"The curse that on the guilty falls."
So far Lorenzo, I with thee,
In part most readily agree;
That vice will leave a sting behind,
And virtue its reward shall find.
Yet all, with good St. Paul, confess
"Without a law we cannot transgress."
Now nature's law is Heaven's command,
Whose will no mortal can withstand.
How! lives earth's animated clod
To contravene the will of God?
As well, adventurous of his neck,
The laws of gravity to break,
Presumptuous man might seek to fly,
A creeping earth-worm, to the sky;
Or don the bishop's winged shoon,
To trip it yarely to the moon. Bishop Wilkins conceived a possibility of our
flying up to the moon; and that it would, in time, become as common for a
traveller to call for his wings, as it was for his cotemporaries to call for
their boots.

What curse soever then vice provoke,
Creation's laws can never be broke.
But know, by physical alone
Is moral good or evil known;
For, had not vice the power to vex,
Its evil never would perplex.
Each moral thus a partial ill,
Permitted by the eternal will;
To mortals relative the offense
And punishments of providence.
Lorenzo, state the matter clear.
Be pain and pleasure strangers here.
Strangers to pleasure and to pain,
Induce what motives to complain?
Suppose we, then, in nature's plan,
T'exist th'automaton of man,
Rising from senseless matter's arms,
Where perfect rest nor grieves, nor charms;
Should Heaven a consciousness bestow,
Subject to good or ill below;
Not real pain or pleasure give,
But only make the form to live:
As yet from all reflection clear,
Unnerv'd by hope, unawed by fear,
Suppose to action thus consigned
This naked, unaffected mind.
Lorenzo, with precision hence
Let us infer the consequence.
Ere yet existed moral ill,
The first sole agent Was the will:
Reason without the power to act,
To censure or advise a fact;
As from experience naught it knew,
Of good or bad, or false or true:
For reason its conclusion draws
From similar effect and cause;
No instinct, faculty or sense,
Insuring actual innocence,
That bids us virtue's steps pursue,
Or points to bliss it never knew:
Else giving reason here had Heaven
No less than actual pleasure given:
This not supposed -- hence reason's use
Some known effect must introduce.
Now, as innate if we maintain
A love of bliss and hate of pain,
Directed as the passions fired,
The will to pleasure first aspired;
The moral agent bound to choose
From pleasure's most immediate views.
But, prone to censure and complain,
Suppose our first sensation pain;
Let pain or pleasure be attained,
Of both an equal sense was gained,
As the first tree of knowledge bore
Of good and evil equal store;
For when the mind one pleasure knew,
Its neutral state of rest withdrew:
Pleasure and pain, by contrast known,
Criteria of each other grown.
Hence felt th'initiated mind
The sting which pleasure left behind,
And reason did to act commence
On th'information of the sense;
Seeing the passions ebb and flow,
Now swollen with bliss, now sunk in woe,
Traced out the bounds, extremes between,
Of innocence that golden mean.
But ah, the fluctuating tide
Of passion does this mean deride:
Consistent only, it is confessed,
With nature in a state of rest.
Here then from moral action came
The necessary ill, we blame:
Running self-love, in full career,
Reason her guide not always near,
Her satisfaction often pursuing,
Though at her own and others' ruin.
Pronounce we, hence, a moral ill
Th'indulgence of the human will,
Whenever from such indulgence flows
More pain than pleasure it bestows.
In guilt original involved,
Here see the wondrous mystery solved.
To the first man no more confined
Than passions found in every mind,
Is, the plain cause of moral woe,
Sin, human frailty here below.
Lorenzo, evil understood,
The die's reverse is moral good:
Whatever more pleasure yields than pain Not, indeed, solely to the agent, but
to mankind, or the moral world in general.

The name of goodness does obtain.
Unsatisfied, Lorenzo, yet,
Do thou lost happiness regret?
Does, from our plan of morals, seem
Yet providence no perfect scheme,
Because, perplexed with fear or pain,
Even virtue covets bliss in vain?
Do thou against the cause object?
"'It Is disproportioned to the effect,
"Thus in th'intemp'rance of the will
"To place the source of moral ill:
"Our passions but a natural cause,
"Obedient to creation's laws,
"Here palpably too innocent
"The cause of misery to be meant."
Must I repeat it over again?
From pleasure flows our sense of pain.
Through life, each other's contrast made,
Dependant these as light and shade.
Whence, though to moderation joined
Content's serenity of mind,
While vice but sports with higher glee
To sink as low in misery,
Proportioned to the guilty joy
The pangs intemperance annoy,
Yet, on the whole, no abstract ill
Does here confront the eternal will;
Of evil all th'effected strife
But relative to human life.
Say thou indeed "if man confined
"To fill the place by Heaven assigned,
"But partially to rise, or fall,
"Why feels he misery at all?"
Another question answers this.
What title have mankind to bliss?
During thy life if, man and boy,
Thy share of both thou may enjoy;
If perfect rest the certain mean
Our pleasures and our pains between;
Nulled the momentum of our pain;
Who shall of providence complain?
See thou incumbering the ground,
The barren fig trees flourish round;
While virtue stands the brunt of vice,
And knaves possess fools' paradise?
It Is here indeed our error lies.
Our virtue we too highly prize;
And adequate rewards to find,
Create them fondly to our mind:
Not satisfied on Heaven to trust,
Or think its dispensations just,
Unless his conduct God submit
To our investigating wit;
Here toiling, as an humble drudge,
For man, his critic, lord and judge.
What merit in thy Maker's eye
That thou vain man art six foot high?
To Heaven must all, with shame, agree
Unprofitable servants we;
Unworthy of celestial dress
The rags of human righteousness:
The all that virtue has to boast
Claiming the world's regard, at most.
As virtue here so vice depends.
Ourselves our guilt alone offends.
For know, proud man, no act of thine
Renders defective God's design:
No power to human frailty given
To injure unpreventing Heaven.
Presume not at so high a price
To rate the iniquity of vice.
Nor let the vainly-virtuous fool,
Projecting Heaven by line and rule,
Sore lashed and wasting to the bone,
The crimes of health and ease t'atone,
Conceive by want of rest and meat
The eternal purpose to defeat.
Presume not at so vile a rate
To hold the omnipotence of fate.
Yet who shall say that guilt is free,
Or promise vice impunity?
Since it is so plain the sting of woe
To joy inordinate does grow;
And none from virtue's paths would stray
If pleasure did not lead the way.
Can virtue also hence despair?
Since virtue's providence's care;
Compensing pleasure due to pain,
And this nor that bestowed in vain.
Let fools, when hard their present lot,
Think distant Heaven has earth forgot;
In discontent aloud complain,
"That all our trust in Heaven is vain,"
Pretending God the world protects,
And yet its several parts neglects.
Do thou, Lorenzo, better taught,
Never indulge so wild a thought;
Conceiving the individual man
No charge on nature's general plan.
What though impossible that we
At once the whole and parts should see;
To single objects here confined
Each fixed attention of the mind;
Yet, shall we blasphemously join
Heaven's intellect with yours and mine?
Know thou the world's great architect
Its smallest part shall not neglect;
As needful in the stately pile,
As golden roofs the abutments vile;
Nor, in their kind, more perfect they,
The parian stones, than potter's clay.
How sadly, blund'ring in the dark,
Here St. John missed his boasted mark;
When, Heaven's omnipotence t'enhance,
He almost gave the world to chance:
Supposing God too great to mind
The peccadillos of mankind;
Too insignificant our claim
To deity's immediate aim.
Or rather, from his reasons given,
He thought the task too great for Heaven;
Too puzzling for the eternal wit
To hold its state and thus submit;
Wherefore, like th'idiot at a loss
To count, Heaven takes us in the gross.
Lorenzo, probable the scheme,
However strange the doctrine seem,
Whatever the next world give, in this
That virtue has its share of blifs;
While all accounts 'tween vice and woe
Are settled and discharged below:
No balance to receive or pay,
Left, shuffling, for a future day.
Go, make an estimate of life;
Compare the sums of joy and strife;
Each in its separate degree,
Duration and intensity.
Perhaps, upon the whole, you will find
That neither's due to human-kind;
Nor loss nor profit in the trade
Of life's commercial pleasures made.
Mean-time how difficult to guess
At real objects of distress!
How difficult, in fact, to trace
Where real pleasure has a place!
See, shudd'ring at September's frost,
In clothes of fur, Duke Chilly lost;
Lamenting, with his belly full,
The tinker's half-cloth'd, starving trull:
A jade, that, warmer than his grace,
Laughs at his pity to his face.
Accustomed to the melting mood,
So, wishing every mortal good;
Behold Tendrilla drown her eyes
At what the sufferers despise.
How often, the scene reversed, again,
Apparent bliss is actual pain!
How often we hear much-envied state
Groan beneath bulky grandeur's weight;
Of thousands broke their nightly rest
By that for which we call them blessed!
Nay, as a God on earth adored,
See the dread inquisition's lord,
Raised, in the pomp of priestly pride,
How envied, by his monarch's side!
And yet how mis'rable a part
He acts, if not extinct his heart:
How little less, at nature's cost,
If every social feeling lost.
Meanwhile the wretch, for whom we sigh,
In cruel tortures doomed to die,
To pain superior, fear or shame,
Exulting, smiles amidst the flame;
Makes his proud judge with malice swell;
And triumphs over death and hell.
Proportioned to the weight of care,
Gives nature thus the power to bear?
But partial judges we, it is plain,
Of others' joy or others' pain.
So vice and virtue could we trace,
Neither is stamped upon the face.
And who to read presumes the art
The secret of another's heart?
Nay, even that art how little known
To open, and peruse our own!
Who then, so much a slave to sense,
Shall here arraign Heaven's providence:
Thinking "the good the world may leave
"Ere virtue's portion they receive;
"Triumphant that the wicked go,
"Blessed, or unpunished, here below:
"As if our end a slight event,
"Depending on mere accident."
Is this not atheism in the eye
Of those who atheism most decry?
Who made the world, with equal skill
Can surely guide it, if he will.
Who, then, appearances shall trust,
To tnink that Heaven's on earth unjust;
When vice and virtue may relate
Solely to man's sublunar state;
And here, for ought we truly know,
Be paid their dues of joy and woe.
Yet think not thou I here deny
That virtuous souls ascend the sky:
Or that the groveling sons of vice
Shall be excluded paradise.
Prepared, my friend, the man, in life,
By varied means of joy and strife,
Or, by redemption's wondrous grace,
To view his Maker face to face,
In death completed for the state
Designed him by the will of fate,
A place of constant rest may find
The portion of the virtuous mind;
A place, comparatively ill,
For those whose god their brutal will:
By Heaven the immortal being placed,
Consistent with its powers and taste.
Such future scenes may sure be given;
This called a hell and that a heaven;
And justly vice and virtue, here,
Have that to hope and this to fear.
Still do I hear the growl of care?
"To be we know not what or where!"
Is it, because we know not why,
So sad a thing for once to die?
Is it so hazardous, my friend,
On God our maker to depend?
That God to whom we being owe,
Our friend and guardian here below;
Who, all along the vale of life,
In every scene of care and strife,
Affords his providential arm,
To raise beneath, or shield from, harm?
Is it for him so hard to save
Our conscious being from the grave?
Secure, Lorenzo, in the power,
That waked me at my natal hour,
To me, and mine, in life so just,
On this in death I mean to trust:
Safe in the hollow of his hand,
Content to fall by whom I stand,
Of whom I kiss the chast'ning rod,
And bless the father in the God.


EPISTLE THE SEVENTH.

ARGUMENT.
On moral principles -- The respective influence of reason and the passions --
The immorality of ignorance and the indispensable duty of seeking knowledge.

SUMMARY.
THE doctrine, by which virtue and vice are confessedly limited to this life,
will doubtless excite the clamor of those who pride themselves, or ground
their expectations of future happiness, on their own merit. It may also be
asked, "To what purpose is it that mankind should pursue virtue rather than
vice, if all our pains and pleasures depend reciprocally on each other, and our
bad deeds neither actually offend, nor our good ones have any real merit with,
the Deity." It is answered, that, as the merits and demerits of virtue and vice
are partial and relative, so also must be conceived their respective rewards
and punishments. So that, whatever distinction may be made between the virtuous
and vicious in a future state, it must be purely owing to the good pleasure of
our creator, and not to the influence of our merit over his final
determinations. -- It must not be conceived, however, that this doctrine
countenances immorality. On the contrary, it proves, that (as we are led to
vice solely by the motives of pleasure, apparently attending the gratification
of our desires) were a conviction always present to the mind, that such
pleasure must necessarily be attended with an equal degree of pain, such
conviction might prove an antidote to vice, and preserve us, at least, in
innocence; the motive to action being thereby removed. As to actual virtue,
indecd, it is not pretended that any rational conviction whatever is, of
itse'f, a sufficient motive to virtue: the use of reason being only to
determine what is true or false, just or unjust; and not to excite us to
embrace either. This is the business of the passions; which are, however, in
themselves, neither good nor evil: those dispositions of mind which are
generally termed virtuous being the frequent occasion of our falling into
vices, which opposite ones, though generally disapproved or detested, would have
secured us from. Thus compassion, benevolence and candor are the fertile
sources of vice; while hardness-of-heart, selfishness, and distrust are as
frequently the means of preserving innocence. Nay the fierce, hardened and
turbulent passions enter sometimes into the most virtuous characters; and a
heart unaffccted by the present sufferings of humanity is, not unfrequently,
necessary to preserve the rights and liberties of mankind. -- In fact we are
much deceived, in the motives as well as in the practice of virtue; it being
not only necessary that we should mean to do good and take the best way our
reason may direct us to effect it; but that we should previously take those
measures which are in our power, to acquire the knowledge of the means of doing
such good. Wilful ignorance is declared therefore intentionally vicious; not
having, though innocent in fact, the least claim to merit; to which even virtue
itself has but relative pretensions. Indeed, as physical good in the
consequence is the measure of moral good in the action, the very appearance of
merit in the agent in a great degree vanistes; our power of doing good
depending frequently on accident, and, not very seldom on downright knavery. On
all which considerations knowledge is laid dow^ as a fundamental and
indispensible moral principle; and, hence, the employment of our leisure hours
in inquiries after tru^^ is presumed to be not merely entertaining but morally
virtuous.

EPISTLE THE SEVENTH.
HARK! my Lorenzo, how they rage,
The pious of our pious age;
Those who think Heaven an easy fool,
Of wiser mortals made the tool,
Vile counters take for current coin;
Our filthy rags for robes divine:
We made its joint immortal heirs
For penance, paltry alms and prayers!
What racks their disappointed zeal
Dooms the poor, culprit bard to feel;
A thief, whose rhimes the rents have stole,
Long marked on their celestial roll!
So angry bees take sudden wing,
Furious the harmless boy to sting,
Who, less in anger than in play,
O'erturn'd their labors in his way.
Have they the poor their farthings lent,
At more than the usual cent per cent;
Because the promises of Heaven
For principal and interest given;
Yet, loath to mortgage house or land,
Dealing even these with sparing hand;
Hard times and taxes wont to moan,
T'excuse their adding to the loan;
Spite of hypocrisy, confessed
The world's security the best?
Vile us'rers! yet you think it hard,
Your virtue should not meet reward!
I think so too -- hence, hence, to hell:
With merit there among devils swell.
Do here the immoral pertly ask,
What profits rise from virtue's task?
Or wherefore vice we should eschew,
If what the muse has sung be true?
That "vice and virtue, bliss and woe
"Quit scores effectually below;
"While, unaffected, Heaven surveys
"Its ends fulfilled in human ways."
Say they "if pain give pleasure birth,
"To joy proportioned grief, on earth,
"Our sufferings all comparative,
"What matters how the ungodly live?
"What can we gain by self-denial,
"Or standing virtue's fiery trial?"
Virtue's clear gain, my friend, it is true,
If any, hid from me and you,
Lodged in the dark decrees of fate,
A waits us in some future state;
A gift Heaven pleases to bestow,
Wholly unmerited below.
So, whatsoever different state
Should vice in future life await,
Hid in the counsels of the All-wise,
The reprobating secret lies:
Predestination's dreadful plan
Beyond the scrutiny of man.
Can yet Lorenzo weakly dream
That ours is an immoral scheme;
Because we hold that joy and strife
Are balanced probably in life;
Whence equally nor blessed nor cursed
The lives of the unjust and the just?
Shines not the sun alike, on earth,
On good and bad of mortal birth?
Falls not the plant-enliv'ning rain
Alike on mountain-heath and plain?
Though noxious there vile brambles shoot;
Here sweetest flowers and choicest fruit,
To reason's sober call, my friend,
Did the blind passions but attend;
While ever present to the mind
A full conviction we might find,
"That in the lust of mere desire
"No certain pleasure men acquire;
"But what in ecstasy they gain
"They Are sure to lose in future pain."
By truth enlightened, hence, to fly
The distant evil as the nigh,
Men were no longer prone to vice,
Now stripped of all her charms t'entice;
But, arming in their own defense,
Would stand in neutral innocence.
Through reason let a sensual eye
The enchanting form of vice espy:
Equivocal in make and face,
Her left side does her right disgrace.
As formed to give, and share, delight,
One blooming cheek does hearts invite,
While roguish loves in ambush lie,
And dart their arrows from her eye.
A polished arm, a taper side,
Her thigh, that scarce her garments hide,
Her snow-white leg, and foot, shod neat,
The half of beauty's form complete.
But ah, the contrast side appears
Worn out with care and gray with years;
With wrinkled brow and squinting eye,
Scowling most haggardly awry;
While hollow cheek and nostril maimed,
Notch'd ear, burnt hand, and thigh bone lamed,
Display a wretch, from head to tail
Diseased with many a desperate ail;
A form, which, wrapped in squalid dress,
Compleats the half of ugliness.
Behold the charmer -- this is Vice.
Embrace her. -- Is thy stomach nice?
Too often passion, single eyed,
Enamored with the fairer side,
The monster clasps; till, turned her face,
We starting fly her loathed embrace:
Through reason's medium only shown
Her real form, in tints her own;
Which thus disgusting to the sense,
Could never beguile our innocence.
Should virtue, then, disown the muse;
At least let innocence excuse:
The strictest moralists content
If mortals were but innocent.
In actual virtue, true, indeed,
I see no hopes we should succeed;
If once by reason grown so tame
That naught our passions could inflame.
For say, desires may not extrude
A sense of moral rectitude:
This only points, to what is right;
But never to virtue can excite.
Reason, indiff'rent to the event,
Merely bestows its cold assent;
As far as truth's concerned, in part,
Speaks to the head, but not the heart:
Reason bestowed, an humble friend,
Not to keep faultless, but to mend;
With hopes to cheer or fears to bind
Self-love, a glutton deaf and blind;
To give our scene of action light;
To check the sensual appetite;
To show us what is good and fair;
And passion's blunders to repair.
To virtue sense of right and wrong
Must of necessity belong;
But from this knowledge who infer
The conscious party, cannot err?
Nay, founded on such sense our claim
To bear of vice the moral blame;
The fool, the mad, do what they will,
Standing excused of moral ill.
Say, then, the virtuous must be wise;
Yet not in wisdom virtue lies.
By other motives must the mind
To virtuous action be inclined.
"What other motive?" do thou ask?
Lorenzo, difficult the task
T'unravel here the human mind;
Its moral principles to find.
Say thou we all true virtue love;
And virtue that which all approve.
Supposing this, yet is it with you
That very approbation too?
Is this, Lorenzo, what is meant
By virtue sprung from sentiment? See Hume, on the general principles of morals.

By that ambiguous term of art
The native goodness of the heart?
Pride not yourselves, ye Pharisees,
That acts of kindness give you ease:
Nor think, ye publicans, from Heaven
An evil inclination given.
Know that from different passions vice
And virtue take not separate rise.
For, though deducing moral ill
But from the indulgence of the will,
No passion, not the love of pelf,
Is really vicious, in itself:
The noblest in the human breast,
Motives to action but confessed,
However admired, however approved,
From actual virtue far removed.
For a good heart, as put to use,
Or vice or virtue may produce:
A fertile soil, where, taking root,
Plants good and bad bear equal fruit.
Narcissa boasted once a mind,
The purest sure of human kind,
Till growing passions taught her breast
To feel for all that seemed distressed,
To melt in tenderness of grief,
And sigh to give, unasked, relief.
Ah, since, by cruel arts betrayed,
How low is fallen the hapless maid!
Too innocent to feel distrust,
Or know how different love and lust!
Now, by her tempter even accused,
See her abandoned and abused;
Her open heart, her generous mind
To prostitution how resigned!
Of vices glorying in the shame
Her former self had blushed to name.
Alas, for pity! sec, meanwhile,
At lost Narcissa's ruin smile
Gremia, to pity never moved,
As little loving as beloved;
In spite of all vile man could say,
In pious maidenhood grown gray,
Blessing her better stars, that she
Still triumphs in her chastity;
Though, with the planets, on her side
Ill Nature, ugliness and pride.
See Phormio, stoically cold,
In youth by constitution old,
Who never yet, his heart of stone,
Once made another's cause his own;
But, living for himself, or heirs,
Minds nothing but his own affairs:
Whose word not unbelieving Jews,
For more than Heaven is worth, refuse:
His credit sacred, east and west
His bills negotiating best;
Safe in whose hands were many a pound;
Too good a man to run a-ground.
O worthy, honest man! we cry;
While bankrupt knaves in dungeons lie:
So vile the rogue, who, scorning pelf,
Loved others better than himself!
Thus often th'inflexible, the just,
The man that never broke his trust,
Indebted to inhuman art,
Or killing coldness in his heart;
While base and mean the quick-of-sense,
From glowings of benevolence.
Lorenzo, feelingly I speak
Of failings where myself am weak;
To whom adversity severe
Has sold experience much too dear:
Hard hearted prudence far from me,
And narrow-soul'd economy,
To knave and fool too often a prey,
No match for either in his way,
Till cheated, plundered, filled with shame,
Lit on my luckless head the blame.
How short, Lorenzo, plainly, hence,
Of virtue is benevolence!
To mere good nature, while you live,
No more that pompous title give:
The milk of kindness in a trice
Yielding the luscious cream of vice. The milk of human kindness has been not
unfrequently used, as a florid term, for benevolence. See Fielding and others.

The dryest eye, the hardest heart,
May act as virtuous a part:
When turned, as adders deaf, the ear
From all that others feel or fear;
Thence, vicious sloth, a whining cheat,
Is forced to work before it eat;
Misfortune, struggling in its thrall,
Rises more glorious from its fall.
Should to the prodigal the friend,
On whom his spendthrift hopes depend,
When asked assistance or advice,
Reply, with looks as cold as ice,
With all the insolence of ease,
"Nay, friend, for me do what you please."
May this not teach the hand profuse
Virtuous discretion's sovereign use;
And thus a coldness of the heart
A good to too much warmth impart?
How much less vicious often the mind,
That never, beneficent or kind,
For others broke one moment's rest,
Nor cheered with comfort the distressed,
Than he, whose open hand and heart
Espouse the poor and needy's part,
Plunging in unforeseen distress
Hundreds, in striving one to bless.
Shortsighted, often benevolence
Proves a sad breach of innocence:
To virtue requisite that first
The virtuous mind be strictly just.
Passions, the springs of joy and strife,
Are but the elements of life;
And, as the streams from mountains flow,
Smooth winding some through vales below,
While others, raging as they come,
Tear up their mother-mountain's womb;
Or, pouring down the hills amain,
Deluge, at once, the humble plain;
So some of these are gently mild,
While others, furious, bold and wild,
Foaming over reason's rock-built mounds,
Disdain the check of moral bounds.
But see in pastures streams of use
When art corrects the flood's abuse,
When, their due channels taught to keep,
In shallow brook or river deep,
Smiling through dappled meads they go;
And paint the flowers they cause to grow.
Corrected thus, by reason's art,
The bursts, or meltings, of the heart,
In virtue's channels see them glide;
Her flowers the blooming margin's pride.
Is the small spring thy favorite theme,
That trickles forth a shallow stream,
In murmurs soft, a purling rill?
What will thou do to drive the mill?
How will thou make to ride at large
Thy timber, or thy loaded barge?
As much as purling rills admired
The navigable stream required;
The stream, whose turbulence abides
The roaring of the swelling tides,
Alike whose raging bosom swells,
And back the threatening tide repels.
The hero, thus, the hardy brave It should seem that Mr. Pope supposed heroism
incompatible with virtue, from the following lines, in his essay on man. Heroes
are much the same, the point's agreed,
From Macedonia's madman to the Swede;
The whole strange purpose of their lives, to find,
Or make, an enemy of all mankind.
I will grant that many heroic actions have been achieved, which have given
just room for those, who have no tincture of heroism in themselves, to suppose
the hero to be without either head or heart. But, however reprehensible the
conduct of heroes may have been in general, history may inform us that many of
the distinguishing blessings mankind enjoy, have been effected by those, whom
narrow-minded moralists have stigmatized as rogues and madmen.

How needful half the world to save;
Like Prussia's king, through seas of blood
Wading, for threatened Europe's good!
Virtuously useful to mankind
The strongest as the weakest mind,
Thus, one no better than the other,
The warmest heart's the cold one's brother:
And neither this nor that, in fact,
Are virtuous till as such they act.
Yet here, appearances believed,
In virtuous actions often deceived,
How plain in th'hypocritick face
We read the characters of grace;
And falsely to youth's giddy tribe
Designing villainy ascribe;
While time, and circumstance, and place,
Our biased judgments here disgrace.
Is there a man, whose tender heart
Takes in another's pains a part,
Who clothes the naked, feeds the poor,
And bribes the orphan to his door;
So kind he cannot bear to see
Another less at ease than he?
Godlike benevolence! you cry;
And praise his virtue to the sky.
But were this virtuous mortal poor,
Obliged to beg from door to door;
Could he not eat the bread at rest,
Torn by the law from the distressed;
Should his weak mind compunction feel,
In honest ways of trade, to steal;
Could not the softness of his heart
Torture the horse, that draws the cart;
Mangle the lamb before it die,
Or draw its heart's blood through its eye:
Who would not cry, "too proud to serve!
"Work, idle wretch, or work or starve:"
To Bridewell's lash the knave consigned,
For vicious tenderness of mind.
Is there who, worn with vice, begins
To hide his multitude of sins,
Leave of the wicked world does take
And hermit turns for virtue's sake;
Or, anxious for the souls of men,
Flies to the pulpit or the pen?
Behold another Paul! we cry,
A new apostle from on high!
Are there whom cares nor want exclude,
At little cost, from doing good;
In pious practices that spend
Their fortune and their latter end;
The sick who physic in distress;
And make the trav'ler's burden less?
To these what virtue will refuse
The praiseful, elegiack muse!
But, say, does tenderness of heart
Teach the divine's or doctor's art?
Too often unlettered preachers rave,
And damn the souls they meant to save:
Too often, alas, the pious pill
Of charity, like Ward's, does kill:
While lightened more the pedlar's pack
To clothe our own than save his back.
"Whence then is virtue," do thou cry?
In truth and nature, I reply:
Reason and passion both combined
To form true virtue in the mind.
Nor rests it there in mere design;
To go where these may chance to incline.
It Is not sufficient to set out,
Though meaning well, thy way in doubt;
Needful experience here to use,
That passion reason may not abuse;
Cautious in virtue's route to go
No farther than such route we know:
Lest, when, through ignorance lost our way,
Passion to vice should wildly stray.
It Is not enough to mean aright,
Unless that meant effect's in sight:
Too apt to wander from the mark,
When blund'ring forward in the dark.
A poor excuse to have it said
The heart had put it in the head,
When mischief done, instead of good,
For want of being understood!
To virtue pitiful our claim
When, at a venture taking aim,
More by good luck than sense or wit,
The mark of moral good we hit!
What virtue's in the madman's dream,
Or fool's impracticable scheme?
Whose, should they even succeed, at best,
Chance-medley morals are confessed.
Knowledge, my friend, goes, hence it is plain,
Foremost in virtue's splendid train;
While reason and the passions, joined,
Walk closely, hand in hand, behind.
Is It said? "one mere good-natured deed
"All worth in science does exceed." One moral, or a mere well-natur'd deed,
Can all desert in sciences exceed.
Duke of Buckingham;

On this weak maxim do object
We virtuous merit here neglect;
Thus honest ignorance to contemn;
And inability condemn?
Say thou " here no foreknowledge given,
Events are in the hands of Heaven;
"And, therefore, virtuous those confessed
"From what they know who act the best."
Lorenzo, no -- unless it is shown
That such no better might have known.
It Is true, as individuals here
Are placed in, each his, proper sphere,
Their knowledge more or less complete
As genius and instruction meet,
Man by no seraph's rapture fired,
Virtue's, as knowledge given, required.
But think not thou that bounteous Heaven
Has barren understanding given;
Has talents lent which, unapplied,
It Is virtuous in the earth to hide.
No -- with the power of genius blessed,
Improvement's claimed, as interest.
Is there who turns away his ear,
Instruction's voice averse to hear,
Most obstinately bent to plod
Along the road his father trod,
Old custom never to forsake;
Nor use of eye or ear to make?
Though right the wilful wretch we find,
Is his a virtuous turn of mind?
With God above, or man below,
How is it deserving not to know?
Of virtue's merit, folly, hush:
Nor put true wisdom to the blush,
Remember virtue still depends
Both on our motives and our ends.
What merit is it we gladly do
That which our hearts incline us to?
Or what that reason does submit
To own the truth is right and fit?
For say that by the heart or head
Solely to virtue men were led.
If by the heart, and that alone,
What man ever called his heart his own?
Right often by impulse forced to go,
Whether his reason leads or no:
Apparently against the will,
As often conducting him to ill.
How meritorious, then, the best
That love or pity warms the breast?
For this, nor that, from vice can save;
Or if they could -- it is God that gave.
Is it from caution, practiced long,
You seek the right and shun the wrong;
By just experience understood
How much your interest to be good?
What merits here the clod of earth
That nature smiled upon its birth;
And gave it reason's fost'ring aid
To teach it virtue as its trade?
Say thou "when head and heart we praise,
"Does this not virtue's merit raise?
"The man of vicious acts ashamed -- "
May yet for spiritual pride be blamed.
"The elegantly just" -- too nice
Perhaps for vulgar scenes of vice.
"The lowly-minded, kind and meek" --
Mean, pitiful, perhaps, and weak.
"The patriot, in his country's cause" --
A gudgeon, greedy of applause.
"The pious, that their God revere," --
Only, perhaps, of Hell in fear;
Or, not by fears sufficient driven,
Pushed forward by the hopes of Heaven.
So little do we truly know
The cause to which we virtue owe;
To what bad principle or good
Even we ourselves have vice withstood:
Nor can the best of mortals say
From what has yet directed may;
Or in a state he never knew
Tell what his head and heart might do.
Who then their moral worth shall prize?
Shall even the best the worst despise?
Thin the partitions that divide
Even vice itself from virtue's pride;
The virtuous boaster weak and proud;
Like the tall idiot in the crowd,
Who, stalking with exalted tread,
Above his fellows rears his head:
While from his more distinguished height
The harm upon his pate does light.
The pride of virtue hence depressed,
O learn to pity not detest:
Even looking with a brother's eye
On wretches doomed by law to die:
To Heaven that has the difference made
'Tween thee and them, the honor paid!
The object more of pity, sure,
The vicious mind no leech can cure,
Than such whose mere corporeal part
Diseased admits the doctor's art!
Nay, if by virtue understood
The act producing moral good,
And moral good and evil known
By sense of physical alone,
The term of merit thrown aside,
Abashed at once is virtue's pride:
Since such most virtuous we must call
Who most promote the good of all.
Here virtue see, in fortune's power,
Dependent every day and hour!
So little rests on good intent,
So much alas, on accident!
See to the public good conduce
Of wealth and state the simple use: For -- hence the poor are clothed, the
hungry sed, Health to himself and to his infants bread The lab'rer bears. --
Pope.

Such power of doing good a lot
By birth, caprice, or favor got:
A post of virtue often the gain
Of knavery; honest hearts disdain.
Proportional to every state
Say thou its virtue we must rate;
Those much to blame, though doing good,
Who fail to do the must they could?
Most needful, then, how far to know
Our powers of doing good may go:
In every station, place and time,
Neglectful ignorance a crime.
For say, if ever preferred to place,
Should fortune take us into grace;
Though kings should act the donor's part,
They neither give a head or heart.
It Is true a ribbon, star and garter
May make a fluttering fop look smarter;
SIR John sounds big and mighty pretty
Among the plain John's of the city;
But George himself, of many a knight,
Never dubbed one sordid cit polite.
Clever indeed could royal grace
Fit every placeman for his place!
If being voted for with spirit
Supplied our want of real merit,
Conferred taste, judgment, observation,
Adapted to the appointed station!
Title and power give consequence,
But ah! never gave one jot of sense.
Knowledge, Lorenzo, hence confese'd
Of moral principles the best,
Well spent we hope our vacant days
In studious search of wisdom's ways:
On reason while our steps attend,
Reason fair virtue's firmest friend!
Hail sober guide! O teach my youth
To woo thy lovelier sister truth;
For whose embrace my vows I pay,
In ardent sighs, throughout the day;
Nor, when the longest day is over,
Cease, by the midnight lamp, to pore
Over the dull tale, or tedious, page
Of saint or, more laborious, sage:
Happy if saint or sage could tell,
Where I with her might ever dwell:
With her for whom, and whom alone,
My genius for the verse be knwon:
For truth content to lose the bays;
The poet's for her lover's praise.


EPISTLE THE EIGHTH.

ARGUMENT.
On the immortality of the soul; and the arguments for, and against, a future
state.

SUMMARY.
THE immortality of the soul, or doctrine of a future state, is proposed as the
subject of inquiry. A doctrine, which, however true or false in itself, is both
weakly attacked and lamely supported by the philosophical arguments generally
made use of, for, or against, it. Comparisons drawn from the vegetable
creation, however striking, are partial and prove nothing. Moral arguments
prove as little, unless we could first be made certain that vice and virtue are
not duly punished and rewarded in this life; or, unless we could entertain
adequate ideas of divine justice. With these, the metaphysical refinements,
concerning the soul's immateriality, are shown to be equally inconclusive. Our
natural desire of existence is exposed, also, as a weak argument for the
justice of our claim to immortality. On the other hand, that intimate
connection between body and mind, and their apparent dependence on each other,
are shown to afford rather a specious plea in favor of the immortality of the
soul, than, as frequently made to do, any argument against it -- Setting,
however, moral and metaphysical speculations aside, man is considered merely in
the light of an animal. In which state of humiliation, his pretensions to a
future state are, notwithstanding, evidently justified on the plain and
reasonable supposition that, the Creator has given to all animals such powers
and faculties as were necessary to the state of being appointed them. -- Now
the evident pursuits of other animals tend solely to the gratification' of
themselves or the mere preservation of their kind. They have no intellectual
system that extends beyond the life of the individual; nor does their
experience serve to the improvement of their species. With man it is otherwise:
The preservation and gratification of the individual, however powerful their
motives, are in him made subservient to more general views: his case, health
and life being constantly sacrificed to pursuits, that are of no use to him
merely as an animal; but, on the contrary, serve to promote the intellectual
perfection of his species; hence apparently intended for the enjoyment of a
state of existence, to which those faculties are adapted. In the powers of
imagination and genius may also be traced that faint image of the Deity, in
which man was confessedly made. So that philosophy alone affords us sufficient
reason to believe the certainty of a future state, without our having recourse
to contested authorities, the chimerical suppositions of error, or the
absurdities of ignorance.

EPISTLE THE EIGHTH.
O Blind to truth, to science blind,
The sceptick tribe of human-kind!
Who doubt, Lorenzo, if our lot
Be here to die and be forgot,
Or if it prove our future fate
To know an intellectual state,
In death to perish, or to rise,
Immortal, to our native skies. By our being immortal is only meant, that the
soul does not perish with the body; we being strangers to any philosophical
proof of its abstract, or essential, immortality.

Allured by wit to neither side,
Be reason our impartial guide;
Let us, Lorenzo, fairly weigh
What argument has here to say.
Have thou poor Dromio's sophisms got,
Who bids us vegetate and rot;
Man but a rank and useless weed?
Prove them alike and it is agreed.
But the analogy of parts
Is all that is proved by skeptic arts.
Say that, "of vegetable race,
"We spread the root from place to place;
"The lovely flower of beauty blows;
"Twin sister to the province rose,
"Allures at morn the gazing eye,
"That ere the evening sees it die."
Say, "years disrobe the mantled brow,
"As winter strips the autumnal bough;
"The rough, rude blast to both unkind,
"Both perish by an eastern wind:
"Or, by the axe, untimely blow!
"Are laid their spreading honors low."
Admit, Lorenzo, this be true:
Go on -- the parallel pursue.
Say, "the tall elms, you stately row,
"Sweet transports of sensation know.
"When zephyrs kiss the lilly's breast
"The lilly's rapture be confessed."
Say "the broad oak, when thunders roar,
"Fears till the thunder-storm be over;
"Conscious of doubt and dread by turns,
"Stands trembling as the forest burns;
"Alive, awake, to nature's laws,
"From nature's scenes experience draws;
"Throbbing its trunk with hopes and fears,
"Grown old in wisdom as in years!
Is this absurd? absurd indeed!
Lorenzo how unlike a weed!
To moral arguments do run?
Here shall we end as we begun.
Say thou "the virtuous, when they die,
"In their own right ascend the sky;
"The wicked, here unpunished, go
"To torment in the world below;
"Heaven's justice else we should arraign,
"And prove the virtuous good in vain,"
You take, my friend, for granted here,
What none by reason make appear;
That vice at God almighty's hands
Eternal punishment demands;
While endless bliss, beyond the skies,
Justice bestows, as virtue's prize.
Justice! Lorenzo, what, my friend,
By justice do thou here intend?
Her sword she holds; but, say, what ails
The equilibrium of her scales?
How low the one, though empty, lies,
To kick the beam while the other flies!
Alas, I see by what compelled;
In different mediums are they held;
One in material fluids buoyed;
The other in a perfect void:
Weighed in eternity and time,
The punishment against the crime!
Dare the self-righteous tribe to say,
That Heaven's no more than virtue's pay,
While vice demerits endless woe?
Needs God a friend? fears God a foe?
Holding vindictive rage in store,
For his own sake, on man to pour?
O, no -- unhurt The Almighty cause,
Or kept or broken human laws.
Cease, then, presumption, to contend
That mortals Heaven itself offend,
Or, at an infinite expense,
Must answer a finite offense:
To pay the fine immortal made;
Which else unable to have paid.
The dying wretch though tyrants cure
But tortures longer to endure;
With nature cruelty at strife
When criminals are quit with life;
Can God, whose tender mercies flow
Over all his varied works below,
Whose loving kindness all confess,
Whose name the distant nations bless;
Say, can this God, of boundless love,
Vengeful as earthly tyrants prove?
O shame, Lorenzo, shame to all
Such cruelty that justice call!
Such argument, beside, is vain,
Unless the premises were plain;
Unless we first could make it clear,
That vice can never be punished, here;
That virtue must be ever blessed,
For foll'wing but its interest;
Or that we truly could define
That justice mortals call divine.
By metaphysics do thou strive
To keep the man in death alive?
Would thou, set moral pleas aside,
The body from the soul divide?
Material that and born to die,
While this a native of the sky;
Objects that none can hear and see
Hence claiming immortality!
But, say, is thy corporeal claim
Laid to the matter or the frame?
Is it the substance of the heart
Or make that is the mortal part?
Does change of form bring death alone?
Form we must immaterial own.
If to the essence of the clay,
Again, mortality we lay,
Doomed the loathed carcass to the worm,
The substance changes but its form:
Through modes of being given to range,
Immortal in perpetual change,
Maiter by all the skeptic crowd
Essentially the same allowed;
In death, in life, our shame, our pride,
In various forms but modified.
Say, then, the matter or the frame,
Or both, in body have a claim;
Nor mortal, nor immortal, we
From our materiality. This argument might be carried much farther, and the
mere potential existence of matter proved, to a demonstration; but this would
be perhaps, too abstruse to enter into poetical composition.

Lorenzo, does thy bosom beat
To claim in heaven the immortal seat?
So fond of thy existence here,
Do thou annihilation fear?
To fall as undistinguished clay
To dumb forgetfulness a prey?
The joys of paradise in view,
Say thou "thy claim must needs be true,
"Else, wherefore does thy fond desire
"To immortality aspire," See the famous soliloquy in Addison's CATO; which may
pass for logic on the stage, and is perhaps good-enough theatrical reasoning;
but will hardly satisfy a philosopher, in his closet: unless, indeed, such a
one as prefers the declamation of a Plato to the demonstrations of a Newton.

Whatever in hope be Heaven's intent,
This is, my friend, no argument.
I, too, perhaps, so pleased to live,
My very means of life might give,
All I am worth, from death to save,
If hope were buried in the grave.
But let Lorenzo never trust
To wish or hope, however just:
Nor let a passionate desire
To reason's sober task aspire.
Would thou false principles defend,
Because they serve a pleasing end?
Who loves the truth will sure despise
Her cause to rest on specious lies.
What merit does it add to worth
That knaves its virtues babble forth?
What added weight or consequence,
In suff'rage, gives the fool to sense?
Again, is it said "so closely joined
"In life the body and the mind,
"Reciprocally formed to bear
"Each other's weight of pain and care,
"Sharing alike the mutual joy,
"Which either wholly may destroy;
"Since thus together both concur,
"We know not either to prefer,
"If both be purposely combined,
"In use of body or of mind."
Are there who weakly, hence, suppose
"The soul no separate being knows;
"But, as the body does decay,
"So wears the mortal mind away."
Yet wherefore might not at our birth,
Lodged in this tenement of earth,
Locked up for life the immortal mind,
Its temporary prison find,
Till paid our vital debt should be,
And death should set the captive free?
Meanwhile, in hope, in fear, in doubt,
Concerning friends and foes without,
Prone through its prison grates to pry,
It sees Time's scattered ruins lie,
In darkness and confusion hurled,
The embryo of another world.
Why may not thus, on earth, be joined
The body and the tenant mind?
Th'inhabitant, with cost and care,
Keeping his mansion in repair,
Used to the dungeon where he lies,
And prone his present home to prize,
Unknowing whither doomed to roam,
If once bereft of house and home.
What wonder, then, for help he calls
When danger threats his tottering walls?
Nor strange, if, heedless of their fate,
They tumble on his wareless pate:
Each other's mutual strength and ward
The mansion and the mansion's lord.
What though we hold the soul to be
Attached to sensibility,
Concludes Lorenzo rashly hence
The soul's as mortal as the sense?
Alleging that "in life we find
"Perception to the organs joined,
"Poor mortals of sensation void
"As these are damaged or destroyed;
"Therefore the soul on sense depends,
"And with the failing organ ends."
Lorenzo, through a darkened glass
See thou but faintly objects pass?
More darkened yet, do thou confess
Thy certainty of vision less?
With its transparency thy sight
Decreasing, till obstructed quite.
Suppose it broke or let it fall,
Do think thou could not see at all?
Ridiculous! when objects lie
All open to the naked eye.
Thus, may the soul, to body joined,
Be deaf, irrational or blind:
But take th'obstructing organs hence,
At liberty its native sense,
By fits no more it hears and sees,
As now by piecemeal and degrees,
In partial modes, adapted here
To organs of the eye and ear;
But, intellect, all ear, all eye,
It reads the wonders of the sky,
At once what nature can disclose
Of scientifick secrets knows:
Now sense and science both combined
In each perception of the mind.
But here, Lorenzo, for a while
Lay by the metaphysick foil.
With this, behind our darkened glass,
Too apt to make a blund'ring pass:
By much more anxious, on the whole,
To guard the body than the soul.
Too nice the anatomizing art,
To take them dexterously apart,
Let us on both inquiry plan,
And scrutinize their compound, man:
Contented from his present state
To reason of his future fate.
Does Dromio say, to hold dispute,
"Man, if no plant, is yet a brute;
"A helpless animal in birth,
"His body formed of kindred earth,
"An animal in his decay,
"His strength and vigor past away;
"Equal the beast's sagacious powers
"Or even superior often to ours."
The politic, industrious be
Do own in wisdom rivals thee?
Economy secures from want
The careful and laborious ant,
While man, with all his boasted sense,
Riots at health's and life's expense,
Luxurious, casts his cares aside,
Or starves through indolence or pride;
Here no pre-eminence his claim,
Insects! in life and death the same!
Is there no medium in dispute?
Must man be either God or brute?
Must we with burning seraphs join,
Or litter with the groveling swine?
Content to bear the slight disgrace
Of mingling with the brutal race;
Agreed -- for once, no longer proud,
Be men mere animals allowed.
Say that, more helpless at his birth
Than even the vilest brute on earth,
Man, if denied the nurse's care,
Might have run wild, a human bear;
Have beat the plains in search of food,
Or sought his shelter in the wood:
Devoid of language and of art,
Apparent brute in head and heart.
Yet still, Lorenzo, as we find
Some little difference, in kind;
Man, as an animal, is known,
By marks peculiarly, his own.
Though both, sharp-sighted, grave and fat,
Melinda and her tabby cat,
But a specific difference seen
'Twixt Pug and Faddle, in the spleen,
The wild, the tame, the great, the small,
Included in one genus all;
We must not hence, my friend, infer
Melinda's only born to purr;
Nor that, because alike in shape,
Faddle by nature's but an ape.
What, if a monkey, taught in France,
A modish minuet could dance;
Or, mischievous, should play his tricks,
Versed in Parisian politics,
Breaking thy china's brittle clay,
Though sure to suffer for his play.
Would thou acknowledge, hence, to me,
The pert baboon, un homme d'esprit?
Or own, on this sagacious plan,
A monkey's nat'rally a man?
Let rash polemicks idly prate
Of nature and a natural state,
The arts of social life despise,
And think that brutes are only wise;
Pretending better had it been
If kings and priests we never had seen;
If lawless, ignorant and wild,
Man had been left, while yet a child,
With brutes to share a common fate;
More blessed than in his present state:
Go thou, and act a social part
Man's natural state's a state of art The word natural, as Mr. Hume justly
observes, is commonly taken in so many senses, that its signification remains
very loose and indeterminate. The ingenious Rousseau of Geneva, after having
declaimed heartily against la bonne chere, or, in plain English, displayed the
terrible consequences of eating beef and pudding, cries out, Voila les funestes
garands que la plupart de nos maux sont notre propre ouvrage, et que nous les
aurions presque tous evites, en conservant la maniere de vivre simple,
uniforme, et solitaire qui nous etoit prescrite par la nature. Si elle nous a
destines a etre sains, j'ose presque assurer, que l'etat de reflection est un
etat contre nature, et que l'homme qui medite est un animal deprave. What use
is here made of the word nature! but I would ask, if mankind ever were in this
state of solitude, how came it about they are united in a social one? -- were
they led to it by inclination or necessity? If by inclination, nature evidently
prescribed it; if by the necessities peculiar to their species, a state of
society was not only prescribed but enforced by nature. Indeed, whoever before
doubted of man's being, by nature, a social animal!
.
'Twas nature, when the world was young,
Unloos'd our first, great grandsire's tongue;
Taught his wild sons the force of speech,
And gave the human power to teach;
To social converse tuned the ear,
Gave mutual love and mutual fear,
Inspired the hero, warmed the friend,
And bade the strong the weak defend.
'Twas nature gave religion's rule,
And bade the wise conduct the fool;
In justice gave the law, to save
The weak and honest from the knave.
'Twas nature raised our thoughts on high,
In contemplation, to the sky;
Taught us to beat the wilds of space,
And worlds on worlds in either trace;
Planets and suns unknown explore,
And hence their maker, God, adore.
All this you artificial call,
I heed not empty terms at all.
Call it by whatsoever name,
It Is human nature's special claim.
Say, from mere phrases to depart,
How differs nature here form art?
Within the solitary wood
Rears the old brock her helpless brood;
For safety, scouring to her den,
At sight, or sound of dogs and men?
It Is nature warns her not t'expose
Herself, or offspring, to her foes;
But sends her to the safe retreat,
Where both enjoy their rest and meat.
Why rears not man in forest wild,
Or acorn grove, his favorite child?
But, lodged in towns, and nursed with care;
Protects and feeds his fondled heir.
Experter, sure, were human race
If trained in forests for the chase;
The chase that might our food provide;
And what need animals beside?
Lorenzo, here we plainly find
The characters that mark our kind.
'Twas nature knowledge did impart,
Which time has ripened into art:
But call it art, or what you will.
It Is nature, human nature still.
As natural for us, my friend,
To bid the cloud-capt towers ascend;
To bid the floating castles ride
On moving mountains of the tide;
As for the bird and beast their food
To seek in thicket, plain or wood,
To build the nest, or dig the den,
Far distant from the haunts of men.
Science, disprove it those who can,
Is, therefore, natural to man:
To other animals denied
This best and worst excuse for pride.
There are, it is true, who gravely hold
"Grimalkin's no essential scold,
"That men and monkies differ wide,
"As Gods to stocks and stones allied:"
Striving to prove, by various means,
"That brutes are nothing but machines." There are, indeed, also, some
pretended philosophers, whose heads, so full of impenetrable matter, have been
employed to prove MAN a machine too: but with these we will not dispute.

But, can we ever with these suppose
Springs lodged within the terrier's nose,
Direct his nimble feet to go
Where the old fox lies eathed below?
Or that by mere mechanics tray
Pursues his master's doubtful way?
For me, I frankly must impute
True syllogism to even the brute:
A power of reason, spite of pride,
No more to them than man denied.
So much admitting, do thou say?
"I fairly throw my cause away,
"Unless to brutes Heaven also give
"In immortality to live."
Lorenzo, no. -- Though less refined,
My pleas are of another kind.
Low as the dust though here we lie,
Yet death may raise us to the sky.
Is man a worm? it is here his fate
To winter his aurelia state;
In time to burst his cell designed,
And leave his clay-cold case behind;
Fluttering on angel wings, to rise
A bright papilio of the skies!
Distinguished from the beasts, my friend,
Experience every doubt may end;
Granting "by nature all enjoy
"The powers heaven meant them to employ;
"Passion or instinct never bestowed
"On man, or beast, a useless load;
"But serving animals, in kind,
"To the end for which they were designed."
This once supposed, here end disputes.
Look round among our fellow brutes.
See to what point their labors tend;
And how in death their talents end.
Perfect the bird and beast, we find,
Advance not here their several kind;
From race to race no wiser grow,
No gradual perfection know;
T'increasing knowledge void their claim,
Still their specific powers the same,
In th'individual centred all,
Though generations rise and fall.
Meanwhile, by observation wise,
The human genius never dies;
But, in tradition kept alive,
The wreck of kingdoms does survive;
Or, glowing in th'instructive page,
Improving, lives from age to age;
Even giving those who greatly know
An immortality below.
What idle mourner droops his head?
Is Plato, Lock, or Newton dead?
With Plato still his pupils rove
Along his academick grove;
With Lock we wing the naked soul,
And mount with Newton to the pole.
To animals of every kind
Are, then, their proper powers assigned;
To actuate, strengthen or restrain,
Nor sense nor instinct given in vain?
Man, as an animal confessed,
Distinguished plainly from the rest,
Behold his powers, his labors here
Presumptive of a brighter sphere!
Not merely to this life confined
The aim, and end, of human-kind!
Say, if our purpose but to live,
What mighty help does science give?
What needed more the human brute
Than cooling springs and strengthening fruit?
Or, summer past, the diet spare
Of wholesome roots, his winter fare?
How need our better rest and health
Golconda's or Potosi's wealth,
That sacrificed that health and rest,
To fetch it home from east and west?
Lorenzo, sure, if human-kind
For this life only were designed,
As well we ignorant had been
Of luxury, the bawd to sin;
As well those arts had been without
That give, while none can cure, the gout.
Ah! why was speculation given
If not to teach the way to Heaven?
What need have animals below
The planets' paths above to know?
Or in what curves, meand'ring, rove
Satellites round the orb of Jove?
Lends art its microscopick eye,
In nature's miniature to pry?
To see beneath the civil knife
The butchered atoms robbed of life;
To know that 'scaping from the steel,
Thousands may perish at a meal:
While, conscious every step we tread,
We trample hosts of beings dead.
Ah, why this knowledge given, to raise
Our wonder to our Maker's praise;
Why hence inspired our God to adore,
If seen, in death, his face no more?
It cannot be. -- Of Heavenly birth,
Science, no offspring of the earth,
To man has Jacob's ladder given,
Reaching, its foot on earth, to heaven.
O, seize, with ardour seize the prize;
And claim thy kindred to the skies.
Genius, Lorenzo, yours or mine,
Faint image of the power divine;
Endowed with even creative power,
To form the beings of an hour,
To people worlds, to light the skies,
To bid a new creation rise;
Over all to wield the thund'rer's rod,
And act the momentary God!
Even here my friend, in nature's plan
Owned the divinity of MAN.
A truth that genius feels and knows,
As often as with the God it glows.
And shall t'oblivion be consigned
This portion of etherial mind?
O, no. -- Come death in any form,
I doubt not to ride out the storm;
The shipwrecked body to survive;
My thinking part still left alive.
Meanwhile, through all the modes of sense,
Bear me, bold Contemplation, hence.
On thy firm wing, O, let me soar;
And idly hope and fear no more.
Bear me to the ever-blooming groves,
Where genius with fair science roves;
Where, in the cool sequestered shade,
Sits Resignation, pious maid;
To Heaven directed by whose eye,
When drooping nature calls to die,
Let this my latest wishes crown,
On her soft lap to lay me down;
Whilst mild content, and gentle peace,
Her handmaids, waiting my release,
Strew, stealing round with softest tread,
Their grateful roses over my bed,
No thorn among, to break my rest;
By euthanasian slumbers blessed;
Without a sigh, at close of day,
To breathe, becalmed, my soul away.



