MARIAN: A COMIC OPERA, IN TWO ACTS. PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL,
COVENT GARDEN.

By Mrs. BROOKS.

LONDON: Printed by A. Strahan, Printers-Street; FOR T. N. LONGMAN AND O. REES,
PATERNOSTER-ROW. 1800. [Price One Shilling.]

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Sir Henry Truman Mr. INCLEDON. Oliver (Father to Marian) Mr. THOMPSON. Edward
(her Lover) Mr. JOHNSTONE. Robin Mr. BLANCHARD. Jamie Mr. POWELL. Thomas Mr.
DARLEY. William Mr. GRAY. Servant Mr. ABBOT.
Marian Mrs. BILLINGTON. Patty Mrs. MARTYR. Fanny Mrs. BARNET. Kitty Mrs.
ARNOLD. Peggy Mrs. MOUNTAIN.
Villagers, Country Girls, etc.
SCENE -- A VILLAGE NEAR LINCOLN. TIME -- A Day in May. MARIAN.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- A rural Scene; on the right hand Sir HENRY TRUMAN's Park-Wall just
appears, with an iron Palisade -- Gate half open, and a Style near the Gate. --
At the back of the Scene a River; beyond which is a Road winding up the side of
a Hill -- A small House close to the River, with a Window to the Stage -- Near
the House, bending over the River, a Willow, to which the Boat is fastened. --
The Sun appears as just risen. PATTY, FANNY, and KITTY appear, walking up to
the Boatman's House, with Baskets of Fruit and Flowers on their arms, as for
the Market -- THOMAS and WILLIAM following. PATTY. WHY, Robin! Robin! boatman!
He Is not awake yet, as I live; though he know'd we should want to be ferry'd
over early this morning. -- Call him, Thomas.

(They all go up to the window.)
SONG.
Thomas. The sun gaily peeps over the hills;
Sweet airs from the jessamins blow;
Wake, Robin! blithe Robin; here is three pretty maids
A tapping at your window.

Patty. Tap!

Fanny. Tap!

Kitty. Tap!

All three. Here Is three pretty maids,
Three pretty maids,
A tapping at your window.




Robin (at the window). Holloa! Who calls there?


Patty. We want, if you please, Robin, to be ferry'd over to market.


Robin. That you shall, my pretty lasses: I Will be wi' you presently. Bear a
hand, my lads, and be untying the boat.


(THOMAS and WILLIAM go up to the boat.) Fanny. Will you give us a song the
while, Patty? I remember as how you sung us a pretty one last week, all about
the May.


SONG -- PATTY.
Now the wintry storms are over,
Spring unlocks her verdant store;
Smiling pleasure crowns the day;
Sweetly breathes the blushing May.
Over the daisy-painted mead
Now the wanton lambkins spread,
Ever playful, ever gay,
Fond to welcome in the May.
Now responsive through the grove,
Softer tuned to spring and love,
Echo, with her sportive lay,
Joins our carols to the May.
(During the last stanza ROBIN enters.)


Robin. Zooks! Patty, you sing like a sky-lark; but come, we'll have it in the
boat.


All. Ay, ay, we'll have it in the boat.


(ROBIN hands PATTY into the boat; the others follow: they cross the river
singing the first stanza in chorus.) Enter MARIAN with a basket of fruit and
flowers -- she looks after them, then sits down on the style. Marian. They are
gone without me: the boat goes swiftly with the stream. -- Heigho! -- They
sing; they are merry; with me those happy days are over. -- Edward thinks me
unfaithful, and has not been at the Grange these three days. He wove me this
basket as we sat near the little holt of osiers and willows by the river's side.

SONG -- MARIAN.
By the osiers so dank
As we sat on the bank,
And looked at the swell of the billow,
This basket he wove
As a token of love,
Alas! 'twas the branch of the willow.
Now sad all the day
Through the meadows I stray,
And rest flies at night from my pillow:
The garland I were
From my ringlets I tore,
Alas! must I wear the green willow!


I Will sit down on the style and wait Robin's return.


Enter Sir HENRY TRUMAN, and a SERVANT following. (Sir HENRY looks back at the
river.) Serve. They are only the girls of the village, Sir, ferrying over to
market.


Sir H. Here Is one seems to be left behind.


Serve. It Is Marian, your Honor; Oliver Meadow's daughter at the Grange.


Sir H. What do you do here, pretty Marian? Why are you not with your
companions?


Marian (rises and curtsies). I was too late, Sir.


Sir H. That Is pity; but you shall not lose your market; I Will buy your
strawberries; carry them up to the hall (gives her money -- She goes out
through the park-gate). How very lovely! the pure coloring of nature, with the
artless smile of simplicity and truth; I have observed her more than once with
admiration when dancing on the village green. (To the SERVANT) Let the huntsmen
lead the hounds round to the other park-gate; we will throw off at the entrance
of the heath: and let my horses be brought this way.

[Exit SERVANT. SONG -- Sir HENRY.
To the chase, to the chase: on the brow of the hill
Let the hounds meet the sweet-breathing morn;
Whilst full to the welkin, their notes, clear and shrill,
Join the sound of the heart-chearing horn.
What music celestial! when urging the race,
Sweet echo repeats, "To the chase, to the chase."
Our pleasure transports us -- How gay flies the hour!
Sweet health and quick spirits attend;
Not sweeter when evening convenes to the bower,
And we meet the loved smile of a friend.
See the stag just before us! he starts at the cry,
He stops -- his strength fails -- speak my friends -- must he die?
His innocent aspect, whilst standing at bay,
His expression of anguish and pain,
All plead for compassion -- your looks seem to say
Let him bound over his forests again.
Quick! release him to dart over the neighboring plain;
Let him live, let him bound over his forests again.


The gay expansion of my heart this morning, and the flow of good humor which
I can scarce express, seem propitious to the poor stag, if a hunter's
enthusiasm does not check it.


Enter MARIAN, but seeing Sir HENRY she retires. Sir H. Come here, Marian. --
What is the matter, my little girl? You don't seem so gay as usual.


Marian (sighing). No. Sir.


Sir H. Pray tell me: does anything vex you? A sweetheart, perhaps. --


Marian. No, Sir; he never vexed me in his life.


Sir H. Then you have a sweetheart, pretty Marian?


Marian. I had, Sir. There Is nobody to blame but my father; he consented I
should have Edward; and was impatient if he did not see him come running over
the lea every evening at foldingtime; but now my father has changed his mind,
and says I must hold my head higher.


Sir H. And why has he changed his mind, Marian?


Marian. Because I am grown rich, Sir. My god-mother has left me three hundred
pounds for a portion; and that is the cause of all my misfortunes.


Sir H. Where is your father, Marian?


Marian. Gone to Lincoln with some sheep, Sir; but I expect him home very early.


Sir H. Perhaps I may be able to serve you, Marian -- Send your father to me as
soon as he returns.


Marian If your Honor could but persuade my father to take the money and leave
me Edward -- But Edward no longer loves me, and it is all my father's fault.

SONG -- MARIAN.
Too happy when Edward was kind,
My father agreed to our love;
No cares ever disordered my mind.
I sung as I traversed the grove.
Like the lark's was each note of my song;
Serene were my cheerful days spent;
Whilst eve brought my shepherd along;
My shepherd -- fond love and content.


[Exit.
Sir H. I Will shorten my chase today, to devote a few hours to the happiness of
this charming girl -- But I will first speak to Edward, and be certain he has
constancy to deserve her.


Enter SERVANT. Serve. Your Honor's horses are just on the other side of the
gate, Sir.


Sir H. It Is very well; let somebody go to Edward, the young man who writes for
me, and desire him to be at the hall at twelve.

[Exeunt.
ROBIN and THOMAS appear in and land from the boat -- EDWARD enters, stands
pensive -- ROBIN taps him on the shoulder. Robin. Why so melancholy, my lad?
I Will be bound for it Marian loves you, though she seems a little shy at
present. -- Didn't I see her look back at you twenty times last night at
folding of the lambs, as she walked slowly toward home, leaning on her
father's arm?


Edward. I wish I could believe you, Robin; and surely a mind like hers must be
incapable of falsehood.

SONG -- EDWARD.
Who can suspect sweet Marian's faith
That hears her softly speak?
Or doubt the candid blush of truth
Which mantles on her cheek?
Those accents never can deceive;
No guile that bosom knows;
Pure as the untainted breath of morn,
And chaste as falling snows.
Unheeded passed the dancing hours
Which saw our growing flame;
The grove, the dell, the fanning breeze,
The glow of noon the same.
But now no more the dell delights,
The grove or fanning breeze;
The taste of nature's genuine charms
Demands the mind at ease.



Robin. And why shou'dn't your mind be at ease? Odd's heart! you're enough to
spoil all the girls in the parish -- Now I Will tell you my way -- I ax'd Patty
what time I should bring the boat; and she said as how she had rather come
round over the brig; so I shall even let her come round over the brig.


Thomas. And repent it when you have done, like enough -- I could not have
served my Fanny so -- But where will you find two prettier lasses than Patty or
Fanny? or two truer suitors than Robin and I? -- Nay, for that matter, who so
happy as we country lads?

SONG -- THOMAS.
How blessed our condition! how jocund our day!
Ye swains, can our pleasures be told?
To range in sweet order the rows of new hay,
To lead the strayed lamb to the fold.
To fetch up the kine for the maiden we love,
And guard her from noon's burning beam;
To guide her dear steps, when she leads through the grove
The heifer which pants for the stream.
To carry her pail when with milk it overflows;
To wait while she rests on the style;
To gather the king-cup, the woodbine, and rose,
To make her a posy the while.
It Is Fanny, the lovely, who causes my smart;
It Is she does all maidens excel;
If you ask her dear name who has conquered my heart,
It Is Fanny, the pride of the dell.
It Is Fanny, sweet Fanny!
It Is Fanny, sweet Fanny, the pride of the dell!



Robin. Here comes pretty Marian! Don't be shy, nor mind her vagaries! sit down
on the style and make as if you did not see her -- Thomas and I will step into
the house the while.

[Exeunt ROBIN and THOMAS into the house.
(EDWARD sits on the style and plays on the flute.) Enter MARIAN. (She goes
softly up to him, throws flowers at him from her basket -- EDWARD turns -- she
stops, looks confused, he runs to her and takes her hand.) Edward. Do you love
me still, Marian?


Marian. Do you ask me, Edward? (hiding her face with her apron.) -- My father
wants me to marry Robin, because he has ten acres of land, besides the ferry,
and a vote in the country, and milks four cows; but I will not marry Robin, nor
anybody but Edward.


Edward. How could I be so unjust, Marian?


Marian. My father values wealth; but for me, the kindness of my honored
godmother is only welcome in the hope of sharing it with Edward! (looking down
and playing with the strings of her hat.)


Edward. I know my Marian's generous bosom well; therefore, though I was so
unjust to doubt her constancy, I never had the meanness to suspect any
acquisition of fortune could occasion it.


Enter ROBIN from the House. Robin. Yonder Is your father, Marian, hobbling
along toward the Grange -- whip over the style -- go the nearest way, and be
at home before him.

[Exit MARIAN, led off by EDWARD.
Re-enter EDWARD with THOMAS. Robin (takes EDWARD's hand). Didn't I tell you,
my lad, that Marian loved you? -- Why, you have got quite another face, man!


Edward. How different looks the whole scene around me! Nature now resumes all
her charms.

SONG -- EDWARD.
Ye happy pairs, sincere and kind,
It Is here you taste each joy refined;
Fair truth and love delight to dwell
At yonder cottage on the dell.
Light as the fairy step at morn,
Swift passing over, the unbending corn;
All other pleasures weakly move
The heart awake to generous love!
How dear sweet Marian's artless sighs!
Hers the mild eloquence of eyes;
When constancy's all-cheering ray
Drives every jealous thought away.
Far hence be doubt and tender fears;
How blessed the life which love endears!
When truth informs the glowing cheek,
O Love! thy transports who can speak?



Enter SERVANT, whispers EDWARD, and exit. Robin. Where did you leave the
lasses, Thomas?


Thomas. In the market, but they will soon be here; they only stop at the
cherry-holt on the other side of the water to get some fresh cherries and
posies to sell at the fair. William and I promised to meet them at the brig.


Robin. You see, Thomas, every one to his liking; Edward is inveigled by
Marian's brown locks -- You love Fanny the Pindar's daughter, and I Am in love
with Patty Clover; we fancied one another when bairns -- I liked her before I
knew what liking was.

SONG -- ROBIN.
When little on the village-green
We played, I learnt to love her;
She seemed to me some fairy queen,
So light tripp'd Patty Clover.
With every simple childish art,
I tried each day to move her;
The cherry plucked, the bleeding heart,
To give to Patty Clover.
The fairest flowers to deck her breast,
I chose, an infant lover:
I stole the goldfinch from its nest
To sing to Patty Clover.


[Exeunt through park-gate.
Robin. Thomas, let us have a drink; it is a main good thing after a walk -- I Have
a brave barrel of ale just broached for the fair. -- Come, Thomas.

[Exeunt into house.
Enter Sir HENRY and EDWARD. Edward. As you command me to speak, Sir, your
tenants have but one wish, that you would bring down a lady to replace your
honored mother.


Sir H. Be assured, Edward, I shall marry the moment I am tired of being a
bachelor: in the meantime, my tenants may be perfectly easy: -- pleasure
without remorse, the rose without the thorn, is my pursuit. -- Yet I cannot
convince the girls of this; even the lively Patty, whom I should think less
apprehensive, if she meets me alone, darts from me with the swiftness of a
lapwing: she reminds me of that beautiful Ode of Horace, which a very slight
alteration makes exactly to my purpose.

AIR -- Sir HENRY.
Patty flies me like a fawn,
Which, through some sequestered lawn,
Panting seeks the mother deer
Not without a panic fear
Of the gently breathing breeze
And the motion of the trees --
Over the cool sequestered lawn
Patty flies me like a fawn.
If the curling leaves but shake,
If a lizard stir the brake,
Frighted it begins to freeze
Trembling both at heart and knees;
Thus alarmed with causeless fear
Fancy paints a lover near:
Whilst along the dewy lawn
Patty flies me like a fawn.



Enter ROBIN with a jug, and THOMAS at the door, bowing. Sir H. Come here,
Robin. -- What time does your little fair on the green begin? -- I intend to be
there, and give the girls fairings.


Robin. At one o'clock, your Honor, and ends at milking time. We have been
drinking your Honor's good health (shows the jug).


Sir H. I Will return your compliment, Robin; I am this moment returned from the
chase, and shall have no objection to a draught of your family liquor.


Robin. How kind your Honor is! -- (To EDWARD) One may know his Honor to be a
gentleman born, by his not having a morsel of pride. -- I remember hearing his
Honor bear a bob once in the very ballad we were going to sing.


Sir H. You shall hear me again, Robin. -- I wish you to call at the hall about
two o'clock, Edward, as I have something particular to say to you.


QUARTETTO.
Sir HENRY, EDWARD, ROBIN, and THOMAS. Sir HENRY. Truth exalts the generous
soul!

EDWARD. Seek him in the social bowl.

Sir HENRY. Seek him.

EDWARD. Seek him.

Sir HENRY. Seek him.

EDWARD. Seek him.

ALL. Seek him in the social bowl.

EDWARD. Mirth's the medicine of the soul!

Sir HENRY. Find him in the social bowl.

EDWARD. Find him, etc.

ROBIN. Carking care consumes the soul.

THOMAS. Drown him in the social bowl.

ROBIN. Drown him, etc.

ROBIN. Sorrow wears the weary soul!

THOMAS. Sink him in the social bowl.

ROBIN. Sink him, etc.

Sir HENRY. Seek him.

EDWARD. Find him.

ROBIN. Drown him.

THOMAS. Sink him.

ALL. Sink him in the social bowl.



[Exeunt.
THE END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE -- The Village-Green -- Stalls set out for a Country Fair -- A different
and more distant view of the River, with the Bridge over -- On each side
Cottages interspersed, and a clump of Trees at a little distance -- A Public
House high up the Stage, with a Bench at the Door: some Villagers sitting on
it, others walking about cheapening Ribbons, etc. Enter PATTY, KITTY, FANNY,
THOMAS and WILLIAM over the bridge singing. QUINTETTO.
Yon poplars which wave in the gale
Bid the swain be as active as day:
Let the poplar's example prevail,
All nature is blithsome and gay.

PATTY, KITTY, and FANNY. How sweet is the song in the vale!
The song which makes vocal the grove:
Let the blackbird's example prevail;
Her notes are the language of love.

(ROBIN just appears, but retires; PATTY sees him, whispers THOMAS and WILLIAM:
they form a trio-groupe on one side. -- ROBIN comes forward, takes FANNY and
KITTY under each arm, and form a trio-groupe on the other -- PATTY coquetting
with the men -- ROBIN with the girls. -- All six repeat the last stanza.)
PATTY. Young William is constant as light,
And Thomas has truth on his brow,
Whilst Robin resembles the blight
Which mildews the bud on the bough.
(Gives a nosegay to each.)
ROBIN. False Patty is changeful as air,
Inconstancy sits on her brow,
Whilst Robin still true to the fair,
Leaves its sweets to the bud on the bough.
(Gives a ribbon to each.)
THOMAS, WILLIAM, KITTY, and FANNY come forward singing. No longer repine and
complain,
Nor fill with your murmurs the grove;
For pleasure, sweet pleasure, not pain --
The fond bosom was fashioned to love.

ROBIN and PATTY advance, and all six repeat the last stanza. No longer repine,
etc.




(ROBIN offers to take PATTY's hand -- she draws it back.) Patty. No, Robin, I
cannot forget it; to let me come round over the brig in the broiling sun, when
the boat was idle at home!


Robin. Why, I ax'd if I should bring the boat, but you said no.


Patty. But you knows young maidens often say no when they mean to say yes.


Robin. But how should I know that?


Patty. You should have found it out.


Robin. You joke, Patty -- you know I loves you.


Patty. I knows nothing, but that I Will go meet my mother in the Thirty Acres
before I go to the fair; now don't you be following me (goes, but looks back on
ROBIN).

[Exit.
Robin. How pretty she looks! I Will follow her if she goes to the Thirty Acres,
and twenty miles beyond.

[Exit.
JAMIE and PEGGY come forward followed by the bagpipes. SONG -- PEGGY.
Ken ye not my blithsome bairns
My love is Scottish Jamie,
Wha'se luking for a bonny child
That Is wandered fra' his mamy.
Wandered fra', etc.
Over hill and dale, through bog and mire,
I gang'd alang wi' Jamie;
In bonnet blue and tartan played
He wooed me fra' my mamy.
Wooed me fra', etc.
Come bring, come bring your siller here
For ribbons, garters, glasses:
Here Is Jamie fresh fra' bra' Dundee
Wi' gear for pratty lasses.
Geer for pratty, etc.
Come buy, come buy, my pratty maids,
And bring your siller here;
Here Is Jamie fresh fra' bra' Dundee,
Wha' brings you mickle gear.
Brings you, etc.

CHORUS. Ken ye not, etc.




Peggy. Ise unco weary, Jamie.


Jamie. I ken a good auld wife sitting by her door -- she looks kind -- sit
thee down by her, Peggy, whilst I open my warehouse of geer.


(PEGGY goes up to the old Woman, who invites her into the Cottage -- JAMIE
opens his pack on the bench by the public house, and PEGGY sings -- the
Villagers gather round him.) PEGGY. Come buy, come buy, my pratty maids,
And bring your siller here;
Here Is Jamie fresh fra' bra' Dundee,
Wha' brings ye mickle gear.




Jamie (to THOMAS and WILLIAM). I have gang'd to London and a' about -- I do'
no' like the lasses of the sooth; they are a' unco proud, and the lassies
cheeks ruddled over laike a sheep after sheering -- They lack wit too; lack the
sharp air of the north to quacken their understandings -- then they gabble fic
gibberish, it gars me laugh to hear them; but a' hereabout you speak the
language in a' its purity, almost as weel as we do in Scotland. Your Lincoln is
for a' the world laike our Dundee; and the lassies are sa pratty, and the lads
sa kind and sa courteous, I almost fancied myself at haime.


William. We have rare land, my lad, and a kind landlord, and that makes our
hearts merry.


Jamie. Eh! Jamie can be as merry as the best of ye -- When I hard the sweet
twang of the bagpipe, and ken'd sic bra' lads and lassies, my heart danced
aboot as leight as a feather.

[Exit into the house.
EDWARD and MARIAN come forward. Edward. Do you remember, Marian, the first
time I ever saw you? I came a stranger from the distant banks of Tyne -- you
were preparing to dance on the green -- I offered my hand, you kindly gave me
yours; you had a garland of flowers on your head, which, during the dance, you
placed on mine.


Marian. How my heart beat when you spoke to me! You were so different from the
young men of our village; so genteel and yet so modest -- then you spoke so
kind! your words were like the honey dew -- Yes, Edward, I remember well!


DUETTO -- EDWARD and MARIAN.
EDWARD. Marian scorns each sordid pleasure,
Joys which fortune can impart;
Love alone is real treasure,
Treasure of the feeling heart.

MARIAN. All you fruitful vales possessing,
Were their flocks thy Marian's part,
Only valued were the blessing,
Given to Edward with my heart!

EDWARD. Given to Edward with thy heart!

MARIAN. Given to Edward with my heart!

BOTH. Only valued were the blessing.
Given to Edward with thy / my heart.



[She leans on his arm and they exeunt.
Enter PATTY. Patty. I hard it all; hard him tell old Susan as how he would
have me if so be I was willing, and feoff me in ten acres of as good freehold
land as any in the county. Nay, if he will feofft me he certainly loves me, for
I Have never a penny of portion -- but he mus'n't know I listened; I Will steal
away before he comes.


DUETTO -- PATTY and ROBIN.
PATTY. I hard it all behind you tree;
My Robin only proves me;
No more I Will grieve, my heart's at ease;
I Will steal away, he loves me.

Enter ROBIN. ROBIN. I was to blame to be so wild;
My Patty only proves me;
I saw her hide, she looked and smiled,
I sure believes she loves me.

PATTY. I Will fetch my pail and milk my kine
Since Robin only proves me;
He still is true, his heart is mine,
No more I Will grieve, he loves me.
(ROBIN takes PATTY's hand.)
ROBIN. My Patty is the sweetest lass,
Her pouting only proves me;
I saw her hide, she looked and smiled --
I sure believes she loves me.

BOTH. I Will fetch my / her pail and milk my / her kine,
Since Robin / Patty only proves me;
How blithe our days! I Will never repine,
Since Robin / Patty truly loves me!




Robin. You owes me a kiss, Patty, ever since last Tuesday, when I gave your
mother a new churn; you promised to pay me of Saturday, and this is Friday
afternoon!


Patty. And what then, Robin?


Robin. Why then, I Will have it today; there is no harm in a day more or less
between true sweethearts! (kisses her.) Zooks! I believe you have bewitched me,
Patty.


Enter Sir HENRY -- then goes into the Cottage, and enters with PEGGY, talking
to her. Patty. For shame, Robin! there is his Honor!


Robin. His Honor's a brave gentleman; but ain't I a freeholder; and may not I
kiss who I please? Howsomever, let us go choose our fairings, Patty!

[They retire up.
Sir H. Why do you fly me, my pretty lassie? I mean you no harm.


Peggy. I donna know that -- I donna laike when great lairds are sa free wi'
poor lassies; I wonna be wooed; I'se Jamie's bride, and my good will is a' for
him -- I have loved him lang; he is a neighbor's bairn, and I ken his bringing
up.


Sir H. Only take this ribbon, my pretty lassie, to tie on your bosom.


Peggy. I'se none of your gear, good Sir; there is planty of lassies on the
green, and a' bra' and bonny.

SONG -- PEGGY.
I canno' laike ye, gentle Sir,
Although a Lord ye be:
I laike a bonny Scottish lad
Wha brought me fra' Dundee.
(Sir HENRY offers to take her hand.) Haud away! haud away!
Wi' Jamie over the lea
I gang'd alang wi' free good will,
He Is a' the world to me.
I'se gang'd wi' Jamie fra' Dundee
To cheer the lanesome way,
His cheeks are ruddy over wi' halth,
He Is frolic as the May.
The laverock mounts to hail the morn,
The lintwhite swells her throat,
But neither are sa sweet, sa clear
As Jamie's tunefu' note.
Haud away, etc.


O that Peggy were in her ain country! But I Will sit me down by Jamie; his heart
is kind, and he has na mair guile than a maiden -- He Is mair than a brother to
me: he wadded me at the auld kirk, before he would let me gang wi' him -- Bonny
are the days since I called him my ain (she goes to the bench and sits by JAMIE
-- The bell rings the girls all together.)


Thomas. A milking! a milking!


All the Girls. A milking! a milking!

[Exeunt all -- different ways.
Enter MARIAN hastily, and OLIVER following. Oliver. Don't hurry on so, Marian;
you will not hear me: I tell you again and again he is a rover; wanders about the
country, and has a sweetheart wherever he comes -- He sends all his earnings to
a wench in the North country.


Marian. Indeed, my dear father, they slander him; his heart is as free from
guile as my own.


Oliver. Boddikins! when will women be wise? But I can tell you more: I saw him
a little agone in the wood; he took a sort of picture out of his pocket, a
little we thing, no bigger nor a crownpiece; I stole softly, peeped over his
shoulder, and saw it with my own eyes: 'twas as feat a lass as one shall see on
a summer's day; he kissed it, and seemed ready to cry. -- Yes, he kissed it,
and put it to his bosom, just for all the world as if it had been a live
sweetheart.


Marian. It Is impossible! father, you must have been mistaken --


Oliver. Mistaken! Why, there it is then: he dropped it, and I picked it up
(she looks at the picture, throws it down, leans on OLIVER's shoulder, and
wipes her eyes with her apron). Will you believe your father now?


Marian. Would to Heaven I always had! Can you forgive me, father?


Oliver (taking up the picture). Haud away! Don't be coaxing of me. Come with
me to his Honor; he shall know all.


Marian. Oh, Edward! if truth is a stranger to that breast --


Oliver. Truth, quotha!


Marian. If Edward is indeed false, I may grieve, but can never change; he
first won my heart, and I can never love another.


Oliver. Come, come away, girl.

[Exit.
SONG -- MARIAN.
How can I forget the fond hour
When Edward first offered his heart?
At eve on the green, in the bower,
I trembled for fear we should part.
You left me, dear Edward! forlorn,
When night sent the shepherds to rest;
I watched the first streaks of the morn,
I saw you return, and was blessed.


[Exit.
Enter the Girls from milking, with pails on their heads, and Sir HENRY talking
to them -- they offer him milk from their pails. Sir H. You are very kind, my
little girls; but why so fearful?


Patty. If your Honor would but bring us down a lady --


Sir H. Your apprehensions make me smile: you are all very pretty; but I have
not the remotest design on any of you -- You will find me the protector, not
the invader of innocence!

[Exeunt Girls.
Enter OLIVER, bowing to Sir HENRY. Oliver. If I could speak three words to
your Honor --


Sir H. Certainly, Oliver: I wanted also to speak three words to you.


Enter EDWARD leading in MARIAN, who struggles to get from him. Edward. I will
be justified, Marian. Your father's suspicions, for I will not call 'em yours,
have drawn from me a secret which the wealth of worlds should not! This picture
he showed you is the lively image of a mother, dear to me as the lifeblood
which warms my heart; and the money I sent was to her.

SONG -- EDWARD.
With truth on her lips she my infancy formed,
A stranger to falsehood and art;
She charged me to speak to the maid of my choice
No language but that of the heart.
I heard her -- obeyed; and when Marian's soft voice,
Mild as love, added wings to the dart,
Sincere my expression, though ardent, I spoke
No language but that of the heart.



Marian. Take my three hundred pounds for her, Edward; we are both young enough
to work.


Oliver. Why, you are a fool, Marian; what argufies all he has said? -- A
pretty choice you have made!


Marian. I can never make a second.


Sir H. You shall not, my good girl -- I have talked with Edward, and find he
deserves you; in the station of a cottager, he has the sentiments and the
manners of a gentleman. -- Oliver, I will place Edward in a respectable
situation, and make him more than an equal match for Marian.


Enter JAMIE, ROBIN, and PATTY. Jamie (throws down his pack, runs hastily up to
EDWARD and embraces him). You sha' na need, good Sir. -- My bonny chiel, art
here?


Edward. Jamie here! Then I need no other vindication -- Do you know that
picture, Jamie?


Jamie. Eh! It Is thy good Mamy; her mild eyne, and her pratty kind lucks! She
has been unco sad for thee: she sands me now to seek thee, and to tall thee a'
the good tidings. -- The auld carle is deed that made a false will for her
uncle: his conscience prack'd him at last, and he has left her her ain. -- Do
you ken you hoose by the hillside? It Is now your good Mamy's, wi' a thoosand
acres of bra' land, and siller besides planty -- She pines to share it wi'
thee, and wi' the kind lassie wha chose thee wi'out means.


Edward. Then I indeed am happy! A fortune, the gift of a beloved parent, and
shared with Marian, who chose me in poverty, is bliss beyond my fondest hopes.


Jamie. Eh! She Is a paragon of a Mamy!


Edward. How shall I thank you for your kind intentions, Sir?


Sir H. By making Marian happy. -- Oliver, are you now satisfied with your
son-in-law?


Oliver. I am so ashamed, Sir -- and so overjoyed -- Edward a 'Squire, and
Marian a 'Squire's lady! -- Nay, I always said Marian loved his young Honor.


Edward. Your kindness, Sir Henry, makes me speak more of myself than I meant
to do. My parents were both of good birth, but little indebted to fortune: my
father died too young to provide for, and my mother retired on a small annuity
to the banks of Tyne: unable to give me a learned education, she gave me, in
the noblest sense of the word, a liberal one; and inspired me with her own and
my father's virtues.


Sir H. Worthy young man! -- Oliver, you shall have the farm I promised Edward;
and to stock it you will permit to be my care, Sir.


Oliver. You are all too kind to me, your Honor.


Sir H. (to EDWARD.) I have been thinking the little adventures of this day
might be thrown into a drama -- On that idea we'll venture at a Finale, and
suppose it addressed to an indulgent and candid Audience.


Enter THOMAS, FANNY, etc. FINALE.
Sir HENRY. Still from grave to lively changing,
When the poet quits his ease,
Over the wilds of fancy ranging,
How his bosom pants to please.
Still from grave, etc.

ROBIN. Though our love to one is bounded,
Love, the smiling child of ease;
Yet by pretty maids surrounded,
How delightsome it is to please.
Though our love, etc.

PATTY. Though I love my Robin dearly,
More than holidays or ease;
Yet when lads will court me chearly,
Sure it is no harm to please.

EDWARD. Fond I mark the swell of pleasure,
When I see the tender dove
Fluttering round his heart's best treasure,
Emblem of my constant love.

MARIAN. Edward's faithful heart my treasure,
Dearest object of my love!
Poor to me all other pleasure,
Fondly constant as the dove.

Sir HENRY and EDWARD. One ingenuous passion fires us,
Scorning every meaner toil,
When ambition's hope inspires us,
It Is meet to your favoring smile.

MARIAN. If there is a joy transcending,
Dear as truth, content, or ease;
When to gain your smile contending,
This bright circle it is to please.

(The last stanza is repeated by the whole chorus.)


THE END.
PLAYS printed for LONGMAN and REES.
1. SPEED THE PLOUGH, a Comedy; by Mr. MORTON. 2s. 2. RAMAH DROOG; or, WINE
DOES WONDERS, a Comic Opera; by JAMES COBB, Esquire 2s. 3. MANAGEMENT, a Comedy; by
Mr. REYNOLDS. 2s. 4. The BIRTH DAY, a Comedy; altered from KOTZEBUE by T.
DIBDIN. 2s. 5. The JEW AND THE DOCTOR, a Farce; by Ditto. 1s. 6. LIE OF A DAY,
a Comedy; by Mr. O'KEEFFE. 1s. 6d. 7. MODERN ANTIQUES, a Farce; by Ditto. 1s.
8. HIGHLAND REEL, an Opera; by Ditto. 1s. 9. THE FARMER, an Opera; by Ditto.
1s. 10. LOVE IN A CAMP: Or, PATRICK IN PRUSSIA, an Opera; by Ditto. 1s. 11. The
POSITIVE MAN, an Opera; by Ditto. 1s. 12. The POOR SOLDIER, an Opera; by Ditto.
1s.
Of the above Booksellers may be had: 1. The VOTARY OF WEALTH, a Comedy; by Mr.
HOLMAN. 2s. 2. LAUGH WHEN YOU CAN, a Comedy; by Mr. REYNOLDS. 2s. 3. The
DRAMATIST, a Comedy; by Ditto. 1s. 6d. 4. NOTORIETY, a Comedy; by Ditto. 1s.
6d. 5. HOW TO GROW RICH, a Comedy; by Ditto. 1s. 6d. 6. The RAGE, a Comedy; by
Ditto. 2s. 7. WERTER, a Tragedy; by Ditto. 1s. 6d. 8. SPECULATION, a Comedy; by
Ditto. 2s. 9. WILD OATS, a Comedy: by Mr. O'KEEFFE. 1s. 6d. 10. The CASTLE OF
ANDALUSIA, a Comic Opera; by Ditto. 1s. 6d. 11. SPRIGS OF LAUREL, an Opera; by
Ditto. 1s. 12. HARTFORD BRIDGE, allarce; by Mr. PEARCE. 1s. 13. The MIDNIGHT
WANDERERS, an Opera; by Ditto. 1s. 14. NETLEY ABBEY, an Opera; by Ditto. 1s.
15. ARRIVED AT PORTSMOUTH; by Ditto. 1s. 16. The MYSTERIES OF THE CASTLE, an
Opera; by M. P. ANDREWS. 2s. 17. The IRISHMAN IN LONDON, a Farce; by Mr.
M'READY. 1s. 18. ZORINSKI, a Play; by Mr. MORTON. 2s. 19. The WAY TO GET
MARRIED, a Comedy; by Ditto. 2s. 20. The CURE FOR THE HEART ACHE, a Comedy; by
Ditto. 2s. 21. SECRETS WORTH KNOWING, a Comedy; by Ditto. 2s. 22. LOCK AND KEY,
a Farce; by Mr. HOARE. 1s.


Printed by A. Straban, Printers-Street, London.


