THE INSOLVENT: OR, FILIAL PIETY. A TRAGEDY.

ACTED AT THE THEATER in the HAY-MARKET, (By AUTHORITY) Under the DIRECTION of
Mr. CIBBER.

WRITTEN BY THE LATE AARON HILL, Esquire AUTHOR OF MEROPE; Partly on a Plan of Sir
WILLIAM D'AVENANT's and Mr. MASSENGER's.

LONDON: ^rinted and sold by W. REEVE, opposite Crane-Court, in Fleet Street.
MDCCLVIII. Price One Shilling and Sixpence.]

PREFACE.
ABOVE thirty years ago, Mr. WILKS (then one of the patentees of the theater
royal) gave an old manuscript play, called, The Guiltless Adultress; or, Judge
in his own Cause, to Mr. THEOPHILUS CIBBER, who was then manager of what used
to be called, the summer company. This company consisted, in general, of the
junior part of the performers; who, during the vacation time, commonly acted
twice, or thrice, a week. As they played on shares (divided in proportion
according to their several salaries stipulated in the winter) their endeavors
to please the town generally produced 'em double pay, on those nights;
sometimes more.

This kept most of 'em from strolling into the country, for the summer season:
it added to their income, and gave 'em an opportunity of getting forward in
their business, in a more regular manner, than has been practiced of late
years. It had its effect: performers then tried their force in characters, in
the summer; and became, by practice therein, gradually acquainted with their
business, and the town with them. Nor was every one supposed to be equal, at
their very setting out, to the most capital characters of the drama.

But to return to the play. -- By the hand, and the long time it had been in
the possession of the managers, it was supposed to have been one of Sir WILLIAM
D'AVENANT's (formerly a patentee) and, by the opening of the piece, palpably
was founded on a play of MASSENGER's, called, The Fatal Dowry -- (this last
piece has often been enquired after in vain) -- Mr. WILKS recommended it to Mr.
CIBBER to be got up in the summer, with some alterations -- It lay by some
time. -- In the year 1733, it was intended for the stage in the summer -- But
the performers were then shut out of the theater, by the then patentees of
Drury Lane. -- A candid account of which will be given, when Mr. CIBBER has a
proper opportunity to speak thereof, in his purposed history of the stage.

In the following year, when the principal comedians of that time returned from
the theater in the Hay-Market, and played under the direction of Mr. FLETEWOOD,
it was proposed again to have a summer company; as the use of it, both to the
actors and managers, had been experienced. Many light pieces were then revived,
and several new petit pieces brought on the stage; such as, The Devil to Pay,
The Mock Doctor, etc. which proved afterward lasting entertainments in the
winter season.

'Twas in The Devil to Pay, in a summer season, Mrs. CLIVE (then Miss KAFTOR)
first surpised a delighted audience with a proof of her extraordinary genius,
in the character of NELL. Her spirited simplicity, and strong natural humor,
carried her through the part with an astonishing variety, and propriety. She
showed herself an excellent original. -- She has had many followers, some
imitators; and, it is but justice to add, no equal. She then promised to be,
what she has since proved, one of the first performers of the stage: and, when
judiciously examined in the general various cast of parts she acts, it is
imagined, she will be allowed not to be inferior to any performer of her time.

Well, this is digression on digression -- (pardon it, reader, and let it pass)
-- In 1734, a summer company was again proposed. They played once the play of
George Barnwell, to a very great house. The manager (jealous, least the company
should get too much) ordered the farther acting to be stopped. It was judged,
indeed, the jealousy of some actors (who were not concerned in the summer) gave
this advice -- so the affair dropped -- and there has been no summer playing
since.

But, to return to our play. -- On a revisal, it was judged to want some
alterations -- Accordingly, Mr. CIBBEE requested his kind friend the late Mr.
HILL (who was never happier than when he had an opportunity to do a friendly
office) to correct it -- How much he was taken with the play, will appear on a
perusal of some letters of his relative thereto, (published in his collection)
and sent to Mr. THEOPHILUS CIBBER, about the year 1746. -- Let it suffice here,
to add -- Mr. HILL almost new wrote the whole; and the last act was entirely
his, in conduct, sentiment, diction, etc.

It was brought on the stage at the theater in the Hay-Market early this year,
1758 -- When his Grace the Duke of DEVONSHIRE humanely considered the
unfortunate, extraordinary condition of a comedian (who has had more frequent
opportunities of happily entertaining the town) and gave him liberty to try his
fortune, awhile, at the little theater in the Hay-Market.

But what mighty matters could be hoped, from a young, raw, unexperienced
company, hastily collected, and as hastily to be employed (but sinking men
catch at reeds) while established theaters were open to entertain the town,
with the united force of tragedy, comedy, opera, pantomime, song, dance, and a
long train of et ceteras -- Some rational, and some other exhibitions, which
are so frequently followed in a winter season?

Mr. CIBBER was out of pocket by his undertaking; yet this does not prevent his
having a grateful sense of the favors he received, from those noble
personages, and other friends, who have frequently pratonis'd his undertakings.
-- To acknowledge a favor, is but gratitude -- To name the persons, might
appear vanity.

It may not be improper, on this occasion to signify, as Mr. CIBBER has not had
the wished success at the theater in the Hay-Market -- That Mr. RICH has, with
great goodnature, granted the use of his theater in Covent Garden to Mr.
CIBBER, for his benefit, the beginning of next month -- When a new
mock-tragedy, (which many persons of taste have approved of, and which the
author has kindly allowed Mr. CIBBER to make use of on this occasion) will be
acted, with all the variety of scenes, machines, songs, dirges, processions,
etc. etc. -- requisite to embellish ( a-la-moderne) this extraordinary heroic
piece.

PROLOGUE.
Spoke by Mr. CIBBER. (Then in mourning for his father) OUR scenes, tonight,
would nature's pangs impart;
True filiel piety should reach the heart.
I feel it now -- That thought the tear shall claim;
To merit sacred, and immortal fame.
Now sleeps the honored dust, which gave me birth;
Recent in death, but newly lodged in earth:
Forgive the heartfelt grief! the filial lay!
The public tear might drop over CIBBER's clay!
His comic force -- for more than half an age;
His well-wrote moral scene, his manly page,
Your fathers fathers pleased -- His scenes shall live;
And, to your childrens children, equal pleasure give.
Forgive the filial dews that thus distill --
It Is from the heart they flow, and not from skill:
By nature moved, your patience thus I try;
Art would but give my suffering soul the lie.
Now for the father's sake, the son endure;
Let his paternal worth your smile secure.
Let his rich merit my poor wants atone;
His high desert I plead -- Boast none my own.
Let then this tribute, to the father due;
This public tribute, be approved by you.
Whatever faults may through this piece be shown,
No living bard can now those faults atone,
While such you, transient, mark -- Let mercy spare,
Such parts as you may think some merit share.
Where judgment wakes, let candor intervene,
Mark out the failings with that golden mean,
Nor for a single sentence damn a scene.
To our young actors too your smiles extend;
Youth claims indulgence -- as want claims a friend:
Whatever their flattering hopes, their fears are great,
Which your applause alone can dissipate:
And, it is a maxim with the truly brave,
They triumph most, who generously save.
PROLOGUE.
By the Late AARON HILL, Esquire
POOR (at first opening) seems the plot we choose:
But no felt indigence unfir'd the muse.
Insolvent prisoner -- bears no awful sound!
Yet -- hope strong buildings -- on that humble ground.
Debtor and creditor the account begin:
But then comes joy -- wife -- misery -- death and sin!
While, from these varying lights, fierce fires we raise,
Lend but attention -- and your tears shall praise.
Few are the public stains, that tinge the fame
Of this brave, rich, good-natured nation's name:
Yet, one there is -- from time's long license, grown --
That blots out pity -- and turns flesh, to stone.
It Is -- the deaf rage, that (where hard wants oppress)
Doubles the insolvent suff'rer's dire distress.
Stung by this wasp, past friendships lose their weight;
Warped estimation wears a face like hate:
Suspended mercy bids affliction smart;
And, in a scale of flint, immures her heart.
Self -- yet, unreach'd by woe -- made proud, by gain,
Blind to disaster -- and insulting pain;
In ease, short-sighted -- hugs her lot, secure --
And marks no difference -- 'twixt the base, and poor;
Flings from calamity, turns short on grief,
And, to the prison's grave, refers relief.
So -- for awhile -- triumphantly severe!
Towers the bid insult -- and disdains to hear.
At last, comes disappointment home -- Then, starts
Touched sense -- and wonders at men's cruel hearts!
Then (self still upmost) the roused sleeper shakes;
And insolently hopes -- compassion wakes!
But scorn close waits upon the scorner's heel;
And he, that shunned to hear -- vouchsafes to feel.
Too late, he feels! -- The Eye, that wakes for all,
Fore-doom'd his anguish -- and enjoys his fall;
Points, to his trembling view, that wise man's school --
That god-given law -- the all-temp'ring golden rule:
Bids him thank bitterness, for due despair;
And, since he could not pity, learn to bear.
From our last age's plays exemplar aim,
Present and past, we find too much the same:
Stern, unrelenting int'rest's partial will
Reigned then resistless -- and it reigns so still.
How happy were the effect -- could miseries, here,
From pride's correction (mourned by pity's tear)
Teach the dry rock to melt, in pain-touch'd flow;
And ease the unhoping crowds, that sigh, in woe!
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
Old AUMELE, first president of Burgundy. Young AUMELE, in love with AMELIA.
Count CHALONS, son of the marshal of Burgundy. LA FOY, his friend, a rough
soldier. VALDORE, father to AMELIA, and predecessor to Old AUMELE. BELGARD,
cousin, and dependent on AUMELE. LE FER, servant to VALDORE.
WOMEN.
AMELIA, daughter to VALDORE. FLORELLA, her maid. PRESIDENTS, ADVOCATES,
CLIENTS, JAILER, etc.
SCENE, the capital of Burgundy. THE INSOLVENT: OR, FILIAL PIETY.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A court sitting. Judges on the bench. Lawyers with clients at the bar. 2d
PRESIDENT. HAIL! reverend judges! May this meeting prove
Prosperous to us, and end in general good.

Old AUMELE. Speak to the point, the cause of this our summons.

2d PRESIDENT. We meet, my lords, reluctant to dispose
The awful place, and high important power
Of first in council of this sacred court:
This, to our grief, the reverend wise VALDORE
Resolves, grown weary of the ponderous charge,
Here to give up this day.

VALDORE. Too heavy trust! it pressed my conscious weakness:
Yet, not for private ease would I resign it,
But, bowed beneath the burden, sinking age
Implores your kind release from care too weighty.

Old AUMELE. Still to preside, we all would gladly move you.

VALDORE. It must not be; nor can your lordships goodness
Deny my poor remains of time the refuge
Of some short space, for penitence and prayer.
Let me employ my last low ebb of breath,
In cares for future life -- and learn to die. --
I pray the court to ease me of this burden.

3d PRESIDENT. The court entreats your lordship would be pleased
To guide the general voice -- The choice you make
Will be, by all, confirmed.

VALDORE. The lord AUMELE.

3d PRESIDENT. [After a pause -- the presidents bow.] The court allows it --
Be it so decreed.

VALDORE. But here are suitors, and their cause may carry
More weight, than forms like those attending on
This choice -- Dispatch them first.

3d PRESIDENT. Please you, my lord AUMELE, to take the chair,
We would begin.

Old AUMELE. [Seats himself.] Speak, ADVOCATE; we hear.

ADVOCATE. The cause my client offers to your lordships
Is in itself so pleaful, that it needs
Nor eloquence, nor favor, in this court.
The guilty, when condemned, confess your justice;
Our cause shall claim your mercy.

Old AUMELE. Speak to the cause.

ADVOCATE. It Is the cause speaks. -- Great Burgundy's blessed state
Had once -- But stop. [Pause.] To say that her dead marshal,
The father of this brave young lord, my client, [Pointing to CHAEONS.
Honored his country's name by far-fam'd service,
Would tax assertion, by a doubt undue.
You all, my lords, remember that so well,
'Twere injury to prove it. -- In his life,
He grew indebted to these thrifty men; [Pointing to the creditors.
And failing, by repeated loss in war,
Of power to free himself from such low claims;
I weep to tell it -- But, his country saved,
Saw him imprisoned -- and in prison die.
It is a maxim in our law -- that debts
Die, with insolvent debtors: But these men,
Lengthening malicious pain beyond life's bounds,
From death snatch bodies for new chains.
They dare deny him even his funeral rites;
Rites, not by heathens held from wretched slaves.
We humbly, therefore, pray your lordships pity,
Setting aside their more than barbarous insult,
To disappoint revenge -- That woe may rest.

Old AUMELE. How long have you, sir, practiced in this court?

ADVOCATE. Full twenty years, my lord.

Old AUMELE. How! -- Twenty years? --
So bold an ignorance had half convinced me,
Your judgment scarce could number twenty days.

ADVOCATE. I hope, in such a cause as this, my lord --

Old AUMELE. How dare you thus presume to urge the court
(Law's sacred guardian) to dispense with law?
Terror of bankrupts gave this statute birth.
Go home, and with more care peruse known acts;
And then make motions.

ADVOCATE. I submit -- but mourn.
[Exit ADVOCATE.
LA FOY. Can then your lordships think, that he whose plea
Supports a friendless cause (condemned by law,
Though justice owns it) errs by honest zeal?

Old AUMELE. Prodigious arrogance!

LA FOY. Is reason such!
Or is it here a maxim, that the pleader
Reads on the judge's face his cause's worth?

3d PRESIDENT. Too bold LA FOY -- Pay reverence where it is due.

LA FOY. Or was the power you act by, trusted with you
To qualify no rigor in the laws;
But doubling every wound that mercy feels,
Treat pity like a guilt? -- Oh, shame of state! --
This strictness of your sour decree, that grinds
The debtor's dying bones, to feast the spite
Of a still greedy creditor, who gapes
For payment from the grave's unclosing dust;
Condemns misfortune, to let crimes go free.

Old AUMELE. You, sir, that prate thus saucily, what are you?

LA FOY. I am a soldier -- If you know not me,
Never has yourself been known in honor's courts.
Beneath the banner of the dead CHALONS,
Long witness of his deeds, I served, in blood;
Saved your ungrateful head, and lent it means
To lift that haughty brow -- my partial judge.

3d PRESIDENT. Forbear, bold Man -- It Is rashness past support.

LA FOY. Let those proud angry Eyes flash lightning round,
Each object they can meet feels dumb disdain;
Shrinks from their blood-shot beams, and frowns within:
Long had they been, ere this, by some fierce hand
Torn from their tasteless orbs; or, saved for shame,
Had, justly weeping, served some needy foe;
Had I not worn a sword, and used it better,
Than, in disgrace of law, thou do thy tongue.

Old AUMELE. If insolence, like this, pass here unpunished --

LA FOY. Yet I -- who in my country's balanced scale
Out-weigh'd a thousand tame proud logs like thee,
Confess myself unworthy name, compared
With the least claim of my dead general's worth.
Then from his numberless, long line of glories,
Make choice of any one, even of the meanest;
Whether against that wily fox of France,
The politic LEWIS, or more desperate Swiss;
Still shall thou find it poize, beyond all tricks,
Craft, views, or acts, that ever gown-men thought of.

Old AUMELE. Away -- to prison with him.

LA FOY. Off. [To the guards.] If curses,
Urged in the bitterness of aching wrong,
Ever pierced the ear of heaven -- and drew down bolts,
On heads that most deserved them, let not mine,
Now, rise in vain. -- Fear, from this moment;
And, fearing, feel; and tremble to sustain,
The whips that furies shake over cruel men.
[To AUMELE.] You have a son; take care this curse not reach him.
You clods [To the creditors.] in human forms, that could deny
Earth, gentler than your own, its mournful claim,
To cover the remains of that great chief.
May all your wives prove false, and bring you heirs
Of liberal hearts, whose riots may undo you!
Your factors all prove thieves, your debtors bankrupts;
And thou, stern patron of their blushless plea,
Live to lose all thy lordships; not even save
Room on thy dunghill for thyself and dog.
Be old before thou die, to die more wretched!
That, as thou have denied the dead a grave,
Thy living misery in vain may wish one. --
I Have well begun -- on -- imitate -- exceed. [To CHALONS.

Old AUMELE. Force him away.
[Exit LA FOY guarded.
3d PRESIDENT. Remember where you are. [To CHALONS.

CHALONS. Thus low the wretched bends to thank your counsel.
I Will teach my tempered language to suspend
All sense of filial pain -- and speak but duty.
Not that I fear to raise my voice as loud,
And with as fierce complaint, as touched LA FOY;
But that from me, who am so deeply sunk
In misery's gulf, so hopeless in distress,
'Twou'd seem the rash man's means to cure despair,
By casting off his load, that ends with life.
No -- let my suffering duty to the dead
Live on -- and pay the tribute of your praise,
Honest severity renowns your justice:
Why should such white, unsinning souls as yours,
Forgive the guilt you act not? -- Why should service
By any man performed, to bless his country,
Exact his country's mercy? -- What though my father,
Ere scarce arrived at youth, out acted man;
Numbered that day no part of life, wherein
He snatched not some new trophy from your foes,
Was he for that to triumph over your courts,
Superior to the laws he fought to save?
What though the sums he died indebted for,
Were borrowed, not for his, but public use,
Should he be free from payment; because poor,
From a spent patrimony, kindly spread
To the starved soldiers wants? -- 'Twas his brave choice;
And, when the willing suffer, -- are they wronged?

Old AUMELE. The precedent were ill --

CHALONS. True, my kind lord!
What is it to your courts, that weigh but laws,
That after all our great defeats in war,
Which in their dreadful ruins buried quick
Courage and hope in all men, but himself;
He forced the foe from that proud height of conquest,
To tremble in his turn -- and sue for peace!
What though he saved an hundred thousand lives,
By hard fatigues, that robbed him of his own;
Dauntless to summer heats, and winter's frost,
Ill airs, mines, cannons, and the unsparing sword;
Was he, for that, to hope escape from debt,
Or privilege from prison?

3d PRESIDENT. 'Twas his fault
To be so prodigal -- he should have spared.

Old AUMELE. The state allowed him what maintained their army.

CHALONS. You say he should have spared -- He should indeed --
Have spared, to trust his hopes on hopeless ground.
I too will spare to speak the pangs I feel,
And feed my thoughts within. -- Yet to these men,
[To the creditors.] To these soft-hearted men, these wise men, here;
These only good men -- Men that pay their debts;
To these, I turn my hopes -- these honest souls!

1st CREDITOR. And so they are.

2d CREDITOR. It is our doctrine, sir.

CHALONS. Be constant in it -- lest you change your road,
And straggle to salvation -- Do not cheat
The devil of his best dues -- make punctual payment.
But my sad swelling heart forgets its cue --
On deaf and narrow natures, such as yours,
I will not waste one hint that honor loves;
The court shall squeeze no scruple from the law,
That lends your selon hearts the weight of right.
I know there is no music to your ears
More pleasing, than the groans of men in pain:
The tears of widows, and the orphans cry,
Feast but your happier sense of wealth's coarse joy.
But rather than my father's reverend dust,
Shall want its place in that still monument
Where all his silent ancestors sleep safe,
Take me, your living pledge -- Renounce the dead,
And, in my fettered freedom, find revenge.
I am possessed of strength to scorn your malice,
Shun the detested world, and love restraint.
I would forget the sun, that shines on you,
And choose my dwelling where no light can enter. --
Release my father's corpse.

VALDORE. Alas! young lord,
Consider well what hopes you cast away;
Your liberty, youth, joy, life, friends and fame.
Your bounty is employed upon a subject,
That cannot feel its vastness: The known glory
Of your dead father vindicates his urn,
Treads on their living dust who wrong his name,
And breaks the prison's gates that bind his body.

Old AUMELE. Let him alone -- the young man loves renown:
If he courts misery, let misery meet him.
Provided these consent, the court objects not.

CHALONS. Consent! -- the wrongful doubt offends their wisdom.
Can these trade-tools lie sullen, and shun work,
When willing interest hires 'em? -- Calls their idol,
And shall their zeal grow deaf -- and drop their worship? --
From my dead father's corpse what hopes of profit?
Nay, they have there no chance of giving pain.
What relish of revenge, where it is not felt?
In me they are sure, at least of present vengeance,
And cherish prospect of some future gain.

1st CREDITOR. What think you of the offer? -- Shall we close?

2d CREDITOR. I like the motion well -- It gives some hopes.

1st CREDITOR. Some young, unthinking girl, or gay, warm widow,
Pleased with his fame for manly deeds in arms,
May pay us all our debts, and bind him hers.

3d PRESIDENT. What is your answer?

2d CREDITOR. You shall speak for all.

1st CREDITOR. Make all our actions on his father laid,
Stand the son's debts, and we release the body.

Old AUMELE. The court must grant you that.

CHALONS. I thank you all.
In this you have conferred a glory on me,
That nobly over-pays your envious view.
Come, lead me to the gloom I long to find;
'Twill free me from your forms, and shade my own.
[Exit, with creditors, officers, etc.
Old AUMELE. Strange madness!

VALDORE. Madness, do you call it! -- Term it
Strange, generous extacy of matchless virtue!
Worthy of happier fortune, nobler fate! --
But rest that now unargued. -- To my cause
Already I have found your lordships bounty
So lavish in your grants, that it should teach me
To limit my desires to narrower bounds.

3d PRESIDENT. There Is nothing you can ask, we would not grant.

2d PRESIDENT. Our wills are all your own; pray use 'em freely.

VALDORE. It has been here, you know, the court's kind custom,
Confirmed by time's long venerable practice,
That at surrender of the place I held,
Some grant indulged confirms a favor asked.
As proof then of your grace, that loves to give,
I tempt its proffered bounty.

3d PRESIDENT. Think it yours.

VALDORE. I ask remission for that rash LA FOY;
And that you, lord AUMELE, whose wrong partook
The affront that moved the court, will pardon with it,
And sign his wished enlargement.

Old AUMELE. Nay, my lord, demand one half of my estate -- Take all --
But spare me this strange prayer -- It warms my wonder!

VALDORE. If I must be denied --

2d PRESIDENT. That cannot be.

3d PRESIDENT. I have a voice to give.

2d PRESIDENT. I add mine to it.

3d PRESIDENT. If then persuasion fails -- we must insist,
That votes decide this question.

Old AUMELE. You are too absolute;
I could consent to any thing but this:
Yet, this -- if it must be -- my lord -- I yield.

VALDORE. I thank your hard concurrence.

Old AUMELE. Break up the court.
[The court rises. [Exeunt, all but VALDORE and servant.
VALDORE. I Will follow instantly. --
LE FER.

LE FER. My lord.

VALDORE. What did thou think, but now, of young CHALONS;
How did his conduct strike thee?

LE FER. With due wonder; and so did brave LA FOY's.

VALDORE. Fie, fie; he is faulty. --
What ready money have I unassign'd?

LE FER. Enough for every use your wish can form.

VALDORE. It Is well. -- I Am wounded, when the brave feel pain:
Some call this weakness -- Heaven turn their hearts.
The filial piety of young CHALONS, demands reward
Beyond our admiration. --
Methinks from his example -- low mankind,
Should rise in body's scorn -- for taste of mind;
Fly the coarse dross, that weighs down virtue's claim;
Stretch for futurity -- and grapple fame.
[Exeunt omnes.
End of the first Act.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
A PRISON. JAILER and LE FER. JAILER. SO ripe a judgment, at an age so young;
It Is wonderful!

LE FER. Religious -- though a soldier!

JAILER. That still is more a wonder! -- So to quit,
In the strong tide of youth, his flowing fortune;
Drop his own living taste of joy's full feast,
To give his father's dead remains a grave,
Seems something that exceeds the bounds of faith.

LE FER. It makes a golden precedent indeed!
It teaches piety a bright, new road,
To reach perfection by a shorter cut.

JAILER. What is his age?

LE FER. Scarce three and twenty years. I remember
When first he served unhappy Burgundy,
Under his more unhappy father's wing;
Where serving and commanding, he learned both,
With such a ready fire and temper mixed,
That sometimes he appeared his father's father;
And never less, than our great captain's son.

JAILER. Look, where he comes; and see his friend, LA FOY,
Waiting the father's corpse, the son has freed,
Now moving to its last, long prison's cell.

Enter Funeral, attend by CHALONS, LA FOY, etc. LA FOY. How like a silent
stream, by night's dark brow
O'er-shaded, gliding under still cold showers,
Moves the slow march of that sad solemn train!
Tears, sighs, and mournful black, but paint woe's face,
Within lies all the depth that drowns distress.

CHALONS. Stay, friends, a moment -- while a wretch, denied
To bear due murmurs to the cave of death,
Bounds here his hollow groans. Rest, rest awhile. [To the bearers, who set
down the hearse.
Oh! hail; for ever hail! dear reverend shade!
Adieu, ye loved remains of that blessed form,
Who gave a nation rest -- and lost his own!
Cruel extent of proof, that he who toils
To serve (mistaken thought) the public cause,
Works for a fleeting shadow, that but seems
To wear a tempting shape -- a dream, and fades.
Here stands thy poor executor -- thy son;
More proud a captive, thus thy hearse to free,
Than when he fought thy cause, and shared its fame.
Of all the thousands thou have served and saved,
These only could remember. These dear few,
Remember well -- for they forget not gratitude.
I thank you -- and I wish I could reward;
It Is the last friendly aid you lend his love.
His native land, like an unnatural mother,
Not only has devoured the worth she bore,
But blots it from her memory's blank record;
Leaving thy heir (great stain of want!) so poor,
He cannot buy thee one sad humble stone,
To mark its only spot exempt from shame.
[Observes the soldiers weep. Alas! the mournful scene's not wholly mine!
The honest soldiers weep! -- LA FOY too weeps!
Oh, heaven! behold a miracle of virtue,
The very jailer weeps! -- And look, LA FOY,
The plaintiff crocodiles themselves shed tears!
Nay, then -- my father's bones shall need no tomb:
Be these his body's balm; these drops, more hard
Than Idumean flints, on sunburned plains!
[Creditors seem to weep.
LA FOY. Away, ye sniv'ling rogues! nor mix profane
The dry-drawn tribute of a whine like yours,
With rites of heartfelt sorrow -- Howl not here:
Strain your fqueez'd eye-strings 'till they crack, for pain;
Never shall one generous dew-drop start, for virtue.

PRIEST. On with the procession.

CHALONS. Hold -- Yet hold --
But, 'till in presence of his honor's hearse,
I struggle 'till I find a few poor legacies.
[To a soldier] Come hither, generous soldier -- Wear this ring;
'Twill, when thou see it, bid thy valor glow
Distinguished as thy pity.
Thou, good friend, [To another]
Cross thy afflicted manly breast shall bind
This scarf -- and doubly dye the warlike crimson.
[To the bearers] You, gentle bearers of the noblest load,
That ever pressed willing shoulders, take this purse;
Divide its little all -- For thee, LA FOY,
Poor as thou think thy friend, I Have gold yet lest:
Take thou this medal; wear it for his sake
Who knew thy worth, and loved it.
And now my wants and wealth are ended all:
Now -- bleak, inhospitable world, farewell;
Darkness will, gratis, in my silent cell
Furnish an unbought shelter -- Life's short storm
Blown over, I once more shall meet my father.
'Till then -- Tears speak the rest. [Weeps.

LA FOY. On -- on -- he shakes me.

Funeral proceeds. 1st CREDITOR. No farther. [Stopping CHALONS.] Jailer, at
your peril, keep him.
What! squander our estate before our faces!

JAILER. Sir -- Please you to return?

2d CREDITOR. Please! -- He shall please.
Come, every little helps -- and money's money.

CHALONS. Dear, venerable earth! -- Adieu, for ever!
[Goes in. [Exeunt omnes.
SCENE II.
A CHAMBER in VALDORE's House. Enter AMELIA and FLORELLA. AMELIA. Your story of
CHALONS has greatly moved me.
If AUMELE touched my thoughts, 'twas partial folly;
Yet 'twas not love, 'twas duty; since my father
Pointed his lightness out, not warned me from it.

FLORELLA. AUMELE is light, deceitful, loose, ignoble;
Loves every face, is every woman's claim,
And she who first believes, is first undone.
His very friendship's false -- Himself, whom only
He wishes not to cheat, he cheats the most.
He courts you for a mistress, not a wife.

AMELIA. No more -- I hear him with suspecting hope;
And doubt, I should not trust him.

FLORELLA. Still it is thus! --
Woman, by nature formed to be undone,
Often sees, yet helps the treason she would shun.

Enter Young AUMELE. AMELIA. Hush, good FLORELLA -- hush -- No more -- He comes!
The gay, the witty, could I add the just,
AUMELE were all the maid beloved could wish.
[Exit FLOR.
AUMELE. Lov'liest AMELIA; if, before my hour,
I break on your retirement, thank your charms.
Love has its winged desires, when beauty calls. --
Sweeter than spring! than summer's sun more awful!
Yet colder than the winter's starry nights!
Say, how much longer will that frozen heart
Resist the warmth it gives me?

AMELIA. Gay AUMELE! --
Lovers make light complaints, who love like you.
Too well you guess the father must prevail,
Where daughters, by their duty, guide their choice:
You know my heart admits no wavering flame.

AUMELE. Could gifts of empty air enrich my claim,
How wealthy had you made me! -- Still look angel,
But more like woman love -- Meet flame with flame.

AMELIA. Has not my father's will pronounced me yours?

AUMELE. True -- But methinks he gave what was not his:
Your lover's pride would owe you to yourself.
Whatever you to a father's orders yield,
Proves your obedience, but it proves not love:
The surest test of love is confidence.

AMELIA. She gives without reserve, who gives up all.

AUMELE. Manner, in miser's deeds, destroys their bounty:
Bonds they insist on -- first -- then pinch out gold;
While the true friend tells fast, and trusts repay.

AMELIA. I understand you not.

AUMELE. Had you but love,
Then could you soon --

AMELIA. What mean you!

AUMELE. Credit mine --
But your calm, patient passion waits dull form;
Asks holy mortgage -- to insure captivity,
And doubts if honor's ties can bind like priests.

AMELIA. How! -- For thy honor, should I part with mine!
Fain would I think less souly of AUMELE,
Than once to fear he dares design my ruin.

AUMELE. Thy ruin! -- No, thy happiness he courts --
Would crown AMELIA empress of his soul,
Not warden of his body -- See her reign
Sovereign, by freeborn choice, with generous sway,
Safely surrounded with thy guard of charms.
What need -- what use -- of yeoman duty's aid?

AMELIA. What would thou dare? --

AUMELE. Why -- It Is unjust, my love,
To treat our queens, like slaves -- Weigh marriage rightly,
You Will find it humbling fierce, tumultuous joy,
Concurrent wills, and elegant desires;
Made cold, and lifeless all -- because compelled.

AMELIA. Oh, heaven! begone for ever from my sight;
Nor dare to blast my name, from this black moment,
With breath more baneful than the viper's hiss!
If, in some softer hour's unguarded faith,
Trustful I listened, and half hoped thee just;
Spite of thy known, thy dreaded lightness, heard thee --
Punish me, angry powers, when I forgive thee!

AUMELE. Have frowns such charms! why heaves that snowy bosom,
Unformed for any sighs, but those of love?
[Forcing her hand, and embraces her -- She puts him aside. Change 'em for
fiercer transports, yet unknown:
Soft murmurs -- stifled whispers -- throbbing heart --
Eyes mixing angry fear, with fond defires;
Earnest of joy too violent to last,
And kindly made too short, lest bliss might kill.
[After struggling, she breaks from him.
AMELIA. Unhand me, villain! traitor, fly this moment!
O! that the eyes thou wrong'st, could look thee dead!
The cursed hyaena's wily cry -- false tears
Of crocodiles -- All, all that is fatal, dire,
Destructive to our sex -- all meet in thee!
No, base AUMELE -- once passion did but pause --
This insult on my honor ends it all:
I Would sooner -- But begone -- it is guilt to see thee;
But, to hold converse with thee, blots my fame. [Going.

AUMELE. Hear yet one humble word --

AMELIA. When next I do,
Then curse me every power that hates not virtue. [Going, meets her father
entering.
My father! -- Sure he has not been a witness
To this man's daring perfidy!

Enter VALDORE. VALDORE. AMELIA! --
Young lord, allow me to expect your pardon, [To AUMELE.
That business of importance calls my daughter.

AUMELE. I humbly take my leave.
[Exit bowing. [VALDORE sees him to the door, and returns.
VALDORE. Why look you sad, AMELIA?

AMELIA. I was moved,
By news my woman brought me of this fame,
From great and generous praise, that crowns CHALONS.

VALDORE. Kind heaven prepared that thought to suit my purpose.
Thy duty ever met thy father's will;
And, as thou know I will but for thy good,
I have no cause to doubt thy wished obedience.

AMELIA. Sir, I am yours -- so wholly, that my heart
Unhesitating hears -- when you command.

VALDORE. To say I love thee, were too short -- Thou art
My age's only comfort -- my soul's joy --
My hope for future time -- my pride in this.

AMELIA. Would I had merit, fir, to make this justice.

VALDORE. I thought, AMELIA, at my entrance here,
I saw thee moved to anger?

AMELIA. Oh! my heart! [Aside.

VALDORE. AUMELE was with thee -- As I know him vain,
I fear some lightness shook thee!

AMELIA. Me! my lord!

VALDORE. Sprung from a brutal stem, himself more brutal,
I now, too late, repent I bade thee love him.
Too conscious of his father's power, I poorly
Bartered my love of truth, for earth's proud views;
And heaven resentful, has resolved to blast 'em.
To him, this morning, I surrendered up
A power, his schemes insidious long had crossed:
But, by his conduct in CHALONS' just cause,
New shocked by savage proof of flinty nature,
He waked me into detestation, due
To his whole impious race, and stop thy ruin.

AMELIA. Alas! my lord, far happier had I been,
Never to have indulged a listening ear.
Unapprehensive innocence, in maids,
Weighs man by its own meanings.

VALDORE. Wary maids --

AMELIA. Alas! there are no such, when love reigns lord.
Ah! what, if in obedience to your orders,
I should have given my heart, where you assigned it?
Think to what misery then my duty dragged me.
Passions newborn, at first are in our power;
But, when their tide runs strong, they sweep resolves.

VALDORE. Away -- Ere yet the priest has joined your hands,
To trust your passion's range beyond your power,
Were treason against honor -- If it is so,
Recall it, while you can: You are too wise
To dote, AMELIA, on a youth so weightless.
The solid lover guards his favourer's same,
Which the fool's whole wished joy but seeks to fully.
Boasters of frothy soul, when young, like this,
So little too informed by manly virtue,
Blast, like a basilisk, each fair they look on:
Loud, among lewd companions, wildly cruel.
Each but compares with each his list of conquests,
And he is most hero, who has ruined most.

AMELIA. And is AUMELE of taste depraved like this?

VALDORE. Name him no more -- I, whose mistaken hand
Brought malady, will also bring the cure.
CHALONS, the brave CHALONS, shall claim thy heart,
And prize it to its value. Smile, AMELIA;
CHALONS, that moved thy praise, deserves thy pity.
CHALONS has every worth should charm a woman;
A mind exalted, like a fancied god!
Judge it, by what thou'st heard of his dead father.
Example never reached it -- It has fired
My blood to sense of transport! -- Give him then
Your wonder and your love.

AMELIA. He has my wonder! has my heart's applause;
But, for its tenderness, it is scarce my own!

VALDORE. Peace, AMELIA,
Lest thou should lead me to believe -- But -- no --
AUMELE had never the power to wound thy honor;
I cannot then suspect thy heart admits him.
Is that a man to move a lady's wish?
Light rival of her sexes emptiest arts,
The toilet and the ball-room are his fields --
Thence rise his trophies -- There expands his same.

AMELIA. Yet, once, you thought him worthiest of my love.

VALDORE. How careful should men be to weigh resolves!
Push thought to consequence, and take in fear!
Else comes reproach, let loose -- for ever ours.
I charge you, on my blessing, shun AUMELE;
And view CHALONS as one that claims your love.

Enter LE FER. LE FER. LA FOY, my lord, attends,
[Exit.
VALDORE. AMELIA -- you may now
Retire, to suit 'your wish to my command;
Or bear the weight of a wronged father's curse,
And live a stranger to me.

AMELIA. Oh! sir! -- Oh! father! [Kneeling.

VALDORE. Away -- I will not hear thee! -- Go -- Obey!
[Exit AMELIA, weeping.
Enter LA FOY. VALDORE. I wished to see you, sir, for your own sake;
'Twas to lend counsel (...) your iron rashness:
Love of your bravery forced me to esteem you.
Haste, and submit yourself to warm AUMELE.
Weigh your too bold contempt of a court's power,
And deprecate its vengeance.

LA FOY. When I do --
May my tongue rot. -- My lord, you know not me.
Submit, and crave forgiveness of a brute!
What though his wealth were equal to a monarch's?
Nay, though himself a monarch (as his pride
Out-monarch's his crowned master's) let me die
The death his baseness merits, ere once stoop
To think commissioned brutes are less than monsters.
Does he not use his power to crush the needy?
Oppress the soldier, scholar, all desert?
Nay, wronged he not the marshal! -- Nature formed
This loathed, wry mouth of law, to scare mankind,
By scorn of ugly vice, to love of virtue!
How savagely the brute blasphemer spoke
Of the dead general! -- Ask him forgiveness!
First let me perish law-struck -- A judge! -- A dog!
How he insulted over the brave man's memory!
Perdition seize him for it! -- I weep to think on it!

VALDORE. I was to blame
To yield my place too blindly -- But, perhaps,
It Is practicable to retrieve that error. --
Sir, give not way to passion.

LA FOY. I weep not when I fight -- But, pardon me,
I melt because too weak to check oppression.
Whenever I think of the vile injuries,
The bold black injuries done my worthy master,
I could devour him piecemeal.

VALDORE. Pray be temperate --
I but advise your frenzy -- not constrain:
Opinion is as free as air -- and they
Who err in power, are least exempt from censure.

Enter LE FER. LE FER. The creditors attend with count CHALONS.

VALDORE. Pay those hard men their claims -- Wait the count in.
Please you, LA FOY, to witness their receipts,
And take their full releases -- What but now
I said, meant nothing -- 'Twas this call
Detained you for their coming -- What you will see
Will more explain my purpose.

LA FOY. What I hear alarms my love and wonder.

LE FER. This way, sir.
[Exit LE FER and LA FOY.
Enter CHALONS, wiping his eyes and melancholy. VALDORE meets him. VALDORE.
Brave sir, you are most welcome. -- Fie! be hushed,
You have out wept a woman! -- Noble CHALONS!
No man that lives but has a father lost,
Or once must lose a father.

CHALONS. Sir, it is true. --
I never thought my father was immortal;
But as I passed your hall, his reverend picture
Smiled on my startled eye, and forced some tears.

VALDORE. My lord -- I loved your father -- and would wish
One favor from his son.

CHALONS. Of me -- a favor!
What has he left to grant, who wants his liberty?

VALDORE. The liberty you think you want, is yours.
The rich man that beholds the brave in chains,
And pants not for his freedom, is a slave.
Jewels or gold, whatever your wants require,
Take all that I possess, and end restraint.
You look amazement.

CHALONS. Nay, I am amazed!
You cannot mock distress -- Natures, like yours,
Call feigned compassion insult. But your virtue
Shall wonder, in its turn -- for I Will not tax
Your bounty for myself -- But beg release
(In my forgotten stead) of poor LA FOY.

Enter LA FOY. VALDORE. See what a power the prayers of good men hold!
I give him to your friendship -- and to his
I join your own due freedom -- Live and love.
Your father's debts discharged, his name shines free.

LA FOY. It Is an astonishing, yet sacred truth!
I come from witnessing the generous deed --
See here, your own discharge.

CHALONS. Honored VALDORE! -- [Pauses.] But words won'd wrong my meaning.
Dumb be my tongue, while blushes only speak --
All language is too light, for deeds like these!

VALDORE. Would you requite 'em, count?

LA FOY. Command his life --
And, if one serves not; throw in mine, my lord.
[CHALONS stands struck with silent attention.
VALDORE. I have an only child, her mother's likeness,
Care of my life, and comfort of my years!
I stand so near the brink of time's dark stream,
That soon in course I must drop in, and die:
Fain would I first provide a guard more strong
For my AMELIA's youth, than age like mine.
Her birth perhaps less splendid, matched with yours,
Yet worthy noblest notice. Take her, then,
And with her all my fortune -- Call her wife.
Thank me, by loving her; it is all the gratitude
My hopes, from brave CHALONS, can bear to claim.

CHALONS. Oh! what delightful payments you exact,
When you thus plunge me deeper far in debt!
Now, not my life's last toils can ever pay you.
She were, without a dower, a prince's prize;
How greatly then too rich, too dear, for me!

VALDORE. Is it resolved then?

CHALONS. Sir -- I have loved her long --
Despairing (lost in fortune's clouds) to gain her.
Her beauty is the boast of Burgundy;
Her father is VALDORE! -- There honor strikes
Perfection's proudest point -- and joy stands dumb.
Heaven grant her generous will but pleased as mine,
And ere the sun yet sets -- his day's a year.

VALDORE. Enough, I answer for her willing duty.
She wants no sense of that -- and knows your worth.
This day shall smile on my completed wish.

CHALONS. It Is more than love's stretched arrogance of hope
Durst promise my desires. Oh, sir! I groan
Beneath such added weight of benefit!
You, CURTIUS like, have cast into the gulf
Of our sunk Burgundy's ungrateful shame,
Your fame and fortune, to redeem her name.

VALDORE. Fortune's an empty well -- and hoards but air,
'Till use lends weight to wealth -- and taste to care:
Then shine the rich man's joys -- when shared they flow;
He that would well possess, must wide bestow.
[Exeunt omnes.
End of the second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
A GARDEN, belonging to VALDORE's House. On one side, FLORELLA and AUMELE
discovered, talking earnestly: On the other, enter BELGARD. BELGARD. SO! he has
lodged me here, for his old purpose.
How base are these employments! -- I Will forsake him.
Thinks he, because I owe his father's purse
My poor subsistence, I but eat to sin!
From this close conference, and that low voice,
The new bride's faithless maid, or I guess wrong,
Betrays some trusted secret. -- Hark! he is louder.

AUMELE. Well -- grant that I advised the useful scheme,
Which authorized thy crafty tongue to paint me
In odious lights; that, seeming not my friend,
Her caution should not catch the least faint glimpse,
That I had bought thy service; was you by that,
Commissioned to betray me for another,
And pay CHALONS the joys bespoke by me?

FLORELLA. If you could hear -- I meant to do you service;
Enrich you, by your loss -- Never, 'till now,
Was your hope likely -- never near, 'till now.

AUMELE. Thy fancy is all woman -- Wind and feather!

FLORELLA. Will you hear me?
You say my lady's married -- Thank heaven for it,
And feel the clue that guides you. -- Track two footsteps;
One over the trodden path of some hedged field,
That tempts approach to beat it more, yet tells not:
The other cross cold lawns of shivering snow,
'Till then by mortal wanderer unimprinted,
Which of these two proclaims discovery soonest?
Shame on such shallow plotters! -- When in love,
Interest, or treason, your he blunderer moves,
Without a woman's help, his wit destroys him.

AUMELE. What am I to infer from this fine story?

FLORELLA. Her marriage but invites her lover's hopes;
Unbars the door of doubt, fast locked by danger.
France, you well know, trusts wives with ample freedom;
And when these wives have maids -- those maids good friends --
And those friends liberal hearts -- What think you now?

AUMELE. Provided she consented, this were easy.

FLORELLA. Oh! there are arts -- Consent or not consent:
In short, I know she loves you -- Did you know
But half as well who serves your interest there,
You Would scorn to weigh how dear the hope may cost you.

AUMELE. Nay, that is unjust reproach. Here Is a new witness;
[Gives her a purse. I want no grateful will to note thy friendship:
If it succeeds, in this sweet view thou show me,
Be richer than thy mistress.

FLORELLA. See! I told you,
She should walk there alone -- pretend you sought her.
[Exit FLORELLA.
BELGARD comes forward. BELGARD. So, sir! I see for what you dragged me hither.
Preferred to be your pander. Help to ruin
A fine young lady, formed for love and piety.
That she could ever fancy one so wicked!

AUMELE. No, no; I brought thee but to take the air,
Thy dulled wit wanted fresh'ning: and besides,
Thou have a sword edged sharp, how blunt soever
Thy surly virtue makes thee -- Threat'nings, BELGARD,
Threat'nings grow frequent, and these groves are solitary.
What! you want money now? That makes you peevish.
There -- [Offers money.

BELGARD. I scorn your money, sir; nor will be bought
To a base act. I shall acquaint your father.

AUMELE. Aye, do; he will not believe thee -- His own gambols
Lay not my way, his loves have hard round faces;
And what men wish not theirs, they grudge not others.

BELGARD. But will not law defend a lady's honor?

AUMELE. No, it is the lady's property: while so,
What legal right has power to enter on it?
Grant it were stolen, (as yet, woes me, it is not)
Then in comes law indeed, and makes good pen'worths
In the rogues rents that robbed it. -- Ah, BELGARD!
Had thou a kinsman judge -- I Would say sin cheap;
But mum for that -- So, cousin, go thy way:
I Will think on thy advice, muse here awhile,
And meet thee at the Vine, to hear more counsel.

BELGARD. Adieu, then, if you're still thus obstinate;
The loss is but your own: henceforth, your father
Shall hold my care excused for such a son;
And I Will renounce his help, or wake his caution.
[Exit BELGARD.
AUMELE. He went in pinch of time; for yonder walks
A saint, this blustering devil had scared from sin.
He Is born to spoil my markets. -- I Will stand shaded.
[AUMELE stands on one side.
Enter AMELIA and FLORELLA. FLORELLA. You know I never liked him; if I had,
Good faith, I might have laughed myself to pity:
For, could you see how like a lovesick mope,
The poor, touched penitent, weeps, prays and curses,
Forsaken though he is, you would never forget him.

AMELIA. He has too much deserved the pain he suffers.

FLORELLA. Would you shun him?
Perhaps, for much he ever loved our grove,
He may not yet have left it. -- Look! -- He Is here.

AMELIA. I charge you, stir not -- Stay, and be a witness,
If he dares speak -- But sure he will not dare.
Light chance lends slander often to idle tongues,
And innocence might suffer.

FLORELLA. I will be near.
[Exit.
AUMELE approaches respectfully. AUMELE. Madam -- forgive a trembling criminal;
Guilty -- but greatly punished -- that -- thus -- led,
By chance -- his conscious reverence of your power,
Permits an awful anguish to approach you.

AMELIA. Chance was unkind to both; since neither's wish
Could have forecast a meeting, neither's reason
Could find pretense to justify.

AUMELE. Oh! my AMELIA!

AMELIA. No, false AUMELE! -- forget presumptious freedom.
While I was yet my own, I was not yours;
Less can I, when another's.

AUMELE. I was to blame --
But you have punished adoration's warmth,
As coldness should be punished!

AMELIA. Guilty warmth,
And adoration's transports never met.

AUMELE. Oh! had you seen my agony of soul,
When, led by swift repentance, I returned
To throw me at your feet -- But met your father,
Altered like you -- averse to every prayer,
And all forgetful of his once kind wish,
You would have wept the misery you caused.
Distracted with my love, rage, shame, despair,
I loathed my name, race, life; but, most, my crime,
And hid me in your groves -- to die absolved.

AMELIA. Your being here is adding to your crime:
If truly penitent, offend no more.

AUMELE. I would have slept away some sense of pain,
Made the cold earth my bed; and tried all night,
Moistened by midnight dews, to shut out shame:
But busy fancy raised thy beauteous form
(Distracting image!) -- giving joy to him,
Who reaps the harvest my cursed folly sowed.

AMELIA. Be dumb -- Begone -- and never see me more:
Honor demands it now, if justice did not.
I can no more -- I should forget thee quite,
But thy fault will not let me. Once I dreamt,
And flumb'ring fancy showed thee gay, kind, honest;
But, waking, 'twas no more.

AUMELE. You would forget me then?

AMELIA. I must, and will forget thee.

AUMELE. If it must be -- it is best I take my leave:
He cannot die too soon, who lives for scorn.

AMELIA. I do not wish your death; but go -- for ever.

AUMELE. For ever is a dismal sound, AMELIA!
Would it be more than pity might allow,
Since all my crime, bold as it was, was love,
To grant one last -- soft -- trembling -- distant touch,
[Takes her hand to kiss it. She draws it back again. Of this dear hand -- that
shuns me? 'Twas too much;
'Twas ecstasy too great for one condemned.

AMELIA. Begone, AUMELE!

AUMELE. Grant one nearer rapture --
[Takes her hand again. And it shall dwell so sweetly on my thought,
That memory shall admit no sad idea.
This last permitted transport, and I go.
[Kisses her hand. Enter LA FOY, at a distance, and starts. Yet, since I never
am to see you more,
You will not, must not, think despair grows bold,
If I thus force one warmer, dearer draught,
From these pressed lips, to cool my severish soul.
[Struggling, he kisses her.
AMELIA. Leave me, presumptuons, grief-struck madman,
Leave me.

AUMELE. I would -- but it is impossible.

LA FOY. Sure it is a vision. --
[Draws his sword. Draw, russian, or thou dy'st.
[AUMELE retreats fighting in confusion, followed out by LA FOY.
AMELIA. FLORELLA -- where? -- Oh! wretched, lost AMELIA!
This only wanted to complete thy woe.
My fame's fair promise, my white name, is lost:
Blood too must follow. -- Innocence, in vain,
Will now appeal to truth's distrusted aid,
And I am black as guilt -- indulging none,
[Exit, in disorder.
Enter LA FOY, putting up his sword. LA FOY. Light as the robber's purpose was
his foot,
And he has 'scap'd my vengeance. Now I Am cool,
Let me reflect. -- I Am glad of his escape,
His death had broad proclaimed her now hid shame.
What shall I do? Shall I conceal or tell it?
Something I must resolve, nor injure friendship.
Had she been well inclined -- To keep her cautions,
Her secret should be kept -- But -- She Is a woman;
And who can stem their passions? To surmount
Her sex's rage of heart beneath restraint,
Is harder than to prop a falling tower.

Enter VALDORE. VALDORE. Good morning, my LA FOY.

LA FOY. My lord, good morrow.
[Aside.] How if I break it to him? He is wise,
And his authority will give due weight
And warrant to his counsels. --
It shall be so.

VALDORE. It Is an inspiring sun -- and the day shines;
Good omen to your friend's beginning joys.

LA FOY. Yes, the air's hot -- I wish it had been purer:

VALDORE. I never heard it merited that censure.

LA FOY. Some climes change fast, my lord.

VALDORE. I pray, be plain.

LA FOY. I stand engaged for such unbounded favor,
That 'twere to be ungrateful to be dumb,
On what concerns your honor.

VALDORE. Honor! -- How?

LA FOY. Serious and pensive in my morning's walk,
Led through these covering groves and hid between 'em,
I saw your daughter and AUMELE --

VALDORE. How, saw 'em?

LA FOY. Close as the grove they kissed in.

VALDORE. Kissed in, soldier!

LA FOY. Faith, I Am no orator;
Knew I a word more kind than kiss, you would had it.

VALDORE. I hope you saw no guilt, beyond that promise.

LA FOY. She struggled, and he pressed her; she struggled on,
And he pressed closer. 'Twas no more than woman
Can all, by nature, do as well as she did.

VALDORE. I must inform you, sir, my daughter's modesty
Discredits this bold tale, that stains her virtue.
I know not from what quarter to suspect,
Unless some hatred of AUMELE's light race,
Propell'd you to accuse him. If 'twas so,
It Is an ungenerous anger; that, for vengeance
Against an offending foe, forgets the friend.
I will, however, hold a watchful eye
Over her examined conduct; and mean while
Trust, and demand your silence.
[Exit VALDORE, angrily.
LA FOY. Curse on my wayward fate that sent me here,
To interrupt their loves -- It was ill-breeding.
Some soft, cool wit, whom love more warmed than friendship,
Had past it over, or forwarded the business;
So wisely gained good will -- and pleased 'em all.

Enter CHALONS. CHALONS. Muttering alone, LA FOY? what fretful scheme,
What melancholy rage of honest heart,
Disturbs thy spleen thus early? Prithee brighten;
Since fortune smiles at last -- for shame, smile with her.
If you are untouched within, and know no joys
Thy own -- let mine inspire thy sullen temper.

LA FOY. Yes -- that is a wise man's plot -- Thy joys distrub me.

CHALONS. Thou art too good for envy? What then moves thee?
How can a happiness, like mine, distress thee?
Married to beauty -- reconciled to hope;
Splendid in riches -- in thy friendship happy;
And blessed by fame and love -- what want I more?

LA FOY. One thing I Am sure you want.

CHALONS. What Is that?

LA FOY. Distrust
Of woman's wavering love.

CHALONS. Nay, now you are cynical:
Merits my wise no trust?

LA FOY. Aye -- trust her on.
As to myself, I feel no pain from woman:
'Twas for your sake, I found one not quite angel.

CHALONS. For my sake! -- Be explicit in thy charge,
And ease my heart's new anguish.

LA FOY. No -- rest it here:
You are too young a lover -- III prepared
For proofs your faith will start from; 'twill unman you,

CHALONS. What can thou mean?

LA FOY. Why should I pull down plagues?
Why should I strike diseases through thy bones,
Beyond the cure of medicine -- Scorch thy blood;
Rob thy torn hours of peace -- and send in pain?
Better continue blind, than see but misery.

CHALONS. Thou strik'st a deadly coldness to my heart.
Point out this foe to life; that, like a man,
I may subdue, or bear it. Am I not,
(Cruel LA FOY!) was I not bred -- a soldier?
If it be fate, I Will meet it -- If but a fault
That cankers on my mind, I Will cut it off,
Or cure it by my reason. Thus adjur'd,
If you continue dumb, you doubt my courage,

LA FOY, I Have heard that married men find friends in heaven:
You should have many there -- Pray their kind guard
To keep your fair wife chaste. [Is going.

CHALONS. Stay -- what said thou?
Take this devouring wolf out of my breast.
Stay -- or for ever lose me.

LA FOY. Nay -- I but go,
Lest I should lose thee.

CHALONS. Have a care thou do not;
Thou have inflamed me now -- and I will have it.

LA FOY. Nay -- be content -- thou have it.

CHALONS. Death and hell!
Have it! -- what have I?

LA FOY. Why a fine young wife.
How can I help it, if she too has claims,
Beyond all rights allowed her.

CHALONS. Rights! claims! -- Furies!
Speak plainly, or thou dy'st.

LA FOY. Why there it is, now!
Was it my fault, that I don't like her kissing
The son of your wronged father's mortal enemy?

CHALONS. Nay, then -- the world has no fixed honor in it;
And he whom most I loved, is most a villain.

LA FOY. Hark -- my hot child! villain's wrong, bad word;
Use it no more -- or, if again thou speak,
Think twice, who hears -- and let no name denote him.

CHALONS. Nature and name thy own -- Hear it to heaven,
Ye saints, that waste no prayer for falsehood damned;
Hear it, ye winds, and blow it through his ear,
'Till his heart shrinks to feel it -- that LA FOY,
His friend's belyar, his stained sword's disgracer,
Envies superior bliss -- and is a villain.

LA FOY. Madman, be dumb for ever. Thou have shrunk
Indeed my feeling heart, and poured in horror.
[Drawing.] Look here -- behold this sword -- bright as the truth
It Is drawn for -- Never was it stained, 'till now;
But, when it wears thy blood, 'twill blush for pity.

CHALONS. Hold -- ere thy courage dares this desperate stake,
Throw not for life on the bad chance of guilt;
Own but thy falsehood -- it shall stand forgiven.

LA FOY. Wittal! thy wife's a wanton -- That Is truth; keep falsehood,
She Will want it for her dowry.

CHALONS. Oh! my father! [Drawing.
This was your heart's tried friend. You loved him long;
And, with your dying breath, you bad me love him:
Now, from the grave that hides you from his guilt,
If possibly those awful eyes pale beams
Can pierce the marble vault -- Oh! see me wronged,
And groan reluctant license to revenge it.

LA FOY. Amen -- to that; where the wrong lies, fall vengeance.
[Offering the medal.] Here -- ere I kill thee -- take back what thou gav'st me.
Take all that bears thy virtuous father's image;
Take back this kiss-worn paper -- Should thy sword
Force a success thy crime's bad cause disclaims,
'Twou'd, if I then retained that good man's gift,
Seem drawn against thy father. Take it from me;
Tear it, and scatter it in air -- for ever;
So has thy rashness torn the love that bound us.

CHALONS. What would this paper teach me?

LA FOY. Teach thee -- nothing;
Distraction will not learn -- it shuns to hear.
It Is the dear, grateful oath he signed and gave me,
On the victorious evening of a day,
Thou dare not hear me name without a blush.
When covered over with blood, from wounds ill earned,
In thy unthank'd defense -- Then fallen and hopeless,
Half trampled into earth beneath the hoofs
Of fiery VILEROY's barb'd iron squadron;
He snatched me to his breast -- hailed my sword's labor.
He wept, kind man! wept tears of grateful joy --
Gave that sealed, written oath, to pay me greatly;
Or, should he die unable, leave the obliged in charge,
(I scorn to name him) bound himself to pay me.
Well has he paid his father's vow! -- Quick -- tear it,
Let not the bond upbraid thee. Cancel that,
Since thou have blotted me; then, if I fall,
The payment I declined in life -- dies too.

CHALONS. [Drops his sword.] Oh! all ye blissful angels, who have seen me,
What horror am I 'scap'd from!

LA FOY. Raise thy fallen point.

CHALONS. Not for a thousand wrongs would I resist thee.
Perish the unlist'ning rage of human pride,
That burns up kind remembrance! -- Wound me -- kill me;
It Is but to take your own -- the life you saved me.
Generous LA FOY! -- brave hearts make room for pity:
Say but I Am pardoned, and I Will dare look up,
Meet thy offended eyes -- and hear thee chide me.
Why was love touched too roughly?

LA FOY. [Putting up his sword.] Did I? -- Faith,
I half begin to doubt I was to blame --
But 'twill be always thus in women's matters;
Clap one of those white make-bates 'twixt two pigeons,
You turn 'em into vultures!

CHALONS. You say strangely,
My wife gave wanton freedoms, to the son
Of my worst enemy? -- Sure 'twas impossible!

LA FOY. Likely enough -- We'll walk, and waste an hour
On some fresh subject; air our glowing bloods,
'Till they grow cool as reason; then resume
That feathery theme, and find its weight anon.
Think -- have you marked no favor from her eye,
When it surveyed AUMELE?

CHALONS. AUMELE has long
Made boast of her attachment to his folly;
But, as 'twas folly taught him to believe it,
I charged it to his lightness. -- Yet -- 'twas odd,
When the priest joined our hands, she dragged here is back,
Trembling and cold; then raised it to her eyes,
Covered an ill-timed tear, and sighed profound.
Let me consider --
[Pauses.
LA FOY. Do; and this do further.
If she has guilt, and you dare search it boldly,
Trust my advice -- Make light of my grave jealousy:
Laugh when you tell it her -- Call it the blunder
Of an uncourtly taste, not broke to gallantry.
I will contrive BELGARD, the honest hater
Of AUMELE's shameless riots, shall be sent,
As from his father, to require your presence
For two whole days, to wait the assembled states.
Obey the summons with assumed regret,
Mourning such tedious absence. Then take leave,
And go no farther than to BELGARD's brother's.
But have a care -- women have subtle piercings;
Kiss warm at parting -- closer -- longer -- kinder:
Squeeze a more hard, blind lover's hug, than ever.

CHALONS. I will.

LA FOY. Then leave the rest to me.

CHALONS. Oh! what a bliss might marriage hopes create,
Were but its joys as permanent as great!
[Exeunt omnes.
End of the third Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
An ANTICHAMBER, in VALDORE's House. Enter FLORELLA and Young AUMELE.
FLORELLA. YOU a young lover, and so near his mistress --
And she asleep too -- and stand wisely doubting!
Go, and protect your fears within you nightgown;
Then safely fill your absent rival's place.
Darkness can tell no tales -- if rapture does not:
If you must speak, take care you don't too soon;
Wise women know, mistakes once past are helpless.

AUMELE. But where is that sullen friend? Did he go with him?

FLORELLA. No, no -- The count's kind, undistrusting goodness,
Thanked the rough soldier's too officious sight,
The husband's usual way -- and checked his error.

AUMELE. Impossible!

FLORELLA. What can be so to woman? --
Drowned in due tears, and racked by strong despair,
Fled from the garden to her chamber's shelter,
She tore her hair, beat wild her beauteous bosom;
Cursed every sleeping star, that watched not innocence;
Wounded the senseless floor with bleeding nails,
As if she plough'd up graves to cover shame.
Just in this tempest of ungoverned rage,
In comes the all-hushing husband; kissed her to stillness,
And every whirlwind's wing grew fledged with down;
Soft lent his head on her hard-heaving bosom,
While in an eager, doubt-dispell'd embrace,
He broke the chain of fear that held her dumb.

AUMELE. No more of their embraeing -- pass that by.

FLORELLA. He told her all the rough LA FOY's report,
But laughed at, while he told it -- Generous spouse!
He scorned to see too clear -- 'twas wronging love!
Sorry he was (and there the jest grew pang-full)
That, for two endless ages -- two -- long -- nights!
He must, that moment, leave her. All the rest
I have already told you; and thus near her,
I dare not trust, in my constraint of muscles,
To tell it over again -- for I shall laugh;
Nay, laugh too loud -- and if she wakes, all is over.

AUMELE. By CUPID's dart,
I love thee for thy virtues! Thy keen rays
Of sparkling wantonness have fired my fancy,
And I could kiss thee into tenfold ecstasy!
[Kisses her eagerly.
FLORELLA. Psha! mind your business, my French man of straw;
Soon kindled, soon burnt out -- The proverb knew ye.

AUMELE. Well -- thou shall see I am a judge's son;
I will be stayed, and reverend -- But let me once
Catch thee behind the curtain of occasion,
And if there is judge or sergeant amongst 'em all
Makes sweeter use of darkness -- I Am his client.
Heaven save me! what a dreadful thought was that?

FLORELLA. My lady and myself, alone inhabit
This right wing of the mansion -- You may secure
Undress in the next chamber; two doors farther
You Will find your hope soft sleeping. Take the nightgown,
She Will dream the count returned. Keep your voice under;
Short murm'rings pass for eloquence in love.
Whisper, whenever you give her breath for question,
That you received fresh orders, and returned.

AUMELE. Sweet oracle! -- Had thou been born in Greece,
CUPID were king of Delphos. Here, eat gold --
Melt the whole purse.
[Gives her a purse.
FLORELLA. One hint more I Will give you --
When you succeed, triumphant in your scheme,
Own, in soft tumult, and with humblest joy,
The pleasing theft -- Lest, ignorant of that,
She might blab secrets in a husband's ear,
Would set his brains a madding. Timely warned,
She will be glad to bury what is past;
And for her own sake, or for yours, conceal it.

AUMELE. No more, but trust me to my fate -- Away;
I can no longer my fierce joys delay;
Too swiftly ended, with approaching day.
[Exeunt severally.
Enter LA FOY, softly. LA FOY. By the count's master-key I Have past three doors,
Yet fail to find this closet. It Is no matter,
I Am sure I Have sprung my quarry -- So there needs
No covert, from a game already started.
How shall I act? If I alarm the house,
And he once more escapes, VALDORE's blind trust,
In this chaste daughter's modesty, will break
His spleen with laughter -- and conclude me mad.
Enter CHALONS, pensive. Hark! there is some cautious step! -- It must be he;
He entered with a view, that bids tread soft --
Guilt stands in need of silence. May this
Good sword and arm for ever fail me,
If he out-lives this meeting --

CHALONS. Who is there?

LA FOY. Shrink from thy horrid purpose, fatal sword:
Is not that voice CHALONS's?

CHALONS. LA FOY!

LA FOY. The same.
Speak softly -- Why are you come hither, now?
You promised to be patient, and expect
'Till I returned to call you,

CHALONS. Is she innocent?
I glow with pain to wait that dear, wished news.
I dare be sworn, you found her watchful virtue,
Befieging heaven with prayers for my return.
How have you marked her bufied? All was hushed,
As through the private grot I passed unseen;
All was serene as peace. Still midnight nods,
And nothing breathes in this lulled house like guilt.

LA FOY. I hope, all is well -- and wish you would begone.

CHALONS. Begone first, self-tormenting jealousy!
Thou dire camelion, that from air's each blast
Catchest new colors -- and deceiv'st to live!
Honest LA FOY -- it is generous, as a god,
To change hard hasty doom -- and make it mercy.

LA FOY. In mercy too, some scars I yet retain;
Remitted -- but not cured. Go -- my heart bleeds,
And shuns to tell thee more -- Go hence, this moment.

CHALONS. Nay, then there is fate!

LA FOY. You Will make it fate, by staying.

CHALONS. Answer me only this,

LA FOY. Be brief -- propose it.

CHALONS. What have you seen -- of what I dread to hear?

LA FOY. Best friend -- Your sorrows make you doubly such.

CHALONS. Go on; I find then there is cause for sorrow.

LA FOY. Oh! would to heaven there was not. I have seen
(Oppressed by all thy miseries made my own,
How can I tell thee) thy fond faith's misplaced.
I love thee more than ever; for I add
My pity to my friendship. --
Thou must prepare thy honest heart for woe.
Here, like a ghost that haunts its hidden treasure,
With melancholy glide thou stalk'st along,
Fond of the dirty earth thou take for gold.

CHALONS. If thou have pity, torture me no longer.

LA FOY. Scarce had I turned the corner of the street
That fronts this fatal house -- ere I beheld,
Swift passing by me, muffled from their note,
AMELIA's faithless favorite maid, FLORELLA;
And close behind her, as sin follows hard
Upon temptation's heels, on stalked AUMELE.
I saw 'em enter -- Saw the door shut softly:
Watched, 'till the lights extinguished showed all quiet;
Then followed, by the way you lately taught me.
He Is still within; if you, without much noise,
Search close, you will find him closer. If he starts,
I Will seize him at his out-shot.

CHALONS. Give me thy sword.

LA FOY. I Will keep it for your use -- but not your folly.

CHALONS. If you refuse it now, you stain my fame.

LA FOY. You know I wear it, but to serve your cause;
Let me go with it, you command it freely.

CHALONS. I shall be shamed for ever, if thy rashness
Denies to trust me with it.

LA FOY. So adjur'd,
I am no more its master -- Use it wisely.

CHALONS. Go, and be safe then -- by the way you came.
Take my repentant thanks for all past goodness, [Embracing LA FOY.
And pardon your poor friend, that -- once -- he wronged you.
Oh! my LA FOY, they who have soldier's hearts,
Unmingled with the lover's, never felt
The softning pangs of tenderness we suffer.
Did you but know to what excess of joy
I raised my foolish hope, from this loved woman,
You would forget my fault -- and call it weakness.

LA FOY. Before you let your passion loose once more,
Take care it not deceives you. Heedfully
Convince yourself of wrongs, we now but fear;
And, above all, be mindful she is a woman.

CHALONS. Yet once embrace me, dear, too kind LA FOY.
If we must meet no more -- tell the hard world
My wrongs -- and vindicate an injured name.
[Exit, as into the chamber.
LA FOY. I Will hover near, and hold attentive note
On what may want prevention. Swords used rashly,
May justify intrusion every where.
I haunt no beauty's bed-chambers -- Pray heaven
He finds not AUMELE does. -- I raised my voice
Higher than prudence ton'd it, purposely
To warn escape from danger. -- Troth, this pain
Wounds my poor friend, beyond the cause's claim:
I could half hate myself, for having given it.
[A noise of footsteps within. That Is a new step, and near me; by its sound,
It Is from a different quarter.

Enter FLORELLA, frighted. FLORELLA. Sure! I heard
Some noise! -- and, if my fear deceived me not,
The hum of busy voices. Now it is hushed;
And I almost dare hope, 'twas but the echo
Of the wind's hollow groan, through empty chambers.
I Will venture listening at the inner door;
Lest some alarm has reached them.
[Passing near LA FOY, he seizes her.
LA FOY. Who art thou,
That thus, in dead of night, with robber's tread,
Steal'st to some purposed scene of frighted guilt?

FLORELLA. Say rather, what presuming ruffian's grasp,
Withholds me from my duty? -- Who, or what thou
May be, my trembling heart wants power to guess.

LA FOY. I know thy raven's croak.

FLORELLA. I am called FLORELLA;
Attendant on the countess of CHALONS.

LA FOY. Thou art the bribed she-baw'd that led AUMELE,
Hopeful of livelier pastime, to the sword,
That his vain penitence and punished vanity
Have sailed to save his youth from.

FLORELLA. Heaven forbid!
Alas! is AUMELE dead?

LA FOY. How dare thou doubt it?

FLORELLA. Who murdered him?

LA FOY. Say, 'twas LA FOY.

FLORELLA. I knew
Thy voice, but too, too well.

LA FOY. You Are come to die;
I waited but 'till heaven's just anger sent thee,
For thou art doomed to follow.

FLORELLA. Oh! for pity!
Spare my defenseless life. I will kneel, weep,
Beg mercy undeserved -- and tell thee all.

LA FOY. Has the unhappy countess ever before
Been guilty with AUMELE?

FLORELLA. No -- by my soul!
Nor is she guilty now.

LA FOY. Play'st thou at riddles?

FLORELLA. Hark! what is that frightful noise! I hear clash'd swords,
And die with apprehension.

LA FOY. Go -- I want leisure,
But shall examine further. Do but prove
Thy lady innocent, and claim some pity.
Which is the count's gilt closet?

FLORELLA. See it there.

LA FOY. I have the key -- In -- enter -- and be safe,
Locked from escape or danger; 'till I ripen
The growing distant hope, that may release thee.
[Shuts her in the closet. Takes the key, and puts it in his pocket. And now,
forgetful of all forms, I rush
To interpose prevention. [Is going -- Starts.
Horrid hand!
Enter CHALONS, his sword drawn and bloody. Eyes horrid! mien confused -- and
that sword bloody,
Make needless all enquiry.

CHALONS. He is dead.

LA FOY. Alas! too sure you found him! Oh, 'twas thoughtless!
What will his father, what VALDORE, what law,
Misjudging censure, and the public tongue,
What will the world and heaven -- conceive of this?

CHALONS. I did not kill him basely.

LA FOY. Where is your wise?

CHALONS. I Have given her to the winds -- They Will blow her name
Round the four borders of her country's scorn.

LA FOY. Joyless CHALONS! -- You killed him in her bed?

CHALONS. No, not in bed -- I found him kneeling near it.
He sighed, and kissed her hand with amorous boldness,
Mutt'ring his transports over it. Often, in vain,
He tried to interrupt her torrent rage
Of agoniz'd reproach, and conscious shame.
Cruel, unkind AUMELE! I heard her say;
How can I see the sun, when daybreak comes?
How meet my injured husband's dreaded eyes,
My reverend father's tears, my friends disdain,
The hoot of the light rabble's cutting scorn,
And all the killing anguish I must owe thee?
Go -- for if here, by some disast'rous chance,
Discovered -- 'twill undo me. Patience bore it,
Even to this madding length -- 'twas all it could,
And I was tame no longer.

LA FOY. 'Twas indeed
Too much for injured excellence, like thine,
To beat, from blind depravity of taste,
That left to feed upon a boundless lawn,
And brows'd on a dry common!

CHALONS. Out, at once,
Burst my relentless rage. Swift stepped I to him,
Sending thy honest sword before -- That never,
'Till then, had armed a hand unworthy. Take,
I cried, regardless of the shrieks she raised,
Take a defense undue -- protect thy vileness --
Nor let me basely kill, though basely wronged.
He rose -- leaped back, and wondered -- Paused, stood dumb,
And, for awhile, declined his urged defense.
" I should not," he began -- and purposed more,
" In such a cause as this" -- I stopped him short --
Poured in reproach, and roused him into firmness.
He, in his turn, grew hot -- came fiercely on --
Met the vindictive point -- Sighed loud, and fell.

LA FOY. Trembling I ask -- rash, violent CHALONS!
Ask with a friend's too apprehensive dread;
Ask, since I must prepare my ear for anguish,
What followed this beginning? -- The offense
Was bitter -- bitterer still the offender's fate!
Oh, 'twas enough! -- and asked no weak partaker.

CHALONS. Ease that ungrounded pain -- I could not wound her.
Oh! had thou seen, and heard, thou had not feared it.
Speechless with horror -- wasting fruitless tears;
Trembling, with force that shook the curtains round her;
Wringing her hands, in half-rais'd attitude,
And bending over the bed, through night's pale gleam,
She marked the bleeding form, and eye'd it ghastly.
" Cruel, lost, shameless wanton! -- Oh!" I cried,
" I want a name to speak thee! -- Should I kill thee,
" What marble heart of censure durst reproach me:
" But I remember what thou, wanton, did not;
" And, for thy sex, I spare thee. Be this room
" Thy prison, 'till that venerable judge,
" Thy own shocked father, sentence, or release thee."
There, as I turned to go, the unhappy starter
Sprung from her pillow, caught my feet, and held 'em;
Clung, like her beauty's influence, fast and painful;
Hung her dragged weight on my retarded knees,
That, trembling, scarce sustained me. At the door,
Fainting and hopeless, she relaxed her hold.
I snatched the afflicting moment, shook her from me;
And, imprisoned in her chamber, left her captive,
Companion of a flatterer cold and dumb,
And now grown tasteless of a lady's liking.

LA FOY. Poor, poor AMELIA! what a sat is yours!
How fallen, from yester morning's awe-mix'd shine,
Of white untained beauty -- Since it is thus,
I must approve the sad appeal proposed,
To an impartial judge, at once, and father:
His influence too, in your judicial process,
Will balance, and 'twill all be needful there,
The vengeance of a judge less just than he.

CHALONS. Too generous, ill-rewarded, loved VALDORE!
How shall my fick'ning soul find strength to meet him!
I cannot -- It Is impossible.

LA FOY. It Is necessary:
Leave to my care that melancholy duty;
I Will bring him first prepared to stand the shock.

CHALONS. But break not in on his too short repose;
Shake not his unsuspecting heart abruptly;
Wait 'till his usual hour of waking comes:
'Twill be too soon, however long delayed,
To sigh such sorrows to him.

LA FOY. I Will go listen.
[Exit.
CHALONS. Oh what a change can one short hour bestow!
To bury man's best hopes in endless woe!
Beauty's frail bloom's a cheat! Valor's brief fame
An empty sound -- The shadow of a name!
Riches are envy's bait -- Scorn haunts the poor --
In death alone, from pain we rest secure.
[Exit.
End of the fourth Act.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
The ANTICHAMBER. CHALONS on the floor, half raised, and weeping. CHALONS. WHY
should it be a sin, when life grows painful,
To end it, and to trust futurity?
Whom can the wretched here offend above,
By hastening to hereafter? -- Guilt, indeed,
Might pale the expiring murd'rer's conscious cheek,
Ghastly with fear to meet the dead man's eye,
New glazed, to glare at vengeance -- But the wronged,
The soul-sick sufferer -- the despised -- the insulted --
The poor, pined boneling, that, grown old in want,
Begs his cold draught, and drinks it mixed with scorn;
What have these groundling windfalls of the world,
To fear from future tempests? -- Out, false meteor!
Faithless in every form -- This life deludes us,
Valor's but pride's big bubble. Honesty,
The plain man's devious path to shun prosperity.
Learning and wit (not prostitutes to power)
Are marks for shafted envy. Beauty (curse her!)
Lures us to every chase of every joy.
That every plague may blast us -- Love's blind fool-mark,
Stamped on the Almighty's weakened image, man,
Tempts but a woman's mischief. -- Down, proud worms!
Fill your stretched mouths with dust -- and farewell all.
[Throws himself prostrate.
Enter VALDORE and LA FOY. LA FOY. See! my good lord, where on the floor
extended,
Torn by too fierce a sense of strong distress,
The mournful misery of his fate has cast him!

VALDORE. Leave this dejected bed of humble sorrow --
For her, who -- from thine softer -- sadly fell;
Fell, even too stained and low for this last refuge.

LA FOY. Find the forgotton firmness of thy brow,
And with a manly meekness meet compassion.
Who, that ever loved a woman, lived exempt
From weakness that o'er-rates her? -- Fie, CHALONS!
Is this that famed enliv'ner of the field,
Whose heart grew sprightly at the trumpet's call?
Oh! I have seen thee war against distress;
Charge home, on softness and fatigue at once,
And conquer in both onsets. Come, come, rise;
Shift this sad scene of shame: Change it for views
Of opening glory -- that shall dazzle pain.
Look up -- the reverend witness of thy weakness
Hides his own heart's distress, to comfort thine.

CHALONS. [Half raised.] Oh! my afflicted father! -- That I thus
Dare face the sorrows on that awful brow,
(Which but for generous pity of my woes,
Had felt no home-born pang) -- requires more courage,
Than ever warmed the veins of warring youth.

VALDORE. Reach me thy hand -- Lean on my feeble aid;
And, every way confiding, task my help.

CHALONS. Too much already have I task'd your goodness;
Too ill have I repaid its wasted care.
How can I look on miseries I have made!
When I was sunk beneath lost mercy's hope;
Found by no far-strain'd eye -- This hand's kind reach,
Took pity on my wants; stretched out relief,
And drew me from a prison's joyless gloom.

VALDORE. No more of that sad tale -- forget it, now;
One far more sad repels it.

CHALONS, Never, never,
Will I forget the hand's kind help that saved me:
From all this deep distress you called me up;
Chased insult, grinding poverty, and shame;
Healed every infelt sting contempt can wound with;
Gave me your power, friends, fortune -- Gave me -- Oh! --
How shall I, trembling, add -- gave me your daughter!

VALDORE. Worse than I feared -- LA FOY thou have deceived me.
Cruel CHALONS! -- Since she deserved to die,
Had but her shame died with her, I had strove
To hold back nature's tax -- these father's tears,
And labored to forgive thee.

CHALONS. Sir! but hear me.

VALDORE. It Is needless -- What have artful words to do
With a pained parent's anguish? Sooth not me
With unavailing flattery. Let vain youth
Taste false men's frothy praises -- Age is wiser:
Age has experience in such fruitless wiles --
Will not be flattered -- Knows, that rash revenge
Is blinder than transgression. -- How am I sure
My daughter was not innocent? -- The jealous
Dream that they see best -- when darkest.

LA FOY. My lord, my lord,
Lend your ear calmly.

VALDORE. Had he but let her live to own her guilt;
Had I but read it in her silent eye,
I had forgiven him both -- yet one too much.
He snatched the sword from the wronged hand of law,
And plunged it in the strong's unsentenc'd breast:
The weak should have escaped -- and touched his mercy.

LA FOY. Give him his way, mistaken grief impels him;
Anon, he will be juster.

VALDORE. Juster! -- Juster! --
What justice has he right to? -- Justice, say thou?
What justice can the ungrateful squand'rer plead,
That ruins his redeemer? -- Has he not
Poured misery on my dotage? All my joys,
The poor faint remnants of an old man's gleanings,
For his few, feeble wishes! at one blow,
Cut from their tender root, destroyed for ever!
Oh! 'twas a black return -- to me, who loved him!
What, though he knew not half her claims to pity,
He should have felt for me. I loved -- I watched her;
Raised her from prattling infancy, to wonder!
She touched my charmed (perhaps too partial) heart.
I prized her own sweet bloom -- Still more endeared,
By her dead mother's likeness. He should have stopped,
When his fell point was raised, and thought whose pangs
Were to partake her sufferings.

CHALONS. Had she been dead --
Had she -- (but, oh! she is not) -- been partaker
Of her lost paramour's disastrous fate;
Think then -- oh! then -- how had my horror torn me;
Who scarce support, with life, the undue reproach.

VALDORE. What says he, my LA FOY? Does he not mean
That my AMELIA lives?

LA FOY. She does, my lord:
I told you that before; but your sad heart
Repelled the offered comfort.

VALDORE. Generous CHALONS!
Scarce has the daughter's crime more wronged thy goodness,
Than did the father's anguish.

CHALONS. Oh! my dear lord --
Could some descending angel but restore
Her innocence (for ever lost!) -- Lend peace
Of mind once more -- and make life tasteful to her;
To such excess of fondness am I here is,
That I would burn discernment's eyes to blindness,
Rather than see a fault, in one so loved --
So much has this day's torture cost my soul!

LA FOY. CHALONS, thou have a sure friend's voice in heaven.
My general often would say -- "Pray, soldiers, pray;
" If you deserve success -- It Is yours for asking."
Alas! I have too seldom tried this power;
Who knows, but some such angel as you wished for,
(I am no teazing, troublesome invoker)
May in yon closet, on my prayer descend,
And whiten the stained name that paints your love.
[Goes, and unlocks the closet.
VALDORE. Poor man! -- Thy griefs have touched thy pitying friend,
'Till his hurt brain grows frantic.

LA FOY. Appear, thou wing-clipt demon! -- If thou hop'st
To shun the doom that waits perdition's tribe,
Wash thy saved soul from all its native black,
And take an angel's form -- Truth's convert friend.

LA FOY leads out FLORELLA. VALDORE. What means this? -- FLORELLA!

FLORELLA. I once was FLORELLA;
But heaven has touched my heart with will so new,
That my old name offends me.

LA FOY. Answer, first,
Truly and briefly, as when late I caught thee,
Skulking through night's lone gloom, that wanted shade
To suit thy darker purpose -- Answer, plainly,
Is thy unhappy lady innocent,
IL AUMELE's dire admission to her chamber;
Or, is she guilty of it?

FLORELLA. Innocent.

VALDORE. How! -- Innocent?

CHALONS. A wife -- her husband absent,
Admits a lover in his room, at midnight --
Found in her chamber, in a loose dis-robe:
Nay, in the husband's night-dress -- Yet all this,
Thy venal evidence (false maid!) calls innocence!

LA FOY. Pray, let her speak. My lord, you are a judge;
Should an accuser brow-beat witnesses,
Or interrupt their answers? [To VALDORE.

CHALONS. Nay, LA FOY;
Pity, thus forced, grows insult. I have told thee,
I heard her loud reproach confess the guilt,
To amorous AUMELE, when kneeling by her bed.
She called him, cruel AUMELE -- Bid him begone;
For, if he there was found, her name was blasted.

LA FOY. Away with such strained proofs. Had I myself
Been there, but on some far more honest purpose,
Poor soul! she might have said the same to me;
When blund'ring accident alone had brought me.

VALDORE. I think, CHALONS, you said that AUMELE knelt
But near AMELIA's bed -- Was it not more?

FLORELLA. Had it been more -- She still were innocent;
Unconscious of his coming. I alone
Was guilty. I (betrayed by bribe's profusion)
Admitted the deaf, headstrong, thoughtless lover,
Both to the house and chamber. I advised
The night-grown's needful cover. I gave notice
Of your wronged lordship's absence; taught him how
To personate your chanced return; soft whispering,
That if she waked not ere he reached her bed,
Whatever succeeded, might be meant for you.

LA FOY. Now, now CHALONS! what now becomes of all
Those mad mis-proofs of guilt she shines untouched by?
By heaven! it is plain, to me, she waked too full
Of your remembered image, to mistake
For that the intruder's loathed one. She reproached
Not her accomplished, but intended, ruin:
And, though the traitor not unjustly fell,
His crime was nobly, by her guarded virtue,
Prevented, and ideal.

FLORELLA. Never breathed
A virtue more untainted. May my soul,
In time's last dreadful judgment meet no mercy,
If ever wife more faithful blessed a husband;
Or, with more cautious conduct, feared a lover.

VALDORE. Oh! what have thou deserved -- if this her due?

CHALONS. Pity, forgiveness -- A safe bought retreat,
To some sweet convent's silent space for prayer:
For penitence to heaven -- and 'scape from shame.
More shall be here is; for, oh! my gracious lord,
It Is by her just amends for cast-off sin,
Your own paternal tenderness -- my love --
And my brave, honest, generous friend's compassion,
Are all redeemed, at once, from deep despair.
Go, fly FLORELLA -- Take this guilty key --
Tell the poor captive innocent this tale;
And court her to be blessed, by blessing all.
[Gives her the key, and exit FLORELLA.
VALDORE. [Kneeling.] Thou! ever-gracious, ever present power!
That, first, inspires our virtue -- loves it, next;
And guards it, in conclusion! -- Take, Oh! take
An old man's awful thanks, for days prolonged;
Days doomed, by grief, to pain -- now saved for joy!

CHALONS. [Kneeling.] From me (most worthless of the mercy shown)
Accept, all-worship'd author of all bliss!
The pour'd-out heart's whole tide of grateful prayer.

LA FOY. Let not me seem least sensible of zeal,
Because less taught speak it. [Kneels too.] -- Had I words,
I would adore heaven eloquently -- (Now) --
Receive a plain blunt heart's sincerest thanks,
For more than I deserve -- or know to tell.

FLORELLA within, speaks. FLORELLA. Oh! horror! horror! -- Comfort comes too
late;
Death intercepts relief -- and help is vain.

All start up in confusion; and LA FOY, running out, meets and assists
FLORELLA, leading in AMELIA bleeding. CHALONS. Defend me from this vision's
ghastly menace,
Or I am lost again!

VALDORE. Hapless AMELIA!
What has thy rashness done? Just heaven, but now,
Heard our given thanks -- Thy innocence stood cleared.
FLORELLA, guilty, proved thy virtue wronged:
And, in this ill-chosen crisis of our joy,
Thou murder'st thy own blessing!

AMELIA. [Kneeling to VALDORE.] Heaven was too kind!
That eased my honored father's aching sense,
Of a lost daughter's shame! Death, in this thought,
Robbed of its sharpest sting, grows half a friend.
[To CHALONS; who raises her, weeping.] Oh! too unkind CHALONS! -- What shall I
say --
What shall distrusted honor -- think -- of thee?
I cannot -- must not -- blame -- thy dreadful rage:
Appearance was against me. -- Ah! ebb slow,
My offered blood -- Give my sick, trembling heart
One moment's short reprieve -- to clear my name.

CHALONS. Pause, my faint, injured charmer -- thy cleared name,
Is spotless as thy beauty.

VALDORE. Save thy shook spirits.

CHALONS. FLORELLA! fly -- Go, call immediate aid.

LA FOY. No -- let her stay -- I Will haste myself, my lord.
[Exit LA FOY.
VALDORE. How have thou given thy breast that fatal wound?

AMELIA. Shut up with horror, and bound in with death,
'Twas natural to despise familiar fear.
Shunning the breathless corpse, that clogged my way,
I stumbled over a sword -- Thus, learnt its use --
And thanked it, for escape from dreaded shame.
Living, and hopeless to attract belief,
To the unhappy story of my woe;
The eye of every gazer's dumb reproach,
Had given a sharper wound, than this I chose.

VALDORE. Did thou discover the vile youth's disguise?
Or -- were thou sleeping, and unconscious found,
When his bold craft surpised thee?

AMELIA. Troubled thoughts,
For my departed lord's so sudden absence,
Chased from my eye lids wish all power of sleep.
Anxiously doubtful for his safe return,
Alarmed by apprehension's busy fears,
And wondering what strange hasty cause had called him --
I started -- when the door's soft opening sound
Gave glanced admission to the intrusive tread. --
Poring, I shook with terror -- for I saw
(By the pale, gleamy, ghost-like glaze of light)
That nor the force nor freedom showed that ease
Of manly grace, that marks my mienful lord.

CHALONS. Oh! I was born to curses -- thus to wrong
Such tenderness of virtue!

AMELIA. Twice I raised
My frighted voice -- and twice he tried, in vain,
To sooth it into silence. Failing that,
Grew fearful of discovery -- paused amazed,
Stepped back -- returned -- stood doubtful -- 'till, at last,
He threw himself on his presumptuous knees,
As (my dear, angry lord) you found, and heard him.
Nearer than that (by the blessed hopes I haste to!
When, from this world of grief, I rise to peace!)
He never had approached me. -- Ah! -- farewell --
My swimming eyes, dimmed over, have lost your forms,
And I am covered round with dark -- sick -- shadow.

VALDORE. [Kissing her.] Dear, dying child! -- Her lips are cold and pale.
Farewell, too ill-star'd girl! -- farewell -- for ever.

CHALONS. She cannot die. Heaven is too kind, too just,
To excellence like here is -- to let that be.

VALDORE. Lead, to her chamber -- Gently guide her feet,
They lose -- (Oh ki^ling sight!) their own sweet motion.
[Exit AMELIA, led off by CHALONS and FLORELLA.
Enter LA FOY, with BELGARD. VALDORE. Alas! you're come too late, See, where
they lead her --
Lifeless, and past all sense of art's lost care.

LA FOY. Follow, BELGARD; haste, urge thy utmost skill:
Snatch her from death -- and thou command'st my fortune.
[Exit BELGARD.
VALDORE. I knew BELGARD -- unknowing of his skill.

LA FOY. He practiced many a year, saved many a life,
In war's deep wounding rage -- but peace came on,
And his shunned virtue starved him. -- 'Twas not him,
I purposed to have called; but met him, coming
To warn us, lord AUMELE (who now supports him) --
Fired at his son's presumptuous levity,
His watched admission here, and whole night's absence,
Comes, with intent to note and tell his practice;
Then take such measures as you best approve.

VALDORE. What shall we do? -- He seeks a living son:
He finds a dead one. Unprepared event!
But, he must bear his part -- and share distress.

LA FOY. 'Twas due to his hard heart. -- My curse (provoked
By his unseeling wrong to my dead general)
Falls heavy on his head -- to teach him pity.

Enter CHALONS and BELGARD. CHALONS. Blessed, my LA FOY, be thy successful call
Of this good angel's aid! -- She wakes! -- She breathes! --
He tells me she shall live! -- Her opening eye
Adds to the morning's light, and shines once more.

VALDORE. Then is indulgent heaven grown kind indeed.

BELGARD. The wound, itself not mortal, gathered danger
From weak'ning waste of blood: her spirits, thence,
Lost vigor to sustain the toilsome length
Of agoniz'd complaint, I Am told, she made.
So, fainting, she seemed dead; but rest, with aid
Of skilled attention, will restore her soon.

LA FOY. Let us forethink of old AUMELE's approach.

VALDORE. I Will justify the fate that reached his son.

LA FOY. Warned by that fate, the brutal mind shall feel
Pangs, due to cruel breasts, with hearts of steel.
On their own heads shall fall woe's driving rain,
And drown too bold contempt of other's pain.
Pity shall smile, to see the unpitier fall;
And he who aids no want, shall suffer all.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
(By AARON HILL, Esquire)
Spoke by AMELIA. I HAVE 'scap'd, tonight, two terrible disasters;
My honor's indignation -- and my master's:
And heaven best knows what hapless hole can hide me,
If (to crown all my woes) your help's denied me.
LADIES, you see how much exposed our sex is;
Sleeping, or waking, some sad chance perplexes.
Man's a more wily snake than mother EVE's was;
In his own shape -- and others too -- deceives us.
Hungry devourer! never tired with snapping;
Shun him with open eyes -- he will catch us napping:
And how to 'scape him, if I know -- never let me
Break through the entangling nets, that thus beset me.
Now, GENTLEMEN, to your own thoughts appealing,
(Fitter, I doubt, for making wounds -- than healing)
What would you have poor women do with honor,
When danger heaps such monstrous loads upon her?
Do You think in conscience now -- half-wak'd, half-weary
With foregone frights, for one's departed deary --
'Thad been so strange a crime -- or worth such pother,
In darkness to mistake one dear for the other?
Pray think on it -- Put yourselves behind the curtain;
What cannot be cured must be endured -- that is certain.
It Is a fair question -- and it is plainly asked ye;
Answer it -- or confess, I Have over-task'd ye.
Suppose me bound in sleep's soft, silken fetter,
And one of your dear selves the dark besetter:
Sight has no eyes, at midnight -- and, for touches,
"JOAN," (says the proverb) "in the dark's a duchess."
For my part -- I cannot find we have any senses,
Can furnish such attacks with fit defenses.
Let trusty spouse, when business sends him packing,
("Safe bind safe find") leave no due caution lacking.
I see some judge-like eyes, that look too sprightly
To miss a she law-point, put to 'em rightly.
Is mine the court's decree? -- I humbly move it;
That, if your hearts affirm -- your hands approve it.

