OVID'S Metamorphoses

Translated by the most Eminent Hands.



OVID's METAMORPHOSES IN FIFTEEN BOOKS. Translated by the most Eminent HANDS.

Adorned with SCULPTURES.

LONDON: Printed for JACOB TONSON at Shakespear's-Head over against
Katharine-Street in the Strand. MDCCXVII.

Her Royal Highness the PRINCESS of WALES
G Kneller (...) pinxit.
Geo Vertus Sculpsit

Berchet del.
E Kirkall scu.

TO HER ROYAL HIGHNESS.
MADAM,
SINCE I am allowed the honor, and Privilege of so easy Access to Your Royal
Highness, I dare say, I shall not be the worse received for bringing Ovid along
with me. He comes from Banishment to the Fautress of Liberty; from the
Barbarous to the Polite; and has this to recommend him, which never fails with
a Clemency, like Yours; He is Unfortunate.

Your Royal Highness, who feels for every one, has lately been the mournful
Occasion of a like Sensibility in many Others. Scarce an Eye, that did not tell
the Danger You were in: Even Parties, tho'different in Principles, united at
that time in their grief, and affectionate concern, for an event of so much
consequence to the Interest of Humanity, and Virtue; whilst Your Self was the
only Person, Then, unmoved.

It was remarkable, That She, who, with a Manner most engaging, taught the
innocent Pleasures to appear more desirable, than the criminal; who was every
day the Life of some new agreeable Diversion; should behave Her Self, upon that
cruel Trial, with a Magnanimity so unshaken, that those who were Witnesses
might have imagined, She scarce ever had done any thing, but study how to Dye.

It is the greatest Happiness can attend an Age under a long depravation of
Morals, to be blessed with Examples, where Virtue is set off by the advantage of
Birth. Such Qualifications, when united, do not only persuade an Imitation, but
Command it. Humane Nature is always more affected by what it sees, than what it
hears of: And as those Ideas, which enter by the Eye, find the surest passage
to the Heart; so the more the Object, whatever it be, seems desirable to the
One, the longer it continues in the Other.

There are Perfections so shining, that one must be the very Worst of Mortals,
or the very Best, not to admire in all Those who possess them. To be blessed with
a disposition to Charity, not confined by any other Limits, than the Modesty of
those who ask It: To know, and be ready to excuse Faults; yet, so strict in
Life, as not to want the like Indulgence; To have a Superiority of Genius
capable of judging of the highest Affairs, and an Application so observant, as
to penetrate into the most Minute: To be easy to lay down Grandeur upon
familiar Occasions, and discerning to take It up, when Dignity of Station
requires; To know the politer Languages of the present Age, as a Native, and
the greater Occurrences, and Periods of the Past, as an Historian, make up a
Character, which is so obvious, that Every one will know where to apply it,
except the Person, whose it really is: and if in this Your Royal Highness be at
a Loss, I think it is the only thing within the Province of Your Sex You are
ignorant of.

I shall take up no more of Your time in this Dedication; because, to do every
thing that may be most acceptable to You, shall always be the Endeavor of,

MADAM, Your ROYAL HIGHNESS's most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, S. GARTH.

PREFACE.
THE Method I propose in writing this Preface, is to take Notice of some of the
Beauties of the Metamorphoses, and also of the Faults, and particular
Affectations. After which I shall proceed to hint at some Rules for Translation
in general; and shall give a short Account of the following Version.

I shall not pretend to impose my Opinion on others with the magisterial
Authority of a Critic; but only take the Liberty of discovering my own Taste. I
shall endeavor to show our Poet's Redundance of Wit, Justness of Comparisons,
Elegance of Descriptions, and peculiar Delicacy in touching every Circumstance
relating to the Passions, and Affections; and with the same Impartiality, and
Frankness, I shall confess the too frequent Puerilities of his luxuriant Fancy,
and the too great Negligence of his sometimes unlabored Versification.

I am not of an Opinion, too common to Translators, to think that One is under
an Obligation to extol every thing he finds in the Author he undertakes: I am
sure one is no more obliged to do so, than a Painter is to make every Face that
sits to him handsome. It Is enough if he sets the best Features he finds in
their full, and most advantageous Light. But if the Poet has private
Deformities, though Good-breeding will not allow to expose him naked, yet surely
there can be no Reason to recommend him, as the most finished Model of Harmony,
and Proportion.

Whoever has this undistinguishing Complaisance, will not fail to vitiate the
Taste of the Readers, and misguide many of them in their Judgment, where to
Approve, and where to Censure.

It must be granted, that where there appears an infinite Variety of inimitable
Excellencies, it would be too harsh, and disingenuous to be severe on such
Faults, as have escaped rather through want of Leisure, and Opportunity to
correct, than through the erroneous Turn of a depraved Judgment. How sensible
Ovid himself was of the Uncorrectness of the Metamorphoses, appears from these
Lines prefixed before some of the Editions by the Care of his Commentators;
Trist. El. vi
Orba parente suo quicunque Volumina tangis,
His saltem veslra detur in urbe locus.
Quoque magis saveas; non sunt haec edita ab Illo,
Sed quasi de domini funere rapta sui.
Quicquid in his igitur vilii rude carmen habebit,
Emendaturus, si licuisses, erat.


Since therefore the Readers are not solemnly invited to an Entertainment, but
come accidentally; they ought to be contented with what they find: And pray
what have they to complain of, but too great Variety? where, though some of the
Dishes be not served in the exactest Order, and Politeness, but hash'd up in
haste; there are a great many accommodated to every particular Palate.

To like every thing, shows too little Delicacy; and to like nothing, too much
Difficulty. So great is the Variety of this Poem, that the Reader, who is never
pleased, will appear as monstrous, as he that is always so. Here are the
Hurries of Battles for the Hero, tender Emotions of Soul for the Lover, a
Search, and Penetration into Nature for the Philosopher, Fluency of Numbers,
and most expressive Figures for the Poet, Morals for the Serious, and
Plaisantries for Admirers of Points of Wit.

It Is certain a Poet is more to be suspected for saying too much, than too
little. To add is often hazardous; but to retrench, commonly judicious. If our
Author, instead of saying all he could, had only said all he should; Daphne had
done well to fly from the God of Wit, in order to crown his Poet: Thus Ovid had
been more honored, and adored in his Exile, than Augustus in his Triumphs.

I shall now attempt to give some Instances of the Happiness, and vast Extent
of our Author's Imagination. I shall not proceed according to the Order of the
Poem, but rather transcribe some Lines here, and there, as my Reflection shall
suggest.

Nec circumsuso pendebat in aere tellus
Ponderibus librata suis --
Thus was the State of Nature before the Creation: And here it is obvious, that
Ovid had a discerning Notion of the Gravitation of Bodies. It Is now
demonstrated, that every Part of Matter tends to every Part of Matter with a
Force, which is always in a direct simple Proportion of the Quantity of the
Matter, and an inverse duplicate Proportion of the Distance; which Tendency, or
Gravitating is constant, and universal. This Power, whatever it be, acting
always proportionably to the solid Content of Bodies, and never in any
Proportion to their Superficies; cannot be explained by any material Impulse.
For the Laws of Impulse are physically necessary: There can be no (...), or
arbitrary Principle in mere Matter; its Parts cannot move unless they be moved;
and cannot do otherwise, when pressed on by other Parts in Motion; and
therefore it is evident from the following Lines, that Ovid strictly adhered to
the Opinion of the most discerning Philosophers, who taught that all things
were formed by a wise, and intelligent Mind.

Jussit and extendi campos, subsidere valles,
Fronde tegi sylvas --
The Fiat of the Hebrew Lawgiver is not more sublime, than the Jussit of the
Latin Poet, who goes on in the same Elevated, and Philosophical Style.

His super imposuit liquidum, and gravitate carentem
Aethera --
Here the Author spreads a thin Veil of Ether over his Infant Creation; and
though his asserting the upper Region to be void of Gravitation, may not, in a
Mathematical Rigor, be true; yet it is found from the Natural Enquities made
since, and especially from the learned Dr. Hally's Discourse on the Barometer,
that if, on the Surface of the Earth, an Inch of Quicksilver in the Tube be
equal to a Cylinder of Air of 300 Foot, it will be at a Mile's height equal to
a Cylinder of Air of 2700000: and therefore the Air at so great a Distance from
the Earth, must be rarified to so great a Degree, that the Space it fills must
bear a very small Proportion to that which is entirely void of Matter.

I think, we may be confident from what already appears, as well as from what
our Author has writ on the Roman Feasts, that he could not be totally ignorant
of Astronomy. Some of the Critics would insinuate from the following Lines,
that he mistook the annual Motion of the Sun for the Diurnal.

Met. B. 2.
Sectus in obliquum --
Though the Sun be always in one or other of the Signs of the Zodiac, and never
goes by either Motion more Northward, or Southward, than is here described; Yet
Phaeton being designed to drive the Chariot but one Day, ought to have been
directed in the Equator, or a Circle Parallel to it, and not round the other
Oblique one of the Ecliptic: a Degree of which, and that by a Motion contrary
to the Diurnal, he was obliged to go in that length of Time.

I am inclined to think, that Ovid had so great an Attention to Poetical
Embelishments, that he voluntarily declined a strict Observance of any
Astronomical System. For though that Science was far from being neglected in
former Ages; yet the Progress which was made in it, by no means equaled that
of our present Time.

Lucretius, though in other things most penetrating, describes the Sun scarce
bigger, than he appears to the Eye.

Nec nimio solis major rota, nec minor ardor
Esse potest, nostris quam sensibus esse videtur.
And Homer, imagining the Seats of the Gods above the fixed Stars, represents
the falling of Vulcan from thence to the Isle of Lemnos, to continue during a
whole Day.

(...) B. 1.
(...) --
The Greek Poet aims here to give a surprising Idea of the height of the
Celestial Mansions: but if the Computation of a modern Astronomer be true, they
are at so much a greater Distance, that Vulcan would have been more Years in
falling, than he was Minutes.

But least I should exceed the usual Length of a Preface, I shall now give some
Instances of the Propriety of our Author's Similes, and Epithets; the
Perspicuity of his Allegories; the Instructive Excellence of the Morals; the
peculiar happy Turn of his Fancy; and shall begin with the Elegance of his
Descriptions.

Met. B. 1.
-- Madidis Notus evolat alis,
Terribilem picea tectus caligine vultum.
Barba gravis nimbis, canis fluit unda capillis,
Front sedent nebulae, rorant pennaeque, sinusque.
--
Sternuntur segetes, and deplorata coloni
Vota jacent, longique labor perit irritus anni.
These Lines introduce those of the Deluge, which are also very Poetical, and
worthy to be compared with the next, concerning the Golden Age.

-- Sine militis usu
Mollia securae peragebant otia gentes.
Ipsa quoque immunis rastroque intacta, nec ullis
Saucia vomeribus, per se dabat omnia tellus.
Contentique cibis, nullo cogente, creatis,
Arbuteos foetus, montanaque sraga legebant,
Et quae deciderant patula Jovis arbore glandes.
Ver erat aeternum, placidique tepentibus auris
Mulcebant Zephyri natos sine semine flores.
Virgil has also touched upon the same Subject in the end of the Second
Georgick.

Aureus hanc vitam in terris Saturnus agebat,
Nec dum etiam audierant inflari classica, nec dum
Impositos duris crepitare incudibus enses.
And again Aen. B. S. l. 319.
Primus ab aetherio venit Saturnus Olympo
--
Aurea, quae perhibent, illo sub rege suerunt
Saecula: sic placida populos in pace regebat.


Some of the Lines, a little foreign to the present Subject, are omitted; but I
shall make the most admirable Author amends by transcribing at length his next
Description. It Is of a Stag, which gave the first Occasion to the War betwixt
the Trojans and the Rutulians: I choose this, because my Design is to have these
two great Poets seen together, where the Subject happens to be almost the same,
though the Nature of the Poems be very different.

Aen. B. 7. l. 483.
Cervus erat sorma praestanti, and cornibus ingens,
Tyrreidae pueri, quem matris ab ubere raptum
Nutribant, Tyrrheusque pater, cui regia parent
Armenta, and late custodia credita campi.
Assuetum imperiis soror omni Sylvia cura
Mollibus intexens ornabat cornua sertis:
Pectebatque ferum, puroque in font lavabat.
Ille manum patiens, mensaeque assuetus herili
Errabat sylvis --
The Image which Ovid gives of the Favorite Stag slain accidentally by
Cyparissus, seems not of less Dignity.

Ingens cervus erat, lateque patentibus altas
Ipse suo capiti praebebat cornibus umbras:
Cornua fulgebant auro, demissaque in armos
Pendebant tereti gemmata monilia collo.
Bulla super frontem parvis argentea loris
Vincta movebatur: parilique ex aere nitebant
Auribus in geminis circum cava tempora baccae.
Isque metu vacuus, naturalique pavore
Deposito, celebrare domos, mulcendaque colla
Quamlibet ignotis manibus praebere solebat.
Gratus erat Cyparisse tibi, Tu pabula cervum
Ad nova, tu liquidi ducebas fontis ad undam.
--
Tu modo texebas varios per cornua flores:
Nunc, eques in tergo residens, huc latus and illuc
Mollia purpureis fraenabas ora capistris.
In the following Lines, Ovid describes the watery Court of the River Peneus,
which the Reader may compare with Virgil's Subterranean Grott of Cyrene the
Naiad, Mother to Aristaeus.

Met. B. r.
Est nemus Haemoniae, praerupta quod undique claudit
Silva: vocant Tempe, per quae Peneus ab imo
Effusus Pindo spumosis volvitur undis:
Dejectuque gravi tenues agitantia sumos
Nubila conducit, summasque aspergine sylvas
Impluit; and sonitu plus quam vicina fatigat.
Haec domus, hae seeds, haec sunt penetralia magni
Amnis: in hoc residens sacto de cautibus antro.
Undis jura dabat, Nymphisque colentibus undas.
Convenient illuc popularia slumina primum;
Nescia gratentur, consolenturve parentem,
Populiser Spercheos, and irrequietus Enipeus,
Eridanusque senex, lenisque Amphrysos, and Aeas.
Moxque amnes alii, qui, qua tulit impetus illes,
In mare deducunt sesas erroribus undas.
G. B. 4
Tristis Aristaeus Penei genitoris ad undam
Stat lacrymans --
--
Jamque domum mirans genetricis, and humida regna,
Speluncisque lacus clausos, lucosque sonantes,
Ibat; and ingenti motu stupefactus aquarum,
Omnia sub magna labentia flumina terra
Spectabat diversa locis, Phasimque, Lycumque,
Et caput, unde altus primum se erumpit Enipeus,
Unde pater Tiberinus, and unde Aniena fluenta,
Et gemina auratus taurino cornua vultu
Eridanus, quo non alius per pinguia culta
In mare purpureum violentior influit amnis.
The Divine Poet goes on in Pomp of Numbers, and easy Magnificence of Words,
till he introduces the Story of Orpheus and Euridice; in the Narration of
which, he is as much superior to Ovid, as the Reeds of his own Mantuan
Shepherds are less Musical, than the Lyre of Orpheus.

That I may not be too long on this Article, I shall recommend to the Reader,
Ovid's admirable Description of Sleep -- Est prope Cimmerios -- Met. B. 11.
That of Hunger -- Est locus extremis Scythiae -- B. 8.
That of the Plague -- Dira lues -- B. 7.
That of Fame -- Orb locus medio est -- B. 12.



Virgil has also touched on the two last; in the one he had Lucretius in View;
in the other, Homer: and I think it will not be to the Disadvantage of our
Author to appear at the same time.

There are many other Descriptions scattered in the Metamorphoses, which, for
just Expression of Nature, and Majestic Modulation of Words, are only Inferior
to those already transcribed, as they are shorter; which makes the Objection,
that his Diction is commonly loytring into Prose, a great deal too severe.

The Metamorphoses must be considered, as is observed before, very uncorrect;
and Virgil's Works as finished: though his own Modesty would not allow the
Aeneids to be so. It seems it was harder for him to please himself, than his
Readers. His Judgment was certainly great, nor was his Vivacity of Imagination
less; for the first without the last is too heavy, and like a Dress without
Fancy; and the last without the first is too gay, and but all Trimming.

Our Author's Similitudes are next to be considered, which are always
remarkably short, and convey some pleasing Idea to the Imagination. It Is in
this Branch of the Poem, that he has discovered as just a Judgment, as any of
the Classicks whatever. Poets, to give a Loose to a warm Fancy, are generally
too apt, not only to expatiate in their Simile's, but introduce them too
frequently; by doing the first, they detain the Attention too long from the
principal Narration; and by the latter, they make too frequent Breaches in the
Unity of the Poem.

Those two Errors Ovid has most discerningly avoided. How short, and
significant are generally his Comparisons! he fails not, in these, to keep a
stiff Rein on a High-mettled Pegasus; and takes care not to surfeit here, as he
has done on other Heads, by an erroneous Abundance.

His Simile's are thicker sown by much in the Fable of Salmacis, and
Hermaphroditus, than in any other Book, but always short.

The Nymph clasps the Youth close to her Breast, and both insensibly grow one.

Met. B. 4.
-- Velut si quis conducto cortice ramos
Crescendo jungi, pariterque adolescere cernat.
Again, as Atlanta reddens in the Race with H^ppomenes,

Met. B. 10.
Inque puellari corpus candore ruborem
Traxerat; haud aliter quam cum super atria velum
Candida purpureum simulatas inficit umbras.
Philomela's Tongue seemed to move after it was cut out by Tereus.

B. 6.
Utque salire solet mutilatae cauda colubrae,
Palpitat --
Cadmus sows the Dragons Teeth, and the Sons of the Earth rise gradually.

B. 3.
Inde fide majus glebae cepere moveri;
Primaque de sulcis acies apparuit hastae;
Tegmina mox capitum picto nutantia cono,
Mox humeri, pectusque --
Sic ubi tolluntur festis aulaea theatris
Surgere signa solent, primumque ostendere vultum,
Caetera paulatim, placidoque educta tenore
Tota patent, imoque pedes in margin ponunt.
The Objection to Ovid, that he never knows when to give over, is too manifest.
Though he frequently expatiates on the same Thought, in different Words; yet in
his Simile's, that Exuberance is avoided. There is in them all a Simplicity,
and a Confinement to the present Object; always a Fecundity of Fancy, but
rarely an Intemperance: nor do I remember he has erred above once by an
ill-judg'd Superfluity. After he has described the Labyrinth built by Daedalus,
he compares it thus, B. 8.
Non secus ac liquidus Phrygiis Maenandros in arvis
Ludit, and ambiguo lapsu refluitque, sluitque;
Et nunc ad sontes, nunc ad mare versus apertum
Incertas exercet aquas --


He should have ended at the close of the Second Line, as Virgil should have
done at the end of the Fourth in his noble Simile, where Dido proceeds to the
Temple with her Court about her.

Aen. B. 4.
Qualis in Eurotae ripis, aut per juga Cynthi
Exercet Diana choros, quam mill secutae
Hinc, atque hinc glomerantur Oreades, illa pharetram
Fert humero, gradiensque deas supereminet omnes:
Latonae tacitum pertentant gaudia pectus.
I see no Reason for the last Line: Though the Poet be justly celebrated for a
most consummate Judgment, yet by an Endeavor to imitate Homer's Simile's, he
is not only very long, but by introducing several Circumstances, he fails of an
applicable Relation betwixt the principal Subject, and his new Ideas. He
sometimes thinks fit to work into the Piece some differing Embroidery, which,
though very rich, yet makes at best but glorious Patchwork. I really believe his
excellent Poem had not been the less so, if, in this Article, he had thought
fit to have walked on in his own regular and Majestic Grace, rather than have
been hurried forward through broken By-ways by his blind Guide.

I shall transcribe one of his Simile's which is not culled out, but exactly of
the same Texture with all the rest in the four last Books of the Aeneids.

Turnus leaps in Fury from his Chariot. Aen. B. 12. L. 684
Ac veluti montis saxum de vertice praeceps
Cum ruit avulsum vento, seu turbidus imber
Proluit, aut annis solvit sublapsa vetustas,
Fertur in abruptum magno mons improbus actu
Exultatque solo, sylvas, armenta, virosque
Involvens secum --


It does not seem to be at all Material, whether the Rock was blown, or washed
down by Wind, or Rain, or undermined by Time.

But to return to Ovid; the Reader may take Notice how unforced his
Compliments, and how natural his Transitions generally are. With how much Ease
does he slide into some new Circumstance, without any Violation of the Unity of
the Story. The Texture is so artful, that it may be compared to the Work of his
own Arachne, where the Shade dies so gradually, and the Light revives so
imperceptibly, that it is hard to tell where the one ceases, and the other
begins.

When he is going off from the Story of Apollo, and Daphne; how happily does he
introduce a Compliment to the Roman Conquerors.

Met. B. ^
-- Et conjux quoniam mea non potes esse,
Arbor eris certe --
Tu Ducibus laetis aderis, cum laeta triumphum
Vox canet, and longae visent Capitolia pompae.
Postibus Augustis eadem fidissima custos
Ante sores stabis; mediamque tuebere quercum.
He compliments Augustus upon the Assassination of Julius; and, by way of
Simile, takes the Opportunity from the Horror that the Barbarity of Lycaon gave.

-- Sic cum manus impia saevit
Sanguine Caesareo Romanum extinguere nomen, etc.
Julius is deify'd, and looks down on his adopted Son.

B. 25.
-- Natique videns benesacta, fatetur
Esse suis majora, and vinci gaudet ab illo.
And immediately follows -- Hic sua praeferri quanquam vetat acta paternis;
Libera fama tamen, nullisque obnoxia jussis
Invitum praefert. --


The Author in the two first Lines shows the Affectionate Condescension of the
Father; in the three last, the pious Gratitude of the Son.

The Compliments to Augustus are very frequent in the last Book of the
Metamorphoses; as those to the same Emperor are in the Georgicks of Virgil,
which also strike the Imagination by their agreeable Flattery.

G. 1.
Haec super arvorum cultu pecorumque canebam,
Et super arboribus; Caesar dum magnus ad altum
Fulminat Euphratem bello, victorque volentes
Per populos dat jura, viamque affectat Olympo.
Again on Julius, Aen. B. 1.
Imperium Oceano, famam qui terminet astris
Julius --


The Compliments have a great Sublimity, and worthy of the Grandeur of the
Heroes, and the Wit of the Poet.

Ovid as much deserves Praise, for saying a great deal in a little, as Censure
for saying a little in a great deal. None of the Classick Poets had the Talent
of expressing himself with more Force, and Perspicuity.

Phaeton desires some Pledge of his Father's Tenderness, and asks to be trusted
with his Chariot. He answers, B. 2.
Pignora certa petis; do pignora certa timendo.


However, the latter complies with his Importunity: the Consequence is fatal,
the World is set on Fire, even the Rivers feel the force of the Conflagration.
The Tagus boyls, -- Fluit ignibus Aurum.


The Nile retreats, Occuluit que caput, quod adhuc latet --


Zanthus is parched up, Arsurusque iterum Zanthus --


The Poet's Fancy is here full of Energy, as well as in the following Lines.
Apollo courts Daphne, and promises himself Success, but is disappointed.
Quodque cupit, sperat; suaque illum Oracula sallunt.


And again,

The River Achelous combats Hercules, and assumes several Shapes in vain, then
puts on at last that of a Snake; the Hero smiles in Contempt. Cunarum labor
est angues superare mearum.


Ovid never excells himself so much, as when he takes Occasion to touch upon
the Passion of Love; all Hearts are in a manner sensible of the same Emotions;
and, like Instruments tuned Unisons, if a String of any one of them be struck,
the rest, by consent, vibrate.

Procris is jealous of Cephalus; she endeavors to be confirmed in her Fears,
but hopes the contrary, -- Speratque miserrima falli.


The next is not less Natural, -- Sed cuncta timemus amantes.


Biblis is in love with Caunus. The Struggle is betwixt her unlawful Flame, and
her Honor.

She Is all Confusion at the Thoughts of discovering her Passion -- -- miserere
fatentis amorem.


She attempts to write, Incipit and dubitat: scribit, damnatque tabellas,
Et notat, and delet: mutat, culpatque probatque


In the End, Inclination, as it does always, gets the better of Discretion.

This last Fable shows how touchingly the Poet argues in Love Affairs, as well
as those of Medea, and Scylla. The two last are left by their Heroes, and their
Reflections are very Natural, and Affecting. Ovid seemed here to have had
Virgil's Passion of Dido in his Eye, but with this difference; the one had
conversed much with Ladies, and knew they loved to talk a great deal: The other
considered no less what was natural for them to say, than what became them to
say.

Virgil has, through the whole Management of this Rencounter, discovered a most
finished Judgment. Aeneas, like other Men, likes for Convenience, and leaves
for greater. Dido, like other Ladies, resents the Neglect, enumerates the
Obligations the Lover is under, upbraids him with Ingratitude, threatens him
with Revenge, then by and by submits, begs for Compassion, and has recourse to
Tears.

It appears from this Piece, that Virgil was a discerning Master in the Passion
of Love: And they that consider the Spirit, and Turn of that inimitable Line --
Qui Bavium non odit -- cannot doubt but he had an equal Talent for Satyr.

Nor does the Genius of Ovid more exert on the Subject of Love, than on all
others. In the Contention of Ajax, Ulysses his Elocution is most nervous, and
persuading. Where he endeavors to dissuade Mankind from indulging carnivorous
Appetites in his Pythagorean Philosophy, how emphatical is his Reasoning!

B. 15.
Quid meruere hoves, animal sine srande dolisque,
Innocuum, simplex, natum tolerare laborem?
Immemor est demum, nec srugum munere dignus
Qui potuit curvi dempto modo pondere aratri
Ruricolam mactare suum --
I think Agricolam had been stronger, but the Authority of Manuscripts does not
warrant that Emendation.

Through the whole Texture of this Work, Ovid discovers the highest Humanity,
and a most exceeding good Nature. The Virtuous in Distress are always his
Concern; and his Wit contrives to give them an Immortality with himself.

He seems to have taken the most Pains in the first, and second Book of the
Metamorphoses, though the Thirteenth abounds with Sentiments most moving, and
with calamitous Incidents, introduced with great Art. The Poet had here in
View, the Tragedy of Hecuba in Euripides; and it is a wonder, it has never been
attempted in our own Tongue. The House of Priam is destroyed, his Royal
Daughter a Sacrifice to the Manes of him that occasioned it. She is forced from
the Arms of her unhappy Friends, and hurry;d to the Altar, where she behaves
herself with a Decency becoming her Sex, and a Magnanimity equal to her Blood,
and so very affecting, that even the Priest wept.

-- Ipse etiam flens, invitusque sacerdos, etc.
She shows no Concern at approaching Death, but on the Account of her old,
unfortunate Mother, Mors tantum vellem matrem mea fallere possit.
Matter obest, minuitque necis mea gaudia; quamvis
Non mea mors illi: verum sua vita gemenda est.


Then begs her Body may be delivered to her without Ransom, -- Genetrici corpus
inemptum
Reddite; neve, auro redimat jus triste sepulchri,
Sed lacrymis: tunc, cum poterat, redimebat and auro.


The unhappy Queen laments, she is not able to give her Daughter royal Burial,
Non haec est fortuna domus --


Then takes the Body in her decrepid Arms, and halts to the Sea to wash off the
Blood, -- Ad littus passu processit anili
Albentes laniata comas. --


The animated Thoughts, and lively Images of this Poem, are numerous. None ever
painted more to the Life, than our Author, though several Grotesque Figures are,
now and then, seen in the same Groupe. The most plentiful Season, that gives
Birth to the finest Flowers, produces also the rankest Weeds. Ovid has shown in
one Line, the brightest Fancy sometimes; and in the next, the poorest
Affectation.

Venus makes Court to Adonis, B. 10. l. 550
-- Et ecce!
Opportuna sua blanditur Populus umbra
Et requievit humo; pressitque and gramen and ipsum.


Phoebus requests Phaeton to desist from his Request.

-- Consiliis, non curribus utere nostris.
Caeneus in the Battle of the Centaurs wounds Latreus in several Places.

-- Vulnusque in vulnere fecit.
These are some of our Poet's Boyisms. There is another Affectation, called by
Quintil. (...), or a witty Folly, which would not have appeared quite so
trifling, had it been less frequent.

Medea persuades the Daughters of Pelias to kill their Father, in order to have
his Youth renewed. She that loves him best gives the first Wound, B. 7.
Et, ne sit scelerata, facit scelus --


Althea is enraged at her Son Meleager, and to do Justice to the Manes of his
Brothers, destroys him, Impietate pia est --


Envy enters Athens, and beholds the flourishing Condition of the City, Vixque
tenet lacrymas, quia nil lacrymabile cernit.


Ovid was much too fond of such Witticisms, which are more to be wondered at,
because they were not the Fashion of that Age, as Punns, and Quibbles are of
this. Virgil, as I remember, is not found trifling in this Manner above once,
or twice.

(...)
Deucalion vacuum lapides jactavit in orbem,
Unde homines nati, durum genus --
Juno is in Indignation at Aeneas upon his Arrival in Italy.

(...)
Number capti potuere capi? number incensa cremavit
Troja viros? --
The Poet is so far from Affecting this sort of Wit, that he rarely ventures on
so spirited a Turn of Fancy, as in these following Instances.

Juno upbraids Venus, and Cupid Ironically, that two Deities could be able to
get the better of one weak Woman, (...)
-- Memorabile nomen,
Una dolo Divum, si saemina victa duorum est.


Euryalus, going upon an Enterprise, expresses his Concern for his surviving
Mother, if he should fall, and recommends her to the Care of Ascanius, who
Answers,

Namque erit ista mihi genitrix, nomenque Creusae
Solum desuerit --
Venus is importunate in her Solicitations to Vulcan, to make Armor (...) her
Son: He Answers, (...)
-- Absiste precando
Viribus indubitare tuis --


At the first kindling of Dido's Passion, he has this most natural Thought, --
Illum absens absentem auditque, videtque.


But to return to Ovid; though I cannot vindicate him for his Points, I shall
endeavor to mollify his Critics, when they give him no quarter for his
Diction, and attack him so inflexibly for ending his Lines with Monosyllables,
as -- si quis -- si non, etc. and as I think he cannot be excused more
advantagiously, than by affirming that where he has done it once, Virgil has
twenty times -- Et cum -- Si quis -- Nec dum -- -- Si quam -- Si quis -- -- Jam
bos -- Nunc nunc -- etc.
G. 1. G. 2. G. 2. Aen. 1. Aen. 7. Aen. 12.


There are a great many Endings of Lines in this manner, and more indeed than
seems consistent with the Majesty of Heroic Verse. When Lines are designed to
be sermoni propiores, this Liberty may be allowable, but not so when the
Subject requires more sonorous Numbers. Virgil seems to endeavor to keep up
his Versification to an Harmonious Dignity; and therefore, when fit Words do
not offer with some ^ase, he will rather break off in an Hemistick, than that the
Line should be lazy, and languid. He well knew how essential it was in Poetry
to flatter the Ear; and at the same time was sensible, that this Organ grows
tired by a constant Attention to the same Harmony; and therefore he endeavored
now and then to relieve it by a Cadence of Pauses, and a Variation of Measures.

Ecl. 2.
Amphion Dircaeus in Actaeo Aracyntho.
This Line seems not tuneful at the first hearing; but by Repetition, it
reconciles it self, and has the same Effect with some Compositions of Music,
which are at the first Performance tiresome, and afterward Entertaining.

The Commentators, and Critics are of Opinion, that whenever Virgil is less
Musical, it is where he endeavors at an Agreement of the Sound with the Sense,
as, -- Procumbit humi bos.


It would show as much Singularity to deny this, as it does a fanciful Facility
to affirm it, because it is obvious, in many Places he had no such view. Aen.
3. l. 390.
-- Inventa sub ilicibus sus.
G. 3. l. 255.
-- Dentesque sabellicus exacuit sus.
Aen. 7. l. 79^
-- Jam setis obsita, jam bos.
Aen. 11. l. 355.
-- Furor additus, inde Lupi ceu, etc.


The Places, which favor most the first Opinion, are, G. 3. l. 275
Saxa per and scopulos, and depressas convalles.
G. 4.
-- Sepe exiguus mus.
Omnia sub magna labentia flumina terra.


The last Line is the only Instance, I remember (except one in Ecl. 2.) where
the Words terminate in the same Vowel, and seem to represent the constant, and
uniform sound of a sliding Stream.

Those, that are most conversant in Classick Poetry, must be sensible, that
Virgil has been much more solicitous, than Ovid, to keep up his Lines to an
easy, and a Musical Flow; but though the Critics charge the latter with breaking
through Prosody and Grammar, and allowing himself too often the License of
Graecisms; I take this Censure to be only an arrogant Pedantry in the
Grammarians, and groundless in it self; but though it were true, I dare be
confident it is full as just upon Virgil, Ec. 5. l. 29.
-- Curru subjungere Tigres,


For Currui, according to the Grammarians.

Often Adjectives for Adverbs; and the contrary. G. 1.
-- Pinguia culta; an Adjective for a Substantive. -- Denso distinguere pingui;
the same. Aen. 11. l. 69.
-- Seu languentis Hyacinthi; first Foot of the Dactyl short. Aen. 4.
-- Tulerunt fastidia menses; the penultima of the Verb short. Obstupui
steteruntque comae -- the same.


So Lucretius, prodiderunt, occiderunt, etc. G. 1. l. 283.
-- Pampineo gravidus autumno; an Iambick for a Spondee. Fluviorum rex Eridanus
camposque per omnes; an Anapest for a Dactyl, or a Spondee. Aen. 10. l. 29.
Nec Clytio genitore minor nec fratre Mnestheo; a Trochee, unless the two
Consonants M N of the following Word be allowed. G. 1. l. 456.
Fervere. non illa quisquam --


The Penultima commonly short with Virgil, so fulgere, stridere, etc.

G. 1. l. 456.
-- Sine me furere ante furorem; a Graecism. Aen. 12. 680.
-- Imponere Pelio Ossam; a Graecism, where there is no Elision, but the long
Vowel before another made short.
The learned, and Reverend Dr. Clark has observed, (as he tells me) that though
there be several short Vowels made long in Homer, yet there is no Instance on
the contrary, of a long Vowel (such as the first Syllable of (...), (...), and
the like) made short, except in such a Case as that I have cited, where the
next Word begins with a Vowel; which shows, that there is no such thing as a
Poetica licentia, properly so called.

Certainly no body can imagine but these two celebrated Authors understood
their own Tongue better, than the scrupulous Grammarians of Afterages, who are
too Dogmatical, and Self-sufficient, when they presume to censure Either of
them for not attending strictly enough to Syntax, and the Measure of Verse. The
Latin Tongue is a dead Language, and none can decide with Confidence on the
Harmony, or Disonance of the Numbers of these Times, unless they were
thoroughly acquainted with their Pauses, and Cadence. They may indeed pronounce
with much more Assurance on their Diction; and distinguish where they have been
negligent, and where more finished. There are certainly many Lines in Ovid,
where he has been downright Lazy, and where he might have avoided the
Appearance of being obviously so by a very little application. In recording the
Succession of the Alban Kings, thus, Epitus ex illo est, post hunc Capetusque,
Capysque,
Sed Capys ante suit --


There are also several Lines in Virgil, which are not altogether tunable to a
modern Ear, and which appear unfinished. G. 2. l. 61.
Scilicet omnibus est labor impendendus, and omnes
Cogendae in sulcum --
G. 2. l. 310.
Praesertim si tempestas a vertice sylvis
Incubuit --
Aen. 11 l. 509.
Quasve refer parem? sed nunc, est omnia quando
Iste animus supra --
Aen. 12. l. 808.
Ista quidem quia nota mihi tua, magne, voluntas,
Jupiter --


But the Sun has its Spots; and if amongst Thousands of inimitable Lines, there
should be some found of an unequal Dignity with the rest, nothing can be said
for their Vindication more, than, if they be Faults, they are the Faults of
Virgil.

As I ought to be on this Occasion an Advocate for Ovid, whom I think is too
much run down at present by the critical Spirit of this Nation; I dare say, I
cannot be more effectually so, than by comparing him in many Places with his
admired Contemporary Virgil; and though the last certainly deserves the Palm, I
shall make use of Ovid's own Lines, in the trial of Strength betwixt Achelous
and Hercules, to show how much he is honored by the Contention.

Met. B. 9.
-- Non tam
Turpe fuit vinci, quam contendisse decorum.
I shall finish my Remarks on our Author, by taking Notice of the Justness, and
Perspicuity of his Allegories; which are either Physical or Natural; Moral; or
Historical. Of the first Kind is the Fable of Apollo, and Python; in the
Explanation of this all the Mythologists agree; Exhalations and Mists being the
constant Effects of Inundations, are here dissipated by the Rays of the Sun.

Of the Second Kind, are Acteon torn to Pieces by his own Pack of Dogs, and
Erisicthon starved by the Disease of Hunger. These two Allegories seem to
signify, that Extravagance and Luxury end in Want.

Of the Third, is the Story of the Rape of Europa. History says, she was
Daughter to Agenor, and carried by the Candians in a Gally, bearing a Bull in
the Stern, in order to be married to one of their Kings named Jupiter.

This Explanation gives an Occasion for a Digression which is not altogether
foreign to the present purpose, because it will be of Use to justify Ovid on
some other Occasions, where he is censured for being too free with the
Characters of the Gods. I was once representing the Metamorphoses, as an
excellent System of Morality; but an illustrious Lady, whose least Advantage
above her Sex, is that of being one of the greatest Princesses in Europe,
objected, that the loose and immodest Sallys of Jupiter did by no means confirm
my Assertion.

One must consider, that what appeared an Absurdity in Ovid, is not so much his
own Fault, as that of the Times before him. The Characters of the Gods of the
old Heroic Age represented them unjust in their Actions; mutable in their
Designs; partial in their Favors; ignorant of Events; scurrilous in their
Language. Some of the superior Hierarchy treating one another with injurious
Brutalities, and are often guilty of such Indecencies and Mis-behaviour as the
lowest of Mortals would blush to own. Juno calls Diana, the Goddess of
Chastity, (...) Brazen-faced Bitch. Hom. Il. 1. B. 21. l. 481.
Jupiter insults his Daughter, the Goddess of Wisdom, for Rashness and Folly;
bids Iris tell her, he will maul her Coach-Horses for her, like a surly Bitch as
she is; (...): Il B. S. from I. 400. to I. 425.
then threatens in another Place to beat his Wife, that divinc Vixon, the
immortal Partner of the Empyreal Throne, (...). Il. B. 15. l. 17.


The Commentators may endeavor to hide those Absurdities under the Veil of
Allegories; but the Reader that considers the whole Texture of the Iliad, will
find, that the Author's Meaning, and their Interpretation are often as unlike,
as the imaginary Heroes of his time, are to the real ones of Ours.

Allegories should be obvious, and not like Meteors in the Air, which represent
a different Figure to every different Eye. Now they are Armies of Soldiers; now
Flocks of Sheep; and by and by, nothing.

Perhaps the Critics of a more exalted Taste, may discover such Beauties in
the ancient Poetry, as may escape the Comprehension of us Pigmies of a more
limited Genius. They may be able to fathom the Divine Sense of the Pagan
Theology; whist we aim at no more, than to judge of a little common Sense.

It is, and ever will be a Rule to a great many, to applaud and condemn with
the general Vogue, though never so ill grounded. The most are afraid of being
Particular; and rather than strive against the Stream, are proud of being in
the wrong with the Many, rather than desirous of being in the right with the
Few: and though they be convinced of the Reasonableness of dissenting from the
common Cry, yet out of a poor fear of Censure, they contribute to establish it,
and thus become an Authority against others, who in reality are but of their
own Opinion.

Ovid was so far from paying a blind deference to the venerable Name of his
Grecian Predecessor, in the Character of his Gods; that when Jupiter punishes
Andromeda for the Crimes of her Mother, he calls him injustus Ammon, Met. B. 4.
and takes commonly an honorable care of the Decorum of the Godhead, when
their Actions are consistent with the Divinity of their Character. His
Allegories include some Religious, or instructive Moral, wrapped up in a
peculiar Perspicuity. The Fable of Proserpina, being sometimes in Hell, and
sometimes with Ceres her Mother, can scarce mean any thing else than the sowing
and coming up of Corn. The various Dresses, that Vertumnus, the God of Seasons,
puts on in his Courtship of Pomona the Garden Goddess, seem plainly to express
the different and most proper times for Digging, Planting, Pruning, and
gathering the Increase. I shall be shorter on this Head, because our Countryman
Mr. Sands has, by a laborious Search amongst the Mythologists, been very full.
He has annexed his Explanations to the end of each Book, which deserve to be
recommended to those, that are Curious in this figurative Learning.

The Reader cannot fail of observing, how many excellent Lessons of Morality
Ovid has given us in the course of his Fables.

The Story of Deucalion, and Pyrrba teaches, that Piety and Innocence cannot
miss of the divine Protection, and that the only Loss irreparable is that of
our Probity, and Justice.

That of Phaeton; how the too great tenderness of the Parent proves a cruelty
to the Child; and that he, who would climb to the Seat of Jupiter, generally
meets with his Bolt by the way.

The Tale of Baucis and Philemon is most inimitably told. He omits not the
minutest Circumstance of a Cottage Life; and is much fuller than Virgil, where
he brings in his contented old Man Corycius. G. 4.
Ovid represents a good old Couple; happy, and satisfied in a cleanly Poverty;
hospitable, and free of the few things, that Fortune had given them; moderate
in Desires; affectionate in their conjugal Relation; so religious in Life, that
when they observed their homely Cabin rising to a Temple, all the Bounty they
asked of the Gods they had entertained, was, that they might do the Office of
Priesthood there; and at their Death, not survive one another.

The Stories of Lycaon, and Pentheus, not only deter from Infidelity, and
Irreverence to the Gods; but the last also shows, that too great Zeal produces
the same Effects, as none at all; and that Enthusiasm is often more cruel, than
Atheism.

The Story of Minos, and Scylla represents the Infamy of selling our Country;
and teaches, that even they who love the Crime, abhor the Criminal.

In Cippus we find a noble Magnanimity, and Heavenly Self-denial: he preferred
the Good of the Republic to his own private Grandeur; and chose with an
exemplary Generosity, rather to live a private Freeman out of Rome, than to
command Numbers of Slaves in it.

From the Story of Hercules we learn, that Glory is a Lady, who, like many
others, loves to have her Admirers suffer a great deal for her. The Poet
enumerates the Labors of the Hero; shows how he conquered every thing for
Others, but nothing for himself: Then does him the Poetical Justice of an
Apotheosis; thinking it most fit that one, who had born the Celestial Orbs on
his Shoulders, should have a Mansion amongst them.

From the Assumption of Romulus; that when War is at an end, the chief Business
of Peace should be the enacting good Laws; that after a People are preserved
from the Enemy; the next care should be, to preserve them from themselves; and
therefore the best Legislators deserve a Place amongst Heroes, and Deities.

From Ariadne being inhumanly deserted by Theseus, and generously received by
Bacchus we find, that as there is nothing we can be sure of, so there is
nothing we ought to despair of.

From Althea burning the Brand; that we should take care least under the Notion
of Justice, we should do a Cruelty; for they that are set upon Revenge, only
endeavor to imitate the Injury.

From Polyphemus making Love to Galatea one may observe, that the most deformed
can find something to like in their own Person. He examines his Face in the
Stream, combs his ruful Locks with a Rake, grows more exact, and studious of
his Dress, and discovers the first Sign of being in Love, by endeavoring at a
more, than usual Care to please.

The Fable of Cephalus, and Procrys confirms, that every Trifle contributes to
heighten the Disease of Jealousy; and that the most convincing Proofs can
scarce cure it.

From that of Hippomenes, and Atalanta we may discover, that a generous Present
helps to persuade, as well as an agreeable Person.

From Medea's flying from Pelias's Court; that the offered Favors of the
Impious should be always suspected; and that they, who design to make every one
fear them, are afraid of every one.

From Myrrha; that Shame is sometimes hard to be overcome, but if the Sex once
gets the better of it, it gives them afterward no more Trouble.

From Cenis; that Effeminacy in Youth may change to Valor in Manhood, and that
as Fame perishes, so does Censure.

From Tereus; that one Crime lays the Foundation of many; and that the same
Person, who begins with Lust, may conclude with Murder.

From Midas; that no Body can punish a Covetous Man worse, than he punishes
himself; that scarce any thing would sometimes prove more fatal to us, than the
Completion of our own Wishes; and that he who has the most Desires, will
certainly meet with the most Disappointments.

From the Pythagorean Philosophy, it may be observed, that Man is the only
Animal who kills his Fellow Creature without being angry.

From Proteus we have this Lesson, that a Statesman can put on any Shape; can
be a Spaniel to the Lion, and a Lion to the Spaniel; and that he knows not to
be an Enemy, who knows not how to seem a Friend; that if all Crowns should
change their Ministry, as often as they please, though they may be called other
Ministers, they are still the same Men.

The Legend of Aesculapiu's Voyage to Rome in form of a Snake, seems to express
the necessary Sagacity required in Professors of that Art, for the readier
Insight into Distempers: This Reptile being celebrated by the ancient
Naturalists for a quick Sight.

Hor. Sat. 3. L. 1.
Cur in amicorum vitium tam cernis acutum
Quam aut aquilae, aut serpens Epidaurius? --
The venerable Epidaurian assumed the figure of an Animal without Hands to take
Fees; and therefore, grateful Posterity honored him with a Temple. In this
manner should wealthy Physicians, upon proper Occasions, practice; and thus
their surviving Patients reward.

If the Metamorphoses be attended to with a just Application, and without
Prepossession; One will be the less surpised at the Author's Prophetic
Spirit, relating to the Duration, and Success of the Work; Jamque opus exegi,
etc. --


This Prediction has so far proved true, that this Poem has been ever since the
Magazine, which has furnished the greatest Poets of the following Ages with
Fancy, and Allusions; and the most celebrated Painters with Subjects, and
Designs. Nor has his Poetical Predecessors, and Contemporaries paid less Regard
to their own Performances.

Luer. B. 1.
Insignemque meo capiti petere inde coronam,
Unde prius nulli velarint tempora Musae.
Enn. Frag.
Nemo me lacrumeis decoret, nec sunera sletu
Facsit; quur volito viv^ per ora virum.
Virg. G. 3
-- Tentanda via est, qua me quoque possim
Tollere humo, victorque virum volitare per ora.
Hor. Od. 1.
Me doctarum Ederae praemia frontium
Diis miscent superis --
Again, Hor. B. 3. Od. 30.
Exegi monumentum aere perennius,
Regalique situ Pyramidum altius,
Quod non imber edax, non Aquilo impotens
Possit diruere, aut innumerabilis
Annorum series, and fuga temporum.
Non omnis moriar. --


The whole Ode is in a manner a continued Compliment to his own Writings; nor,
in Imitation of this celebrated Author, want we Poets of our present Age, who
have been pleased to rank themselves amongst their own Admirers.

I have done with the Original, and shall make no Excuse for the length of the
Preface, because it is in the power of the Reader to make is as short as he
pleases. I shall now conclude with a Word or two about the Version.

Translation is commonly either Verbal, or Paraphrase, or Imitation; of the
first sort is Mr. Sands's, which I think the Metamorphoses can by no means
allow of. It is agreed, the Author left it unfinished; if it had undergone his
last Hand, it is more than probable, that many Superfluities had been
retrenched. Where a Poem is perfectly finished; the Translation, with regard to
particular Idioms, cannot be too exact; by doing this, the Sense of the Author
is more entirely his own, and the Cast of the Periods more faithfully
preserved: But where a Poem is tedious through Exuberance, or dark through a
hasty Brevity, I think the Translator may be excused for doing what the Author
upon revising, would have done himself.

If Mr. Sands had been of this Opinion, perhaps other Translations of the
Metamorphoses had not been attempted.

A Critic has observed, that in his Version of this Book, he has scrupulously
confined the Number of his Lines to those of the Original. It Is fit I should
take the Sum upon Content, and be better bred, than to count after him.

The Manner that seems most suited for this present Undertaking, is neither to
follow the Author too close out of a Critical Timorousness; nor abandon him too
wantonly through a Poetic Boldness. The Original should always be kept in
View, without too apparent a Deviation from the Sense. Where it is otherwise;
it is not a Version, but an Imitation. The Translator ought to be as intent to
keep up the Gracefulness of the Poem, as artful to hide its Imperfections; to
copy its Beauties, and to throw a Shade over its Blemishes; to be faithful to
an Idolatry, where the Author excells; and to take the License of a little
Paraphrase; where Penury of Fancy, or Dryness of Expression seem to ask for it.

The Ingenious Gentlemen concerned in this Undertaking seem to be of this
Opinion; and therefore they have not only consulted the Reputation of the
Author, but their own also. There is one of them has no other Share in this
Compliment, than by being the Occasion of engaging them that have, in obliging
the Public. He has also so just to the Memory, and Reputation of Mr. Dryden,
as to give his incomparable Lines the Advantage of appearing so near his Own.

I cannot pass by that Admirable English Poet, without endeavoring to make his
Country sensible of the Obligations they have to his Muse. Whether they
consider the flowing Grace of his Versification; the vigorous Sallies of his
Fancy; or the peculiar Delicacy of his Periods; they will discover Excellencies
never to be enough admired. If they trace him from the first Productions of his
Youth, to the last Performances of his Age, they will find, that as the Tyranny
of Rhyme never imposed on the Perspicuity of the Sense; so a languid Sense
never wanted to be set off by the Harmony of Rhyme. And as his earlier Works
wanted no Maturity; so his latter wanted no Force, or Spirit. The falling off
of his Hair, had no other Consequence, than to make his Laurels be seen the
more.

As a Translator he was just; as an Inventer he was rich. His Versions of some
parts of Lucretius, Horace, Homer, and Virgil throughout, gave him a just
pretense to that Compliment which was made to Monsieur d'Ablancourt, a
celebrated French Translater; It is uncertain who have the greatest Obligations
to Him, the Dead or the Living.

With all these wondrous Talents, He was Libelled in his Lifetime by the very
Men, who had no other Excellencies, but as they were his Imitators. Where he
was allowed to have Sentiments superior to all others, they charged him with
Theft: But how did he Steal? no otherwise, than like those, that steal Beggars
Children, only to cloth them the better.

It Is to be lamented, that Gentlemen still continue this unfair Behavior, and
treat one another every Day with most injurious Libels. The Muses should be
Ladies of a chaste and fair Behavior: when they are otherwise, they are
Furies. It Is certain that Parnassus is at best but a barren Mountain, and its
Inhabitants contrive to make it more so by their un-neighbourly Deportment; the
Authors are the only Corporation that endeavor at the Ruin of their own
Society. Every Day may convince them, how much a rich Fool is respected above a
poor Wit. The only Talents in Esteem at present are those of Exchange-Ally; one
Tally is worth a Grove of Bays; and it is of much more Consequence to be well
read in the Tables of Interest, and the Rise and Fall of Stocks, than in the
Revolution of Empires.

Mr. Dryden is still a sad, and shameful Instance of this Truth: The Man, that
could make Kings immortal, and raise triumphant Arches to Heroes, now wants a
poor square Foot of Stone, to show where the Ashes of one of the greatest
Poets, that ever was upon Earth, are deposited.

CONTENTS.
BOOK the FIRST.
By Mr. DRYDEN.
THE Creation of the World. Page 1. The Golden Age. p. 5 The Silver Age. p. 6
The Brazen Age. ibid. The Iron Age. ibid. The Giants War. p. 7 The
Transformation of Daphne into a Laurel. p. 20 The Transformation of Io into a
Heyfar. p. 26 The Eyes of Argus transformed into a Peacock's Train. p. 30 The
Transformation of Syrinx into Reeds. p. 31
BOOK the SECOND.
By Mr. ADDISON.
The Story of Phaeton. p. 37 Phaeton's Sisters transformed into Trees. p. 49
The Transformation of Cycnus into a Swan. p. 51 The Story of Calisto. p. 53 The
Story of Coronis, and Birth of Aesculapius. p. 58 Ocyrrhoe transformed to a
Mare. p. 62 The Transformation of Battus to a Touchstone. p. 64 The Story of
Aglauros, transformed into a Statue. p. 65 Europa's Rape. p. 70
BOOK the THIRD.
By Mr. ADDISON.
The Story of Cadmus. p. 73 The Transformation of Actaeon into a Stag. p. 79
The Birth of Bacchus. p. 83 The Transformation of Tiresias. p. 86 The
Transformation of Echo. p. 87 The Story of Narcissus. p. 89 The Story of
Pentheus. p. 93 The Mariners transformed to Dolphins. p. 95 The Death of
Pentheus. p. 99
BOOK the FOURTH.
The Story of Alcithoue and her Sisters, by Mr. Eusden. p. 101 The Story of
Pyramus and Thisbe, by the same Hand. p. 104 The Story of Leucothoe and the
Sun, by the same Hand. p. 109 The Transformation of Clytie, by the same Hand.
p. 114 The Story of Salmacis and Hermaphroditus, by Mr. Addison. p. 115
Alcithoe and her Sisters transformed to Batts, by Mr. Eusden. p. 119 The
Transformation of Ino and Melicerta to Sea Gods, by the same Hand. p. 120 The
Transformation of the Theban Matrons, by the same Hand. p. 127 Cadmus and his
Queen transformed to Serpents, by the same Hand. p. 128 The Story of Perseus,
by the same Hand. p. 130 Atlas transformed to a Mountain, by the same Hand.
ibid. Andromeda rescued from the Sea Monster, by the same Hand. p. 132 The
Story of Medusa's Head, by the same Hand. p. 137
BOOK the FIFTH.
By ARTHUR MAYNWARING, Esquire
The Story of Perseus continued p. 141 Minerva's Interview with the Muses. p.
153 The Fate of Pyreneus. p. 154 The Story of the Pierides. p. 156 The Song of
the Pierides. p. 157 The Song of the Muses. p. 158 The Rape of Proserpine. p.
160 Cyane dissolves to a Fountain. p. 162 A Boy transformed to an Est. p. 163
The Transformation of Ascalaphus into an Owl. p. 167 The Daughters of Achelous
transformed to Sirens. p. 168 The Story of Arethusa. p. 169 The Transformation
of Lyncus. p. 173 The Pierides transformed to Magpies. p. 174
BOOK the SIXTH.
By Mr. CROXALL.
The Transformation of Arachne into a Spider. p. 175 The Story of Niobe. p. 182
The Transformation of Niobe. p. 189 The Peasants of Lycia transformed to
Froggs. ibid. The Fate of Marsyas. p. 193 The Story of Pelops. ibid. The Story
of Tereus, Procne, and Philomela. p. 194 Boreas in Love. p. 209
BOOK the SEVENTH.
The Story of Medea and Jason, by Mr. Tate. p. 213 The Dragon's Teeth
transformed to Men, by the same Hand. p. 218 Old Aeson restored to Youth, by
the same Hand. p. 221 The Death of Pelias, by the same Hand. p. 227 The Story
of Aegeus, by the same Hand. p. 232 The Story of Ants changed to Men, by Mr.
Stonestreet. p. 238 The Story of Cephalus and Procris, by Mr. Tate. p. 245
BOOK the EIGHTH.
The Story of Nisus and Scylla, by Mr. Croxall. p. 253 The Labyrinth, by the
same Hand. p. 260 The Story of Daedalus and Icarus, by the same Hand. p. 262
The Story of Meleager and Atalanta, by Mr. Dryden. p. 266 The Transformation of
the Naiads, by Mr. Vernon. p. 279 Perimele turned into an Island, by the same
Hand. p. 281 The Story of Baucis and Philemon, by Mr. Dryden. p. 282 The
Changes of Proteus, by Mr. Vernon. p. 289 The Story of Erisichthon, by the same
Hand. ibid. The Description of Famine, by the same Hand. p. 292 The
Transformations of Erisichthon's Daughter, by the same Hand. p. 295
BOOK the NINTH.
The Story of Achelos and Hercules, by Mr. Gay. p. 297 The Death of Nessus the
Centaur, by the same Hand. p. 301 The Death of Hercules, by the same Hand. p.
302 The Transformation of Lychas into a Rock, by the same Hand. p. 305 The
Apotheosis of Hercules, by the same Hand. p. 306 The Transformation of
Galanthis, by the same Hand. p. 308 The Fable of Dryope, by Mr. Pope. p. 310
Iolaus restored to Youth, by Mr. Gay. p. 314 The Prophecy of Themis, by the
same Hand. ibid. The Debate of the Gods, by the same Hand. p. 315 The Passion
of Biblis, by Stephen Harvey, Esquire p. 316 The Fable of Iphis and Ianthe, by Mr.
Dryden. p. 323
BOOK the TENTH.
The Story of Orpheus and Eurydice, by Mr. Congreve. p. 331 The Fable of
Cyparissus, by the same Hand. p. 336 -- Continued Mr. Croxall. p. 338
Hyacinthus transformed into a Flower, by Mr. Ozell. p. 339 The Transformations
of the Cerastae and Propoetides, by the same Hand. p. 341 The Story of
Pigmalion and the Statue, by Mr. Dryden. p. 343 The Story of Cinyras and
Myrrha, by the same Hand. p. 346 The Story of Venus and Adonis, by Mr. Eusden.
p. 358
BOOK the ELEVENTH.
The Death of Orpheus, by Mr. Croxall. p. 371 The Thracian Women transformed to
Trees, by the same Hand. p. 374 The Fable of Midas, by the same Hand. p. 375
The Building of Troy, by the same Hand. p. 381 The Story of Thetis and Peleus,
etc. by the same Hand. p. 382 The Transformation of Daedalion, by the same
Hand. p. 384 A Wolf turned into Marble, by the same Hand. p. 387 The Story of
Ceyx and Alcyone, by Mr. Dryden. p. 389 The House of Sleep, by the same Hand.
p. 398 Aesacus transformed into a Cormorant, by the same Hand. p. 405
BOOK the TWELFTH.
By Mr. DRYDEN.
The Trojan War. p. 407 The House of Fame. p. 409 The Story of Cygnus. p. 410
The Story of Caeneus. p. 415 The Skirmish between the Centaurs and Lapithites.
p. 416 The Story of Cyllarus and Hilonome. p. 424 Caeneus transformed to an
Eagle. p. 427 The Fate of Periclymenos. p. 430 The Death of Achilles. p. 432
BOOK the THIRTEENTH.
The Speeches of Ajax and Ulysses, by Mr. Dryden. p. 435 The Death of Ajax, by
the same Hand. p. 454 The Story of Polyxena and Hecuba, by Mr. Temple Stanyan.
ibid. The Funeral of Memnon, by Mr. Croxall. p. 462 The Voyage of Aeneas, by
Mr. Catcott. p. 464 The Story of Acis, Polyphemus and Galatea, by Mr. Dryden.
p. 470 The Story of Glaucus and Scylla, by Mr. Row. p. 477
BOOK the FOURTEENTH.
By Sir SAMUEL GARTH, M. D.
The Transformation of Scylla. p. 481 The Voyage of Aeneas continued. p. 483
The Transformation of Cercopians into Apes. p. 484 Aeneas descends to Hell.
ibid. The Story of the Sibyll. p. 485 The Adventures of Achaemenides. p. 486
The Adventures of Macareus. p. 487 The Enchantments of Circe. p. 488 The Story
of Picus and Canens. p. 489 Aeneas arrives in Italy. p. 493 The Adventures of
Diomedes. p. 494 The Transformation of Appulus. p. 496 The Trojan Ships
transformed to Sea Nymphs. ibid. The Deification of Aeneas. p. 498 The Line of
the Latian Kings. p. 499 The Story of Vertumnus and Pomona. p. 500 The Story of
Iphis and Anaxarete. p. 504 The Latian Line continued. p. 504 The Assumption of
Romulus. p. 505 The Assumption of Hersilia. p. 506
BOOK the FIFTEENTH.
The Pythagorean Philosophy, by Mr. Dryden. p. 509 The Story of Hippolytus, by
Mr. Catcott. p. 532 The Story of Cippus, by Sir Samuel Garth. p. 535 The
Occasion of Aesculapius being brought to Rome, by Mr. Welsted. p. 537 The
Deification of Julius Caesar, by the same Hand. p. 542 The Reign of Augustus,
in which Ovid flourished, by the same Hand. p. 547 The Poet concludes, by the
same Hand. p. 548
To Her Grace the Duchess of Kingston.
(...) Du Guernier Sculp.

OVID's METAMORPHOSES. BOOK I.
Translated by Mr. JOHN DRYDEN.
OF Bodies changed to various Forms I sing:
Ye Gods, from whom these Miracles did spring,
Inspire my Numbers with Celestial Heat;
Till I, my long laborious Work complete:
And add perpetual Tenor to my Rhimes,
Deduced from Nature's Birth, to Caesar's Times.
Before the Seas, and this Terrestrial Ball,
And Heavens high Canopy, that covers all,
One was the Face of Nature; if a Face,
Rather a rude and indigested Mass:
A lifeless Lump, unfashion'd, and unfram'd,
Of jarring Seeds; and justly Chaos named.
No Sun was lighted up, the World to view;
No Moon did yet her blunted Horns renew:
Nor yet was Earth suspended in the Sky;
Nor poised, did on her own Foundations lie:
Nor Seas about the Shoars their Arms had thrown;
But Earth and Air and Water were in one.
Thus Air was void of Light, and Earth unstable,
And Waters dark Abyss unnavigable.
No certain Form on any was impressed;
All were confused, and each disturbed the rest.
For hot and cold were in one Body fixed;
And soft with hard, and light with heavy mixed.
But God or Nature, while they thus contend,
To these intestine Discords put an end:
Then Earth from Air, and Seas from Earth were driven,
And grosser Air sunk from Aetherial Heaven.
Thus disembroil'd, they take their proper place;
The next of kin, contiguously embrace;
And foes are sunder'd, by a larger space.
The force of Fire ascended first on high,
And took its dwelling in the vaulted Sky:
Then Air succeeds, in Lightness next to Fire;
Whose Atoms from unactive Earth retire.
Earth sinks beneath, and draws a numerous throng
Of pondrous, thick, unwieldy Seeds along.
About her Coasts, unruly Waters roar;
And, rising on a ridge, insult the Shore.
Thus when the God, whatever God was he,
Had formed the whole, and made the parts agree,
That no unequal Portions might be found,
He molded Earth into a spacious Round:
Then with a breath, he gave the Winds to blow;
And bad the congregated Waters flow.
He adds the running Springs, and standing Lakes;
And bounding Banks for winding Rivers makes.
Some part, in Earth are swallowed up, the most
In ample Oceans, disembogu'd, are lost.
He shades the Woods, the Valleys he restrains
With Rocky Mountains, and extends the Plains.
And as five Zones the Aetherial Regions bind,
Five, Correspondent, are to Earth assigned:
The Sun with Rays, directly darting down,
Fires all beneath, and fries the middle Zone:
The two beneath the distant Poles, complain
Of endless Winter, and perpetual Rain.
Betwixt the extremes, two happier Climates hold
The Temper that partakes of Hot and Cold.
The Fields of liquid Air, enclosing all,
Surround the Compass of this Earthly Ball:
The lighter parts lie next the Fires above;
The grosser near the watery Surface move:
Thick Clouds are spread, and Storms engender there,
And Thunder's Voice, which wretched Mortals fear,
And Winds that on their Wings cold Winter bear.
Nor were those blustering Brethren left at large,
On Seas and Shoars, their fury to discharge:
Bound as they are, and circumscribed in place,
They rend the World, resistless, where they pass;
And mighty marks of mischief leave behind;
Such is the Rage of their tempestuous kind.
First Eurus to the rising Morn is sent,
(The Regions of the balmy Continent;)
And Eastern Realms, where early Persians run,
To greet the blessed appearance of the Sun.
Westward, the wanton Zephyr wings his flight;
Pleased with the remnants of departing light:
Fierce Borcas, with his Offspring, issues forth
TO invade the frozen Wagon of the North.
While frowning Auster seeks the Southern Sphere;
And rots, with endless Rain, the unwholsom Year.
High over the Clouds and empty Realms of Wind,
The God a clearer space for Heaven designed;
Where Fields of Light, and liquid Ether flow;
Purged from the pondrous dregs of Earth below.
Scarce had the Power distinguished these, when straight
The Stars, no longer overlaid with weight,
Exert their Heads, from underneath the Mass;
And upward shoot, and kindle as they pass,
And with diffusive Light, adorn their heavenly place.
Then, every void of Nature to supply,
With forms of Gods he fills the vacant Sky:
New Herds of Beasts, he sends the Plains to share:
New Colonies of Birds, to people Air:
And to their Oozy Beds, the finny Fish repair.
A Creature of a more exalted Kind
Was wanting yet, and then was Man designed:
Conscious of Thought, of more capacious Breast,
For Empire formed, and fit to rule the rest:
Whether with particles of heavenly Fire
The God of Nature did his Soul inspire,
Or Earth, but new divided from the Sky,
And, pliant, still, retained the Aetherial Energy:
Which wise Prometheus tempered into paste,
And mixed with living Streams, the Godlike Image cast.
Thus, while the mute Creation downward bend
Their Sight, and to their Earthy Mother tend,
Man looks aloft; and with erected Eyes
Beholds his own hereditary Skies.
From such rude Principles our Form began;
And Earth was Metamorphos'd into Man.
The GOLDEN AGE.
The Golden Age was first; when Man yet New,
No Rule but uncorrupted Reason knew:
And, with a Native bent, did Good pursue.
Unforced by Punishment, un-aw'd by Fear,
His Words were simple, and his Soul sincere:
Needless was written Law, where none oppressed:
The Law of Man was written in his Breast:
No suppliant Crowds before the Judge appeared,
No Court erected yet, nor Cause was heard:
But all was safe, for Conscience was their Guard.
The Mountain-Trees in distant prospect please,
Ever yet the Pine descended to the Seas:
Ever Sails were spread, new Oceans to explore:
And happy Mortals, unconcerned for more,
Confined their Wishes to their Native Shore.
No Walls were yet; nor Fence, nor Mote, nor Mound,
Nor Drum was heard, nor Trumpet's angry sound:
Nor Swords were forged; but void of Care and Crime
The soft Creation slept away their time.
The teeming Earth, yet guiltless of the Plough,
And unprovoked, did fruitful Stores allow:
Content with Food, which Nature freely bred,
On Wildings, and on Strawberries they fed;
Cornels and Bramble-berries gave the rest,
And falling Acorns furnished out a Feast.
The Flowers unsown, in Fields and Meadows reigned:
And Western Winds immortal Spring maintained
In following Years, the bearded Corn ensued,
From Earth unasked, nor was that Earth renewed.
From Veins of Valleys, Milk and Nectar broke;
And Honey sweating through the pores of Oak.
The SILVER AGE.
But when Good Saturn, banished from above,
Was driven to Hell, the World was under Jove.
Succeeding times a Silver Age behold,
Excelling Brass, but more excelled by Gold.
Then Summer, Autumn, Winter did appear:
And Spring was but a Season of the Year.
The Sun his Annual Course obliquely made,
Good days contracted, and enlarged the bad.
Then Air with sultry heats began to glow;
The wings of Winds were clogged with Ice and Snow;
And shivering Mortals, into Houses driven,
Sought shelter from the inclemency of Heaven.
Those Houses, then, were Caves, or homely Sheds;
With twining Oziers fenced; and Moss their Beds.
Then Ploughs, for Seed, the fruitful Furrows broke,
And Oxen labored first, beneath the Yoke.
The BRAZEN AGE.
To this came next in course, the Brazen Age:
A Warlike Offspring, prompt to Bloody Rage,
Not Impious yet --
The IRON AGE.
-- Hard Steel succeeded then:
And stubborn as the Metal, were the Men.
Truth, Modesty, and Shame, the World forsook:
Fraud, Avarice, and Force, their places took.
Then Sails were spread, to every Wind that blew.
Raw were the Sailors, and the Depths were new:
Trees rudely hollowed, did the Waves sustain;
Ever Ships in Triumph plough'd the watery Plain.
Then Landmarks limited to each his Right:
For all before was common, as the Light.
Nor was the Ground alone required to bear
Her annual Income to the crooked Share,
But greedy Mortals, rummaging her Store,
Dug from her Entrails first the precious Oar;
Which next to Hell, the prudent Gods had laid;
And that alluring Ill, to sight displaid.
Thus cursed Steel, and more accursed Gold
Gave mischief Birth, and made that mischief bold;
And double Death did wretched Man invade,
By Steel assaulted, and by Gold betrayed.
Now (brandished Weapons glittering in their Hands)
Mankind is broken loose from moral Bands;
No rights of Hospitality remain:
The Guest by him who harbored him, is slain.
The Son in Law pursues the Father's Life;
The Wife her Husband murders, he the Wife.
The Step-dame Poison for the Son prepares;
The Son inquires into his Father's years.
Faith flies, and Piety in Exile mourns;
And Justice, here oppressed, to Heaven returns.
The GIANTS WAR.
Nor were the Gods themselves more safe above;
Against beleaguered Heaven, the Giants move.
Hills pil'd on Hills, on Mountains, Mountains lie,
To make their mad approaches to the Sky.
Till Jove, no longer patient, took his time
TO avenge with Thunder their audacious Crime;
Red Lightning played along the Firmament,
And their demolished Works to pieces rent.
Singed with the Flames, and with the Bolts transfixt,
With Native Earth, their Blood the Monsters mixed:
The Blood, indu'd with animating heat,
Did in the impregnant Earth new Sons beget:
They, like the Seed from which they sprung, accursed,
Against the Gods immortal Hatred nursed.
An impious, arrogant, and cruel Brood;
Expressing their Original from Blood.
Which when the King of Gods beheld from high,
(Withal revolving in his Memory,
What he himself had found on Earth of late,
Lycaon's Guilt, and his inhumane Treat,)
He sighed; nor longer with his Pity strove;
But kindled to a Wrath becoming Jove:
Then called a General Council of the Gods;
Who Summoned, issue from their Blessed Abodes,
And fill the Assembly with a shining Train.
A way there is, in Heaven's expanded Plain,
Which, when the Skies are clear, is seen below,
And Mortals, by the Name of Milky, know.
The Groundwork is of Stars; through which the Road
Lies open to the Thunderer's Abode:
The Gods of greater Nations dwell around,
And, on the Right and Left, the Palace bound;
The Commons where they can: The Nobler sort
With Winding-doors wide open, front the Court.
This Place, as far as Earth with Heaven may vie,
I dare to call the Loovre of the Sky.
When all were placed, in Seats distinctly known,
And he, their Father, had assumed the Throne,
Upon his Ivory Scepter first he leant,
Then shook his Head, that shook the Firmament:
Air, Earth, and Seas, obeyed the Almighty Nod;
And, with a general Fear, confessed the God.
At length with Indignation, thus he broke
His awful silence, and the Powers bespoke.
I was not more concerned in that debate
Of Empire, when our Universal State
Was put to hazard, and the Giant Race
Our Captive Skies were ready to embrace:
For though the Foe was fierce, the Seeds of all
Rebellion; sprung from one Original;
Now, wheresoever ambient Waters glide,
All are corrupt, and all must be destroyed.
Let me this Holy Protestation make,
By Hell, and Hell's inviolable Lake,
I tried whatever in the Godhead lay:
But gangrened Members must be lopt away,
Before the Nobler Parts are tainted to decay.
There dwells below, a Race of Demigods,
Of Nymphs in Waters, and of Fawns in Woods:
Who, though not worthy yet, in Heaven to live,
Let 'em, at least, enjoy that Earth we give.
Can these be thought securely lodged below,
When I my self, who no Superior know,
I, who have Heaven and Earth at my Command,
Have been attempted by Lycaon's Hand?
At this a Murmur through the Synod went,
And with one Voice they vote his Punishment.
Thus, when conspiring Traitors dared to doom
The fall of Caesar, and in him of Rome,
The Nations trembled with a pious fear;
All anxious for their Earthly Thunderer:
Nor was their Care, O Caesar, less esteemed
By thee, than that of Heaven for Jove was deemed:
Who with his Hand and Voice, did first restrain
Their Murmurs, then resumed his Speech again.
The Gods to silence were composed, and sat
With reverence, due to his Superior State.
Cancel your pious Cares; already he
Has paid his Debt to Justice, and to me.
Yet what his Crimes, and what my Judgments were,
Remains for me thus briefly to declare.
The Clamours of this vile degenerate Age,
The Cries of Orphans, and the Oppressor's Rage
Had reached the Stars: I will descend, said I,
In hope to prove this loud Complaint a Lie.
Disguised in Humane Shape, I traveled round
The World, and more than what I heard, I found.
Over Maenalus I took my steepy way,
By Caverns infamous for Beasts of Prey:
Then crossed Cyllene, and the piny Shade
More infamous, by cursed Lycaon made.
Dark Night had covered Heaven and Earth, before
I entered his Unhospitable Door.
Just at my entrance, I displayed the Sign
That somewhat was approaching of Divine.
The prostrate People pray; the Tyrant grins;
And, adding Profanation to his Sins,
I Will try, said he, and if a God appear,
To prove his Deity shall cost him dear.
It Was late; the graceless Wretch my Death prepares,
When I should soundly sleep, oppressed with Cares:
This dire Experiment he chose, to prove
If I were Mortal, or undoubted Jove:
But first he had resolved to taste my Power;
Not long before, but in a luckless hour
Some Legates, sent from the Molossian State,
Were on a peaceful Errand come to treat:
Of these he murders one, he boils the Flesh;
And lays the mangled Morsels in a Dish:
Some part he roasts; then serves it up, so dressed,
And bids me welcome to this humane Feast.
Moved with disdain, the Table I o'er-turn'd;
And with avenging Flames, the Palace burned.
The Tyrant in a fright, for shelter gains
The neighboring Fields, and scours along the Plains.
Howling he fled, and fain he would have spoke;
But humane Voice his Brutal Tongue forsook.
About his Lips the gathered Foam he churns,
And, breathing slaughters, still with rage he burns,
But on the bleating Flock his fury turns.
His Mantle, now his Hide, with rugged Pairs
Cleaves to his Back; a famished Face he bears;
His Arms descend, his Shoulders sink away
To multiply his Legs for chase of Prey.
He grows a Wolf, his hoariness remains,
And the same Rage in other members reigns.
His Eyes still sparkle in a narr'wer space:
His Jaws retain the grin, and violence of his Face.
This was a single ruin, but not one
Deserves so just a Punishment alone.
Mankind's a Monster, and the Ungodly times
Confed'rate into Guilt, are sworn to Crimes.
All are alike involved in ill, and all
Must by the same relentless Fury fall.
Thus ended he; the greater Gods assent;
By Clamours urging his severe intent;
The less fill up the Cry for Punishment.
Yet still with pity they remember Man;
And mourn as much as heavenly Spirits can.
They ask, when those were lost of humane Birth,
What he would do with all this waste of Earth:
If his dispeopl'd World he would resign
To Beasts, a mute, and more ignoble Line;
Neglected Altars must no longer smoke,
If none were left to worship and invoke.
To whom the Father of the Gods replied,
Lay that unnecessary fear aside:
Mine be the care, new People to provide.
I will from wondrous Principles ordain
A Race unlike the first, and try my Skill again.
Already had he tossed the flaming Brand;
And rolled the Thunder in his spacious Hand;
Preparing to discharge on Seas and Land:
But stopped, for fear, thus violently driven,
The Sparks should catch his Axle-tree of Heaven.
Remembering in the Fates, a time when Fire
Should to the Battlements of Heaven aspire.
And all his blazing Worlds above should burn;
And all the inferior Globe to Cinders turn.
His dire Artill'ry thus dismissed, he bent
His thoughts to some securer Punishment:
Concludes to pour a Watery Deluge down;
And what he durst not burn, resolves to drown.
The Northern Breath, that freezes Floods, he binds;
With all the race of Cloud-dispelling Winds:
The South he loosed, who Night and Horror brings;
And Foggs are shaken from his flaggy Wings.
From his divided Beard two Streams he pours,
His Head and rhumy Eyes distill in Showers.
With Rain his Robe and heavy Mantle flow:
And lazy Mists are lowering on his Brow;
Still as he swept along, with his clench'd Fist
He squeezed the Clouds, the imprisoned Clouds resist:
The Skies from Pole to Pole, with peals resound;
And Showers enlarged, come pouring on the Ground.
Then, clad in Colors of a various Dye,
Junonian Iris breeds a new supply
To feed the Clouds: Impetuous Rain descends;
The bearded Corn beneath the Burden bends:
Defrauded Clowns deplore their perished Grain
And the long Labors of the Year are vain.
Nor from his Patrimonial Heaven alone
Is Jove content to pour his Vengeance down;
Aid from his Brother of the Seas he craves,
To help him with Auxiliary Waves.
The watery Tyrant calls his Brooks and Floods,
Who roll from mossie Caves (their moist abodes;)
And with perpetual Urns his Palace fill:
To whom in brief, he thus imparts his Will.
Small Exhortation needs; your Pow rs employ:
And this bad World, so Jove requires, destroy.
Let loose the Reins to all your watery Store:
Bear down the Damms, and open every door.
The Floods, by Nature Enemies to Land,
And proudly swelling with their new Command,
Remove the living Stones, that stopped their way,
And gushing from their Source, augment the Sea.
Then, with his Mace, their Monarch struck the Ground;
With inward trembling Earth received the Wound:
And rising Streams a ready passage found.
The expanded Waters gather on the Plain:
They float the Fields, and overtop the Grain;
Then rushing onwards, with a sweepy sway,
Bear Flocks and Folds, and laboring Hinds away.
Nor safe their Dwellings were, for, sap'd by Floods,
Their Houses fell upon their Household Gods.
The solid Piles, too strongly built to fall,
High over their Heads, behold a watery Wall:
Now Seas and Earth were in confusion lost;
A World of Waters, and without a Coast.
One climbs a Cliff; one in his Boat is born;
And ploughs above, where late he sowed his Corn.
Others over Chimney-tops and Turrets row,
And drop their Anchors on the Meads below:
Or downward driven, they bruise the tender Vine,
Or tossed aloft, are knocked against a Pine.
And where of late the Kids had cropped the Grass,
The Monsters of the deep now take their place.
Insulting Nereids on the Cities ride,
And wondering Dolphins over the Palace glide.
On leaves and masts of mighty Oaks they brouze;
And their broad Finns entangle in the Boughs.
The frighted Wolf now swims amongst the Sheep;
The yellow Lion wanders in the deep:
His rapid force no longer helps the Boar:
The Stag swims faster, than he ran before.
The Fowls, long beating on their Wings in vain,
Despair of Land, and drop into the Main.
Now Hills and Vales no more distinction know;
And levelled Nature lies oppressed below.
The most of Mortals perish in the Flood:
The small remainder dies for want of Food.
A Mountain of stupendous height there stands
Betwixt the Athenian and Boeotian Lands,
The bound of fruitful Fields, while Fields they were,
But then a Field of Waters did appear:
Parnassus is its name; whose forky rise
Mounts through the Clouds, and mates the lofty Skies.
High on the Summet of this dubious Cliff,
Deucalion wafting, moored his little Skiff.
He with his Wife were only left behind
Of perished Man; they two were human Kind.
The Mountain Nymphs and Themis they adore,
And from her Oracles relief implore.
The most upright of Mortal Men was he;
The most sincere and holy Woman, she.
When Jupiter, surveying Earth from high,
Beheld it in a Lake of Water lie,
That where so many Millions lately lived,
But two, the best of either Sex, survived;
He loosed the Northern Wind; fierce Boreas flies
To puff away the Clouds and purge the Skies:
Serenely, while he blows, the Vapors, driven,
Discover Heav'uto Earth, and Earth to Heaven.
The Billows fall, while Neptune lays his Mace
On the rough Sea, and smooths its furrowed Face.
Already Triton, at his call, appears
Above the Waves; a Tyrian Robe he wears;
And in his hand a crooked Trumpet bears.
The Sovereign bids him peaceful sounds inspire;
And give the Waves the signal to retire.
His writhen Shell he takes; whose narrow vent
Grows by degrees into a large extent,
Then gives it breath; the Blast with doubling sound,
Runs the wide Circuit of the World around:
The Sun first heard it, in his early East,
And met the rattling Eccho's in the West.
The Waters, listening to the Trumpet's roar,
Obey the Summons, and forsake the Shore.
A thin Circumference of Land appears,
And Earth, but not at once, her Visage rears,
And peeps upon the Seas from upper Grounds;
The Streams, but just contained within their bounds,
By slow degrees into their Channels crawl;
And Earth increases, as the Waters fall.
In longer time the tops of Trees appear,
Which Mud on their dishonored Branches bear.
At length the World was all restored to view;
But desolate, and of a sickly hue:
Nature beheld her self, and stood aghast,
A dismal Desert, and a silent Waste.
Which when Deucalton, with a piteous look
Beheld, he wept, and thus to Pyrrha spoke:
Oh Wife, oh Sister, oh of all thy kind.
The best and only Creature left behind,
By Kindred, Love, and now by Dangers joined;
Of Multitudes, who breathed the common Air,
We two remain; a Species in a Pair:
The rest the Seas have swallowed; nor have we
Even of this wretched Life a certainty.
The Clouds are still above; and, while I speak,
A second Deluge over our heads may break.
Should I be snatched from hence, and thou remain,
Without relief, or Partner of thy pain,
How could thou such a wretched Life sustain?
Should I be left, and thou be lost, the Sea
That buried her I loved, should bury me.
Oh could our Father his old Arts inspire,
And make me Heir of his informing Fire,
That so I might abolisht Man retrieve,
And perished People in new Souls might live.
But Heaven is pleased, nor ought we to complain,
That we, the Examples of Mankind, remain.
He said; the careful Couple join their Tears:
And then invoke the Gods, with pious Prayers.
Thus, in Devotion having eased their Grief,
From sacred Oracles they seek Relief;
And to Cephysus Brook their way pursue:
The Stream was troubled, but the Foord they knew;
With living Waters, in the Fountain bred,
They sprinkle first their Garments, and their Head,
Then took the way, which to the Temple led.
The Roofs were all defiled with Moss and Mire,
The desert Altars void of Solemn Fire.
Before the Gradual, prostrate they adored;
The Pavement kissed, and thus the Saint implored.
O Righteous Themis, if the Powers above
By Prayers are bent to pity, and to love;
If humane Miseries can move their Mind;
If yet they can forgive, and yet be kind;
Tell, how we may restore, by second birth,
Mankind, and people desolated Earth.
Then thus the gracious Goddess, nodding, said;
Depart, and with your Vestments veil your head:
And stooping lowly down, with loosened Zones,
Throw each behind your backs, your mighty Mother's Bones.
Amazed the Pair and mute with wonder stand,
Till Pyrrha first refused the dire Command.
Forbid it Heaven, said she, that I should tear
Those Holy Relics from the Sepulcher.
They pondered the mysterious words again,
For some new sense; and long they sought in vain:
At length Deucalion cleared his cloudy brow,
And said, the dark Aenigma will allow
A meaning, which if well I understand,
From Sacrilege will free the God's Command:
This Earth our mighty Mother is, the Stones
In her capacious Body, are her Bones:
These we must cast behind. With hope and fear
The Woman did the new Solution hear:
The Man diffides in his own Augury,
And doubts the Gods; yet both resolve to try.
Descending from the Mount, they first unbind
Their Vests, and veiled, they cast the Stones behind:
The Stones (a Miracle to Mortal View,
But long Tradition makes it pass for true)
Did first the Rigor of their Kind expel,
And suppled into softness, as they fell;
Then swelled, and swelling, by degrees grew warm;
And took the Rudiments of Humane Form.
Imperfect Shapes: in Marble such are seen,
When the rude Chizzel does the Man begin;
While yet the roughness of the Stone remains,
Without the rising Muscles, and the Veins.
The sappy parts, and next resembling juice,
Were turned to moisture, for the Bodies use:
Supplying humors, blood, and nourishment;
The rest, too solid to receive a bent,
Converts to Bones; and what was once a Vein,
Its former Name and Nature did retain.
By help of Power Divine, in little space,
What the Man threw, assumed a Manly Face;
And what the Wife, renewed the Female Race.
Hence we derive our Nature; born to bear
Laborious Life; and hardened into Care.
The rest of Animals, from teeming Earth
Produced, in various forms received their birth.
The native moisture, in its close retreat,
Digested by the Sun's Aetherial Heat,
As in a kindly Womb, began to breed:
Then swelled, and quickened by the vital Seed.
And some in less, and some in longer space,
Were ripened into form, and took a several face.
Thus when the Nile from Pharian Fields is fled,
And seeks, with Ebbing Tides, his Ancient Bed,
The fat Manure with Heavenly Fire is warmed;
And crusted Creatures, as in Wombs, are formed;
These, when they turn the Glebe, the Peasants find;
Some rude and yet unfinished in their kind:
Short of their Limbs, a lame imperfect Birth:
One half alive; and one of lifeless Earth.
For heat and moisture, when in Bodies joined,
The temper that results from either Kind
Conception makes; and fighting till they mix,
Their mingled Atoms in each other fix.
Thus Nature's hand the Genial Bed prepares
With friendly Discord, and with fruitful Wars.
From hence the surface of the Ground with Mud
And Slime besmeared, (the faeces of the Flood)
Received the Rays of Heaven; and sucking in
The Seeds of Heat, new Creatures did begin:
Some were of several sorts produced before,
But of new Monsters, Earth created more.
Unwillingly, but yet she brought to light
Thee, Python too, the wondering World to fright,
And the new Nations, with so dire a sight:
So monstrous was his bulk, so large a space
Did his vast Body, and long Train embrace.
Whom Phoebus basking on a Bank espied;
Ever now the God his Arrows had not tried
But on the trembling Deer, or Mountain Goat;
At this new Quarry he prepares to shoot.
Though every Shaft took place, he spent the Store
Of his full Quiver; and 'twas long before
The expiring Serpent wallow'd in his Gore.
Then, to preserve the Fame of such a deed,
(...) Python slain, he Pythian Games decreed.
Where Noble Youths for Mastership should strive,
To Quoit, to Run, and Steeds and Chariots drive.
The Prize was Fame: In witness of Renown
An Oaken Garland did the Victor crown.
The Laurel was not yet for Triumphs born;
But every Green alike by Phoebus worn,
Did, with promiscuous Grace, his flowing Locks adorn.
The Transformation of DAPHNE into a Laurel.
The first and fairest of his Loves, was she
Whom not blind Fortune, but the dire decree
Of angry Cupid forced him to desire:
Daphne her Name, and Peneus was her Sire.
Swelled with the Pride, that new Success attends,
He sees the Stripling, while his Bow he bends,
And thus insults him; Thou lascivious Boy,
Are Arms like these for Children to employ?
Know, such Achievements are my proper claim;
Due to my vigor, and unerring aim:
Resistless are my Shafts, and Python late
In such a feathered Death, has found his fate.
Take up thy Torch, (and lay my Weapons by)
With that the feeble Souls of Lovers fry.
To whom the Son of Venus thus replied,
Phoebus, thy Shafts are sure on all beside,
But mine on Phoebus, mine the Fame shall be
Of all thy Conquests, when I conquer thee.
He said, and soaring, swiftly winged his flight:
Nor stopped but on Parnassus airy height.
Two different Shafts he from his Quiver draws;
One to repel Desire, and one to cause.
One Shaft is pointed with refulgent Gold;
To bribe the Love, and make the Lover bold:
One blunt, and tipped with Lead, whose base allay
Provokes Disdain, and drives Desire away.
The blunted Bolt against the Nymph he dressed:
But with the sharp transfixt Apollo's Breast.
The enamored Deity pursues the Chase;
The scornful Damsel shuns his loathed Embrace:
In hunting Beasts of Prey, her Youth employs;
And Phoebe rivals in her rural Joys.
With naked Neck she goes, and Shoulders bare;
And with a Fillet binds her flowing Hair.
By many Suitors sought, she mocks their pains,
And still her vowed Virginity maintains,
Impatient of a Yoke, the name of Bride
She shuns, and hates the Joys she never tried.
On Wilds and Woods she fixes her desire:
Nor knows what Youth and kindly Love inspire.
Her Father chides her often; Thou ow'st, says he,
A Husband to thy self, a Son to me.
She, like a Crime, abhors the Nuptial Bed:
She glows with Blushes, and she hangs her Head.
Then casting round his Neck her tender Arms,
Sooths him with Blandishments, and filial Charms:
Give me, my Lord, she said, to live and die
A spotless Maid, without the Marriage Tie.
It Is but a small Request; I beg no more
Than what Diana's Father gave before.
The good old Sire was softened to consent;
But said her Wish would prove her Punishment:
For so much Youth, and so much Beauty joined,
Opposed the State, which her desires designed.
The God of Light, aspiring to her Bed,
Hopes what he seeks, with flattering Fancies fed;
And is, by his own Oracles, misled.
And as in empty Fields, the Stubble burns,
Or nightly Travelers, when day returns,
Their useless Torches on dry Hedges throw,
That catch the Flames, and kindle all the row;
So burns the God, consuming in desire,
And feeding in his Breast a fruitless Fire:
Her well-turn'd Neck he viewed (her Neck was bare)
And on her Shoulders her disheveled Hair;
Oh were it combed, said he, with what a grace
Would every waving Curl become her Face!
He viewed her Eyes, like Heavenly Lamps that shone,
He viewed her Lips, too sweet to view alone,
Her taper Fingers, and her panting Breast;
He praises all he sees, and for the rest
Believes the Beauties yet unseen are best:
Swift as the Wind, the Damsel fled away,
Nor did for these alluring Speeches stay:
Stay Nymph, he cried, I follow, not a Foe.
Thus from the Lion trips the trembling Do;
Thus from the Wolf the frightened Lamb removes,
And, from pursuing Faulcons, fearful Doves;
Thou shunn'st a God, and shunn'st a God that loves.
Ah, lest some Thorn should pierce thy tender Foot,
Or thou should fall in flying my pursuit!
To sharp uneven Ways thy steps decline;
Abate thy Speed, and I will bate of mine.
Yet think from whom thou do so rashly fly;
Nor basely born, nor Shepherd's Swain am I.
Perhaps thou know not my superior State;
And from that Ignorance proceeds thy Hate.
Me Claros, Delphos, Tenedos obey;
These Hands the Patareian Scepter sway.
The King of Gods begot me: What shall be,
Or is, or ever was, in Fate, I see.
Mine is the invention of the charming Lyre;
Sweet Notes, and Heavenly Numbers I inspire.
Sure is my Bow, unerring is my Dart;
But ah more deadly his, who pierced my Heart.
Medicine is mine; what Herbs and Simples grow
In Fields and Forests, all their powers I know;
And am the great Physician called, below.
Alas that Fields and Forests can afford
No Remedies to heal their Lovesick Lord!
To cure the pains of Love, no Plant avails:
And his own Physic, the Physician fails.
She heard not half; so furiously she flies;
And on her Ear the imperfect Accent dies.
Fear gave her Wings: and as she fled, the Wind
Increasing, spread her flowing Hair behind;
And left her Legs and Thighs exposed to view:
Which made the God more eager to pursue.
The God was young, and was too hotly bent
To lose his time in empty Compliment:
But led by Love, and fired with such a sight,
Impetuously pursued his near delight.
As when the impatient Greyhound slipped from far,
Bounds over the Glebe to course the fearful Hare,
She in her speed does all her safety lay;
And he with double speed pursues the Prey;
O'er-runs her at the sitting turn, and licks
His Chaps in vain, and blows upon the Flix:
She scapes, and for the neighboring Covert strives,
And gaining shelter, doubts if yet she lives:
If little things with great we may compare,
Such was the God, and such the flying Fair.
She urged by Fear, her feet did swiftly move,
But he more swiftly, who was urged by Love.
He gathers ground upon her in the chase:
Now breaths upon her Hair, with nearer pace;
And just is fast'ning on the wished Embrace.
The Nymph grew pale, and in a mortal fright,
Spent with the labor of so long a flight;
And now despairing, cast a mournful Look
Upon the Streams of her Paternal Brook:
Oh help, she cried, in this extremest need,
If Water Gods are Deities indeed:
Gape Earth, and this unhappy Wretch intomb;
Or change my form, whence all my sorrows come.
Scarce had she finished, when her Feet she found
Benumbed with cold, and fastened to the Ground:
A filmy Rind about her Body grows;
Her Hair to Leaves, her Arms extend to Boughs:
The Nymph is all into a Laurel gone:
The smoothness of her Skin remains alone.
Yet Phoebus loves her still, and casting round
Her Bole, his Arms, some little warmth he found
The Tree still panted in the unfinished part:
Not wholly vegetive, and heaved her Heart.
He fixed his Lips upon the trembling Rind;
It swerved aside, and his Embrace declined.
To whom the God, Because thou can not be
My Mistress, I espouse thee for my Tree:
Be thou the prize of Honor and Renown;
The deathless Poet, and the Poem crown.
Thou shall the Roman Festivals adorn,
And, after Poets, be by Victors worn.
Thou shall returning Caesar's Triumph grace;
When Pomps shall in a long Procession pass.
Wreathed on the Posts before his Palace wait;
And be the sacred Guardian of the Gate.
Secure from Thunder, and unharm'd by Jove,
Unfading as the immortal Powers above:
And as the locks of Phoebus are unshorn,
So shall perpetual Green thy Boughs adorn.
The grateful Tree was pleased with what he said;
And shook the shady Honors of her Head.
The Transformation of IO into a Heyfar.
An ancient Forest in Thessalia grows;
Which Tempe's pleasing Valley does enclose:
Through this the rapid Peneus takes his course;
From Pindus rolling with impetuous force;
Mists from the Rivers mighty fall arise;
And deadly damps enclose the cloudy Skies:
Perpetual Fogs are hanging over the Wood;
And sounds of Waters deaf the Neighborhood.
Deep, in a Rocky Cave, he makes abode:
(A Mansion proper for a mourning God.)
Here he gives Audience; issuing out Decrees
To Rivers, his dependant Deities.
On this occasion hither they resort;
To pay their homage and to make their Court.
All doubtful, whether to congratulate
His Daughter's Honor, or lament her Fate.
Sperchaeus, crowned with Poplar, first appears;
Then old Apidanus came crowned with Years:
Enipeus turbulent, Amphrysos tame;
And Aeas last with lagging Waters came.
Then, of his Kindred Brooks, a numerous throng
Condole his loss, and bring their Urns along.
Not one was wanting of the watery Train,
That filled his Flood, or mingled with the Main:
But Inachus, who in his Cave, alone,
Wept not another's Losses, but his own.
For his dear Io, whether strayed or dead,
To him uncertain, doubtful Tears he shed.
He sought her through the World; but sought in vain;
And no where finding, rather feared her slain.
Her, just returning from her Father's Brook,
Jove had beheld, with a desiring look:
And, Oh fair Daughter of the Flood, he said,
Worthy alone of Jove's Imperial Bed,
Happy whoever shall those Charms possess;
The King of Gods (nor is thy Lover less)
Invites thee to yon cooler Shades; to shun
The scorching Rays of the Meridian Sun.
Nor shall thou tempt the dangers of the Grove
Alone, without a Guide; thy Guide is Jove.
No puny Power, but he whose high Command
Is unconfined, who rules the Seas and Land;
And tempers Thunder in his awful hand.
Oh fly not: For she fled from his Embrace
Over Lerna's Pastures: he pursued the Chase
Along the Shades of the Lyrcaean Plain;
At length the God, who never asks in vain,
Involved with Vapors, imitating Night,
Both Air and Earth; and then suppressed her flight,
And mingling Force with Love, enjoyed the full delight.
Mean time the jealous Juno, from on high,
Surveyed the fruitful Fields of Arcady:
And wondered that the Mist should overrun
The face of Daylight, and obscure the Sun.
No Natural Cause she found, from Brooks, or Bogs,
Or marshy Lowlands, to produce the Fogs:
Then round the Skies she sought for Jupiter;
Her faithless Husband; but no Jove was there:
Suspecting now the worst, Or I, she said,
Am much mistaken, or am much betrayed.
With fury she precipitates her flight:
Dispels the shadows of dissembled Night;
And to the Day restores his native Light.
The Almighty Leacher, careful to prevent
The consequence, foreseeing her descent,
Transforms his Mistress in a trice; and now
In Io's place appears a lovely Cow.
So sleek her Skin, so faultless was her Make,
Even Juno did unwilling pleasure take
To see so fair a Rival of her Love;
And what she was, and whence, inquired of Jove:
Of what fair Herd, and from what Pedigree?
The God, half caught, was forced upon a lie:
And said she sprung from Earth. She took the word,
And begged the beauteous Heyfar of her Lord.
What should he do? 'twas equal shame to Jove
Or to relinquish, or betray his Love:
Yet to refuse so slight a Gift, would be
But more to increase his Consort's Jealousy:
Thus fear and love, by turns, his heart assailed;
And stronger love had sure, at length, prevailed:
But some faint hope remained, his jealous Queen
Had not the Mistress through the Heyfar seen.
The cautious Goddess, of her Gift possessed,
Yet harbored anxious thoughts within her Breast;
As she who knew the falsehood of her Jove;
And justly feared some new relapse of Love.
Which to prevent, and to secure her care,
To trusty Argus she commits the fair.
The head of Argus (as with Stars the Skies)
Was compassed round, and wore an hundred Eyes.
But two by turns their Lids in Slumber steep;
The rest on duty still their station keep;
Nor could the total Constellation sleep.
Thus, ever present, to his Eyes and Mind,
His Charge was still before him, though behind.
In Fields he suffered her to feed by Day,
But when the setting Sun to Night gave way,
The Captive Cow he summoned with a call;
And drove her back, and tied her to the Stall.
On Leaves of Trees and bitter Herbs she fed,
Heaven was her Canopy, bare Earth her Bed:
So hardly lodged, and to digest her Food,
She drank from troubled Streams, defiled with Mud.
Her woeful Story fain she would have told,
With hands upheld, but had no hands to hold.
Her Head to her ungentle Keeper bowed,
She strove to speak, she spoke not, but she lowed:
Affrighted with the Noise, she looked around,
And seemed to inquire the Author of the Sound.
Once on the Banks where often she had played,
(Her Father's Banks) she came, and there surveyed
Her altered Visage, and her branching Head;
And starting, from her self she would have fled.
Her fellow Nymphs, familiar to her Eyes,
Beheld, but knew her not in this disguise.
Even Inachus himself was ignorant;
And in his Daughter, did his Daughter want.
She followed where her Fellows went, as she
Were still a Partner of the Company:
They stroke her Neck, the gentle Heyfar stands,
And her Neck offers to their stroaking Hands.
Her Father gave her Grass; the Grass she took;
And licked his Palms, and cast a piteous Look;
And in the language of her Eyes, she spoke.
She would have told her Name, and asked relief,
But wanting Words, in Tears she tells her Grief.
Which, with her Foot she makes him understand;
And prints the name of Io in the Sand.
Ah wretched me, her mournful Father cried,
She, with a sigh, to wretched me replied;
About her Milk-white Neck, his Arms he threw;
And wept, and then these tender Words ensue.
And art thou she, whom I have sought around
The World, and have at length so sadly found?
So found is worse than lost: with mutual Words
Thou answer'st not, no Voice thy Tongue affords:
But Sighs are deeply drawn from out thy Breast;
And Speech denied, by Lowing is expressed.
Unknowing I, prepared thy Bridal Bed;
With empty hopes of happy Issue fed.
But now the Husband of a Herd must be
Thy Mate, and bell'wing Sons thy Progeny.
Oh, were I mortal, Death might bring relief:
But now my Godhead but extends my Grief:
Prolongs my Woes, of which no end I see,
And makes me curse my Immortality!
More had he said, but fearful of her stay,
The Starry Guardian drove his Charge away,
To some fresh Pasture; on a hilly height
He sat himself, and kept her still in sight.
The Eyes of ARGUS Transformed into a Peacock's Train.
Now Jove no longer could her sufferings bear;
But called in haste his airy Messenger,
The Son of Maia, with severe decree
To kill the Keeper, and to set her free.
With all his Harness soon the God was sped,
His flying Hat was fastened on his Head,
Wings on his Heels were hung, and in his Hand
He holds the Virtue of the Snaky Wand.
The liquid Air his moving Pinions wound,
And, in the moment, shoot him on the Ground.
Before he came in sight, the crafty God
His Wings dismissed, but still retained his Rod:
That Sleep-procuring Wand wise Hermes took,
But made it seem to sight a Shepherd's Hook.
With this, he did a Herd of Goats control;
Which by the way he met, and slily stole.
Clad like a Country Swain, he Pip'd and Sung;
And playing drove his jolly Troop along.
With pleasure, Argus the Musician heeds;
But wonders much at those new vocal Reeds.
And whosoe'er thou art, my Friend, said he,
Up hither drive thy Goats, and play by me:
This Hill has Browz for them, and Shade for thee.
The God, who was with case induced to climb,
Began Discourse to pass away the time;
And still betwixt, his Tuneful Pipe he plyes;
And watched his Hour, to close the Keeper's Eyes.
With much ado, he partly kept awake;
Not suffering all his Eyes Repose to take:
And asked the Stranger, who did Reeds invent,
And whence began so rare an Instrument?
The Transformation of SYRINX into Reeds.
Then Hermes thus; A Nymph of late there was,
Whose Heavenly Form her Follows did surpass.
The Pride and Joy of fair Arcadia's Plains,
Beloved by Deities, adored by Swains:
Syrinx her Name, by Sylvans often pursued,
As often she did the Lustful Gods delude:
The Rural, and the Woodland Powers disdained;
With Cynthia hunted, and her Rites maintained:
Like Phoebe clad, even Phoebe's self she seems,
So Tall, so Straight, such well-proportion'd Limbs:
The nicest Eye did no distinction know,
But that the Goddess bore a Golden Bow,
Distinguished thus, the sight she cheated too.
Descending from Lycaeus, Pan admires
The matchless Nymph, and burns with new Desires.
A Crown of Pine upon his Head he wore;
And thus began her Pity to implore.
But ever he thus began, she took her flight
So swift, she was already out of sight.
Nor stayed to hear the Courtship of the God;
But bent her course to Ladon's gentle Flood:
There by the River stopped, and tired before;
Relief from Water Nymphs her Prayers implore.
Now while the Lustful God, with speedy pace,
Just thought to strain her in a strict Embrace,
He filled his Arms with Reeds, new rising on the place.
And while he sighs, his ill success to find,
The tender Canes were shaken by the Wind;
And breathed a mournful Air, unheard before;
That much surprising Pan, yet pleased him more.
Admiring this new Music, Thou, he said,
Who can not be the Partner of my Bed,
At least shall be the Consort of my Mind:
And often, often to my Lips be joined.
He formed the Reeds, proportioned as they are,
Unequal in their length, and waxed with Care,
They still retain the Name of his Ungrateful Fair.
While Hermes pip'd and sung, and told his Tale,
The Keeper's winking Eyes began to fail,
And drowsy Slumber on the Lids to creep;
Till all the Watchman was, at length, asleep.
Then soon the God his Voice and Song suppressed;
And with his powerful Rod confirmed his Rest:
Without delay his crooked Faulchion drew,
And at one fatal stroke the Keeper slew.
Down from the Rock fell the dissever'd Head,
Opening its Eyes in Death; and falling, bled;
And marked the passage with a Crimson trail:
Thus Argus lies in pieces cold and pale;
And all his hundred Eyes, with all their light,
Are closed at once, in one perpetual Night.
These Juno takes, that they no more may fail,
And spreads them in her Peacock's gaudy Tail.
Impatient to revenge her injured Bed,
She wreaks her Anger on her Rival's head;
With Furies frights her from her Native Home;
And drives her gadding, round the World to roam
Nor ceased her Madness and her Flight, before
She touched the limits of the Pharian Shore.
At length, arriving on the Banks of Nile,
Wearied with length of ways, and worn with toil,
She laid her down; and leaning on her Knees,
Invoked the Cause of all her Miseries:
And cast her languishing regards above,
For help from Heaven and her ungrateful Jove.
She sighed, she wept, she lowed, 'twas all she could
And with Unkindness seemed to tax the God
Last, with an humble Prayer, she begged Repose,
Or Death at least, to finish all her Woes.
Jove heard her Vows, and with a flattering look,
In her behalf, to jealous Juno spoke.
He cast his Arms about her Neck, and said,
Dame, rest secure; no more thy Nuptial Bed
This Nymph shall violate; by Styx I swear,
And every Oath that binds the Thunderer.
The Goddess was appeased; and at the word
Was Io to her former Shape restored.
The rugged Hair began to fall away;
The sweetness of her Eyes did only stay,
Though not so large: her crooked Horns decrease;
The Wideness of her Jaws and Nostrils cease:
Her Hoofs to Hands return, in little space:
The five long taper Fingers take their place.
And nothing of the Heyfar now is seen,
Beside the native whiteness of the Skin.
Erected on her Feet she walks again;
And Two the duty of the Four sustain.
She tries her Tongue; her Silence softly breaks,
And fears her former Lowings when she speaks:
A Goddess now, through all the Egyptian State:
And served by Priests, who in white Linen wait.
Her Son was Epaphus, at length believed
The Son of Jove, and as a God received;
With Sacrifice adored, and public Prayers,
He common Temples with his Mother shares.
Equal in Years and Rival in Renown
With Epaphus, the youthful Phaeton
Like Honor claims; and boasts his Sire the Sun.
His haughty Looks, and his assuming Air,
The Son of Isis could no longer bear:
Thou take thy Mother's word too far, said he,
And have usurped thy boasted Pedigree.
Go, base Pretender to a borrowed Name.
Thus taxed, he blushed with Anger, and with Shame;
But Shame repressed his Rage: The daunted Youth
Soon seeks his Mother, and enquires the truth:
Mother, said he, this Infamy was thrown
By Epaphus on you, and me your Son.
He spoke in public, told it to my Face;
Nor durst I vindicate the dire Disgrace:
Even I, the bold, the sensible of Wrong,
Restrained by Shame, was forced to hold my Tongue.
To hear an open Slander, is a Curse:
But not to find an Answer, is a worse.
If I am Heav'n-begot, assert your Son
By some sure Sign; and make my Father known,
To right my Honor, and redeem your own.
He said, and saying cast his Arms about
Her Neck, and begged her to resolve the Doubt.
It Is hard to judge if Clymene were moved
More by his Prayer, whom she so dearly loved,
Or more with Fury fired, to find her Name
Traduced, and made the sport of common Fame.
She stretched her Arms to Heaven, and fixed her Eyes
On that fair Planet, that adorns the Skies;
Now by those Beams, said she, whose holy Fires
Consume my Breast, and kindle my Desires;
By him, who sees us both, and chears our sight,
By him the public Minister of Light,
I swear that Sun begot thee; if I lie,
Let him his cheerful Influence deny:
Let him no more this perjured Creature see;
And shine on all the World, but only me.
If still you doubt your Mother's Innocence,
His Eastern Mansion is not far from hence;
With little pains you to his Leve go,
And from himself your Parentage may know.
With joy the ambitious Youth his Mother heard
And eager, for the Journey soon prepared.
He longs the World beneath him to survey;
To guide the Chariot; and to give the Day.
From Meroe's burning Sands he bends his Course,
Nor less in India feels his Father's force:
His Travel urging, till he came in sight;
And saw the Palace by the Purple Light.
The End of the First Book.
To Her Grace the Duchess of Roxbu^

OVID's METAMORPHOSES. BOOK II.
Translated by Mr. ADDISON.
The Story of PHAETON.
THE Sun's bright Palace, on high Columns raised,
With burnished Gold and flaming Jewels blazed;
The Folding-Gates diffused a Silver Light,
And with a milder Gleam refreshed the Sight;
Of polished Ivory was the Covering wrought:
The Matter vied not with the Sculptor's Thought,
For in the Portal was displayed on high
(The Work of Vulcan) a fictitious Sky;
A waving Sea the inferior Earth embraced,
And Gods and Goddesses the Waters graced.
Aegeon here a mighty Whale bestrode;
Triton, and Proteus (the deceiving God)
With Doris here were carved, and all her Train,
Some loosely swimming in the figured Main,
While some on Rocks their dropping Hair divide,
And some on Fishes through the Waters glide:
Though various Features did the Sisters grace,
A Sister's Likeness was in every Face.
On Earth a different Landscape courts the Eyes,
Men, Towns, and Beasts in distant Prospects rise,
And Nymphs, and Streams, and Woods, and rural Deities.
Over all, the Heavens refulgent Image shines;
On either Gate were six engraven Signs.
Here Phaeton, still gaining on the Ascent,
To his suspected Father's Palace went,
Till pressing forward through the bright Abode,
He saw at Distance the illustrious God:
He saw at Distance, or the dazzling Light
Had flashed too strongly on his aching Sight.
The God sits high, exalted on a Throne
Of blazing Gems, with Purple Garments on;
The Hours, in order ranged on either Hand,
And Days, and Months, and Years, and Ages stand.
Here Spring appears with flowery Chaplets bound;
Here Summer in her wheaten Garland crowned;
Here Autumn the rich trodden Grapes besmear;
And hoary Winter shivers in the Rear.
Phoebus beheld the Youth from off his Throne;
That Eye, which looks on All, was fixed in One.
He saw the Boy's Confusion in his Face,
Surpised at all the Wonders of the Place;
And cries aloud, " What wants my Son? for know
" My Son thou art, and I must call thee so.
" Light of the World, the trembling Youth replies,
" Illustrious Parent! since you don't despise
" The Parent's Name, some certain Token give,
" That I may Clymene's proud Boast believe,
" Nor longer under false Reproaches grieve.
The tender Sire was touched with what he said,
And flung the Blaze of Glories from his Head,
And bid the Youth advance: " My Son, said he,
" Come to thy Father's Arms! for Clymene
" Has told thee true; a Parent's Name I own,
" And deem thee worthy to be called my Son.
" As a sure Proof, make some Request, and I,
" Whatever it be, with that Request comply;
" By Styx I swear, whose Waves are hid in Night,
" And roll impervious to My piercing Sight.
The Youth transported, asks, without Delay,
To guide the Sun's bright Chariot for a Day.
The God repented of the Oath he took,
For Anguish thrice his radiant Head he shook;
" My Son, says he, some other Proof require,
" Rash was my Promise, rash is thy Desire.
" I Would fain deny this Wish which thou have made,
" Or, what I cannot deny, would fain dissuade.
" Too vast and hazardous the Task appears,
" Nor suited to thy Strength, nor to thy Years.
" Thy Lot is Mortal, but thy Wishes fly
" Beyond the Province of Mortality:
" There is not one of all the Gods that dares
" (However skilled in other great Affairs)
" To mount the burning Axle-tree, but I;
" Not Jove himself, the Ruler of the Sky,
" That hurles the three-fork'd Thunder from above,
" Dares try his Strength; yet who so strong as Jove?
" The Steeds climb up the first Ascent with Pain,
" And when the middle Firmament they gain,
" If downward from the Heavens my Head I bow,
" And see the Earth and Ocean hang below,
"Even I am seized with Horror and Affright,
" And my own Heart misgives me at the Sight.
" A mighty Downfall steeps the Evening Stage,
" And steady Reins must curb the Horses Rage.
" Tethys her self has feared to see me driven
" Down headlong from the Precipice of Heaven.
" Besides, consider what impetuous Force
" Turns Stars and Planets in a different Course.
" I steer against their Motions; nor am I
" Born back by all the Current of the Sky.
" But how could you resist the Orbs that roll
" In adverse Whirls, and stem the rapid Pole?
" But you perhaps may hope for pleasing Woods,
" And stately Domes, and Cities filled with Gods;
" While through a thousand Snares your Progress lies,
" Where Forms of starry Monsters stock the Skies:
" For, should you hit the doubtful Way aright,
" The Bull with stooping Horns stands Opposite;
" Next him the bright Haemonian Bow is strung,
" And next, the Lion's grinning Visage hung:
" The Scorpion's Claws here clasp a wide Extent,
" And here the Crab's in lesser Clasps are bent.
" Nor would you find it easy to compose
" The mettled Steeds, when from their Nostrils flows
" The scorching Fire, that in their Entrails glows.
" Even I their headstrong Fury scarce restrain,
" When they grow warm and restif to the Rein.
" Let not my Son a fatal Gift require,
" But, O! in time, recall your rash Desire;
" You ask a Gift that may your Parent tell,
" Let these my Fears your Parentage reveal;
"And learn a Father from a Father's Care:
" Look on my Face; or if my Heart lay bare,
" Could you but look, you would read the Father there.
" Choose out a Gift from Seas, or Earth, or Skies,
" For open to your Wish all Nature lies,
" Only decline this one unequal Task,
" For it is a Mischief, not a Gift you ask.
" You ask a real Mischief, Phaeton:
" Nay hang not thus about my Neck, my Son:
" I grant your Wish, and Styx has heard my Voice,
" Choose what you will, but make a wiser Choice.
Thus did the God the unwary Youth advise;
But he still longs to travel through the Skies.
When the fond Father (for in vain he pleads)
At length to the Vulcanian Chariot leads.
A Golden Axle did the Work uphold,
Gold was the Beam, the Wheels were orb'd with Gold.
The Spokes in Rows of Silver pleased the Sight,
The Seat with party-colored Gems was bright;
Apollo shined amid the Glare of Light.
The Youth with secret Joy the Work surveys,
When now the Morn disclosed her purple Rays;
The Stars were fled, for Lucifer had chase't
The Stars away, and fled himself at last.
Soon as the Father saw the rosy Morn,
And the Moon shining with a blunter Horn,
He bid the nimble Hours, without Delay,
Bring forth the Steeds; the nimble Hours obey:
From their full Racks the generous Steeds retire,
Dropping ambrosial Foams, and snorting Fire.
Still anxious for his Son, the God of Day,
To make him Proof against the burning Ray,
His Temples with Celestial Ointment wet,
Of sovereign Virtue to repel the Heat;
Then fixed the beamy Circle on his Head,
And fetched a deep foreboding Sigh, and said,
" Take this at least, this last Advice, my Son,
" Keep a stiff Rein, and move but gently on:
" The Coursers of themselves will run too fast,
" Your Art must be to Moderate their Haste.
" Drive 'em not on Directly through the Skies,
" But where the Zodiac's Winding Circle lies,
" Along the midmost Zone; but sally forth
" Nor to the distant South, nor stormy North.
" The Horses Hoofs a beaten Track will show,
" But neither mount too high, nor sink too low.
" That no new Fires, or Heaven, or Earth infest;
" Keep the mid Way, the middle Way is best.
" Nor, where in radiant Folds the Serpent twines,
" Direct your Course, nor where the Altar shines.
" Shun both Extremes; the rest let Fortune guide,
" And better for thee than thy self provide!
" See, while I speak, the Shades disperse away,
" Aurora gives the Promise of a Day;
" I Am called, nor can I make a longer Stay.
" Snatch up the Reins; or still the Attempt forsake,
" And not my Chariot, but my Counsel take,
" While yet securely on the Earth you stand;
" Nor touch the Horses with too rash a Hand.
" Let Me alone to light the World, while You
" Enjoy those Beams which you may safely view.
He spoke in vain; the Youth with active Heat
And sprightly Vigor vaults into the Seat;
And joys to hold the Reins, and fondly gives
Those Thanks his Father with Remorse receives.
Mean while the restless Horses neigh'd aloud,
Breathing out Fire, and pawing where they stood.
Tethys, not knowing what had past, gave way,
And all the Waste of Heaven before 'em lay.
They spring together out, and swiftly bear
The flying Youth through Clouds and yielding Air;
With wingy Speed outstrip the Eastern Wind,
And leave the Breezes of the Morn behind.
The Youth was light, nor could he fill the Seat,
Or poise the Chariot with its wonted Weight:
But as at Sea the unballass'd Vessel rides,
Cast to and fro, the Sport of Winds and Tides;
So in the bounding Chariot tossed on high,
The Youth is hurried headlong through the Sky.
Soon as the Steeds perceive it, they forsake
Their stated Course, and leave the beaten Track.
The Youth was in a Maze, nor did he know
Which way to turn the Reins, or where to go;
Nor would the Horses, had he known, obey.
Then the Sev'n Stars first felt Apollo's Ray,
And wished to dip in the forbidden Sea.
The folded Serpent next the frozen Pole,
Stiff and benumbed before, began to roll,
And raged with inward Heat, and threatened War,
And shot a redder Light from every Star;
Nay, and it is said Boots too, that fain
Thou wou'd'st have fled, though cumber'd with thy Wane.
The unhappy Youth then, bending down his Head,
Saw Earth and Ocean far beneath him spread.
His Color changed, he startled at the Sight,
And his Eyes Darkened by too great a Light.
Now could he wish the fiery Steeds untried,
His Birth obscure, and his Request denied:
Now would he Merops for his Father own,
And quit his boasted Kindred to the Sun.
So fares the Pilot, when his Ship is tossed
In troubled Seas, and all its Steerage lost,
He gives her to the Winds, and in Despair
Seeks his last Refuge in the Gods and Prayer.
What could he do? his Eyes, if backward cast,
Find a long Path he had already past;
If forward, still a longer Path they find:
Both he compares, and measures in his Mind;
And sometimes casts an Eye upon the East,
And sometimes looks on the forbidden West.
The Horses Names he knew not in the Fright,
Nor would he loose the Reins, nor could he hold 'em right.
Now all the Horrors of the Heavens he spies,
And monstrous Shadows of prodigious Size,
That, decked with Stars, lie scattered over the Skies.
There is a Place above, where Scorpio bent
In Tail and Arms surrounds a vast Extent;
In a wide Circuit of the Heavens he shines,
And fills the Space of Two Celestial Signs.
Soon as the Youth beheld him, vexed with Heat,
Brandish his Sting, and in his Poison sweat,
Half dead with sudden Fear he dropped the Reins;
The Horses felt 'em loose upon their Mains,
And, flying out through all the Plains above,
Ran uncontrolled wherever their Fury drove;
Rushed on the Stars, and through a pathless Way
Of unknown Regions hurried on the Day.
And now above, and now below they flew,
And near the Earth the burning Chariot drew.
The Clouds disperse in Fumes, the wondering Moon
Beholds her Brother's Steeds beneath her own;
The Highlands smoke, cleft by the piercing Rays,
Or, clad with Woods, in their own Fuel blaze.
Next over the Plains, where ripened Harvests grow,
The running Conflagration spreads Below.
But these are trivial Ills: whole Cities burn,
And peopled Kingdoms into Ashes turn.
The Mountains kindle as the Car draws near,
Athos and Tmolus red with Fires appear;
Oeagrian Haemus (then a single Name)
And Virgin Helicon increase the Flame;
Taurus and Oete glare amid the Sky,
And Ida, spite of all her Fountains, Dry.
Eryx, and Othrys, and Cithaeron, glow,
And Rhodope, no longer clothed in Snow;
High Pindus, Mimas, and Parnassus, sweat,
And Aetna rages with redoubled Heat.
Even Scythia, through her hoary Regions warmed,
In vain with all her native Frost was armed.
Covered with Flames, the towering Appennine,
And Caucasus, and proud Olympus, shine;
And, where the long-extended Alps aspire,
Now stands a huge continued Range of Fire.
The astonished Youth, wherever his Eyes could turn,
Beheld the Universe around him burn:
The World was in a Blaze; nor could he bear
The sultry Vapors and the scorching Air,
Which from below, as from a Furnace, flowed;
And now the Axle-tree beneath him glowed:
Lost in the whirling Clouds, that round him broke,
And white with Ashes, hovering in the Smoke,
He flew wherever the Horses drove, nor knew
Whither the Horses drove, or where he flew.
'Twas then, they say, the swarthy Moor begun
To change his Hue, and Blacken in the Sun.
Then Libya first, of all her Moisture drained,
Became a barren Waste, a Wild of Sand.
The Water-Nymphs lament their empty Urns,
Baeotia, robbed of Silver Dirce, mourns,
Corinth Pyrene's wasted Spring bewails,
And Argos grieves whilst Amymone fails.
The Floods are drained from every distant Coast,
Even Tanais, though fixed in Ice, was lost.
Enraged Caicus and Lycormas roar,
And Xanthus, fated to be burnt once more.
The famed Maeander, that unwearied strays
Through mazy Windings, smoaks in every Maze.
From his loved Babylon Euphrates flies;
The big-swoln Ganges and the Danube rise
In thick'ning Fumes, and darken half the Skies.
In Flames Ismenos and the Phasis roul'd,
And Tagus floating in his melted Gold.
The Swans, that on Cayster often tried
Their tuneful Songs, now sung their last and died.
The frighted Nile ran off, and under Ground
Concealed his Head, nor can it yet be found:
His sev'n divided Currents all are dry,
And where they roul'd, sev'n Gaping Trenches lie.
No more the Rhine or Rhone their Course maintain,
Nor Tiber, of his promised Empire vain.
The Ground, deep-cleft, admits the dazzling Ray,
And startles Pluto with the Flash of Day.
The Seas shrink in, and to the Sight disclose
Wide naked Plains, where once their Billows rose;
Their Rocks are all discovered, and increase
The Number of the scattered Cyclades.
The Fish in Sholes about the Bottom creep,
Nor longer dares the crooked Dolphin leap:
Gasping for Breath, the unshapen Phocae die,
And on the boiling Wave extended lie.
Nereus, and Doris with her Virgin Train,
Seek out the last Recesses of the Main;
Beneath unfathomable Depths they faint,
And secret in their gloomy Caverns pant.
Stern Neptune thrice above the Waves upheld
His Face, and thrice was by the Flames repelled.
The Earth at length, on every Side embraced
With scalding Seas, that floated round her Waste,
When now she felt the Springs and Rivers come,
And crowd within the Hollow of her Womb,
Up-lifted to the Heavens her blasted Head,
And clapped her Hand upon her Brows, and said;
(But first, impatient of the sultry Heat,
Sunk deeper down, and sought a cooler Seat:)
" If you, great King of Gods, my Death approve,
" And I deserve it, let me die by Jove;
" If I must perish by the Force of Fire,
" Let me transfixed with Thunderbolts expire.
" See, whilst I speak, my Breath the Vapors choke,
(For now her Face lay wrapped in Clouds of Smoke)
" See my singe'd Hair, behold my faded Eye,
" And withered Face, where Heaps of Cinders lie!
" And does the Plow for This my Body tear?
" This the Reward for all the Fruits I bear,
" Tortured with Rakes, and harrass'd all the Year?
" That Herbs for Cattle daily I renew,
" And Food for Man, and Frankincense for You?
"But grant Me guilty; what has Neptune done?
" Why are his Waters boiling in the Sun?
" The wavy Empire, which by Lot was given,
" Why does it waste, and further shrink from Heaven?
" If I nor He your Pity can provoke,
" See your own Heavens, the Heavens begin to smoke!
" Should once the Sparkles catch those bright Abodes,
" Destruction seizes on the Heavens and Gods;
" Atlas becomes unequal to his Freight,
" And almost faints beneath the glowing Weight.
" If Heavn'n, and Earth, and Sea, together burn,
" All must again into their Chaos turn.
" Apply some speedy Cure, prevent our Fate,
" And succor Nature, ever it be too late.
She ceased, for choked with Vapors round her spread,
Down to the deepest Shades she sunk her Head.
Jove called to witness every Power above,
And even the God, whose Son the Chariot drove,
That what he acts he is compelled to do,
Or universal Ruin must ensue.
Strait he ascends the high Ethereal Throne,
From whence he used to dart his Thunder down,
From whence his Showers and Storms he used to pour,
But now could meet with neither Storm nor Shower.
Then, aiming at the Youth, with lifted Hand,
Full at his Head he hurled the forky Brand,
In dreadful Thund'rings. Thus the Almighty Sire
Suppressed the Raging of the Fires with Fire.
At once from Life, and from the Chariot driven,
The ambitious Boy fell Thunderstruck from Heaven.
The Horses started with a sudden Bound,
And flung the Reins and Chariot to the Ground:
The studded Harness from their Necks they broke,
Here fell a Wheel, and here a Silver Spoke,
Here were the Beam and Axle torn away;
And, scattered over the Earth, the shining Fragments lay.
The Breathless Phaeton, with flaming Hair,
Shot from the Chariot, like a falling Star,
That in a Summer's Evening from the Top
Of Heaven drops down, or seems at least to drop;
Till on the Po his Blasted Corpse was hurled,
Far from his Country, in the Western World.
PHAETON's Sisters transformed into Trees.
The Latian Nymphs came round him, and amazed
On the dead Youth, transfixed with Thunder, gazed;
And, whilst yet smoking from the Bolt he lay,
His shattered Body to a Tomb convey,
And over the Tomb an Epitaph devise:
" Here He who drove the Sun's bright Chariot lies;
" His Father's fiery Steeds he could not guide,
" But in the glorious Enterprise he died.
Apollo hid his Face, and pined for Grief,
And, if the Story may deserve Belief,
The Space of One whole Day is said to run,
From Morn to wonted Even, without a Sun:
The burning Ruins, with a fainter Ray,
Supply the Sun, and counterfeit a Day,
A Day, that still did Nature's Face disclose:
This Comfort from the mighty Mischief rose.
But Clymene, enraged with Grief, laments,
And as her Grief inspires, her Passion vents:
Wild for her Son, and frantic in her Woes,
With Hair disheveled, round the World she goes,
To seek wherever his Body might be cast;
Till, on the Borders of the Po, at last
The Name inscribed on the new Tomb appears.
The dear, dear Name she bathes in flowing Tears,
Hangs over the Tomb, unable to depart,
And hugs the Marble to her throbbing Heart.
Her Daughters too lament, and sigh, and mourn,
(A fruitless Tribute to their Brother's Urn)
And beat their naked Bosoms, and complain,
And call aloud for Phaeton in vain:
All the long Night their mournful Watch they keep,
And all the Day stand round the Tomb and weep.
Four times, revolving, the full Moon returned;
So long the Mother and the Daughters mourned:
When now the Eldest, Phaethusa, strove
To rest her weary Limbs, but could not move;
Lampetia would have helped her, but she found
Her self withheld, and rooted to the Ground:
A Third in wild Affliction, as she grieves,
Would rend her Hair, but fills her Hand with Leaves;
One sees her Thighs transformed, Another views
Her Arms shot out, and branching into Boughs.
And now their Legs, and Breasts, and Bodies stood
Crusted with Bark, and hard'ning into Wood;
But still Above were Female Heads displayed,
And Mouths, that called the Mother to their Aid.
What could, alas! the weeping Mother do?
From this to that with eager Haste she flew,
And kissed her Sprouting Daughters as they grew.
She tear's the Bark that to each Body cleaves,
And from their verdant Fingers strips the Leaves:
The Blood came trickling, where she tore away
The Leaves and Bark: The Maids were heard to say,
" Forbear, mistaken Parent, Oh! forbear;
" A wounded Daughter in each Tree you tear;
" Farewell for ever." Here the Bark increased,
Closed on their Faces, and their Words suppressed.
The new-made Trees in Tears of Amber run,
Which, hardened into Value by the Sun,
Distill for ever on the Streams below:
The limpid Streams their radiant Treasure show,
Mixed in the Sand; whence the rich Drops conveyed
Shine in the Dress of the bright Latian Maid.
The Transformation of CYCNUS into a Swan.
Cycnus beheld the Nymphs transformed, allied
To their dead Brother, on the Mortal Side,
In Friendship and Affection nearer bound;
He left the Cities and the Realms he owned,
Through pathless Fields and lonely Shores to range,
And Woods, made Thicker by the Sisters Change*
Whilst here, within the dismal Gloom, alone,
The melancholy Monarch made his Moan,
His Voice was lessened, as he tried to speak,
And issued through a long extended Neck;
His Hair transforms to Down, his Fingers meet
In skinny Films, and shape his oary Feet;
From both his Sides the Wings and Feathers break;
And from his Mouth proceeds a blunted Beak:
All Cycnus now into a Swan was turned,
Who, still remembering how his Kinsman burned,
To solitary Pools and Lakes retires,
And loves the Waters as opposed to Fires.
Meanwhile Apollo in a gloomy Shade
(The native Luster of his Brows decayed)
Indulging Sorrow, sickens at the Sight
Of his own Sunshine, and abhors the Light:
The hidden Griefs, that in his Bosom rise,
Sadden his Looks, and over-cast his Eyes,
As when some dusky Orb obstructs his Ray,
And sullies, in a Dim Eclipse, the Day.
Now secretly with inward Griefs he pined,
Now warm Resentments to his Griefs he joined,
And now renounced his Office to Mankind.
" Ever since the Birth of Time, said he, I Have born
" A long ungrateful Toil without Return;
" Let now some Other manage, if he dare,
" The fiery Steeds, and mount the burning Carr;
" Of, if none else, let Jove his Fortune try,
" And learn to lay his murdering Thunder by;
" Then will he own, perhaps, but own too late,
" My Son deserved not so severe a Fate.
The Gods stand round him, as he mourns, and pray
He would resume the Conduct of the Day,
Nor let the World be lost in endless Night:
Jove too himself, descending from his Height,
Excuses what had happened, and entreats,
Majestically mixing Prayers and Threats.
Prevailed upon at length, again he took
The harnessed Steeds, that still with Horror shook,
And plies 'em with the Lash, and whips 'em on,
And, as he whips, upbraids 'em with his Son.
The Story of CALISTO.
The Day was settled in its Course; and Jove
Walked the wide Circuit of the Heavens above,
To search if any Cracks or Flaws were made;
But all was Safe: The Earth he then surveyed,
And cast an Eye on every different Coast,
And every Land; but on Arcadia most.
Her Fields he clothed, and cheered her blasted Face
With running Fountains, and with springing Grass.
No Tracks of Heavens destructive Fire remain,
The Fields and Woods revive, and Nature smiles again.
But as the God walked to and fro the Earth,
And raised the Plants, and gave the Spring its Birth,
By Chance a fair Arcadian Nymph he viewed,
And felt the lovely Charmer in his Blood.
The Nymph nor Spun, nor dressed with artful Pride,
Her Vest was gathered up, her Hair was tied;
Now in her Hand a slender Spear she bore,
Now a light Quiver on her Shoulders wore;
To chaste Diana from her Youth inclined
The sprightly Warriors of the Wood she joined.
Diana too the gentle Huntress loved,
Nor was there One of all the Nymphs that roved
Over Maenalus, amid the Maiden Throng,
More favored once; but Favor lasts not long.
The Sun now shone in all its Strength, and drove
The heated Virgin panting to a Grove;
The Grove around a grateful Shadow cast:
She dropped her Arrows, and her Bow unbrac'd;
She flung her self on the cool grassy Bed;
And on the painted Quiver raised her Head.
Jove saw the charming Huntress unprepared,
Stretched on the verdant Turf, without a Guard.
" Here I am safe, he cries, from Juno's Eye;
" Or should my jealous Queen the Theft descry,
" Yet would I venture on a Theft like This,
" And stand her Rage for such, for such a Bliss!
Diana's Shape and Habit strait he took,
Softened his Brows, and smoothed his awful Look,
And mildly in a Female Accent spoke.
" How fares my Girl? How went the Morning Chase?
To whom the Virgin, starting from the Grass,
" All-hail, bright Deity, whom I prefer
" To Jove himself, though Jove himself were here.
The God was nearer than she thought, and heard
Well-pleased Himself before Himself preferred.
He then salutes her with a warm Embrace;
And, e're she half had told the Morning Chase,
With Love enflamed, and eager on his Bliss,
Smothered her Words, and stopped her with a Kiss:
His Kisses with unwonted Ardour glowed,
Nor could Diana's Shape conceal the God.
The Virgin did whatever a Virgin could;
(Sure Juno must have pardoned, had she viewed)
With all her Might against his Force she strove;
But how can mortal Maids contend with Jove?
Possessed at length of what his Heart desired,
Back to his Heavens the exulting God retired.
The lovely Huntress, rising from the Grass,
With down-cast Eyes, and with a blushing Face,
By Shame confounded, and by Fear dismayed,
Flew from the Covert of the guilty Shade,
And almost, in the Tumult of her Mind,
Lest her forgotten Bow and Shafts behind.
But now Diana, with a sprightly Train
Of quiver'd Virgins, bounding over the Plain,
Called to the Nymph; the Nymph began to fear
A second Fraud, a Jove disguised in Her,
But, when she saw the Sister Nymphs, suppressed
Her rising Fears, and mingled with the rest.
How in the Look does conscious Guilt appear!
Slowly she moved, and loiter'd in the Rear;
Nor lightly tripp'd, nor by the Goddess ran,
As once she used, the foremost of the Train.
Her Looks were flushed, and sullen was her Mien,
That sure the Virgin Goddess (had she been
Aught but a Virgin) must the Guilt have seen.
It Is said the Nymphs saw all, and guessed aright:
And now the Moon had nine times lost her Light,
When Dian, fainting in the midday Beams,
Found a cool Covert, and refreshing Streams
That in soft Murmurs through the Forest flowed,
And a smooth Bed of shining Gravel showed.
A Covert so obscure, and Streams so clear,
The Goddess praised: " And now no Spies are near,
" Let Us strip, my gentle Maids, and wash, she cries.
Pleased with the Motion, every Maid complies;
Only the blushing Huntress stood confused,
And formed Delays, and her Delays excused;
In vain excused: her Fellows round her pressed,
And the Reluctant Nymph by Force undressed.
The Naked Huntress all her Shame revealed,
In vain her Hands the pregnant Womb concealed;
" Begone! the Goddess cries with stern Disdain,
" Begone! nor dare the hallowed Stream to stain:
She fled, for-ever Banished from the Train.
This Juno heard, who long had watched her Time
To punish the detested Rival's Crime;
The Time was come: for, to enrage her more,
A lovely Boy the teeming Rival bore.
The Goddess cast a furious Look, and cried,
" It is enough! I Am Fully satisfied!
" This Boy shall stand a living Mark, to prove
" My Husband's Baseness and the Strumpet's Love:
" But Vengeance shall Awake: those guilty Charms,
" That drew the Thunderer from Juno's Arms,
" No longer shall their wonted Force retain,
" Nor please the God, nor make the Mortal vain.
This said, her Hand within her Hair she wound,
Swung her to Earth, and dragged her on the Ground:
The prostrate Wretch lifts up her Arms in Prayer;
Her Arms grow shaggy, and deformed with Hair,
Her Nails are sharpened into pointed Claws,
Her Hands bear Half her Weight, and turn to Paws;
Her Lips, that once could tempt a God, begin
To grow distorted in an ugly Grin.
And, lest the supplicating Brute might reach
The Ears of Jove, she was deprived of Speech:
Her surly Voice through a hoarse Passage came
In savage Sounds: her Mind was still the same.
The Furry Monster fixed her Eyes above,
And heaved her new unwieldy Paws to Jove,
And begged his Aid with inward Groans; and though
She could not call him False, she thought him so.
How did she fear to lodge in Woods alone,
And haunt the Fields and Meadows, once her own!
How often would the deep-mouthed Dogs pursue,
Whilst from her Hounds the frighted Huntress flew!
How did she fear her Fellow-Brutes, and shun
The shaggy Bear, though now her self was one!
How from the Sight of rugged Wolves retire,
Although the grim Lycaon was her Sire!
But now her Son had fifteen Summers told,
Fierce at the Chase, and in the Forest Bold;
When, as he beat the Woods in quest of Prey,
He chanced to rouse his Mother where she lay.
She knew her Son, and kept him in her Sight,
And fondly gazed: The Boy was in a Fright,
And aimed a pointed Arrow at her Breast,
And would have slain his Mother in the Beast;
But Jove forbad, and snatched 'em through the Air
In Whirlwinds up to Heaven, and fixed 'em there:
Where the new Constellations nightly rise,
And add a Luster to the Northern Skies.
When Juno saw the Rival in her Height,
Spangled with Stars, and circled round with Light,
She sought Old Ocean in his deep Abodes,
And Tethys; both Revered among the Gods.
They ask what brings her there: " Never ask, says she,
" What brings me here, Heaven is no Place for Me.
" You Will see, when Night has covered all things over,
" Jove's starry Bastard and triumphant Whore
" Usurp the Heavens; You Will see 'em proudly roll
" In their new Orbs, and brighten all the Pole.
" And who shall now on Juno's Altars wait,
" When Those she hates grow Greater by her Hate?
" I on the Nymph a Brutal Form impressed,
" Jove to a Goddess has transformed the Beast;
" This, This was all my weak Revenge could do:
" But let the God his chaste Amors pursue,
"And, as he acted after Io's Rape,
" Restore the Adultress to her former Shape;
" Then may he cast his Juno off, and lead
" The great Lycaon's Offspring to his Bed.
" But you, ye venerable Powers, be kind,
" And, if my Wrongs a due Resentment find,
" Receive not in your Waves their Setting Beams,
" Nor let the glaring Strumpet taint your Streams.
The Goddess ended, and her Wish was given.
Back she returned in Triumph up to Heaven;
Her gaudy Peacocks drew her through the Skies,
Their Tails were Spotted with a thousand Eyes;
The Eyes of Argus on their Tails were ranged,
At the same time the Raven's Color changed.
The Story of CORONIS, and Birth of AESCULAPIUS.
The Raven once in Snowy Plumes was dressed,
White as the whitest Dove's unsullied Breast,
Fair as the Guardian of the Capitol,
Soft as the Swan; a large and lovely Fowl;
His Tongue, his prating Tongue had changed him quite
To sooty Blackness from the purest White.
The Story of his Change shall here be told;
In Thessaly there lived a Nymph of old,
Coronis named; a peerless Maid she hins'd,
Confessed the Fairest of the fairer Kind.
Apollo loved her, till her Guilt he knew,
While true she was, or whilst he thought her true.
But his own Bird the Raven chanced to find
The false one with a secret Rival joined.
Coronis begged him to suppress the Tale,
But could not with repeated Prayers prevail.
His milk-white Pinions to the God he plied;
The busy Daw flew with him, Side by Side,
And by a thousand teizing Questions drew
The important Secret from him as they flew.
The Daw gave honest Counsel, though despised,
And, tedious in her Tattle, thus advised.
" Stay, silly Bird, th'ill-natur'd Task refuse,
" Nor be the Bearer of unwelcome News.
" Be warned by My Example: you discern
" What now I am, and what I was shall learn.
" My foolish Honesty was all my Crime;
" Then hear my Story. Once upon a Time,
" The two-shap'd Ericthonius had his Birth
" (Without a Mother) from the teeming Earth;
" Minerva nursed him, and the Infant laid
" Within a Chest, of twining Osiers made.
" The Daughters of King Cecrops undertook
" To guard the Chest, commanded not to look
" On what was hid within. I stood to see
" The Charge obeyed, perched on a neighboring Tree.
" The Sisters Pandrosos and Hearse keep
" This strict Command; Aglauros needs would Peep,
" And saw the monstrous Infant in a Fright,
" And called her Sisters to the hideous Sight:
" A Boy's soft Shape did to the Waste prevail,
" But the Boy ended in a Dragon's Tail.
" I told the stern Minerva all that passed,
" But for my Pains, discarded and disgraced,
" The frowning Goddess drove me from her Sight,
" And for her Favorite chose the Bird of Night.
" Be then no Tell-Tale; for I think my Wrong
" Enough to teach a Bird to hold her Tongue.
"But you, perhaps, may think I was removed,
" As never by the heavenly Maid beloved:
" But I was loved: ask Pallas if I lie;
" Though Pallas hate me now, she will not deny:
" For I, whom in a feathered Shape you view,
" Was once a Maid (by Heaven the Story's true)
" A blooming Maid, and a King's Daughter too.
" A Crowd of Lovers owned my Beauty's Charms;
" My Beauty was the Cause of all my Harms;
" Neptune, as on his Shores I wont to rove,
" Observed me in my Walks, and fell in Love.
" He made his Courtship, he confessed his Pain,
" And offered Force when all his Arts were vain;
" Swift he pursued: I ran along the Strand,
" Till, spent and wearied on the sinking Sand,
" I shrieked aloud, with Cries I filled the Air
" To Gods and Men; nor God nor Man was there:
" A Virgin Goddess heard a Virgin's Prayer.
" For, as my Arms I lifted to the Skies,
" I saw Black Feathers from my Fingers rise;
" I strove to fling my Garment on the Ground;
" My Garment turned to Plumes, and girt me round:
" My Hands to beat my naked Bosom try;
" Nor naked Bosom now nor Hands had I.
" Lightly I tript, nor weary as before
" Sunk in the Sand, but skim'd along the Shore;
" Till, rising on my Wings, I was preferred
" To be the chaste Minerva's Virgin Bird:
" Preferred in vain! I now am in Disgrace:
" Nyctimene the Owl enjoys my Place.
" On Her incestuous Life I need not dwell,
" (In Lesbos still the horrid Tale they tell)
"And of her dire Amors you must have heard,
" For which she now does Penance in a Bird,
" That, conscious of her Shame, avoids the Light,
" And loves the gloomy Covering of the Night;
" The Birds, wherever she flutters, scare away
" The Hooting wretch, and drive her from the Day.
The Raven, urged by such Impertinence,
Grew Passionate, it seems, and took Offense,
And cursed the harmless Daw; the Daw withdrew:
The Raven to her injured Patron flew,
And found him out, and told the fatal Truth
Of false Coronis and the favored Youth.
The God was wroth; the Color left his Look,
The Wreath his Head, the Harp his Hand forsook:
His Silver Bow and feathered Shafts he took,
And lodged an Arrow in the tender Breast,
That had so often to his own been pressed.
Down fell the wounded Nymph, and sadly groaned,
And pulled his Arrow reeking from the Wound;
And weltring in her Blood, thus faintly cried,
" Ah cruel God! though I have justly died,
" What has, alas! my unborn Infant done,
" That He should fall, and Two expire in One?
This said, in Agonies she fetched her Breath.
The God dissolves in Pity at her Death;
He hates the Bird that made her Falsehood known,
And hates himself for what himself had done;
The feathered Shaft, that sent her to the Fates,
And his own Hand, that sent the Shaft, he hates.
Fain would he heal the Wound, and case her Pain,
And tries the Compass of his Art in vain.
Soon as he saw the lovely Nymph expire,
The Pile made ready, and the kindling Fire,
With Sighs and Groans her Obsequies he kept,
And, if a God could weep, the God had wept.
Her Corpse he kissed, and heavenly Incense brought,
And solemnized the Death Himself had wrought.
But, lest his Offspring should her Fate partake,
Spite of The Immortal Mixture in his Make,
He ripped her Womb, and set the Child at large,
And gave him to the Centaur Chiron's Charge:
Then in his Fury Black'd the Raven over,
And bid him Prate in his White plumes no more.
OCYRRHOE transformed to a Mare.
Old Chiron took the Babe with secret Joy,
Proud of the Charge of the Celestial Boy.
His Daughter too, whom on the sandy Shore
The Nymph Chariclo to the Centaur bore,
With Hair disheveled on her Shoulders came
To see the Child, Ocyrrhoe was her Name;
She knew her Father's Arts, and could rehearse
The Depths of Prophecy in sounding Verse.
Once, as the sacred Infant she surveyed,
The God was kindled in the raving Maid,
And thus she uttered her Prophetic Tale;
" Hail, great Physician of the World, All-hail;
" Hail, mighty Infant, who in Years to come,
" Shall heal the Nations, and defraud the Tomb;
" Swift be thy Growth! thy Triumphs unconfined!
" Make Kingdoms thicker, and increase Mankind.
" Thy daring Art shall animate the Dead,
" And draw the Thunder on thy guilty Head:
"Then shall thou dye, but from the dark Abode
" Rise up Victorious, and be Twice a God.
" And Thou, my Sire, not destined by thy Birth
" To turn to Dust, and mix with common Earth,
" How will thou toss, and rave, and long to dye,
" And quit thy Claim to Immortality;
" When thou shall feel, enraged with inward Pains,
" The Hydra's Venom rankling in thy Veins?
" The Gods, in Pity, shall contract thy Date,
" And give thee over to the Power of Fate.
Thus, entering into Destiny, the Maid
The Secrets of offended Jove betrayed:
More had she still to say; but now appears
Oppressed with Sobs and Sighs, and drowned in Tears.
" My Voice, says she, is gone, my Language fails;
" Through every Limb my kindred Shape prevails:
" Why did the God this fatal Gift impart,
" And with prophetic Raptures swell my Heart!
" What new Desires are these? I long to pace
" Over flowery Meadows, and to feed on Grass;
" I hasten to a Brute, a Maid no more;
" But why, alas! am I transformed all over?
" My Sire does Half a human Shape retain,
" And in his upper Parts preserves the Man.
Her Tongue no more distinct Complaints affords,
But in shrill Accents and misshapen Words
Pours forth such hideous Wailings, as declare
The Human Form confounded in the Mare:
Till by degrees accomplished in the Beast,
She neigh'd outright, and all the Steed expressed.
Her stooping Body on her Hands is born,
Her Hands are turned to Hoofs, and shod in Horn,
Her yellow Tresses ruffle in a Mane,
And in a flowing Tail she frisks her Train.
The Mare was finished in her Voice and Look,
And a new Name from the new Figure took.
The Transformation of BATTUS to a Touchstone.
Sore wept the Centaur, and to Phoebus prayed;
But how could Phoebus give the Centaur Aid?
Degraded of his Power by angry Jove,
In Elis Then a Herd of Beeves he drove;
And wielded in his Hand a Staff of Oak,
And over his Shoulders threw the Shepherd's Cloak;
On sev'n compacted Reeds he used to play,
And on his Rural Pipe to waste the Day.
As once, attentive to his Pipe, he played,
The crafty Hermes from the God conveyed
A Drove, that separate from their Fellows strayed.
The Theft an old insidious Peasant viewed,
(They called him Battus in the Neighborhood)
Hired by a wealthy Pylian Prince to feed
His favorite Mares, and watch the generous Breed.
The thievish God suspected him, and took
The Hind aside, and thus in Whispers spoke;
" Discover not the Theft, whoever thou be,
" And take that milk-white Heifer for thy Fee.
" Go, Stranger, cries the Clown, securely on,
" That Stone shall sooner tell, and showed a Stone.
The God withdrew, but strait returned again,
In Speech and Habit like a Country Swain;
And cries out, " Neighbor, have thou seen a Stray
" Of Bullocks and of Heifers pass this Way?
"In the Recov'ry of my Cattle join,
" A Bullock and a Heifer shall be thine.
The Peasant quick replies, " You Will find 'em there
" In yon dark Vale; and in the Vale they were.
The Double Bribe had his false Heart beguiled:
The God, successful in the Trial, smiled;
" And do thou thus betray my self to Me?
" Me to my self do thou betray? says he:
Then to a Touchstone turns the faithless Spy,
And in his Name records his Infamy.
The Story of AGLAUROS, transformed into a Statue.
This done, the God flew up on high, and passed
Over lofty Athens, by Minerva graced,
And wide Munichia, whilst his Eyes survey
All the vast Region that beneath him lay.
'Twas now the Feast, when each Athenian Maid
Her yearly Homage to Minerva paid;
In Canisters, with Garlands covered over,
High on their Heads their mystic Gifts they bore:
And now, returning in a solemn Train,
The Troop of shining Virgins filled the Plain.
The God well-pleased beheld the pompous Show,
And saw the bright Procession pass below;
Then veer'd about, and took a wheeling Flight,
And hovered over them: As the spreading Kite,
That smells the slaughtered Victim from on high,
Flies at a Distance, if the Priests are nigh,
And sails around, and keeps it in her Eye;
So kept the God the Virgin Quire in view,
And in slow winding Circles round them flew.
As Lucifer excells the meanest Star,
Or, as the full-orb'd Phoebe Lucifer;
So much did Hearse all the rest outvy,
And gave a Grace to the Solemnity.
Hermes was fired, as in the Clouds he hung:
So the cold Bullet, that with Fury slung
From Balearick Engines mounts on high,
Glows in the Whirl, and burns along the Sky.
At length he pitched upon the Ground, and showed
The Form Divine, the Features of a God.
He knew their Virtue over a Female Heart,
And yet he strives to better them by Art.
He hangs his Mantle loose, and sets to show
The golden Edging on the Seam below;
Adjusts his flowing Curls, and in his Hand
Waves, with an Air, the Sleep-procuring Wand;
The glittering Sandals to his Feet applies,
And to each Heel the well trimmed Pinion ties.
His Ornaments with nicest Art displayed,
He seeks the Apartment of the Royal Maid.
The Roof was all with polished Ivory lined,
That, richly mixed, in Clouds of Tortoise shined.
Three Rooms, contiguous, in a Range were placed,
The Midmost by the beauteous Hearse graced;
Her Virgin Sisters lodged on either Side.
Aglauros first the approaching God descried,
And, as he crossed her Chamber, asked his Name,
And what his Business was, and whence he came.
" I come, replied the God, from Heaven to woo
" Your Sister, and to make an Aunt of you;
" I am the Son and Messenger of Jove,
" My Name is Mercury, my Business Love;
"Do you, kind Damsel, take a Lover's Part,
" And gain Admittance to your Sister's Heart.
She star'd him in the Face with Looks amazed,
As when she on Minerva's Secret gazed,
And asks a mighty Treasure for her Hire,
And, till he brings it, makes the God retire.
Minerva grieved to see the Nymph succeed;
And now remembering the late impious Deed,
When, disobedient to her strict Command,
She touched the Chest with an unhallowed Hand;
In big-swoln Sighs her inward Rage expressed,
That heaved the rising Aegis on her Breast;
Then sought out Envy in her dark Abode,
Defiled with ropy Gore and Clots of Blood:
Shut from the Winds and from the wholesome Skies,
In a deep Vale the gloomy Dungeon lies,
Dismal and Cold, where not a Beam of Light
Invades the Winter, or disturbs the Night.
Directly to the Cave her Course she steered;
Against the Gates her martial Lance she reared;
The Gates flew open, and the Fiend appeared.
A poisonous Morsel in her Teeth she chewed,
And gorged the Flesh of Vipers for her Food.
Minerva loathing, turned away her Eye;
The hideous Monster, rising Heavily,
Came stalking forward with a sullen Pace,
And left her mangled Offals on the Place.
Soon as she saw the Goddess gay and bright,
She fetched a Groan at such a cheerful Sight.
Livid and meagre were her Looks, her Eye
In foul distorted Glances turned awry;
A Hoard of Gall her inward Parts possessed,
And spread a Greenness over her cankered Breast;
Her Teeth were brown with Rust, and from her Tongue,
In dangling Drops, the stringy Poison hung.
She never smiles but when the Wretched weep,
Nor lulls her Malice with a Moment's Sleep,
Restless in Spite: while watchful to destroy,
She pines and sickens at Another's Joy;
Foe to her self, distressing and distressed,
She bears her own Tormenter in her Breast.
The Goddess gave (for she abhorred her Sight)
A short Command: " To Athens speed thy Flight;
" On cursed Aglauros try thy utmost Art,
" And fix thy rankest Venoms in her Heart.
This said, her Spear she pushed against the Ground,
And mounting from it with an active Bound,
Flew off to Heaven: The Hag with Eyes askew
Looked up, and muttered Curses as she flew;
For sore she fretted, and began to grieve
At the Success which she her self must give.
Then takes her Staff, hung round with Wreaths of Thorn,
And sails along, in a black Whirlwind born,
Over Fields and flowery Meadows: Where she steers
Her banesul Course, a mighty Blast appears,
Mildews and Blights; the Meadows are defaced,
The Fields, the Flowers, and the whole Year laid waste:
On Mortals next, and peopled Towns she falls,
And breathes a burning Plague among their Walls.
When Athens she beheld, for Arts renowned,
With Peace made happy, and with Plenty crowned,
Scarce could the hideous Fiend from Tears forbear,
To find out nothing that Deserved a Tear.
The Apartment now she entered, where at rest
Aglauros lay, with gentle Sleep oppressed.
To execute Minerva's dire Command,
She stroak'd the Virgin with her cankered Hand,
Then prickly Thorns into her Breast conveyed,
That stung to Madness the devoted Maid:
Her subtle Venom still improves the Smart,
Frets in the Blood, and festers in the Heart.
To make the Work more sure, a Scene she drew,
And placed before the dreaming Virgin's View
Her Sister's Marriage, and her glorious Fate:
The imaginary Bride appears in State;
The Bridegroom with unwonted Beauty glows;
For Envy Magnifies what-e'er she shows.
Full of the Dream, Aglauros pined away
In Tears all Night, in Darkness all the Day;
Consumed like Ice, that just Begins to run,
When feebly smitten by the distant Sun;
Or like unwholesome Weeds, that set on Fire
Are slowly wasted, and in Smoke expire.
Given up to Envy (for in every Thought
The Thorns, the Venom, and the Vision wrought)
Often did she call on Death, as often decreed,
Rather than see her Sister's Wish succeed,
To tell her awful Father what had past:
At length before the Door her self she cast;
And, sitting on the Ground with sullen Pride,
A Passage to the Lovesick God denied.
The God caressed, and for Admission prayed,
And soothed in softest Words the envenomed Maid.
In vain he soothed; " Begone! the Maid replies,
" Or here I keep my Seat, and never rise.
" Then keep thy Seat for ever, cries the God,
And touched the Door, wide-op'ning to his Rod.
Fain would she rise, and stop him, but she found
Her Trunk too heavy to forsake the Ground;
Her Joints are all benumbed, her Hands are pale,
And Marble now appears in every Nail.
As when a Cancer in the Body feeds,
And gradual Death from Limb to Limb proceeds;
So does the Chilness to each vital Part
Spread by degrees, and creeps into her Heart;
Till hard'ning every where, and speechless grown,
She sits unmoved, and freezes to a Stone.
But still her envious Hue and sullen Mien
Are in the Sedentary Figure seen.
EUROPA's Rape.
When now the God his Fury had allayed,
And taken Vengeance of the stubborn Maid,
From where the bright Athenian Turrets rise
He mounts aloft, and re-ascends the Skies.
Jove saw him enter the sublime Abodes,
And, as he mixed among the Crowd of Gods,
Beckoned him out, and drew him from the Rest,
And in soft Whispers thus his Will expressed.
" My trusty Hermes, by who is Ready Aid
" Thy Sire's Commands are through the World conveyed,
" Resume thy Wings, exert their utmost Force,
" And to the Walls of Sidon speed thy Course;
" There find a Herd of Heifers wandering over
" The neighboring Hill, and drive 'em to the Shore.
Thus spoke the God, concealing his Intent.
The trusty Hermes on his Message went,
And found the Herd of Heifers wandering over
A neighboring Hill, and drove 'em to the Shore;
Where the King's Daughter, with a lovely Train
Of Fellow-Nymphs, was sporting on the Plain.
The Dignity of Empire laid aside,
(For Love but ill agrees with Kingly Pride.)
The Ruler of the Skies, the Thundering God,
Who shakes the World's Foundations with a Nod,
Among a Herd of lowing Heifers ran,
Frisk'd in a Bull, and bellowed over the Plain.
Large Rolls of Fat about his Shoulders clung,
And from his Neck the double Dewlap hung.
His Skin was whiter than the Snow that lies
Unfully'd by the Breath of Southern Skies;
Small shining Horns on his curled Forehead stand,
As turned and polished by the Work-man's Hand;
His Eye Balls rolled, not formidably bright,
But gazed and languish'd with a gentle Light.
His every Look was peaceful, and expressed
The Softness of the Lover in the Beast.
Agenor's Royal Daughter, as she played
Among the Fields, the Milk-white Bull surveyed,
And viewed his spotless Body with Delight,
And at a Distance kept him in her Sight.
At length she plucked the rising Flowers, and fed
The gentle Beast, and fondly stroak'd his Head.
He stood well-pleased to Touch the charming Fair,
But hardly could confine his Pleasure there.
And now he wantons over the neighboring Strand,
Now rowls his Body on the yellow Sand;
And, now perceiving all her Fears decayed,
Comes tossing forward to the Royal Maid;
Gives her his Breast to stroke, and downward turns
His grisly Brow, and gently stoops his Horns.
In flowery Wreaths the Royal Virgin dressed
His bending Horns, and kindly clapped his Breast.
Till now grown wanton, and devoid of Fear,
Not knowing that she pressed the Thunderer,
She placed her self upon his Back, and rode
Over Fields and Meadows, seated on the God.
He gently marched along, and by degrees
Left the dry Meadow, and approached the Seas;
Where now he dips his Hoofs and wets his Thighs,
Now plunges in, and carries off the Prize.
The frighted Nymph looks backward on the Shore,
And hears the tumbling Billows round her roar;
But still she holds him fast: one Hand is born
Upon his Back; the other grasps a Horn:
Her Train of ruffling Garments flies behind,
Swells in the Air, and hovers in the Wind.
Through Storms and Tempests he the Virgin bore,
And lands her safe on the Dictean Shore;
Where now, in his Divinest Form arrayed,
In his true Shape he captivates the Maid;
Who gazes on him, and with wondering Eyes
Beholds the new majestic Figure rise,
His glowing Features, and celestial Light,
And all the God discovered to her Sight.
The End of the Second Book.
To Her Grace the Duchess of Newca^^

OVID's METAMORPHOSES. BOOK III.
Translated by Mr. ADDISON.
The Story of CADMUS.
WHEN now Agenor had his Daughter lost,
He sent his Son to search on every Coast;
And sternly bid him to his Arms restore
The Darling Maid, or see his Face no more,
But live an Exile in a foreign Clime;
Thus was the Father Pious to a Crime.
The restless Youth searched all the World around;
But how can Jove in his Amors be found?
When tired at length with unsuccessful Toil,
To shun his angry Sire and Native Soil,
He goes a Suppliant to the Delphick Dome;
There asks the God what new-appointed Home
Should end his Wanderings, and his Toils relieve.
The Delphick Oracles this Answer give.
" Behold among the Fields a lonely Cow,
" Unworn with Yokes, unbroken to the Plow;
"Mark well the Place where first she lays her down,
" There measure out thy Walls, and build thy Town,
" And from thy Guide Baeotia call the Land,
" In which the destined Walls and Town shall stand.
No sooner had he left the dark Abode,
Big with the Promise of the Delphick God,
When in the Fields the fatal Cow he viewed,
Nor galled with Yokes, nor worn with Servitude:
Her gently at a Distance he pursued;
And, as he walked aloof, in Silence prayed
To the great Power whose Counsels he obeyed.
Her Way through flowery Panope she took,
And now, Cephisus, crossed thy Silver Brook;
When to the Heavens her spacious Front she raised,
And bellowed thrice, then backward turning gazed
On those behind, till on the destined Place
She stooped, and couched amid the rising Grass.
Cadmus salutes the Soil, and gladly hails
The newfound Mountains, and the nameless Vales,
And thanks the Gods, and turns about his Eye
To see his new Dominions round him lie;
Then sends his Servants to a neighboring Grove
For living Streams, a Sacrifice to Jove.
Over the wide Plain there rose a shady Wood
Of aged Trees; in its dark Bosom stood
A bushy Thicket, pathless and unworn,
O'er-run with Brambles, and perplexed with Thorn:
Amidst the Brake a hollow Den was found,
With Rocks and shelving Arches vaulted round.
Deep in the dreary Den, concealed from Day,
Sacred to Mars, a mighty Dragon lay,
Bloated with Poison to a monstrous Size;
Fire broke in Flashes when he glanced his Eyes:
His towering Crest was glorious to behold,
His Shoulders and his Sides were scaled with Gold;
Three Tongues he brandished when he charged his Foes;
His Teeth stood jaggy in Three dreadful Rows.
The Tyrians in the Den for Water sought,
And with their Urns explored the hollow Vault:
From Side to Side their empty Urns rebound,
And rowse the sleeping Serpent with the Sound.
Strait he bestirs him, and is seen to rise;
And now with dreadful Hissings fills the Skies,
And darts his forky Tongues, and rouls his glareing Eyes.
The Tyrians drop their Vessels in the Fright,
All pale and trembling at the hideous Sight.
Spire above Spire uprear'd in Air he stood,
And gazing round him, overlooked the Wood:
Then floating on the Ground, in Circles rolled;
Then leaped upon them in a mighty Fold.
Of such a Bulk, and such a monst'rous Size,
The Serpent in the Polar Circle lies,
That stretches over half the Northern Skies.
In vain the Tyrians on their Arms rely,
In vain attempt to fight, in vain to fly:
All their Endeavors and their Hopes are vain;
Some die entangl'd in the winding Train;
Some are devoured, or feel a loathsome Death,
Swollen up with Blasts of Pestilential Breath.
And now the scorching Sun was mounted high,
In all its Luster, to the Noonday Sky;
When, anxious for his Friends, and filled with Cares,
To search the Woods the impatient Chief prepares.
A Lion's Hide around his Loins he wore,
The well-poiz'd Javelin to the Field he bore
Inured to Blood; the far-destroying Dart;
And, the best Weapon, an undaunted Heart.
Soon as the Youth approached the fatal Place,
He saw his Servants breathless on the Grass;
The scaly Foe amid their Corpse he viewed,
Basking at Ease, and feasting in their Blood.
" Such Friends, he cries, deserved a longer Date;
" But Cadmus will revenge, or share their Fate.
Then heaved a Stone, and rising to the Throw,
He sent it in a Whirlwind at the Foe:
A Tower, assaulted by so rude a Stroke,
With all its lofty Battlements had shook;
But nothing here the unweildy Rock avails,
Rebounding harmless from the plaited Scales,
That, firmly joined, preserved him from a Wound,
With native Armor crusted all around.
The pointed Javelin more successful flew,
Which at his Back the raging Warrior threw;
Amid the plaited Scales it took its Course,
And in the spinal Marrow spent its Force.
The Monster hissed aloud, and raged in vain,
And writhed his Body to and fro with Pain;
And bit the Spear, and wrench'd the Wood away;
The Point still buried in the Marrow lay.
And now his Rage, increasing with his Pain,
Reddens his Eyes, and beats in every Vein;
Churn'd in his Teeth the foamy Venom rose,
Whilst from his Mouth a Blast of Vapors flows,
Such as the Infernal Stygian Waters cast.
The Plants around him wither in the Blast.
Now in a Maze of Rings he lies enrowl'd,
Now all unravel'd, and without a Fold;
Now, like a Torrent, with a mighty Force
Bears down the Forest in his boisterous Course.
Cadmus gave back, and on the Lion's Spoil
Sustained the Shock, then forced him to recoil;
The pointed Javelin warded off his Rage:
Mad with his Pains, and furious to engage,
The Serpent champs the Steel, and bites the Spear,
'Till Blood and Venom all the Point besmear.
But still the Hurt he yet received was slight;
For, whilst the Champion with redoubled Might
Strikes home the Javelin, his retiring Foe
Shrinks from the Wound, and disappoints the Blow.
The dauntless Hero still pursues his Stroke,
And presses forward, 'till a knotty Oak
Retards his Foe, and stops him in the Rear;
Full in his Throat he plunged the fatal Spear,
That in the extended Neck a Passage found,
And pierced the solid Timber through the Wound.
Fixed to the reeling Trunk, with many a Stroke
Of his huge Tail, he lashed the sturdy Oak;
Till spent with Toil, and laboring hard for Breath,
He now lay twisting in the Pangs of Death.
Cadmus beheld him wallow in a Flood
Of swimming Poison, intermixed with Blood;
When suddenly a Speech was heard from high,
(The Speech was heard, nor was the Speaker nigh)
" Why do thou thus with secret Pleasure see,
" Insulting Man! what thou thy self shall be?
Astonished at the Voice, he stood amazed,
And all around with inward Horror gazed:
When Pallas swift descending from the Skies,
Pallas, the Guardian of the Bold and Wise,
Bids him plow up the Field, and scatter round
The Dragon's Teeth over all the furrowed Ground;
Then tells the Youth how to his wondering Eyes
Embattled Armies from the Field should rise.
He sows the Teeth at Pallas's Command,
And flings the future People from his Hand.
The Clods grow warm, and crumble where he sows;
And now the pointed Spears advance in Rows;
Now nodding Plumes appear, and shining Crests,
Now the broad Shoulders and the rising Breasts;
Over all the Field the breathing Harvest swarms,
A growing Host, a Crop of Men and Arms.
So through the parting Stage a Figure rears
Its Body up, and Limb by Limb appears
By just Degrees; 'till all the Man arise,
And in his full Proportion strikes the Eyes.
Cadmus surpised, and startled at the Sight
Of his new Foes, prepared himself for Fight:
When one cried out, " Forbear, fond Man, forbear
" To mingle in a blind promiscuous War.
This said, he struck his Brother to the Ground,
Himself expiring by another's Wound;
Nor did the Third his Conquest long survive,
Dying ever scarce he had begun to live.
The dire Example ran through all the Field,
'Till Heaps of Brothers were by Brothers killed;
The Furrows swam in Blood: and only five
Of all the vast Increase were left alive.
Echion One, at Pallas's Command,
Let fall the guiltless Weapon from his Hand;
And with the rest a peaceful Treaty makes,
Whom Cadmus as his Friends and Partners takes:
So founds a City on the promised Earth,
And gives his new Baeotian Empire Birth.
Here Cadmus reigned; and now one would have guess't
The Royal Founder in his Exile blessed:
Long did he live within his new Abodes,
Allied by Marriage to the deathless Gods;
And, in a fruitful Wife's Embraces old,
A long Increase of Children's Children told:
But no frail Man, however great or high,
Can be concluded blessed before he die.
Actaeon was the first of all his Race,
Who grieved his Grandsire in his borrowed Face;
Condemned by stern Diana to bemoan
The branching Horns, and Visage not his own;
To shun his once-lov'd Dogs, to bound away,
And from their Huntsman to become their Prey.
And yet consider why the Change was wrought,
You Will find it his Misfortune, not his Fault;
Or if a Fault, it was the Fault of Chance:
For how can Guilt proceed from Ignorance?
The Transformation of ACTAEON into a Stag.
In a fair Chase a shady Mountain stood,
Well stored with Game, and marked with Trails of Blood
Here did the Huntsmen 'till the Heat of Day
Pursue the Stag, and load themselves with Prey;
When thus Actaeon calling to the rest:
" My Friends, says he, our Sport is at the best.
" The Sun is high advanced, and downward sheds
" His burning Beams directly on our Heads;
" Then by Consent abstain from further Spoils,
" Call off the Dogs, and gather up the Toiles;
"And ever to Morrow's Sun begins his Race,
" Take the cool Morning to renew the Chase.
They all consent, and in a cheerful Train
The jolly Huntsmen, laden with the Slain,
Return in Triumph from the sultry Plain.
Down in a Vale with Pine and Cypress clad,
Refreshed with gentle Winds, and brown with Shade,
The chaste Diana's private Haunt, there stood
Full in the Center of the darksome Wood
A spacious Grotto, all around o'er-grown
With hoary Moss, and arched with Pumice-stone.
From out its rocky Clefts the Waters flow,
And trickling swell into a Lake below.
Nature had every where so played her Part,
That every where she seemed to vie with Art.
Here the bright Goddess, toiled and chafed with Heat,
Was wont to bathe her in the cool Retreat.
Here did she now with all her Train resort,
Panting with Heat, and breathless from the Sport;
Her Armor-bearer laid her Bow aside,
Some loosed her Sandals, some her Veil untied;
Each busy Nymph her proper Part undrest;
While Crocale, more Handy than the rest,
Gathered her flowing Hair, and in a Noose
Bound it together, whilst her own hung loose.
Five of the more ignoble sort by turns
Fetch up the Water, and unlade their Urns.
Now all undrest the shining Goddess stood,
When young Actaeon, wilder'd in the Wood,
To the cool Grott by his hard Fate betrayed,
The Fountains filled with naked Nymphs surveyed.
The frighted Virgins shrick'd at the Surprise,
(The Forest echoed with their piercing Cries.)
Then in a Huddle round their Goddess pressed:
She, proudly eminent above the rest,
With Blushes glowed; such Blushes as adorn,
The ruddy Welkin, or the purple Morn;
And though the crowding Nymphs her Body hide,
Half backward shrunk, and viewed him from aside.
Surpised, at first she would have snatched her Bow,
But sees the circling Waters round her flow;
These in the Hollow of her Hand she took,
And dashed 'em in his Face, while thus she spoke:
" Tell if thou can the wondrous Sight disclosed,
" A Goddess naked to thy View exposed.
This said, the Man begun to disappear
By slow Degrees, and ended in a Deer.
A rising Horn on either Brow he wears,
And stretches out his Neck, and pricks his Ears;
Rough is his Skin, with sudden Hairs o'er-grown,
His Bosom pants with Fears before unknown.
Transformed at length, he flies away in haste,
And wonders why he flies away so fast.
But as by Chance, within a neighboring Brook,
He saw his branching Horns and altered Look,
Wretched Actaeon! in a doleful Tone
He tried to speak, but only gave a Groan;
And as he wept, within the watery Glass
He saw the big round Drops, with silent Pace,
Run trickling down a savage hairy Face.
What should he do? Or seek his old Abodes,
Or herd among the Deer, and sculk in Woods?
Here Shame dissuades him, there his Fear prevails,
And each by turns his aching Heart assails.
As he thus ponders, he behind him spies
His opening Hounds, and now he hears their Cries:
A generous Pack, or to maintain the Chase,
Or snuff the Vapor from the scented Grass.
He bounded off with Fear, and swiftly ran
Over craggy Mountains, and the flowery Plain;
Through Brakes and Thickets forced his Way, and flew
Through many a Ring, where once he did pursue.
In vain he often endeavored to proclaim
His new Misfortune, and to tell his Name;
Nor Voice nor Words the brutal Tongue supplies;
From shouting Men, and Horns, and Dogs he flies,
Deafen'd and stunned with their promiscuous Cries.
When now the fleetest of the Pack, that pressed
Close at his Heels, and sprung before the rest,
Had fastened on him, straight another Pair
Hung on his wounded Haunch, and held him there,
'Till all the Pack came up, and every Hound
Tore the sad Huntsman groveling on the Ground,
Who now appeared but one continued Wound.
With dropping Tears his bitter Fate he moans,
And fills the Mountain with his dying Groans.
His Servants with a piteous Look he spies,
And turns about his supplicating Eyes.
His Servants, ignorant of what had chanced,
With eager Haste and joyful Shouts advanced,
And called their Lord Actaeon to the Game:
He shook his Head in answer to the Name;
He heard, but wished he had indeed been gone,
Or only to have stood a Looker on.
But to his Grief he finds himself too near,
And feels his ravenous Dogs with Fury tear
Their wretched Master panting in a Deer.
The Birth of BACCHUS.
Actae^n's Sufferings, and Diana's Rage,
Did all the Thoughts of Men and Gods engage;
Some called the Evils, which Diana wrought,
Too great, and disproportioned to the Fault:
Others again, esteemed Actaeon's Woes
Fit for a Virgin Goddess to impose.
The Hearers into different Parts divide,
And Reasons are produced on either Side.
Juno alone, of all that heard the News,
Nor would condemn the Goddess, nor excuse:
She heeded not the Justice of the Deed,
But joy'd to see the Race of Cadmus bleed;
For still she kept Europa in her Mind,
And, for her sake, detested all her Kind.
Besides, to aggravate her Hate, she heard
How Semele, to Jove's Embrace preferred,
Was now grown big with an immortal Load,
And carried in her Womb a future God.
Thus terribly incensed, the Goddess broke
To sudden Fury, and abruptly spoke.
" Are my Reproaches of so small a Force?
" It Is time I then pursue another Course:
" It is decreed the guilty Wretch shall die,
" If I Am indeed the Mistress of the Sky,
" If rightly styled among the Powers above
" The Wife and Sister of the thundering Jove;
" (And none can sure a Sister's Right deny)
" It is decreed the guilty Wretch shall die.
" She boasts an Honor I can hardly claim,
" Pregnant she rises to a Mother's Name;
"While proud and vain she triumphs in her Jove,
" And shows the glorious Tokens of his Love:
" But if I Am still the Mistress of the Skies,
" By her own Lover the fond Beauty dies.
This said, descending in a yellow Cloud,
Before the Gates of Semele she stood.
Old Beroe's decrepit Shape she wears,
Her wrinkled Visage, and her hoary Hairs;
Whilst in her trembling Gait she totters on,
And learns to tattle in the Nurse's Tone.
The Goddess, thus disguised in Age, beguiled
With pleasing Stories her false Foster-Child.
Much did she talk of Love, and when she came
To mention to the Nymph her Lover's Name,
Fetching a Sigh, and holding down her Head,
" It Is well, says she, if all be true that is said.
" But trust me, Child, I Am much inclined to fear
" Some Counterfeit in this your Jupiter.
" Many an honest well-designing Maid,
" Has been by these pretended Gods betrayed.
" But if he be indeed the thundering Jove,
" Bid him, when next he court the Rites of Love,
" Descend triumphant from the Etherial Sky,
" In all the Pomp of his Divinity;
" Encompas'd round by those Celestial Charms,
" With which he fills the immortal Juno's Arms.
The unwary Nymph, ensnared with what she said,
Desired of Jove, when next he sought her Bed,
To grant a certain Gift which she would choose;
" Fear not, replied the God, that I Will refuse
" Whatever you ask: May Styx confirm my Voice,
" Choose what you will, and you shall have your Choice.
"Then, says the Nymph, when next you seek my Arms,
" May you descend in those Celestial Charms,
" With which your Juno's Bosom you inflame,
" And fill with Transport Heaven's Immortal Dame.
The God surpised would fain have stopped her Voice,
But he had sworn, and she had made her Choice.
To keep his Promise he ascends, and shrowds
His awful Brow in Whirl-winds and in Clouds;
Whilst all around, in terrible Array,
His Thunders rattle, and his Lightenings play.
And yet, the dazzling Luster to abate,
He set not out in all his Pomp and State,
Clad in the mildest Lightning of the Skies,
And armed with Thunder of the smallest Size:
Not those huge Bolts, by which the Giants slain
Lay overthrown on the Phlegrean Plain.
'Twas of a lesser Mould, and lighter Weight;
They call it Thunder of a Second-Rate.
For the rough Cyclops, who by Jove's Command
Tempered the Bolt, and turned it to his Hand,
Worked up less Flame and Fury in its Make,
And quenched it sooner in the standing Lake.
Thus dreadfully adorned, with Horror bright,
The illustrious God, descending from his Height,
Came rushing on her in a Storm of Light.
The mortal Dame, too feeble to engage
The Light'ning's Flashes, and the Thunder's Rage,
Consumed amidst the Glories she desired,
And in the Terrible Embrace expired.
But, to preserve his Offspring from the Tomb,
Jove took him smoking from the blasted Womb,
And, if on ancient Tales we may rely,
Enclosed the abortive Infant in his Thigh.
Here when the Babe had all his Time fulfilled,
Ino first took him for her Foster-Child;
Then the Niseans, in their dark Abode,
Nursed secretly with Milk the thriving God.
The Transformation of TIRESIAS.
'Twas now, while these Transactions past on Earth,
And Bacchus thus procured a second Birth,
When Jove, disposed to lay aside the Weight
Of Public Empire, and the Cares of State;
As to his Queen in Nectar Bowls he quaff'd,
" In troth, says he, and as he spoke he laughed,
" The Sense of Pleasure in the Male is far
" More dull and dead, than what you Females share.
Juno the Truth of what was said denied;
Tiresias therefore must the Cause decide,
For he the Pleasure of each Sex had tried.
It happened once, within a shady Wood,
Two twisted Snakes he in Conjunction viewed;
When with his Staff their slimy Folds he broke,
And lost his Manhood at the fatal Stroke.
But, after sev'n revolving Years, he viewed
The self-same Serpents in the self-same Wood;
" And if, says he, such Virtue in you lie,
" That he who dares your slimy Folds untie
" Must change his Kind, a second Stroke I Will try.
Again he struck the Snakes, and stood again
New-Sex'd, and strait recovered into Man.
Him therefore both the Deities create
The Sovereign Umpire, in their grand Debate;
And he declared for Jove: When Juno fired,
More than so trivial an Affair required,
Deprived him, in her Fury, of his Sight,
And left him groping round in sudden Night.
But Jove (for so it is in Heaven decreed,
That no one God repeal Another's Deed)
Irradiates all his Soul with inward Light,
And with the Prophet's Art relieves the want of Sight.
The Transformation of ECHO.
Famed far and near for knowing things to come,
From him the enquiring Nations sought their Doom;
The fair Liriope his Answers tried,
And first the unerring Prophet justified;
This Nymph the God Cephisus had abused,
With all his winding Waters circumfus'd,
And on the Nereid got a lovely Boy,
Whom the soft Maids even then beheld with Joy.
The tender Dame, sollicitous to know
Whether her Child should reach old Age or no,
Consults the Sage Tiresias, who replies,
" If ever he knows himself, he surely dies.
Long lived the dubious Mother in Suspense,
'Till Time unriddled all the Prophet's Sense.
Narcissus now his Sixteenth Year began,
Just turned of Boy, and on the Verge of Man;
Many a Friend the blooming Youth caressed,
Many a Lovesick Maid her Flame confessed:
Such was his Pride, in vain the Friend caressed,
The Lovesick Maid in vain her Flame confessed.
Once, in the Woods, as he pursued the Chase,
The babbling Echo had descried his Face;
She, who in other's Words her Silence breaks,
Nor speaks her self but when another speaks.
Echo was then a Maid, of Speech bereft,
Of wonted Speech; for though her Voice was left,
Juno a Curse did on her Tongue impose,
To sport with every Sentence in the Close.
Full often when the Goddess might have caught
Jove and her Rivals in the very Fault,
This Nymph with subtle Stories would delay
Her Coming, 'till the Lovers slipped away.
The Goddess found out the Deceit in time,
And then she cried, " That Tongue, for this thy Crime,
" Which could so many subtle Tales produce,
" Shall be hereafter but of little use.
Hence it is she prattles in a fainter Tone,
With mimick Sounds, and Accents not her own.
This Lovesick Virgin, overjoyed to find
The Boy alone, still followed him behind;
When glowing warmly at her near Approach,
As Sulphur blazes at the Taper's Touch,
She longed her hidden Passion to reveal,
And tell her Pains, but had not Words to tell:
She cannot begin, but waits for the Rebound,
To catch his Voice, and to return the Sound.
The Nymph, when nothing could Narcissus move,
Still dashed with Blushes for her slighted Love,
Lived in the shady Covert of the Woods,
In solitary Caves and dark Abodes;
Where pining wandered the rejected Fair,
'Till harrass'd out, and worn away with Care,
The sounding Skeleton, of Blood bereft,
Besides her Bones and Voice had nothing left.
Her Bones are petrified, her Voice is found
In Vaults, where still it Doubles every Sound.
The Story of NARCISSUS.
Thus did the Nymphs in vain caress the Boy,
He still was Lovely, but he still was Coy;
When one fair Virgin of the slighted Train
Thus prayed the Gods, provoked by his Disdain,
" Oh may he love like me, and love like me in vain!
Rhamnusia pitied the neglected Fair,
And with just Vengeance answered to her Prayer.
There stands a Fountain in a darksom Wood,
Nor stained with falling Leaves nor rising Mud;
Untroubled by the Breath of Winds it rests,
Unsullied by the Touch of Men or Beasts;
High Bowers of shady Trees above it grow,
And rising Grass and cheerful Greens below.
Pleased with the Form and Coolness of the Place,
And overheated by the Morning Chase,
Narcissus on the grassie Verdure lies:
But whilst within the Crystal Fount he tries
To quench his Heat, he feels new Heats arise.
For as his own bright Image he surveyed,
He fell in Love with the fantastic Shade;
And over the Fair Resemblance hung unmoved,
Nor knew, fond Youth! it was himself he loved.
The well-turn'd Neck and Shoulders he descries,
The spacious Forehead, and the spark'ling Eyes;
The Hands that Bacchus might not scorn to show,
And Hair that round Apollo's Head might flow;
With all the Purple Youthfulness of Face,
That gently blushes in the watery Glass.
By his own Flames consumed the Lover lies,
And gives himself the Wound by which he dies.
To the cold Water often he joins his Lips,
Often catching at the beauteous Shade he dips
His Arms, as often from himself he slips.
Nor knows he who it is his Arms pursue
With eager Clasps, but loves he knows not who.
What could, fond Youth, this helpless Passion move?
What kindle in thee this unpitied Love?
Thy own warm Blush within the Water glows,
With thee the colored Shadow comes and goes,
Its empty Being on thy self relies;
Step Thou aside, and the frail Charmer dies.
Still over the Fountain's watery Gleam he stood,
Mindless of Sleep, and negligent of Food.
Still viewed his Face, and languish'd as he viewed,
At length he raised his Head, and thus began
To vent his Griefs, and tell the Woods his Pain.
" You Trees, says he, and thou surrounding Grove,
" Who often have been the kindly Scenes of Love,
" Tell me, if ever within your Shades did lie
" A Youth so tortured, so perplexed as I?
" I, who before me see the Charming (...)
" Whilst there he stands, and yet he (...):
" In such a Maze of Love my (...);
" And yet no Bulwark'd Town, nor (...) Coast,
" Preserves the beauteous Youth from being seen,
" No Mountains rise, nor Oceans flow between.
" A shallow Water hinders my Embrace;
" And yet the lovely Mimick wears a Face
" That kindly smiles, and when I bend to join
" My Lips to his, he fondly bends to mine.
" Hear, gentle Youth, and (...) my Complaint,
" Come from thy Well, (...) Inhabitant.
"My Charms an easy Conquest have obtained
" Over other Hearts, by Thee alone disdained.
" But why should I despair? I Am sure he burns
" With equal Flames, and languishes by turns.
" When-e'er I stoop he offers at a Kiss,
" And when my Arms I stretch, he stretches his.
" His Eye with Pleasure on my Face he keeps,
" He smiles my Smiles, and when I weep he weeps.
" When-e'er I speak, his moving Lips appear
" To utter something, which I cannot hear.
" Ah wretched me! I now begin too late
" To find out all the long-perplex'd Deceit;
" It is my self I love, my self I see;
" The gay Delusion is a Part of me.
" I kindle up the Fires by which I burn,
" And my own Beauties from the Well return.
" Whom should I Court? how utter my Complaint?
" Enjoyment but produces my Restraint,
" And too much Plenty makes me die for Want.
" How gladly would I from my self remove!
" And at a distance set the Thing I love.
" My Breast is warmed with such unusual Fire,
" I wish him absent whom I most desire.
" And now I faint with Grief; my Fate draws nigh;
" In all the Pride of blooming Youth I die.
" Death will the Sorrows of my Heart relieve.
" Oh might the Visionary Youth survive,
" I should with Joy my latest Breath resign!
" But oh! I see his Fate involved in mine.
This said, the weeping Youth again returned
To the clear Fountain, where again he burned;
His Tears defaced the Surface of the Well,
With Circle after Circle, as they fell:
And now the lovely Face but half appears,
O'er-run with Wrinkles, and deformed with Tears.
" Ah whither, cries Narcissus, do thou fly?
" Let me still feed the Flame by which I die;
" Let me still See, though I Am no further blessed.
Then rends his Garment off, and beats his Breast:
His naked Bosom redden'd with the Blow,
In such a Blush as purple Clusters show,
E're yet the Sun's Autumnal Heats refine
Their sprightly Juice, and mellow it to Wine.
The glowing Beauties of his Breast he spies,
And with a new redoubled Passion dies.
As Wax dissolves, as Ice begins to run,
And trickle into Drops before the Sun;
So melts the Youth, and languishes away,
His Beauty withers, and his Limbs decay;
And none of those attractive Charms remain,
To which the slighted Echo su'd in vain.
She saw him in his present Misery,
Whom, spite of all her Wrongs, she grieved to see.
She answered sadly to the Lover's Moan,
Sighed back his Sighs, and groaned to every Groan:
" Ah Youth! beloved in vain, Narcissus cries;
" Ah Youth! beloved in vain, the Nymph replies.
" Farewell, says he; the parting Sound scarce fell
From his faint Lips, but she replied, " Farewell.
Then on the unwholesome Earth he gasping lies,
'Till Death shuts up those self-admiring Eyes.
To the cold Shades his flitting Ghost retires,
And in the Stygian Waves it self admires.
For him the Naiads and the Dryads mourn,
Whom the sad Echo answers in her turn;
And now the Sister-Nymphs prepare his Urn:
When, looking for his Corpse, they only found
A rising Stalk, with yellow Blossoms crowned.
The Story of PENTHEUS.
This sad Event gave blind Tiresias Fame,
Through Greece established in a Prophet's Name.
The un-hallow'd Pentheus only durst deride
The cheated People, and their Eyeless Guide.
To whom the Prophet in his Fury said,
Shaking the hoary Honors of his Head;
" 'Twere well, presumptuous Man, 'twere well for thee
" If thou were Eyeless too, and blind, like me:
" For the Time comes, nay, it is already here,
" When the young God's Solemnities appear;
" Which, if thou do not with just Rites adorn,
" Thy impious Carcass, into Pieces torn,
" Shall strew the Woods, and hang on every Thorn.
" Then, then, remember what I now foretell,
" And own the blind Tiresias saw too well.
Still Pentheus scorns him, and derides his Skill,
But Time did all the Prophet's Threats fulfill.
For now through prostrate Greece young Bacchus rode,
Whilst howling Matrons celebrate the God.
All Ranks and Sexes to his Orgies ran,
To mingle in the Pomps, and fill the Train.
When Pentheus thus his wicked Rage expressed;
" What Madness, Thebans, has your Souls possessed?
" Can hollow Timbrels, can a drunken Shout,
" And the lewd Clamours of a beastly Rout,
" Thus quell your Courage? Can the weak Alarm
" Of Women's Yells those stubborn Souls disarm,
" Whom nor the Sword nor Trumpet ever could fright,
" Nor the loud Din and Horror of a Fight?
"And you, our Sires, who left your old Abodes,
" And fixed in foreign Earth your Country Gods;
" Will you without a Stroke your City yield,
" And poorly quit an undisputed Field?
" But you, whose Youth and Vigor should inspire
" Heroic Warmth, and kindle Martial Fire,
" Whom burnished Arms and crested Helmets grace,
" Not flowery Garlands and a painted Face;
" Remember him to whom you stand allied:
" The Serpent for his Well of Waters died.
" He fought the Strong; do you his Courage show,
" And gain a Conquest over a Feeble Foe.
" If Thebes must fall, oh might the Fates afford
" A nobler Doom from Famine, Fire, or Sword!
" Then might the Thebans perish with Renown:
" But now a beardless Victor sacks the Town;
" Whom nor the prancing Steed, nor ponderous Shield,
" Nor the hacked Helmet, nor the dusty Field,
" But the soft Joys of Luxury and Ease,
" The purple Vests, and flowery Garlands please.
" Stand then aside, I Will make the Counterfeit
" Renounce his Godhead, and confess the Cheat.
" Acrisius from the Grecian Walls repelled
" This boasted Power; why then should Pentheus yield?
" Go quickly, drag the audacious Boy to Me;
" I Will try the Force of his Divinity.
Thus did the audacious Wretch those Rites profane;
His Friends dissuade the audacious Wretch in vain;
In vain his Grandsire urged him to give over
His impious Threats; the Wretch but raves the more.
So have I seen a River gently glide,
In a smooth Course, and inoffensive Tide;
But if with Dams its Current we restrain,
It bears down all, and Foams along the Plain.
But now his Servants came besmeared with Blood,
Sent by their haughty Prince to seize the God;
The God they found not in the frantic Throng,
But dragged a zealous Votary along.
The Mariners transformed to Dolphins.
Him Pentheus viewed with Fury in his Look,
And scarce withheld his Hands, whilst thus he spoke:
" Vile Slave! whom speedy Vengeance shall pursue,
" And terrify thy base seditious Crew:
" Thy Country, and thy Parentage reveal,
" And, why thou join'st in these mad Orgies, tell.
The Captive views him with undaunted Eyes,
And, armed with inward Innocence, replies.
" From high Meonia's rocky Shores I came,
" Of poor Descent, Acoetes is my Name:
" My Sire was meanly born; no Oxen plowed
" His fruitful Fields, nor in his Pastures lowed.
" His whole Estate within the Waters lay;
" With Lines and Hooks he caught the finny Prey.
" His Art was all his Livelihood; which he
" Thus with his dying Lips bequeathed to me:
" In Streams, my Boy, and Rivers take thy Chance;
" There swims, said he, thy whole Inheritance.
" Long did I live on this poor Legacy;
" 'Till tired with Rocks, and my old native Sky,
" To Arts of Navigation I inclined;
" Observed the Turns and Changes of the Wind:
" Learned the fit Havens, and began to note
" The stormy Hyades, the rainy Goat,
" The bright Taygete, and the shining Bears,
With all the Sailor's Catalogue of Stars.
" Once, as by chance for Delos I designed,
" My Vessel, driven by a strong Gust of Wind,
"Moored in a Chian Creek; ashore I went,
" And all the following Night in Chios spent.
" When Morning rose, I sent my Mates to bring
" Supplies of Water from a neighboring Spring,
" Whilst I the Motion of the Winds explored;
" Then summoned in my Crew, and went aboard.
" Opheltes heard my Summons, and with Joy
" Brought to the Shore a soft and lovely Boy,
" With more than Female Sweetness in his Look,
" Whom straggling in the neighboring Fields he took.
" With Fumes of Wine the little Captive glows,
" And nods with Sleep, and staggers as he goes.
" I viewed him nicely, and began to trace
" Each heavenly Feature, each immortal Grace,
" And saw Divinity in all his Face.
" I know not who, said I, this God should be;
" But that he is a God I plainly see:
" And Thou, who-e'er thou art, excuse the Force
" These Men have used; and oh befriend our Course!
" Pray not for us, the nimble Dictys cried,
" Dictys, that could the Main-top-Mast bestride,
" And down the Ropes with active Vigor slide.
" To the same Purpose old Epopeus spoke,
" Who overlooked the Oars, and timed the Stroke;
" The same the Pilot, and the same the rest;
" Such impious Avarice their Souls possessed.
" Nay, Heaven forbid that I should bear away
" Within my Vessel so divine a Prey,
" Said I; and stood to hinder their Intent:
" When Lycabas, a Wretch for Murder sent
" From Tuscany, to suffer Banishment,
" With his clench'd Fist had struck me overboard,
" Had not my Hands in falling grasped a Cord.
"His base Confederates the Fact approve;
" When Bacchus, (for 'twas he) begun to move,
" Waked by the Noise and Clamours which they raised;
" And shook his drowsy Limbs, and round him gazed:
" What means this Noise? he cries; am I betrayed?
" Ah! whither, whither must I be conveyed?
" Fear not, said Proreus, Child, but tell us where
" You wish to land, and trust our friendly Care.
" To Naxos then direct your Course, said he;
" Naxos a hospitable Port shall be
" To each of you, a joyful Home to me.
" By every God, that rules the Sea or Sky,
" The perjured Villains promise to comply,
" And bid me hasten to unmoor the Ship.
" With eager Joy I launch into the Deep;
" And, heedless of the Fraud, for Naxos stand.
" They whisper often, and beckon with the Hand,
" And give me Signs, all anxious for their Prey,
" To tack about, and fsteer another Way.
" Then let some other to my Post succeed,
" Said I, I Am guiltless of so foul a Deed.
" What, says Ethalion, must the Ship's whole Crew
" Follow your Humor, and depend on you?
" And strait himself he seated at the Prore,
" And tacked about, and sought another Shore.
" The beauteous Youth now found himself betrayed,
" And from the Deck the rising Waves surveyed,
" And seemed to weep, and as he wept he said;
" And do you thus my easy Faith beguile?
" Thus do you bear me to my native Isle?
" Will such a Multitude of Men employ
" Their Strength against a weak defenseless Boy?
"In vain did I the God-like Youth deplore,
" The more I begged, they thwarted me the more.
" And now by all the Gods in Heaven that hear
" This solemn Oath, by Bacchus self, I swear,
" The mighty Miracle that did ensue,
" Although it seems beyond Belief, is true.
" The Vessel, fixed and rooted in the Flood,
" Unmoved by all the beating Billows stood.
" In vain the Mariners would plow the Main
" With Sails unfurled, and strike their Oars in vain;
" Around their Oars a twining Ivy cleaves,
" And climbs the Mast, and hides the Cords in Leaves:
" The Sails are covered with a cheerful Green,
" And Berries in the fruitful Canvase seen.
" Amidst the Waves a sudden Forest rears
" Its verdant Head, and a new Spring appears.
" The God we now behold with opened Eyes;
" A Herd of spotted Panthers round him lies
" In glaring Forms; the grapy Clusters spread
" On his fair Brows, and dangle on his Head.
" And whilst he frowns, and brandishes his Spear,
" My Mates, surpised with Madness or with Fear,
" Leaped overboard; first perjured Madon found
" Rough Scales and Fins his stiff'ning Sides surround;
" Ah what, cries one, has thus transformed thy Look?
" Strait his own Mouth grew wider as he spoke;
" And now himself he views with like Surprise.
" Still at his Oar the industrious Libys plies;
" But, as he plies, each busy Arm shrinks in,
" And by degrees is fashioned to a Fin.
" Another, as he catches at a Cord,
" Misses his Arms, and, tumbling overboard,
"With his broad Fins and forky Tail he laves
" The rising Surge, and flounces in the Waves.
" Thus all my Crew transformed around the Ship,
" Or dive below, or on the Surface leap,
" And spout the Waves, and wanton in the Deep.
" Full nineteen Sailors did the Ship convey,
" A Shole of nineteen Dolphins round her play.
" I only in my proper Shape appear,
" Speechless with Wonder, and half dead with Fear,
" 'Till Bacchus kindly bid me fear no more.
" With him I landed on the Chian Shore,
" And him shall ever gratefully adore.
" This forging Slave, says Pentheus, would prevail,
" Over our just Fury by a far-fetched Tale:
" Go, let him feel the Whips, the Swords, the Fire,
" And in the Tortures of the Rack expire.
The officious Servants hurry him away,
And the poor Captive in a Dungeon lay.
But, whilst the Whips and Tortures are prepared,
The Gates fly open, of themselves unbarr'd;
At Liberty the unfettered Captive stands,
And flings the loosened Shackles from his Hands.
The Death of PENTHEUS.
But Pentheus, grown more furious than before,
Resolved to send his Messengers no more,
But went himself to the distracted Throng,
Where high Cithaeron echoed with their Song.
And as the fiery War-horse paws the Ground,
And snorts and trembles at the Trumpet's Sound;
Transported thus he heard the frantic Rout,
And raved and madden'd at the distant Shout.
A spacious Circuit on the Hill there stood,
Level and wide, and skirted round with Wood;
Here the rash Pentheus, with unhallowed Eyes,
The howling Dames and mystic Orgies spies.
His Mother sternly viewed him where he stood,
And kindled into Madness as she viewed:
Her leafy Javelin at her Son she cast,
And cries, " The Boar that lays our Country waste!
" The Boar, my Sisters! Aim the fatal Dart,
" And strike the brindled Monster to the Heart.
Pentheus astonished heard the dismal Sound,
And sees the yelling Matrons gathering round;
He sees, and weeps at his approaching Fate,
And begs for Mercy, and repents too late.
" Help, help! my Aunt Autonoe, he cried;
" Remember how your own Actaeon died.
Deaf to his Cries, the frantic Matron crops
One stretch'd-out Arm, the other Ino lops.
In vain does Pentheus to his Mother sue,
And the raw bleeding Stumps presents to view:
His Mother howled; and, heedless of his Prayer,
Her trembling Hand she twisted in his Hair,
" And This, she cried, shall be Agave's Share.
When from the Neck his struggling Head she tore,
And in her Hands the ghastly Visage bore,
With Pleasure all the hideous Trunk survey;
Then pulled and tore the mangled Limbs away,
As starting in the Pangs of Death it lay.
Soon as the Wood its leafy Honors casts,
Blown off and scattered by autumnal Blasts,
With such a sudden Death lay Pentheus slain,
And in a thousand Pieces strow'd the Plain.
By so distinguishing a Judgment awed,
The Thebans tremble, and confess the God.
The End of the Third Book.
To the Right Honorable the Countess of Hartford.

OVID's METAMORPHOSES. BOOK IV.
The Story of ALCITHOE and her Sisters.
By Mr. EUSDEN.
YET still Alcithoe perverse remains,
And Bacchus still, and all his Rites disdains.
Too rash, and madly bold, she bids him prove
Himself a God, nor owns the Son of Jove.
Her Sisters too unanimous agree,
Faithful Associates in Impiety.
Be this a solemn Feast, the Priest had said,
Be, with each Mistress, unemploy'd each Maid.
With Skins of Beasts your tender Limbs enclose,
And with an Ivy-Crown adorn your Brows.
The leafy Thyrsus high in Triumph bear,
And give your Locks to wanton in the Air.
These Rites profaned, the holy Seer foreshow'd.
A mourning People, and a vengeful God.
Matrons, and pious Wives Obedience show,
Distaffs, and Wool, half-spun, away they throw*
Then Incense burn, and, Bacchus, thee adore,
Or love thou Nyseus, or Lyaeus more?
O! doubly got, O! doubly born, they sung,
Thou mighty Bromius, hail, from Lightning sprung!
Hail, Thyon! Eleleus! each Name is thine:
Or listen Parent of the genial Vine!
Iacchus! Evan! loudly they repeat,
And not one Greecian Attribute forget,
Which to thy Praise, Great Deity, belong,
Styled justly Liber in the Roman Song.
Eternity of Youth is thine! enjoy
Years roul'd on Years, yet still a blooming Boy.
In Heaven thou shin'st with a superior Grace;
Conceal thy Horns, and it is a Virgin's Face.
Thou taught'st the tawny Indian to obey,
And Ganges, smoothly flowing, owned thy Sway.
Lycurgus, Pentheus, equally profane,
By thy just Vengeance equally were slain.
By thee the Tuscans, who conspired to keep
Thee Captive, plunged, and cut with Finns the Deep.
With painted Reins, all-glitt'ring from afar,
The spotted Lynxes proudly draw thy Car.
Around, the Bacchae, and the Satyrs throng;
Behind, Silenus, drunk, lags slow along:
On his dull Ass he nods from Side to Side,
Forbears to fall, yet half forgets to ride.
Still at thy near Approach, Applauses loud
Are heard, with Yellings of the Female Crowd.
Timbrels, and Boxen Pipes, with mingled Cries,
Swell up in Sounds confused, and rend the Skies.
Come, Bacchus, come propitious, all implore,
And act thy sacred Orgies over and over.
But Mineus' Daughters, while these Rites were paid,
At home, impertinently busy, stayed.
Their wicked Tasks they ply with various Art,
And through the Loom the sliding Shuttle dart;
Or at the Fire to comb the Wool they stand,
Or twirl the Spindle with a dext'rous Hand.
Guilty themselves, they force the Guiltless in;
Their Maids, who share the Labor, share the Sin.
At last one Sister cries, who nimbly knew
To draw nice Threads, and wind the finest Clue,
While others idly rove, and Gods revere,
Their fancied Gods! they know not who, or where;
Let us, whom Pallas taught her better Arts,
Still working, cheer with mirthful Chat our Hearts:
And to deceive the Time, let me prevail
With each by turns to tell some antique Tale.
She said, her Sisters liked the Humor well,
And smiling, bad her the first Story tell.
But she awhile profoundly seemed to muse,
Perplexed amid Variety to choose:
And knew not, whether she should first relate
The poor Dircetis, and her wondrous Fate.
The Palestines believe it to a Man,
And show the Lake, in which her Scales began.
Or if she rather should the Daughter sing,
Who in the hoary Verge of Life took Wing;
Who soared from Earth, and dwelt in Towers on high,
And now a Dove, she flits along the Sky.
Or how lewd Nais, when her Lust was cloyed,
To Fishes turned the Youths, she had enjoyed,
By powerful Verse, and Herbs; Effect most strange!
At last the Changer shared herself the Change.
Or how the Tree, which once white Berries bore,
Still crimson bears, since stained with crimson Gore.
The Tree was new; she likes it, and begins
To tell the Tale, and as she tells, she spins.
The Story of PYRAMUS and THISBE.
In Babylon, where first her Queen, for State
Raised Walls of Brick magnificently great,
Lived Pyramus, and Thisbe, lovely Pair!
He found no Eastern Youth his Equal there,
And she beyond the fairest Nymph was fair.
A closer Neighborhood was never known,
Though two the Houses, yet the Roof was one.
Acquaintance grew, the Acquaintance they improve
To Friendship, Friendship ripened into Love:
Love had been crowned, but impotently mad,
What Parents could not hinder, they forbad.
For with fierce Flames young Pyramus still burned,
And grateful Thisbe Flames as fierce returned.
Aloud in Words their Thoughts they dare not break,
But silent stand, and silent Looks can speak.
The Fire of Love the more it is suppressed,
The more it glows, and rages in the Breast.
When the Division-wall was built, a Chink
Was left, the Cement unobserved to shrink.
So slight the Cranny, that it still had been
For Centuries unclos'd, because unseen.
But oh! what thing so small, so secret lies,
Which scapes, if formed for Love, a Lover's Eyes?
Even in this narrow Chink they quickly found
A friendly Passage for a trackless Sound.
Safely they told their Sorrows, and their Joys
In whispered Murmurs, and a dying Noise.
By turns to catch each other's Breath they strove,
And sucked in all the balmy Breeze of Love.
Often as on different Sides they stood, they cried,
Malicious Wall, thus Lovers to divide!
Suppose, thou should awhile to us give Place
To lock, and fasten in a close Embrace:
But if too much to grant so sweet a Bliss,
Indulge at least the Pleasure of a Kiss.
We scorn Ingratitude: To thee, we know,
This safe Conveyance of our Minds we owe.
Thus they their vain Petition did renew
Till Night, and then they softly sighed Adieu.
But first they strove to kiss, and that was all;
Their Kisses died untasted on the Wall.
Soon as the Morn had over the Stars prevailed,
And warned by Phoebus, Flowers their Dews exhaled,
The Lovers to their well-known Place return,
Alike they suffer, and alike they mourn.
At last their Parents they resolve to cheat,
(If to deceive in Love be called Deceit)
To steal by Night from home, and thence unknown
To seek the Fields, and quit the unfaithful Town.
But to prevent their wandering in the Dark,
They both agree to fix upon a Mark;
A Mark, that could not their Designs expose:
The Tomb of Ninus was the Mark they chose.
There they might rest secure beneath the Shade,
Which Boughs, with snowy Fruit encumbered, made:
A wide-spread Mulberry its Rise had took
Just on the Margin of a gurgling Brook.
Impatient for the friendly Dusk they stay;
And chide the Slowness of departing Day;
In Western Seas down sunk at last the Light,
From Western Seas up-rose the Shades of Night.
The loving Thisbe even prevents the Hour,
With cautious Silence she unlocks the Door,
And veils her Face, and marching through the Gloom
Swiftly arrives at the Assignation-Tomb.
For still the fearful Sex can fearless prove;
Boldly they act, if spirited by Love.
When lo! a Lioness rushed over the Plain,
Grimly besmeared with Blood of Oxen slain;
And what to the dire Sight new Horrors brought,
To slake her Thirst the neighboring Spring she sought
Which, by the Moon, when trembling Thisbe spies,
Winged with her Fear, swift, as the Wind, she flies;
And in a Cave recovers from her Fright,
But dropped her Veil, confounded in her Flight.
When sated with repeated Draughts, again
The Queen of Beasts scoured back along the Plain,
She found the Veil, and mouthing it all over,
With bloody Jaws the lifeless Prey she tore.
The Youth, who could not cheat his Guards so soon,
Late came, and noted by the glimmering Moon
Some savage Feet, new printed on the Ground,
His Cheeks turned pale, his Limbs no Vigor found:
But, when advancing on, the Veil he spied
Distained with Blood, and ghastly torn, he cried,
One Night shall Death to two young Lovers give,
But she deserved unnumber'd Years to live!
It Is I am guilty, I have thee betrayed,
Who came not early, as my charming Maid.
Whatever slew thee, I the Cause remain,
I named, and fixed the Place, where thou wast slain.
Ye Lions from your neighboring Dens repair,
Pity the Wretch, this impious Body tear!
But Cowards thus for Death can idly cry;
The Brave still have it in their Power to die.
Then to the appointed Tree he hastes away,
The Veil first gathered, though all rent it lay:
The Veil all rent, yet still itself endears,
He kissed, and kissing, washed it with his Tears.
Though rich (he cried) with many a precious Stain,
Still from my Blood a deeper Tincture gain.
Then in his Breast his shining Sword he drowned,
And fell supine, extended on the Ground.
As out again the Blade he, dying, drew,
Out spun the Blood, and streaming upwards flew.
So if a Conduit-pipe ever burst you saw,
Swift spring the gushing Waters through the Flaw:
Then spouting in a Bow, they rise on high,
And a new Fountain plays amid the Sky.
The Berries, stained with Blood, began to show
A dark Complexion, and forgot their Snow;
While fatten'd with the flowing Gore, the Root
Was doomed for ever to a purple Fruit.
Mean time poor Thisbe feared, so long she stayed,
Her Lover might suspect a perjured Maid.
Her Fright scarce over, she strove the Youth to find
With ardent Eyes, which spoke an ardent Mind.
Already in his Arms, she hears him sigh
At her Destruction, which was once so nigh.
The Tomb, the Tree, but not the Fruit she knew,
The Fruit she doubted for its altered Hue.
Still as she doubts, her Eyes a Body found
Quivering in Death, and gasping on the Ground.
She started back, the Red her Cheeks forsook,
And every Nerve with thrilling Horrors shook.
So trembles the smooth Surface of the Seas,
If brushed over gently with a rising Breeze.
But when her View her bleeding Love confessed,
She shrieked, she tore her Hair, she beat her Breast.
She raised the Body, and embraced it round,
And bathed with Tears unfeigned the gaping Wound.
Then her warm Lips to the cold Face applied,
And is it thus, ah! thus we meet, she cried!
My Pyramus! whence sprung thy cruel Fate?
My Pyramus! -- ah! speak, ever it is too late.
I, thy own Thisbe, but one Word implore,
One Word thy Thisbe never asked before.
At Thisbe's Name, awaked, he opened wide
His dying Eyes; with dying Eyes he tried
On her to dwell, but closed them slow, and died.
The fatal Cause was now at last explored,
Her Veil she knew, and saw his sheathless Sword:
From thy own Hand thy Ruin thou have found,
She said, but Love first taught that Hand to wound.
Even I for thee as bold a Hand can show,
And Love, which shall as true direct the Blow.
I will against the Woman's Weakness strive,
And never thee, lamented Youth, survive.
The World may say, I caused, alas! thy Death,
But saw thee breathless, and resigned my Breath.
Fate, though it conquers, shall no Triumph gain,
Fate, that divides us, still divides in vain.
Now, both our cruel Parents, hear my Prayer,
My Prayer to offer for us both I dare:
Oh! see our Ashes in one Urn confined,
Whom Love at first, and Fate at last has joined.
The Bliss, you envied, is not our Request;
Lovers, when dead, may sure together rest.
Thou, Tree, where now one lifeless Lump is laid,
Ever long over two shall cast a friendly Shade.
Still let our Loves from thee be understood,
Still witness in thy purple Fruit our Blood.
She spoke, and in her Bosom plunged the Sword,
All warm and reeking from it is slaughtered Lord.
The Prayer, which dying Thisbe had preferred,
Both Gods, and Parents with Compassion heard.
The Whiteness of the Mulberry soon fled,
And ripening, sadden'd in a dusky Red:
While both their Parents their lost Children mourn,
And mix their Ashes in one golden Urn.
Thus did the melancholy Tale conclude,
And a short, silent Interval ensued.
The next in Birth unloos'd her artful Tongue,
And drew attentive all the Sister-Throng.
The Story of LEUCOTHOE and the SUN.
The Sun, the Source of Light, by Beauty's Power
Once amorous grew; then hear the Sun's Amor.
Venus, and Mars, with his far-piercing Eyes
This God first spied; this God first all things spies.
Stung at the Sight, and swift on Mischief bent,
To haughty Juno's shapeless Son he went:
The Goddess, and her God-Gallant betrayed,
And told the Cuckold, where their Pranks were played.
Poor Vulcan soon desired to hear no more,
He dropped his Hammer, and he shook all over:
Then Courage takes, and full of vengeful Ire
He heaves the Bellows, and blows fierce the Fire.
From liquid Brass, though sure, yet subtle Snares
He forms, and next a wondrous Net prepares,
Drawn with such curious Art, so nicely sly,
Unseen the Mashes cheat the searching Eye.
Not half so thin their Webs the Spiders weave,
Which the most wary, buzzing Prey deceive.
These Chains, obedient to the Touch, he spread
In secret Foldings over the conscious Bed:
The conscious Bed again was quickly pressed
By the fond Pair, in lawless Raptures blessed.
Mars wondered at his Cytherea's Charms,
More fast than ever locked within her Arms.
While Vulcan the Ivory Doors unbarr'd with Care,
Then called the Gods to view the sportive Pair;
The Gods thronged in, and saw in open Day,
Where Mars, and Beauty's Queen, all naked, lay.
O! shameful Sight, if shameful that we name,
Which Gods with Envy viewed, and could not blame,
But for the Pleasure wished to bear the Shame.
Each Deity, with Laughter tired, departs,
Yet all still laughed at Vulcan in their Hearts.
Through Heaven the News of this Surprizal run,
But Venus did not thus forget the Sun.
He, who stolen Transports idly had betrayed,
By a Betrayer was in kind repaid.
What now avails, great God, thy piercing Blaze,
That Youth, and Beauty, and those golden Rays?
Thou, who can warm this Universe alone,
Feel'st now a Warmth more powerful than thy own:
And those bright Eyes, which all things should survey,
Know not from fair Leucothoe to stray.
The Lamp of Light, for human Good designed,
Is to one Virgin niggardly confined.
Sometimes too early rise thy Eastern Beams,
Sometimes too late they set in Western Streams:
It Is then her Beauty thy swift Course delays,
And gives to Winter Skies long Summer Days.
Now in thy Face thy lovesick Mind appears,
And spreads through impious Nations empty Fears:
For when thy beamless Head is wrapped in Night,
Poor Mortals tremble in despair of Light.
It Is not the Moon, that over thee casts a Veil,
It Is Love alone, which makes thy Looks so pale.
Leucothoe is grown thy only Care,
Not Phaeton's fair Mother now is fair.
The youthful Rhodos moves no tender Thought,
And beauteous Persa is at last forgot.
Fond Clytie, scorned, yet loved, and sought thy Bed,
Even then thy Heart for other Virgins bled.
Leucothoe has all thy Soul possessed,
And chased each rival Passion from thy Breast.
To this bright Nymph Eurynome gave Birth
In the blessed Confines of the spicy Earth.
Excelling others, she herself beheld
By her own blooming Daughter far excelled.
The Sire was Orchamus, whose vast Command,
The Seventh from Belus, ruled the Persian Land.
Deep in cool Vales, beneath the Hesperian Sky,
For the Sun's fiery Steeds the Pastures lie.
Ambrosia there they eat, and thence they gain
New Vigor, and their daily Toils sustain.
While thus on heavenly Food the Coursers fed,
And Night, around, her gloomy Empire spread,
The God assumed the Mother's Shape, and Air,
And passed, unheeded, to his darling Fair.
Close by a Lamp, with Maids encompassed round,
The Royal Spinster, full-employ'd, he found:
Then cried, Awhile from Work, my Daughter, rest;
And, like a Mother, scarce her Lips he pressed.
Servants, retire! -- nor Secrets dare to hear
Entrusted only to a Daughter's Ear.
They swift obeyed: Not one, suspicious, thought
The Secret, which their Mistress would be taught.
Then he: Since now no Witnesses are near,
Behold! the God, who guides the various Year!
The World's vast Eye, of Light the Source serene,
Who all things sees, by whom are all things seen.
Believe me, Nymph! (for I the Truth have showed)
Thy Charms have Power to charm so great a God.
Confused, she heard him his soft Passion tell,
And on the Floor, untwirl'd, the Spindle fell:
Still from the sweet Confusion some new Grace
Blushed out by stealth, and languish'd in her Face.
The Lover, now inflamed, himself put on,
And out at once the God, all-radiant, shone.
The Virgin startled at his altered Form,
Too weak to bear a God's impetuous Storm:
No more against the dazzling Youth she strove,
But silent yielded, and indulged his Love.
This Clytie knew, and knew she was undone,
Whose Soul was fixed, and doated on the Sun.
She raged to think on her neglected Charms,
And Phoebus, panting in another's Arms.
With envious Madness fired, she flies in haste,
And tells the King, his Daughter was unchaste.
The King, incensed to hear his Honor stained,
No more the Father, nor the Man retained.
In vain she stretched her Arms, and turned her Eyes
To her loved God, the Enlight'ner of the Skies.
In vain she owned, it was a Crime, yet still
It was a Crime not acted by her Will.
The brutal Sire stood deaf to every Prayer,
And deep in Earth entombed alive the Fair.
What Phoebus could do, was by Phoebus done,
Full on her Grave with pointed Beams he shone:
To pointed Beams the gaping Earth gave way,
Had the Nymph Eyes, her Eyes had seen the Day,
But lifeless now, yet lovely still, she lay.
Not more the God wept, when the World was fired,
And in the Wreck his blooming Boy expired.
The vital Flame he strives to light again,
And warm the frozen Blood in every Vein:
But since resistless Fates denied that Power,
On the cold Nymph he rained a Nectar-show'r.
Ah! undeserving thus (he said) to die,
Yet still in Odours thou shall reach the Sky.
The Body soon dissolved, and all around
Perfumed with heavenly Fragrancies the Ground.
A Sacrifice for Gods up-rose from thence,
A sweet, delightful Tree of Frankincense.
The Transformation of CLYTIE.
Though guilty Clytie thus the Sun betrayed,
By too much Passion she was guilty made.
Excess of Love begot Excess of Grief,
Grief fondly bad her hence to hope Relief.
But angry Phoebus hears, unmoved, her Sighs,
And scornful from her loathed Embraces flies.
All Day, all Night, in trackless Wilds, alone
She pined, and taught the listening Rocks her Moan.
On the bare Earth she lies, her Bosom bare,
Loose her Attire, disheveled is her Hair.
Nine times the Morn unbarr'd the Gates of Light,
As often were spread the alternate Shades of Night,
So long no Sustenance the Mourner knew,
Unless she drunk her Tears, or sucked the Dew.
She turned about, but rose not from the Ground,
Turned to the Sun, still as he roul'd his Round:
On his bright Face hung her desiring Eyes,
Till fixed to Earth, she strove in vain to rise.
Her Looks their Paleness in a Flower retained,
But here, and there, some purple Streaks they gained.
Still the loved Object the fond Leafs pursue,
Still move their Root, the moving Sun to view,
And in the Heliotrope the Nymph is true.
The Sisters heard these Wonders with Surprise,
But part received them, as Romantic Lies;
And pertly rallied, that they could not see
In Powers Divine so vast an Energy.
Part owned, true Gods such Miracles might do,
But owned not Bacchus, one among the True.
At last a common, just Request they make,
And beg Alcithoe her Turn to take.
I will (she said) and please you, if I can,
Then shot her Shuttle swift, and thus began.
The Fate of Daphnis is a Fate too known,
Whom an enamored Nymph transformed to Stone,
Because she feared another Nymph might see
The lovely Youth, and love as much as she:
So strange the Madness is of Jealousy!
Nor shall I tell, what Changes Scython made,
And how he walked a Man, or tripp'd a Maid.
You too would peevish frown, and Patience want
To hear, how Celmis grew an Adamant.
He once was dear to Jove, and saw of old
Jove, when a Child, but what he saw, he told.
Crocus, and Smilax may be turned to Flowers,
And the Curetes spring from bounteous Showers;
I pass a hundred Legends stale, as these,
And with sweet Novelty your Taste will please.
The Story of SALMACIS and HERMAPHRODITUS.
By Mr. ADDISON.
How Salmacis, with weak enfeebling Streams
Softens the Body, and unnerves the Limbs,
And what the secret Cause, shall here be shown;
The Cause is secret, but the Effect is known.
The Naids nursed an Infant heretofore,
That Cytherea once to Hermes bore:
From both the Illustrious Authors of his Race
The Child was named; nor was it hard to trace
Both the bright Parents through the Infant's Face.
When fifteen Years, in Ida's cool Retreat,
The Boy had told, he left his Native Seat,
And sought fresh Fountains in a foreign Soil:
The Pleasure lessened the attending Toil.
With eager Steps the Lycian Fields he crossed,
And Fields that border on the Lycian Coast;
A River here he viewed so lovely bright,
It showed the Bottom in a fairer Light,
Nor kept a Sand concealed from Human sight.
The Stream produced nor slimy Ooze, nor Weeds,
Nor miry Rushes, nor the spiky Reeds;
But dealt enriching Moisture all around,
The fruitful Banks with cheerful Verdure crowned,
And kept the Spring Eternal on the Ground.
A Nymph presides, nor practiced in the Chase,
Nor skilful at the Bow, nor at the Race;
Of all the Blue-ey'd Daughters of the Main,
The only Stranger to Diana's Train:
Her Sisters often, as it is said, would cry
" Fie Salmacis, what always idle! fie,
" Or take thy Quiver, or thy Arrows seize,
" And mix the Toils of Hunting with thy Ease.
Nor Quiver she nor Arrows ever would seize,
Nor mix the Toils of Hunting with her Ease.
But often would bathe her in the Crystal Tide,
Often with a Comb her dewy Locks divide;
Now in the limpid Streams she views her Face,
And dressed her Image in the floating Glass:
On Beds of Leaves she now reposed her Limbs,
Now gathered Flowers that grew about her Stream
And then by chance was gathering, as she stood
To view the Boy, and longed for what she viewed.
Fain would she meet the Youth with hasty Feet,
She fain would meet him, but refused to meet
Before her Looks were set with nicest Care,
And well deserved to be reputed Fair.
" Bright Youth, she cries, whom all thy Features prove
" A God, and, if a God, the God of Love;
" But if a Mortal, blessed thy Nurse's Breast,
" Blessed are thy Parents, and thy Sisters blessed:
" But oh how blessed! how more than blessed thy Bride.
" Allied in Bliss, if any yet allied.
" If so, let mine the stolen Enjoyments be;
" If not, behold a willing Bride in me.
The Boy knew naught of Love, and touched with Shame,
He strove, and blushed, but still the Blush became:
In rising Blushes still fresh Beauties rose;
The sunny Side of Fruit such Blushes shows,
And such the Moon, when all her Silver White
Turns in Eclipses to a ruddy Light.
The Nymph still begs, if not a nobler Bliss,
A cold Salute at least, a Sister's Kiss:
And now prepares to take the lovely Boy
Between her Arms. He, innocently coy,
Replies, " Or leave me to my self alone,
" You rude uncivil Nymph, or I Will be gone.
" Fair Stranger then, says she, it shall be so;
And, for she feared his Threats, she feigned to go:
But hid within a Covert's neighboring Green,
She kept him still in sight, herself unseen.
The Boy now fancies all the Danger over,
And innocently sports about the Shore,
Playsul and wanton to the Stream he trips,
And dips his Foot, and shivers, as he dips.
The Coolness pleased him, and with eager haste
His airy Garments on the Banks he cast;
His Godlike Features, and his Heavenly Hue,
And all his Beauties were exposed to View.
His naked Limbs the Nymph with Rapture spies,
While hotter Passions in her Bosom rise,
Flush in her Cheeks, and sparkle in her Eyes.
She longs, she burns to clasp him in her Arms,
And looks, and sighs, and kindles at his Charms.
Now all undrest upon the Banks he stood,
And clapped his Sides, and leapt into the Flood:
His lovely Limbs the Silver Waves divide,
His Limbs appear more lovely through the Tide;
As Lilies shut within a Crystal Case,
Receive a glossy Luster from the Glass.
He Is mine, he is all my own, the Naid cries,
And flings off all, and after him she flies.
And now she fastens on him as he swims,
And holds him close, and wraps about his Limbs.
The more the Boy resisted, and was coy,
The more she clipped, and kissed the struggling Boy.
So when the wrigling Snake is snacht on high
In Eagle's Claws, and hisses in the Sky,
Around the Foe his twirling Tail he flings,
And twists her Legs, and wriths about her Wings.
The restless Boy still obstinately strove
To free himself, and still refused her Love.
Amidst his Limbs she kept her Limbs intwin'd,
" And why, coy Youth, she cries, why thus unkind!
" Oh may the Gods thus keep us ever joined!
" Oh may we never, never part again!
So prayed the Nymph, nor did she pray in vain:
For now she finds him, as his Limbs she pressed,
Grow nearer still, and nearer to her Breast;
Till, piercing each the other's Flesh, they run
Together, and incorporate in One:
Last in one Face are both their Faces joined,
As when the Stock and grafted Twig combined
Shoot up the same, and wear a common Rind:
Both Bodies in a single Body mix,
A single Body with a double Sex.
The Boy, thus lost in Woman, now surveyed
The River's guilty Stream, and thus he prayed.
(He prayed, but wondered at his softer Tone,
Surpised to hear a Voice but half his own)
You Parent-Gods, whose Heavenly Names I bear,
Hear your Hermaphrodite, and grant my Prayer;
Oh grant, that whomsoe'er these Streams contain,
If Man he entered, he may rise again
Supple, unsinew'd, and but half a Man!
The Heavenly Parents answered, from on high,
Their two-shap'd Son, the double Votary;
Then gave a secret Virtue to the Flood,
And tinged it is Source to make his Wishes good.
Continued by Mr. EUSDEN.
ALCITHOE and her Sisters transformed to Bats.
But Mineus' Daughters still their Tasks pursue,
To Wickedness most obstinately true:
At Bacchus still they laugh, when all around,
Unseen, the Timbrels hoarse were heard to sound.
Saffron, and Myrrh their fragrant Odours shed,
And now the present Deity they dread.
Strange to relate! Here Ivy first was seen,
Along the Distaff crept the wondrous Green.
Then sudden-springing Vines began to bloom,
And the soft Tendrils curled around the Loom:
While purple Clusters, dangling from on high,
Tinged the wrought Purple with a second Die.
Now from the Skies was shot a doubtful Light,
The Day declining to the Bounds of Night.
The Fabrick's firm Foundations shake all over,
False Tigers rage, and figured Lions roar.
Torches, aloft, seem blazing in the Air,
And angry Flashes of red Lightenings glare.
To dark Recesses, the dire Sight to shun,
Swift the pale Sisters in Confusion run.
Their Arms were lost in Pinions, as they fled,
And subtle Films each slender Limb o'er-spread.
Their altered Forms their Senses soon revealed;
Their Forms, how altered, Darkness still concealed.
Close to the Roof each, wondering, upwards springs,
Born on unknown, transparent, plumeless Wings.
They strove for Words; their little Bodies found
No Words, but murmured in a fainting Sound.
In Towns, not Woods, the sooty Batts delight,
And never, till the Dusk, begin their Flight;
Till Vesper rises with his Evening Flame;
From whom the Romans have derived their Name.
The Transformation of INO and MELICERTA to Sea-Gods.
The Power of Bacchus now over Thebes had flown,
With awful Reverence soon the God they own.
Proud Ino, all around, the Wonder tells,
And on her Nephew-Deity still dwells.
Of numerous Sisters, she alone yet knew
No Grief, but Grief, which she from Sisters drew.
Imperial Juno saw her with Disdain,
Vain in her Offspring, in her Consort vain,
Who ruled the trembling Thebans with a Nod,
But saw her vainest in her Foster-God.
Could then (she cried) a Bastard-Boy have Power
To make a Mother her own Son devour?
Could he the Tuscan Crew to Fishes change,
And now three Sisters damn to Forms so strange?
Yet shall the Wife of Jove find no Relief?
Shall she, still unrevenged, disclose her Grief?
Have I the mighty Freedom to complain?
Is that my Power? is that to ease my Pain?
A Foe has taught me Vengeance; and who ought
To scorn that Vengeance, which a Foe has taught?
What sure Destruction frantic Rage can throw,
The gaping Wounds of slaughtered Pentheus show.
Why should not Ino, fired with Madness, stray,
Like her mad Sisters her own Kindred slay,
Why, she not follow, where they lead the way.
Down a steep, yawning Cave, where Yews displayed
In Arches meet, and lend a baleful Shade,
Through silent Labyrinths a Passage lies
To mournful Regions, and infernal Skies.
Here Styx exhales its noisome Clouds, and here,
The funeral Rites once paid, all Souls appear.
Stiff Cold, and Horror with a ghastly Face
And staring Eyes, infest the dreary Place.
Ghosts, new-arriv'd, and Strangers to these Plains,
Know not the Palace, where grim Pluto reigns.
They journey doubtful, nor the Road can tell,
Which leads to the Metropolis of Hell.
A thousand Avenues those Towers command,
A thousand Gates for ever open stand.
As all the Rivers, disembogu'd, find Room
For all their Waters in old Ocean's Womb:
So this vast City Worlds of Shades receives,
And Space for Millions still of Worlds she leaves.
The unbody'd Specter freely rove, and show
Whatever they loved on Earth, they love below.
The Lawyers still, or right, or wrong, support,
The Courtiers smoothly glide to Pluto's Court.
Still airy Heroes Thoughts of Glory fire,
Still the dead Poet strings his deathless Lyre,
And Lovers still with fancied Darts expire.
The Queen of Heaven, to gratify her Hate,
And sooth immortal Wrath, forgets her State.
Down from the Realms of Day, to Realms of Night,
The Goddess swift precipitates her Flight.
At Hell arrived, the Noise Hell's Porter heard,
The enormous Dog his triple Head up-rear'd:
Thrice from three grizly Throats he howled profound,
Then suppliant couched, and stretched along the Ground.
The trembling Threshold, which Saturnia pressed,
The Weight of such Divinity confessed.
Before a lofty, adamantine Gate,
Which closed a Tower of Brass, the Furies sat:
Misshapen Forms, tremendous to the Sight,
The implacable, foul Daughters of the Night.
A sounding Whip each bloody Sister shakes,
Or from her Tresses combs the curling Snakes.
But now great Juno's Majesty was known,
Through the thick Gloom, all-heav'nly bright, she shone:
The hideous Monsters their Obedience showed,
And rising from their Seats, submissive bowed.
This is the Place of Woe, here groan the Dead;
Huge Tityus over nine Acres here is spread.
Fruitful for Pain, the immortal Liver bleeds,
Still grows, and still the insatiate Vulture feeds.
Poor Tantalus to taste the Water tries,
But from his Lips the faithless Water flies:
Then thinks, the bending Tree he can command,
The Tree starts backwards, and eludes his Hand.
The Labor too of Sisyphus is vain,
Up the steep Mount he heaves the Stone with Pain,
Down from the Summit rouls the Stone again.
The Belides their leaky Vessels still
Are ever filling, and yet never fill:
Doomed to this Punishment for Blood they shed,
For Bridegrooms slaughtered in the Bridal Bed.
Stretched on the rouling Wheel Ixion lies;
Himself he follows, and himself he flies.
Ixion, tortured, Juno sternly cy'd,
Then turned, and toiling Sisyphus espied:
And why (she said) so wretched is the Fate
Of him, whose Brother proudly reigns in State?
Yet still my Altars unador'd have been
By Athamas, and his presumptuous Queen.
What caused her Hate, the Goddess thus confessed,
What caused her Journey now was more than guest.
That Hate, relentless, its Revenge did want,
And that Revenge the Furies soon could grant:
They could the Glory of proud Thebes efface,
And hide in Ruin the Cadmean Race.
For this she largely promises, entreats,
And to Entreaties adds Imperial Threats.
Then fell Tisiphone with Rage was stung,
And from her Mouth the untwisted Serpents flung.
To gain this trifling Boon, there is no need
(She cried) in formal Speeches to proceed.
Whatever thou command'st to do, is done;
Believe it finished, though not yet begun.
But from these melancholy Seats repair
To happier Mansions, and to purer Air.
She spoke: The Goddess, darting upwards, flies,
And joyous re-ascends her native Skies:
Nor entered there, 'till 'round her Iris threw
Ambrosial Sweets, and poured Celestial Dew.
The faithful Fury, guiltless of Delays,
With cruel Haste the dire Command obeys.
Girt in a bloody Gown, a Torch she shakes,
And 'round her Neck twines speckled Wreaths of Snakes.
Fear, and Dismay, and agonizing Pain,
With frantic Rage, complete her loveless Train.
To Thebes her Flight she sped, and Hell forsook;
At her Approach the Theban Turrets shook:
The Sun shrunk back, thick Clouds the Day o'er-cast,
And springing Greens were withered, as she past.
Now, dismal Yellings heard, strange Specter seen
Confound as much the Monarch, as the Queen.
In vain to quit the Palace they prepared,
Tisiphone was there, and kept the Ward.
She wide-extended her unfriendly Arms,
And all the Fury lavished all her Harms.
Part of her Tresses loudly hiss, and part
Spread Poison, as their forky Tongues they dart.
Then from her middle Locks two Snakes she drew,
Whose Merit from superior Mischief grew:
The envenomed Ruin, thrown with spiteful Care,
Clung to the Bosoms of the hapless Pair.
The hapless Pair soon with wild Thoughts were fired,
And Madness, by a thousand ways inspired.
It Is true, the unwounded Body still was sound,
But 'twas the Soul, which felt the deadly Wound.
Nor did the unsated Monster here give over,
But dealt of Plagues a fresh, unnumber'd Store.
Each baneful Juice too well she understood,
Foam, churn'd by Cerberus, and Hydra's Blood.
Hot Hemlock, and cold Aconite she chose,
Delighted in Variety of Woes.
Whatever can untune the harmonious Soul,
And its mild, reasoning Faculties control,
Give false Ideas, raise Desires profane,
And whirl in Eddies the tumultuous Brain,
Mixed with cursed Art, she direfully around
Through all their Nerves diffused the sad Compound.
Then tossed her Torch in Circles still the same,
Improved their Rage, and added Flame to Flame.
The grinning Fury her own Conquest spied,
And to her rueful Shades returned with Pride,
And threw the exhausted, useless Snakes aside.
Now Athamas cries out, his Reason fled,
Here, Fellow-hunters, let the Toils be spread.
I saw a Lioness, in quest of Food,
With her two Young, run roaring in this Wood.
Again the fancied Savages were seen,
As through his Palace still he chased his Queen;
Then tore Learchus from her Breast: The Child
Stretched little Arms, and on its Father smiled:
A Father now no more, who now begun
Around his Head to whirl his giddy Son,
And, quite insensible to Nature's Call,
The helpless Infant slung against the Wall.
The same mad Poison in the Mother wrought,
Young Melicerta in her Arms she caught,
And with disordered Tresses, howling, flies,
O! Bacchus, Evoe, Bacchus! loud she cries.
The Name of Bacchus Juno laughed to hear,
And said, thy Foster-God has cost thee dear.
A Rock there stood, whose Side the beating Waves
Had long consumed, and hollowed into Caves.
The Head shot forwards in a bending Steep,
And cast a dreadful Covert over the Deep.
The wretched Ino, on Destruction bent,
Climbed up the Cliff; such Strength her Fury lent:
Thence with her guiltless Boy, who wept in vain,
At one bold Spring she plunged into the Main.
Her Neice's Fate touched Cytherea's Breast,
And in soft Sounds she Neptune thus addressed.
Great God of Waters, whose extended Sway
Is next to his, whom Heaven and Earth obey:
Let not the Suit of Venus thee displease,
Pity the Floaters on the Ionian Seas.
Increase thy Subject-Gods, nor yet disdain
To add my Kindred to that glorious Train.
If from the Sea I may such Honors claim,
If it is Desert, that from the Sea I came,
As Greecian Poets artfully have sung,
And in the Name confessed, from whence I sprung.
Pleased Neptune nodded his Ascent, and free
Both soon became from frail Mortality.
He gave them Form, and Majesty Divine,
And bad them glide along the foamy Brine.
For Melicerta is Palaemon known,
And Ino, once, Leucothoe is grown.
The Transformation of the THEBAN Matrons.
The Theban Matrons their loved Queen pursued,
And tracing to the Rock, her Footsteps viewed.
Too certain of her Fate, they rend the Skies
With piteous Shrieks, and lamentable Cries.
All beat their Breasts, and Juno all upbraid,
Who still remembered a deluded Maid:
Who, still revengeful for one stolen Embrace,
Thus wreak'd her Hate on the Cadmean Race.
This Juno heard; And shall such Elfs, she cried,
Dispute my Justice, or my Power deride?
You too shall feel my Wrath not idly spent;
A Goddess never for Insults was meant.
She, who loved most, and who most loved had been,
Said, Not the Waves shall part me from my Queen.
She strove to plunge into the roaring Flood;
Fixed to the Stone, a Stone herself she stood.
This, on her Breast would fain her Blows repeat,
Her stiffen'd Hands refused her Breast to beat.
That, stretched her Arms unto the Seas; in vain
Her Arms she labored to unstretch again.
To tear her comely Locks another tried,
Both comely Locks, and Fingers petrified.
Part thus; but Juno with a softer Mind
Part doomed to mix among the feathered Kind.
Transformed, the Name of Theban Birds they keep,
And skim the Surface of that fatal Deep.
CADMUS and his QUEEN transformed to Serpents.
Mean time, the wretched Cadmus mourns, nor knows,
That they who mortal fell, immortal rose.
With a long Series of new Ills oppressed,
He droops, and all the Man forsakes his Breast.
Strange Prodigies confound his frighted Eyes;
From the fair City, which he raised, he flies:
As if Misfortune not pursued his Race,
But only hung over that devoted Place.
Resolved by Sea to seek some distant Land,
At last he safely gained the Illyrian Strand.
Chearless himself, his Consort still he chears,
Hoary, and loaden'd both with Woes, and Years.
Then to recount past Sorrows they begin,
And trace them to the gloomy Origin.
That Serpent sure was hallowed, Cadmus cried,
Which once my Spear transfixed with foolish Pride;
When the big Teeth, a Seed before unknown,
By me along the wondering Glebe were sown,
And sprouting Armies by themselves overthrown.
If thence the Wrath of Heaven on me is bent,
May Heaven conclude it with one sad Event;
To an extended Serpent change the Man,
And while he spoke, the wished for Change began.
His Skin with Seagreen Spots was varied 'round*
And on his Belly prone he pressed the Ground.
He glittered soon with many a golden Scale,
And his shrunk Legs closed in a spiry Tail.
Arms yet remained, remaining Arms he spread
To his loved Wife, and human Tears yet shed.
Come, my Harmonia, come, thy Face recline
Down to my Face; still touch, what still is mine.
O! let these Hands, while Hands, be gently pressed,
While yet the Serpent has not all possessed.
More he had spoke, but strove to speak in vain,
The forky Tongue refused to tell his Pain,
And learned in Hissings only to complain.
Then shrieked Harmonia, Stay, my Cadmus, stay,
Glide not in such a monstrous Shape away!
Destruction, like impetuous Waves, rouls on,
Where are thy Feet, thy Legs, thy Shoulders gone?
Changed is thy Visage, changed is all thy Frame;
Cadmus is only Cadmus now in Name.
Ye Gods, my Cadmus to himself restore,
Or me like him transform; I ask no more.
The Husband-Serpent showed, he still had Thought,
With wonted Fondness an Embrace he sought;
Played 'round her Neck in many a harmless Twist,
And licked that Bosom, which, a Man, he kissed.
The Lookers on (for Lookers on there were)
Shocked at the Sight, half-dy'd away with Fear.
The Transformation was again renewed,
And, like the Husband, changed the Wife they viewed.
Both, Serpents now, with Fold involved in Fold,
To the next Covert amicably roul'd.
There curled they lie, or wave along the Green,
Fearless see Men, by Men are fearless seen,
Still mild, and conscious, what they once have been.
The Story of PERSEUS.
Yet though this harsh, inglorious Fate they found,
Each in the deathless Grandson lived renowned.
Through conquered India Bacchus nobly rode,
And Greece with Temples hailed the conquering God.
In Argos only proud Acrisius reigned,
Who all the consecrated Rites profaned.
Audacious Wretch! thus Bacchus to deny,
And the great Thunderer's great Son defy!
Nor him alone: Thy Daughter vainly strove
Brave Perseus of Celestial Stem to prove,
And herself pregnant by a golden Jove.
Yet this was true, and Truth in time prevails;
Acrisius now his Unbelief bewails.
His former Thought, an impious Thought he found,
And both the Hero, and the God were owned.
He saw, already one in Heaven was placed,
And one with more, than mortal Triumphs graced.
The Victor Perseus with the Gorgon-head,
Over Libyan Sands his airy Journey sped.
The gory Drops distilled, as swift he flew,
And from each Drop envenomed Serpents grew.
The Mischiefs brooded on the barren Plains,
And still the unhappy Fruitfulness remains.
ATLAS transformed to a Mountain.
Thence Perseus, like a Cloud, by Storms was driven
Through all the Expanse beneath the Cope of Heaven.
The jarring Winds unable to control,
He saw the Southern; and the Northern Pole:
And Eastward thrice, and Westward thrice was whirled,
And from the Skies surveyed the nether World.
But when gray Evening showed the Verge of Night,
He feared in Darkness to pursue his Flight.
He poised his Pinions, and forgot to soar,
And sinking, closed them on the Hesperian Shore:
Then begged to rest, till Lucifer begun
To wake the Morn, the Morn to wake the Sun.
Here Atlas reigned, of more than human Size,
And in his Kingdom the World's Limit lies.
Here Titan bids his wearied Coursers sleep,
And cools the burning Axle in the Deep.
The mighty Monarch, uncontrolled, alone,
His Scepter sways: no neighboring States are known.
A thousand Flocks on shady Mountains fed,
A thousand Herds over grassy Plains were spread.
Here wondrous Trees their shining Stores unfold,
Their shining Stores too wondrous to be told,
Their Leafs, their Branches, and their Apples, Gold.
Then Perseus the gigantick Prince addressed,
Humbly implored a hospitable Rest.
If bold Exploits thy Admiration fire,
He said, I fancy, mine thou will admire.
Or if the Glory of a Race can move,
Not mean my Glory, for I spring from Jove.
At this Confession Atlas ghastly star'd,
Mindful of what an Oracle declared,
That the dark Womb of Time concealed a Day,
Which should, disclosed, the bloomy Gold betray:
All should at once be ravished from his Eyes,
And Jove's own Progeny enjoy the Prize.
For this, the Fruit he loftily immured,
And a fierce Dragon the strait Pass secured.
For this, all Strangers he forbad to land,
And drove them from the inhospitable Strand.
To Perseus then: Fly quickly, fly this Coast,
Nor falsely dare thy Acts, and Race to boast.
In vain the Hero for one Night entreats,
Threatening he storms, and next adds Force to Threats.
By Strength not Perseus could himself defend,
For who in Strength with Atlas could contend?
But since short Rest to me thou will not give,
A Gift of endless Rest from me receive.
He said, and, backward turned, no more concealed
The Present, and Medusa's Head revealed.
Soon the high Atlas a high Mountain stood,
His Locks, and Beard became a leafy Wood.
His Hands, and Shoulders into Ridges went,
The Summit-head still crowned the steep Ascent.
His Bones a solid, rocky Hardness gained:
He, thus immensely grown, (as Fate ordained)
The Stars, the Heavens, and all the Gods sustained.
ANDROMEDA rescued from the Sea Monster.
Now Aeolus had with strong Chains confined,
And deep imprisoned every blustering Wind.
The rising Phospher with a purple Light
Did sluggish Mortals to new Toils invite.
His Feet again the valiant Perseus plumes,
And his keen Sabre in his Hand resumes:
Then nobly spurns the Ground, and upwards springs,
And cuts the liquid Air with sounding Wings.
Over various Seas, and various Lands he past,
Till Aethiopia's Shore appeared at last.
Andromeda was there, doomed to atone
By her own Ruin Follies not her own:
And if Injustice in a God can be,
Such was the Libyan God's unjust Decree.
Chained to a Rock she stood; young Perseus stayed
His rapid Flight, to view the beauteous Maid.
So sweet her Frame, so exquisitely fine,
She seemed a Statue by a Hand Divine,
Had not the Wind her waving Tresses showed,
And down her Cheeks the melting Sorrows flowed.
Her faultless Form the Hero's Bosom fires,
The more he looks, the more he still admires.
The Admirer almost had forgot to fly,
And swift descended, fluttering from on high.
O! Virgin, worthy no such Chains to prove,
But pleasing Chains in the soft Folds of Love;
Thy Country, and thy Name (he said) disclose,
And give a true Rehearsal of thy Woes.
A quick Reply her Bashfulness refused,
To the free Converse of a Man unused.
Her rising Blushes had Concealment found
From her spread Hands, but that her Hands were bound.
She acted to her full Extent of Power,
And bathed her Face with a fresh, silent Shower.
But by degrees in Innocence grown bold,
Her Name, her Country, and her Birth she told:
And how she suffered for her Mother's Pride,
Who with the Nercids once in Beauty vy'd.
Part yet untold, the Seas began to roar,
And mounting Billows tumbled to the Shore.
Above the Waves a Monster raised his Head,
His Body over the Deep was widely spread:
Onward he flounc'd, aloud the Virgin cries,
Each Parent to her Shrieks in Shrieks replies,
But she had deepest Cause to rend the Skies.
Weeping, to her they cling; no Sign appears
Of Help, they only lend their helpless Tears.
Too long you vent your Sorrows, Perseus said,
Short is the Hour, and swift the time of Aid.
In me the Son of thundering Jove behold,
Got in a kindly Shower of fruitful Gold.
Medusa's Snaky Head is now my Prey,
And through the Clouds I boldly wing my Way.
If such Desert be worthy of Esteem,
Add, if your Daughter I from Death redeem,
Shall she be mine? Shall it not then be thought,
A Bride, so lovely, was too cheaply bought?
For her my Arms I willingly employ,
If I may Beauties, which I save, enjoy.
The Parents eagerly the Terms embrace,
For who would slight such Terms in such a Case?
Nor her alone they promise, but beside,
The Dowry of a Kingdom with the Bride.
As well-rigg'd Galleys, which Slaves, sweating, row,
With their sharp Beaks the whitened Ocean plough;
So when the Monster moved, still at his Back
The furrowed Waters left a foamy Track.
Now to the Rock he was advanced so nigh,
Whirled from a Sling a Stone the Space would fly.
Then bounding, upwards the brave Perseus sprung,
And in mid Air on hovering Pinions hung.
His Shadow quickly floated on the Main,
The Monster could not his wild Rage restrain,
But at the floating Shadow leaped in vain.
As when Jove's Bird, a speckled Serpent spies,
Which in the Shine of Phoebus basking lies,
Unseen, he souses down, and bears away,
Trussed from behind, the vainly hissing Prey.
To writh his Neck the Labor naught avails,
Too deep the imperial Talons pierce his Scales.
Thus the winged Hero now descends, now soars,
And at his Pleasure the vast Monster gores.
Full in his Back, swift-stooping from above,
The crooked Sabre to its Hilt he drove.
The Monster raged, impatient of the Pain,
First bounded high, and then sunk low again.
Now, like a savage Boar, when chafed with Wounds,
And bay'd with opening Mouths of hungry Hounds,
He on the Foe turns with collected Might,
Who still eludes him with an airy Flight;
And wheeling round, the scaly Armor tries
Of his thick Sides; his thinner Tail now plies:
Till from repeated Strokes out-gush'd a Flood,
And the Waves redden'd with the streaming Blood.
At last the dropping Wings, befoam'd all over,
With flaggy Heaviness their Master bore:
A Rock he spied, whose humble Head was low,
Bare at an Ebb, but covered at a Flow.
A ridgy Hold, he, thither flying, gained,
And with one Hand his bending Weight sustained;
With the other, vigorous Blows he dealt around,
And the Home-thrusts the expiring Monster owned.
In deaf'ning Shouts the glad Applauses rise,
And Peal on Peal runs rattling through the Skies.
The Saviour-Youth the Royal Pair confess,
And with heaved Hands their Daughter's Bridegroom bless.
The beauteous Bride moves on, now loosed from Chains,
The Cause, and sweet Reward of all the Hero's Pains.
Mean time, on Shore triumphant Perseus stood,
And purged his Hands, smeared with the Monster's Blood:
Then in the Windings of a sandy Bed
Composed Medusa's execrable Head.
But to prevent the Roughness, Leafs he threw,
And young, green Twigs, which soft in Waters grew.
There soft, and full of Sap, but here, when laid,
Touched by the Head, that Softness soon decayed.
The wonted Flexibility quite gone,
The tender Scyons hardened into Stone.
Fresh, juicy Twigs, surprised, the Nereids brought,
Fresh, juicy Twigs the same Contagion caught.
The Nymphs the petrifying Seeds still keep,
And propagate the Wonder through the Deep.
The pliant Sprays of Coral yet declare
Their stiff'ning Nature, when exposed to Air.
Those Sprays, which did, like bending Osiers, move,
Snatched from their Element, obdurate prove,
And Shrubs beneath the Waves, grow Stones above.
The great Immortals grateful Perseus praised,
And to three Powers three turfy Altars raised.
To Hermes this, and that he did assign
To Pallas: The mid Honors, Jove, were thine.
He hastes for Pallas a white Cow to cull,
A Calf for Hermes, but for Jove a Bull.
Then seized the Prize of his victorious Fight,
Andromeda, and claimed the Nuptial Rite.
Andromeda alone he greatly sought,
The Dowry-Kingdom was not worth his Thought.
Pleased Hymen now his golden Torch displays;
With rich Oblations fragrant Altars blaze.
Sweet Wreaths of choicest Flowers are hung on high,
And cloudless Pleasure smiles in every Eye.
The melting Music melting Thoughts inspires,
And warbling Songsters aid the warbling Lyres.
The Palace opens wide in pompous State,
And by his Peers surrounded, Cepheus sat.
A Feast was served, fit for a King to give,
And fit for God-like Heroes to receive.
The Banquet ended, the gay, cheerful Bowl
Moved round, and brightened, and enlarged each Soul.
Then Perseus asked, what Customs there obtained,
And by what Laws the People were restrained.
Which told; the Teller a like Freedom takes,
And to the Warrior his Petition makes,
To know, what Arts had won Medusa's Snakes.
The Story of MEDUSA's Head.
The Hero with his just Request complies,
Shows, how a Vale beneath cold Atlas lies,
Where, with aspiring Mountains fenced around,
He the two Daughters of old Phorcus found.
Fate had one common Eye to both assigned,
Each saw by turns, and each by turns was blind.
But while our strove to lend her Sister Sight,
He stretched his Hand, and stole their mutual Light,
And left both Eyeless, both involved in Night.
Through devious Wilds, and trackless Woods he past,
And at the Gorgon-Seats arrived at last:
But as he journey'd, pensive he surveyed,
What wasteful Havoc dire Medusa made.
Here, stood still breathing Statues, Men before;
There, rampant Lions seemed in Stone to roar.
Nor did he, yet affrighted, quit the Field,
But in the Mirror of his polished Shield
Reflected saw Medusa Slumbers take,
And not one Serpent by good chance awake.
Then backward an unerring Blow he sped,
And from her Body lop'd at once her Head.
The Gore prolifick proved; with sudden Force
Sprung Pegasus, and winged his airy Course.
The Heaven-born Warrior faithfully went on,
And told the numerous Dangers which he run.
What subject Seas, what Lands he had in view,
And nigh what Stars the adventurous Hero flew.
At last he silent sat; the listening Throng
Sighed at the Pause of his delightful Tongue.
Some begged to know, why this alone should wear
Of all the Sisters such destructive Hair.
Great Perseus then: With me you shall prevail,
Worth the Relation, to relate a Tale.
Medusa once had Charms; to gain her Love
A rival Crowd of envious Lovers strove.
They, who have seen her, own, they never did trace
More moving Features in a sweeter Face.
Yet above all, her Length of Hair, they own,
In golden Ringlets waved, and graceful shone.
Her Neptune saw, and with such Beauties fired,
Resolved to compass, what his Soul desired.
In chaste Minerva's Fane, he, lustful, stayed,
And seized, and rifled the young, blushing Maid.
The bashful Goddess turned her Eyes away,
Nor durst such bold Impurity survey;
But on the ravished Virgin Vengeance takes,
Her shining Hair is changed to hissing Snakes.
These in her Aegis Pallas joys to bear,
The hissing Snakes her Foes more sure ensnare,
Than they did Lovers once, when shining Hair.
The End of the Fourth Book.
To the Right Honorable the Countess of Warwick.
E Kirkall

OVID's METAMORPHOSES. BOOK V.
Translated by ARTHUR MAYNWARING, Esquire
The Story of PERSEUS continued.
WHILE Perseus entertained with this Report
His Father Cepheus, and the listening Court,
Within the Palace Walls was heard aloud
The roaring Noise of some unruly Crowd;
Not like the Songs which cheerful Friends prepare
For nuptial Days, but Sounds that threatened War;
And all the Pleasures of this happy Feast,
To Tumult turned, in wild Disorder ceased:
So, when the Sea is calm, we often find
A Storm raised sudden by some furious Wind.
Chief in the Riot Phineus first appeared,
The rash Ringleader of this boisterous Herd,
And brandishing his brazen-pointed Lance,
Behold, he said, an injured Man advance,
Stung with Resentment for his ravished Wife,
Nor shall thy Wings, O Perseus, save thy Life;
Nor Jove himself; though we have been often told
Who got thee in the Form of tempting Gold.
His Lance was aimed, when Cepheus ran, and said,
Hold, Brother, hold; what brutal Rage has made
Your frantic Mind so black a Crime conceive?
Are these the Thanks that you to Perseus give?
This the Reward that to his Worth you pay,
Whose timely Valor saved Andromeda?
Nor was it he, if you would reason right,
That forced her from you, but the jealous Spite
Of envious Nereids, and Jove's high Decree;
And that devouring Monster of the Sea,
That ready with his Jaws wide-gaping stood
To eat my Child, the fairest of my Blood.
You lost her then, when she seemed past Relief,
And wished perhaps her Death, to ease your Grief
With my Afflictions: Not content to view
Andromeda in Chains, unhelp'd by you,
Her Spouse and Uncle; will you grieve that he Exposed his Life the dying Maid
to free?
And shall you claim his Merit? Had you thought
Her Charms so great, you should have bravely sought
That Blessing on the Rocks, where fixed she lay:
But now let Perseus bear his Prize away,
By Service gained, by promised Faith possessed;
To him I owe it, that my Age is blessed
Still with a Child: Nor think that I prefer
Perseus to thee, but to the Loss of her.
Phineus on him, and Perseus roul'd about
His Eyes in silent Rage, and seemed to doubt
Which to destroy; till, resolute at length,
He threw his Spear with the redoubled Strength
His Fury gave him, and at Perseus struck;
But missing Perseus, in his Seat it stuck.
Who, springing nimbly up, returned the Dart,
And almost plunged it in his Rival's Heart;
But he, for Safety, to the Altar ran,
Unfit Protection for so vile a Man;
Yet was the Stroke not vain, as Rhaetus found,
Who in his Brow received a mortal Wound;
Headlong he tumbled, when his Skull was broke,
From which his Friends the fatal Weapon took,
While he lay trembling, and his gushing Blood
In crimson Streams around the Table flowed.
But this provoked the unruly Rabble worse,
They flung their Darts, and some in loud Discourse
To Death young Perseus and the Monarch doom;
But Cepheus left before the guilty Room,
With Grief appealing to the Gods above,
Who Laws of Hospitality approve,
Who Faith protect, and succor injured Right,
That he was guiltless of this barbarous Fight.
Pallas her Brother Perseus close attends,
And with her ample Shield from Harm defends,
Raising a sprightly Courage in his Heart;
But Indian Athis took the weaker Part,
Born in the crystal Grottoes of the Sea,
Limnate's Son, a Fenny Nymph, and she
Daughter of Ganges; Graceful was his Mein,
His Person lovely, and his Age Sixteen.
His Habit made his native Beauty more;
A purple Mantle fringed with Gold he wore;
His Neck well-turn'd with golden Chains was graced,
His Hair with Myrrh perfumed, was nicely dressed.
Though with just Aim he could the Javelin throw,
Yet with more Skill he drew the bending Bow;
And now was drawing it with artful Hand,
When Perseus snatching up a flaming Brand,
Whirled sudden at his Face the burning Wood,
Crushed his Eyes in, and quenched the Fire with Blood;
Through the soft Skin the splinter'd Bones appear,
And spoiled the Face that lately was so fair.
When Lycabas his Athis thus beheld,
How was his Heart with friendly Horror filled?
A Youth so noble, to his Soul so dear,
To see his shapeless Look, his dying Groans to hear!
He snatched the Bow the Boy was used to bend,
And cried, With me, false Traitor, dare contend;
Boast not a Conquest over a Child, but try
Thy Strength with me, who all thy Powers defy;
Nor think so mean an Act a Victory.
While yet he spoke he flung the whizzing Dart,
Which pierced the plaited Robe, but missed his Heart:
Perseus defied, upon him fiercely pressed
With Sword unsheathed, and plunged it in his Breast;
His Eyes overwhelmed with Night, he stumbling falls,
And with his latest Breath on Athis calls;
Pleased that so near the lovely Youth he lies,
He sinks his Head upon his Friend, and dies.
Next eager Phorbas, old Methion's Son,
Came rushing forward with Amphimedon;
When the smooth Pavement, slippery made with Gore,
Trip'd up their Feet, and flung 'em on the Floor;
The Sword of Perseus, who by chance was nigh,
Prevents their Rise, and where they fall they lie:
Full in his Ribs Amphimedon he smote,
And then stuck fiery Phorbas in the Throat.
Eurythus lifting up his Ax, the Blow
Was thus prevented by his nimble Foe;
A golden Cup he seizes, high embost,
And at his Head the massy Goblet tossed:
It hits, and from his Forehead bruised rebounds,
And Blood and Brains he vomits from his Wounds;
With his slain Fellows on the Floor he lies,
And Death for ever shuts his swimming Eyes.
Then Polydaemon fell, a Goddess-born;
Phlegias, and Elycen with Locks unshorn
Next followed; next, the Stroke of Death he gave
To Clytus, Abanis, and Lycetus brave;
While over unnumber'd Heaps of ghastly Dead,
The Argive Hero's Feet triumphant tread.
But Phineus stands aloof, and dreads to feel
His Rival's Force, and flies his pointed Steel:
Yet threw a Dart from far; by chance it lights
On Idas, who for neither Party fights;
But wounded, sternly thus to Phineus said,
Since of a Neuter thou a Foe have made,
This I return thee, drawing from his Side
The Dart; which, as he strove to fling, he died.
Odites fell by Clymenus's Sword,
The Cephen Court had not a greater Lord.
Hypseus his Blade does in Protenor sheath,
But brave Lyncides soon revenged his Death.
Here too was old Emathion, one that feared
The Gods, and in the Cause of Heaven appeared,
Who only wishing the Success of Right,
And, by his Age, exempted from the Fight,
Both Sides alike condemns; This impious War
Cease, cease, he cries; these bloody Broils forbear.
This scarce the Sage with high Concern had said,
When Chromis at a Blow struck off his Head,
Which dropping, on the royal Altar roul'd,
Still staring on the Crowd with Aspect bold;
And still it seemed their horrid Strife to blame,
In Life and Death his pious Zeal the same;
While, clinging to the Horns, the Trunk expires,
The severed Head consumes amidst the Fires.
Then Phineus, who from far his Javelin threw,
Broteas and Ammon, Twins and Brothers, slew;
For knotted Gauntlets matchless in the Field;
But Gauntlets must to Swords and Javelins yield.
Ampycus next, with hallowed Fillets bound,
As Ceres' Priest, and with a Mitre crowned,
His Spear transfixed, and struck him to the Ground.
O, lapetides, with Pain I tell
How you, sweet Lyrist, in the Riot fell;
What worse than brutal Rage his Breast could fill,
Who did thy Blood, O Bard Celestial, spill?
Kindly you pressed amid the Princely Throng,
To crown the Feast, and give the Nuptial Song:
Discord abhorred the Music of thy Lyre,
Whose Notes did gentle Peace so well inspire;
Thee, when fierce Pettalus far off espied,
Defenseless with thy Harp, he scoffing cried,
Go; to the Ghosts thy soothing Lessons play;
We loath thy Lyre, and scorn thy peaceful Lay:
And, as again he fiercely bid him go,
He pierced his Temples with a mortal Blow.
His Harp he held, though sinking on the Ground,
Whose Strings in Death his trembling Fingers found
By chance, and tuned by chance a dying Sound.
With Grief Lycormas saw him fall from far,
And, wresting from the Door a massy Bar,
Full in his Poll lays on a Load of Knocks,
Which stun him, and he falls like a devoted Ox.
Another Bar Pelates would have snatched,
But Corythus his Motions slily watched;
He darts his Weapon from a private Stand,
And rivets to the Post his veiny Hand:
When strait a missive Spear transfixed his Side,
By Abas thrown, and as he hung, he died.
Melaneus on the Prince's Side was slain;
And Dorylas, who owned a fertile Plain,
Of Nasamonia's Fields the wealthy Lord,
Whose crowded Barns could scarce contain their Hoard.
A whizzing Spear obliquely gave a Blow,
Stuck in his Groin, and pierced the Nerves below;
His Foe beheld his Eyes convulsive roll,
His ebbing Veins, and his departing Soul;
Then taunting said, Of all thy spacious Plains,
This Spot thy only Property remains.
He left him thus; but had no sooner left,
Than Perseus in revenge his Nostrils cleft;
From his Friend's Breast the murdering Dart he drew,
And the same Weapon at the Murderer threw;
His Head in halves the darted Javelin cut,
And on each Side the Brain came issuing out.
Fortune his Friend, his Deaths around he deals,
And this his Lance, and that his Faulchion feels:
Now Clytius dies; and by a different Wound,
The Twin, his Brother Clanis, bites the Ground.
In his rent Jaw the bearded Weapon sticks,
And the steeled Dart does Clytius' Thigh transfix.
With these Mendesian Celadon he slew;
And Astreus next, whose Mother was a Jew,
His Sire uncertain: Then by Perseus fell
Aethion, who could things to come foretell;
But now he knows not whence the Javelin flies
That wounds his Breast, nor by whose Arm he dies.
The Squire to Phineus next his Valor tried,
And fierce Agyrtes stained with Parricide.
As these are slain, fresh Numbers still appear,
And wage with Perseus an unequal War;
To rob him of his Right, the Maid he won,
By Honor, Promise, and Desert his own.
With him, the Father of the beauteous Bride,
The Mother, and the frighted Virgin side;
With Shrieks and doleful Cries they rend the Air:
Their Shrieks confounded with the Din of War,
With clashing Arms, and Groanings of the Slain,
They grieve unpitied, and unheard complain.
The Floor with ruddy Streams Bellona stains,
And Phineus a new War with double Rage maintains.
Perseus begirt, from all around they pour
Their Lances on him, a tempestuous Shower,
Aimed all at him; a Cloud of Darts and Spears,
Or blind his Eyes, or whistle round his Ears.
Their Numbers to resist, against the Wall
He guards his Back secure, and dares them all.
Here from the Left Molpeus renews the Fight,
And bold Ethemon presses on the Right:
As when a hungry Tiger near him hears
Two lowing Herds, awhile he both forbears;
Nor can his Hopes of This, or That renounce,
So strong he lusts to prey on both at once;
Thus Perseus now with That, or This is loath
To war distinct, but fain would fall on Both.
And first Chaonian Molpeus felt his Blow,
And fled, and never after faced his Foe;
Then fierce Ethemon, as he turned his Back,
Hurried with Fury, aiming at his Neck,
His brandished Sword against the Marble struck,
With all his Might; the brittle Weapon broke,
And in his Throat the Point rebounding stuck.
Too slight the Wound for Life to issue thence,
And yet too great for Battle, or Defense;
His Arms extended in this piteous State,
For Mercy he would sue, but sues too late;
Perseus has in his Bosom plunged the Sword,
And, e're he speaks, the Wound prevents the Word.
The Crowds increasing, and his Friends distressed,
Himself by warring Multitudes oppressed;
Since thus unequally you fight, it is time,
He cried, to punish your presumptuous Crime;
Beware, my Friends; his Friends were soon prepared,
Their Sight averting, high the Head he reared,
And Gorgon on his Foes severely star'd.
Vain Shift! says Thescelus, with Aspect bold,
Thee, and thy Bugbear Monster I behold
With Scorn; he lifts his Arm, but e're he threw
The Dart, the Hero to a Statue grew.
In the same Posture still the Marble stands,
And holds the Warrior's Weapons in its Hands.
Amphyx, whom yet this Wonder cannot alarm,
Heaves at Lyncides' Breast his impious Arm;
But, while thus daringly he presses on,
His Weapon, and his Arm are turned to Stone.
Next Nileus, he who vainly said he owed
His Origin to Nile's prolifick Flood;
Who on his Shield seven silver Rivers bore,
His Birth to witness by the Arms he wore;
Full of his sev'n-fold Father, thus expressed
His Boast to Perseus, and his Pride confessed:
See whence we sprung; Let this thy Comfort be
In thy sure Death, that thou did die by me.
While yet he spoke, the dying Accents hung
In Sounds imperfect on his Marble Tongue;
Though changed to Stone, his Lips he seemed to stretch,
And through th'insensate Rock would force a Speech.
This Eryx saw, but seeing would not own;
The Mischief by your selves, he cries, is done,
It Is your cold Courage turns your Hearts to Stone.
Come follow me; fall on the stripling Boy,
Kill him, and you his magic Arms destroy.
Then rushing on, his Arm to strike he reared,
And marbled over, his varied Frame appeared.
These for affronting Pallas were chastis'd,
And justly met the Death they had despised.
But brave Aconteus, Perseus' Friend, by chance
Looked back, and met the Gorgon's fatal Glance:
A Statue now become, he ghastly stares,
And still the Foe to mortal Combat dares;
Astyages the living Likeness knew,
On the dead Stone with vengeful Fury flew;
But impotent his Rage, the jarring Blade
No Print upon the solid Marble made:
Again, as with redoubled Might he struck,
Himself astonished in the Quarry stuck.
The vulgar Deaths 'twere tedious to rehearse,
And Fates below the Dignity of Verse;
Their Safety in their Flight Two Hundred found,
Two Hundred, by Medusa's Head were stoned.
Fierce Phineus now repents the wrongful Fight,
And views his varied Friends, a dreadful Sight;
He knows their Faces, for their Help he sues,
And thinks, not hearing him, that they refuse:
By Name he begs their Succor, one by one,
Then doubts their Life, and feels the friendly Stone.
Struck with Remorse, and conscious of his Pride,
Convict of Sin, he turned his Eyes aside;
With suppliant Mein to Perseus thus he prays,
Hence with the Head, as far as Winds and Seas
Can bear thee; Hence, O quit the Cephen Shore,
And never curse us with Medusa more,
That horrid Head, which stiffens into Stone
Those impious Men who, daring Death, look on.
I warred not with thee out of Hate or Strife,
My honest Cause was to defend my Wife,
First pledged to me; What Crime could I suppose,
To arm my Friends, and vindicate my Spouse?
But vain, too late, I so was our Design;
Mine was the Title, but the Merit thine.
Contending made me guilty, I confess,
But Penitence should make that Guilt the less:
'Twas thine to conquer by Minerva's Power;
Favored of Heaven, thy Mercy I implore;
For Life I sue; the rest to thee I yield;
In Pity, from my Sight remove the Shield.
He suing said; nor durst revert his Eyes
On the grim Head: And Perseus thus replies;
Coward, what is in me to grant, I will,
Nor Blood, unworthy of my Valor, spill:
Fear not to perish by my vengeful Sword,
From that secure; it is all the Fates afford.
Where I now see thee, thou shall still be seen,
A lasting Monument to please our Queen;
There still shall thy Betrothed behold her Spouse,
And find his Image in her Father's House.
This said; where Phineus turned to shun the Shield,
Full in his Face the staring Head he held;
As here, and there he strove to turn aside,
The Wonder wrought, the Man was petrified:
All Marble was his Frame; his humid Eyes
Dropped Tears, which hung upon the Stone like Ice.
In suppliant Posture, with uplifted Hands,
And fearful Look, the guilty Statue stands.
Hence Perseus to his native City hies,
Victorious, and rewarded with his Prize.
Conquest, over Praetus the Usurper, won,
He reinstates his Grandsire in the Throne.
Praetus, his Brother dispossessed by Might,
His Realm enjoyed, and still detained his Right:
But Perseus pulled the haughty Tyrant down,
And to the rightful King restored the Throne.
Weak was the Usurper, as his Cause was wrong,
Where Gorgon's Head appears, what Arms are strong?
When Perseus to his Host the Monster held,
They soon were Statues, and their King expelled.
Thence, to Seriphus with the Head he sails,
Whose Prince his Story treats as idle Tales:
Lord of a little Isle, he scorns to seem
Too credulous, but laughs at That, and Him.
Yet did he not so much suspect the Truth,
As out of Pride or Envy hate the Youth.
The Argive Prince, at his Contempt enraged,
To force his Faith by fatal Proof engaged.
Friends, shut your Eyes, he cries; his Shield he takes,
And to the King exposed Medusa's Snakes.
The Monarch felt the Power he would not own,
And stood convict of Folly in the Stone.
MINERVA's Interview with the MUSES.
Thus far Minerva was content to rove
With Perseus, Offspring of her Father Jove:
Now, hid in Clouds, Seriphos she forsook;
And to the Theban Towers her Journey took.
Cythnos and Gyaros lying to the Right,
She passed unheeded in her eager Flight;
And choosing first on Helicon to rest,
The Virgin Muses in these Words addressed:
Me, the strange Tidings of a newfound Spring,
Ye learned Sisters, to this Mountain bring.
If all be true that Fame's wide Rumors tell,
'Twas Pegasus discovered first your Well;
Whose piercing Hoof gave the soft Earth a Blow,
Which broke the Surface, where these Waters flow.
I saw that Horse by Miracle obtain
Life, from the Blood of dire Medusa slain;
And now, this equal Prodigy to view,
From distant Isles to famed Boeotia flew.
The Muse Urania said, Whatever Cause
So great a Goddess to this Mansion draws;
Our Shades are happy with so bright a Guest,
You, Queen, are welcome, and we Muses blessed.
What Fame has published of our Spring is true,
Thanks for our Spring to Pegasus are due.
Then, with becoming Courtesy, she led
The curious Stranger to their Fountain's Head;
Who long surveyed, with Wonder, and Delight,
Their sacred Water, charming to the Sight;
Their ancient Groves, dark Grottos, shady Bowers,
And smiling Plains adorned with various Flowers.
O happy Muses! she with Rapture cried,
Who, safe from Cares, on this fair Hill reside;
Blessed in your Seat, and free your selves to please
With Joys of Study, and with glorious Ease.
The Fate of PYRENEUS.
Then one replies; O Goddess, fit to guide
Our humble Works, and in our Choir preside,
Who sure would wisely to these Fields repair,
To taste our Pleasures, and our Labors share,
Were not your Virtue, and superior Mind
To higher Arts, and nobler Deeds inclined;
Justly you praise our Works, and pleasing Seat,
Which all might envy in this soft Retreat,
Were we secured from Dangers, and from Harms,
But Maids are frightened with the least Alarms,
And none are safe in this licentious Time;
Still fierce Pyreneus, and his daring Crime
With lashing Horror strikes my feeble Sight,
Nor is my Mind recovered from the Fright.
With Thracian Arms this bold Usurper gained
Daulis, and Phocis, where he proudly reigned:
It happened once, as through his Lands we went,
For the bright Temple of Parnassus bent,
He met us there, and in his artful Mind
Hiding the faithless Action he designed,
Conferred on us (whom, Oh! too well he knew)
All Honors that to Goddesses are due.
Stop, stop, ye Muses, it is your Friend who calls,
The Tyrant said; Behold the Rain that falls
On every Side, and that ill-boding Sky,
Whose lowering Face portends more Storms are nigh.
Pray make my House your own, and void of Fear,
While this bad Weather lasts, take Shelter here.
Gods have made meaner Places their Resort,
And, for a Cottage, left their shining Court.
Obliged to stop, by the united Force
Of pouring Rains, and complaisant Discourse,
His courteous Invitation we obey,
And in his Hall resolve awhile to stay.
Soon it cleared up; the Clouds began to fly,
The driving North refined the show'ry Sky;
Then to pursue our Journey we began:
But the false Traitor to his Portal ran,
Stopped our Escape, the Door securely barred,
And to our Honor, Violence prepared.
But we, transformed to Birds, avoid his Snare,
On Pinions rising in the yielding Air.
But he, by Lust and Indignation fired,
Up to his highest Tower with Speed retired,
And cries, In vain you from my Arms withdrew,
The Way you go your Lover will pursue.
Then, in a flying Posture wildly placed,
And daring from that Height himself to cast,
The Wretch fell headlong, and the Ground bestrew'd
With broken Bones, and Stains of guilty Blood.
The Story of the PIERIDES.
The Muse yet spoke; when they began to hear
A Noise of Wings that fluttered in the Air;
And strait a Voice, from some high spreading Bough,
Seemed to salute the Company below.
The Goddess wondered, and inquired from whence
That Tongue was heard, that spoke so plainly Sense:
(It seemed to her a human Voice to be,
But proved a Bird's; for in a shady Tree
Nine Magpies perched lament their altered State,
And, what they hear, are skilful to repeat.)
The Sister to the wondering Goddess said,
These, foiled by us, by us were thus repaid.
These did Evippe of Paeonia bring
With nine hard Labour-Pangs to Pella's King.
The foolish Virgins of their Number proud,
And puffed with Praises of the senseless Crowd,
Through all Achaia, and the Aemonian Plains,
Defied us thus, to match their artless Strains;
No more, ye Thespian Girls, your Notes repeat,
Nor with false Harmony the Vulgar cheat;
In Voice or Skill, if you with us will vye,
As many we, in Voice or Skill will try.
Surrender you to us, if we excel,
Famed Aganippe, and Medusa's Well.
The Conquest yours, your Prize from us shall be
The Aemathian Plains to snowy Paeone
The Nymphs our Judges. To dispute the Field,
We thought a Shame; but greater Shame to yield.
On Seats of living Stone the Sisters sit,
And by the Rivers swear to judge aright.
The Song of the PIERIDES.
Then rises one of the presumptuous Throng,
Steps rudely forth, and first begins the Song;
With vain Address describes the Giants Wars,
And to the Gods their fabled Acts prefers.
She sings, from Earth's dark Womb how Typhon rose,
And struck with mortal Fear his heavenly Foes.
How the Gods fled to Egypt's slimy Soil,
And hid their Heads beneath the Banks of Nile;
How Typhon, from the conquered Skies, pursued
Their routed Godheads to the sev'n-mouth'd Flood;
Forced every God, his Fury to escape,
Some beastly Form to take, or earthly Shape.
Jove (so she sung) was changed into a Ram,
From whence the Horns of Libyan Ammon came.
Bacchus a Goat, Apollo was a Crow,
Phaebe a Cat; the Wife of Jove a Cow,
Whose Hue was whiter than the falling Snow.
Mercury to a nasty Ibis turned,
The Change obscene, afraid of Typhon, mourned;
While Venus from a Fish Protection craves,
And once more plunges in her native Waves.
She sung, and to her Harp her Voice applied;
Then us again to match her they defied.
But our poor Song, perhaps, for you to hear,
Nor Leisure serves, nor is it worth your Ear.
That causeless Doubt remove, O Muse rehearse,
The Goddess cried, your ever-grateful Verse.
Beneath a checkered Shade she takes her Seat,
And bids the Sister her whole Song repeat.
The Sister thus; Calliope we chose
For the Performance. The sweet Virgin rose,
With Ivy crowned; she tunes her golden Strings,
And to her Harp this Composition sings.
The Song of the MUSES.
First Ceres taught the laboring Hind to plow
The pregnant Earth, and quickening Seed to sow.
She first for Man did wholesome Food provide,
And with just Laws the wicked World supplied:
All Good from her derived, to her belong
The grateful Tributes of the Muse's Song.
Her more than worthy of our Verse we deem,
Oh! were our Verse more worthy of the Theme.
Jove on the Giant fair Trinacria hurled,
And with one Bolt revenged his starry World.
Beneath her burning Hills Typhaeus lies,
And, struggling always, strives in vain to rise.
Down does Pelorus his right Hand suppress
Toward Latium, on the left Pachyne weighs.
His Legs are under Lilybaecum spread,
And Aetna presses hard his horrid Head.
On his broad Back he there extended lies,
And vomits Clouds of Ashes to the Skies.
Often laboring with his Load, at last he tires,
And spews out in Revenge a Flood of Fires.
Mountains he struggles to overwhelm, and Towns,
Earth's inmost Bowels quake, and Nature groans.
His Terrors reach the direful King of Hell;
He fears his Throws will to the Day reveal
The Realms of Night, and fright his trembling Ghosts.
This to prevent, he quits the Stygian Coasts,
In his black Carr, by sooty Horses drawn,
Fair Sicily he seeks, and dreads the Dawn.
Around her Plains he casts his eager Eyes,
And every Mountain to the Bottom tries.
But when, in all the careful Search, he saw
No Cause of Fear, no ill suspected Flaw;
Secure from Harm, and wandering on at Will,
Venus beheld him from her flowery Hill:
When strait the Dame her little Cupid pressed
With secret Rapture to her snowy Breast,
And in these Words the fluttering Boy addressed.
O thou, my Arms, my Glory, and my Power,
My Son, whom Men, and deathless Gods adore;
Bend thy sure Bow, whose Arrows never missed,
No longer let Hell's King thy Sway resist:
Take him, while straggling from his dark Abodes
He coasts the Kingdoms of superior Gods.
If Sovereign Jove, if Gods who rule the Waves,
And Neptune, who rules them, have been thy Slaves;
Shall Hell be free? The Tyrant strike, my Son,
Enlarge thy Mother's Empire, and thy own.
Let not our Heaven be made the Mock of Hell,
But Pluto to confess thy Power compel.
Our Rule is slighted in our native Skies,
See Pallas, see Diana too defies
Thy Darts, which Ceres' Daughter would despise.
She too our Empire treats with awkward Scorn;
Such Insolence no longer's to be born.
Revenge our slighted Reign, and with thy Dart
Transfix the Virgin's to the Uncle's Heart.
She said; and from his Quiver strait he drew
A Dart that surely would the Business do.
She guides his Hand, she makes her Touch the Test,
And of a thousand Arrows chose the best:
No Feather better poised, a sharper Head
None had, and sooner none, and surer sped.
He bends his Bow, he draws it to his Ear,
Through Pluto's Heart it drives, and fixes there.
The Rape of PROSERPINE.
Near Enna's Walls a spacious Lake is spread,
Famed for the sweetly-singing Swans it bred;
Pergusa is its Name: And never more
Were heard, or sweeter on Cayster's Shore.
Woods crown the Lake; and Phoebus never invades
The tufted Fences, or offends the Shades.
Fresh fragrant Breezes fan the verdant Bowers,
And the moist Ground smiles with enameled Flowers.
The cheerful Birds their airy Carols sing,
And the whole Year is one eternal Spring.
Here, while young Proserpine, among the Maids,
Diverts herself in these delicious Shades;
While like a Child with busy Speed and Care
She gathers Lillies here, and Vi'lets there;
While first to fill her little Lap she strives,
Hell's grizly Monarch at the Shade arrives;
Sees her thus sporting on the flowery Green,
And loves the blooming Maid, as soon as seen.
His urgent Flame impatient of Delay;
Swift as his Thought he seized the beauteous Prey,
And bore her in his sooty Carr away.
The frighted Goddess to her Mother cries,
But all in vain, for now far off she flies;
Far she behind her leaves her Virgin Train;
To them too cries, and cries to them in vain.
And, while with Passion she repeats her Call,
The Vi'lets from her Lap, and Lillies fall:
She misses 'em, poor Heart! and makes new Moan;
Her Lillies, ah! are lost, her Vi'lets gone.
Over Hills, the Ravisher, and Valleys speeds,
By Name encouraging his foamy Steeds;
He rattles over their Necks the rusty Reins,
And ruffles with the Stroke their shaggy Manes.
Over Lakes he whirls his flying Wheels, and comes
To the Palici breathing sulfurous Fumes.
And thence to where the Bacchiads of Renown
Between unequal Havens built their Town;
Where Arethusa, round the imprisoned Sea,
Extends her crooked Coast to Cyane;
The Nymph who gave the neighboring Lake a Name,
Of all Sicilian Nymphs the first in Fame.
She from the Waves advanced her beauteous Head,
The Goddess knew, and thus to Pluto said;
Farther thou shall not with the Virgin run;
Ceres unwilling, can thou be her Son?
The Maid should be by sweet Persuasion won.
Force suits not with the Softness of the Fair;
For, if great things with small I may compare,
Me Anapis once loved; a milder Course
He took, and won me by his Words, not Force.
Then, stretching out her Arms, she stopped his Way;
But he, impatient of the shortest Stay,
Throws to his dreadful Steeds the slackened Rein,
And strikes his Iron Scepter through the Main;
The Depths profound through yielding Waves he cleaves,
And to Hell's Center a free Passage leaves;
Down sinks his Chariot, and his Realms of Night
The God soon reaches with a rapid Flight.
CYANE dissolves to a Fountain.
But still does Cyane the Rape bemoan,
And with the Goddess' Wrongs laments her own;
For the stolen Maid, and for her injured Spring,
Time to her Trouble no Relief can bring.
In her sad Heart a heavy Load she bears,
Till the dumb Sorrow turns her all to Tears.
Her mingling Waters with that Fountain pass,
Of which she late immortal Goddess was.
Her varied Members to a Fluid melt,
A pliant Softness in her Bones is felt.
Her wavy Locks first drop away in Dew,
And liquid next her slender Fingers grew.
The Body's Change soon seizes its Extreme,
Her Legs dissolve, and Feet flow off in Stream.
Her Arms, her Back, her Shoulders, and her Side,
Her swelling Breasts in little Currents glide.
A Silver Liquor only now remains
Within the Channel of her purple Veins;
Nothing to fill Love's Grasp; her Husband chaste
Bathes in that Bosom he before embraced.
A Boy transformed to an Eft.
Thus, while through all the Earth, and all the Main,
Her Daughter mournful Ceres sought in vain;
Aurora, when with dewy Looks she rose,
Nor burnished Vesper found her in Repose.
At Aetna's flaming Mouth two pitchy Pines
To light her in her Search at length she tines.
Restless with these, through frosty Night she goes,
Nor fears the cutting Winds, nor heeds the Snows;
And, when the Morning Star the Day renews,
From East to West her absent Child pursues.
Thirsty at last by long Fatigue she grows,
But meets no Spring, no Riv'let near her flows.
Then looking round, a lowly Cottage spies,
Smoking among the Trees, and thither hies.
The Goddess knocking at the little Door,
'Twas opened by a Woman old and poor,
Who, when she begged for Water, gave her Ale
Brewed long, but well preserved from being stale.
The Goddess drank; a chuffy Lad was by,
Who saw the Liquor with a grutching Eye,
And grinning cries, She Is greedy more than dry.
Ceres, offended at his foul Grimace,
Flung what she had not drunk into his Face.
The Sprinklings speckle where they hit the Skin,
And a long Tail does from his Body spin;
His Arms are turned to Legs, and lest his Size
Should make him mischievous, and he might rise
Against Mankind, diminutives his Frame,
Less than a Lizzard, but in Shape the same.
Amazed the Dame the wondrous Sight beheld,
And weeps, and fain would touch her quondam Child.
Yet her Approach the affrighted Vermin shuns,
And fast into the greatest Crevice runs.
A Name they gave him, which the Spots expressed,
That rose like Stellio.
Stars, and varied all his Breast.
What Lands, what Seas the Goddess wandered over,
Were long to tell, for there remained no more.
Searching all round, her fruitless Toil she mourns,
And with Regret to Sicily returns.
At length, where Cyane now flows, she came,
Who could have told her, were she still the same
As when she saw her Daughter sink to Hell,
But what she knows she wants a Tongue to tell.
Yet this plain Signal manifestly gave,
The Virgin's Girdle floating on a Wave,
As late she dropped it from her slender Waste,
When with her Uncle through the Deep she past.
Ceres the Token by her Grief confessed,
And tore her golden Hair, and beat her Breast.
She knows not on what Land her Curse should fall,
But, as ingrate, alike upbraids 'em all,
Unworthy of her Gifts; Trinacria most,
Where the last Steps she found of what she lost.
The Plough for this the vengeful Goddess broke,
And with one Death the Ox and Owner struck.
In vain the fallow Fields the Peasant tills,
The Seed, corrupted e're it is sown, she kills.
The fruitful Soil, that once such Harvests bore,
Now mocks the Farmer's Care, and teems no more.
And the rich Grain which fills the furrowed Glade,
Rots in the Seed, or shrivels in the Blade;
Or too much Sun burns up, or too much Rain
Drowns, or black Blights destroy the blasted Plain;
Or greedy Birds the new-sown Seed devour,
Or Darnel, Thistles, and a Crop impure
Of knotted Grass along the Acres stand,
And spread their thriving Roots through all the Land.
Then from the Waves soft Arethusa rears
Her Head, and back she flings her dropping Hairs.
O Mother of the Maid, whom thou so far
Have sought, of whom thou can no Tidings hear;
O thou, she cried, who art to Life a Friend,
Cease here thy Search, and let thy Labor end.
Thy faithful Sicily's a guiltless Clime,
And should not suffer for another's Crime;
She neither knew, nor could prevent the Deed.
Nor think that for my Country thus I plead;
My Country's Pisa, I Am an Alien here,
Yet these Abodes to Elis I prefer,
No Clime to me so sweet, no Place so dear.
These Springs I Arethusa now possess,
And this my Seat, O gracious Goddess, bless.
This Island why I love, and why I crossed
Such spacious Seas to reach Ortygia's Coast,
To you I shall impart, when, void of Care,
Your Heart's at Ease, and you're more fit to hear;
When on your Brow no pressing Sorrow sits,
For gay Content alone such Tales admits.
When through Earth's Caverns I awhile have roul'd
My Waves, I rise, and here again behold
The long lost Stars; and, as I late did glide
Near Styx, Proserpina there I espied.
Fear still with Grief might in her Face be seen;
She still her Rape laments; yet, made a Queen,
Beneath those gloomy Shades her Scepter sways,
And even the infernal King her Will obeys.
This heard, the Goddess like a Statute stood,
Stupid with Grief; and in that musing Mood
Continued long; new Cares awhile suppressed
The reigning Powers of her immortal Breast.
At last to Jove her Daughter's Sire she flies,
And with her Chariot cuts the crystal Skies;
She comes in Clouds, and with disheveled Hair,
Standing before his Throne, prefers her Prayer.
King of the Gods, defend my Blood and thine,
And use it not the worse for being mine.
If I no more am gracious in thy Sight,
Be just, O Jove, and do thy Daughter right.
In vain I sought her the wide World around,
And, when I most despaired to find her, found.
But how can I the fatal Finding boast,
By which I know she is for ever lost?
Without her Father's Aid, what other Power
Can to my Arms the ravished Maid restore?
Let him restore her, I Will the Crime forgive,
My Child, though ravished, I Would with Joy receive.
Pity, your Daughter with a Thief should wed,
Though mine, you think, deserves no better Bed.
Jove thus replies; It equally belongs
To both, to guard our common Pledge from Wrongs.
But if to things we proper Names apply,
This hardly can be called an Injury.
The Theft is Love; nor need we blush to own
The Thief, if I can judge, to be our Son.
Had you of his Desert no other Proof,
To be Jove's Brother is methinks enough.
Nor was my Throne by Worth superior got,
Heaven fell to me, as Hell to him, by Lot.
If you are still resolved her Loss to mourn,
And nothing less will serve than her Return;
Upon these Terms she may again be yours,
(Th'irrevocable Terms of Fate, not ours.)
Of Stygian Food if she did never taste,
Hell's Bounds may then, and only then, be past.
The Transformation of ASCALAPHUS into an Owl.
The Goddess now, resolving to succeed,
Down to the gloomy Shades descends with Speed;
But adverse Fate had otherwise decreed.
For, long before, her giddy thoughtless Child
Had broke her Fast, and all her Projects spoiled.
As in the Garden's shady Walks she strayed,
A fair Pomegranate charmed the simple Maid,
Hung in her Way, and tempting her to taste,
She plucked the Fruit, and took a short Repast.
Seven times, a Seed at once, she eat the Food;
The Fact Ascalaphus had only viewed;
Whom Acheron begot in Stygian Shades
On Orphne, famed among Avernal Maids;
He saw what past, and by discov'ring all,
Detained the ravished Nymph in cruel Thrall.
But now a Queen, she with Resentment heard,
And changed the vile Informer to a Bird.
In Phlegeton's black Stream her Hand she dips,
Sprinkles his Head, and wets his babbling Lips.
Soon on his Face, bedropt with Magic Dew,
A Change appeared, and gaudy Feathers grew.
A crooked Beak the Place of Nose supplies,
Rounder his Head, and larger are his Eyes.
His Arms and Body waste, but are supplied
With yellow Pinions flagging on each Side.
His Nails grow crooked, and are turned to Claws,
And lazily along his heavy Wings he draws.
Ill-omen'd in his Form, the unlucky Fowl,
Abhorred by Men, and called a Scrieching Owl.
The Daughters of ACHELOUS transformed to SIRENS.
Justly this Punishment was due to him,
And less had been too little for his Crime;
But, O ye Nymphs that from the Flood descend,
What Fault of yours the Gods could so offend,
With Wings and Claws your beauteous Forms to spoil,
Yet save your maiden Face, and winning Smile?
Were you not with her in Pergusa's Bowers,
When Proserpine went forth to gather Flowers?
Since Pluto in his Carr the Goddess caught,
Have you not for her in each Climate sought?
And when on Land you long had searched in vain,
You wished for Wings to cross the pathless Main;
That Earth and Sea might witness to your Care:
The Gods were easy, and returned your Prayer;
With golden Wing over foamy Waves you fled,
And to the Sun your plumy Glories spread.
But, lest the soft Enchantment of your Songs,
And the sweet Music of your flattering Tongues
Should quite be lost, (as courteous Fates ordain)
Your Voice and Virgin Beauty still remain.
Jove some Amends for Ceres' Loss to make,
Yet willing Pluto should the Joy partake,
Gives 'em of Proserpine an equal Share,
Who, claimed by both, with both divides the Year.
The Goddess now in either Empire sways,
Six Moons in Hell, and six with Ceres stays.
Her peevish Temper's changed; that sullen Mind,
Which made even Hell uneasy, now is kind.
Her Voice refines, her Mein more sweet appears,
Her Forehead free from Frowns, her Eyes from Tears.
As when, with golden Light, the conquering Day
Through dusky Exhalations clears a Way.
Ceres her Daughter's Rape no longer mourned,
But back to Arethusa's Spring returned;
And sitting on the Margin, bid her tell
From whence she came, and why a sacred Well.
The Story of ARETHUSA.
Still were the purling Waters, and the Maid
From the smooth Surface raised her beauteous Head,
Wipes off the Drops that from her Tresses ran,
And thus to tell Alpheus' Loves began.
In Elis first I breathed the living Air,
The Chase was all my Pleasure, all my Care.
None loved like me the Forest to explore,
To pitch the Toils, and drive the bristled Boar.
Of Fair, though Masculine, I had the Name,
But gladly would to that have quitted Claim:
It less my Pride than Indignation raised,
To hear the Beauty I neglected praised;
Such Compliments I loathed, such Charms as these
I scorned, and thought it Infamy to please.
Once, I remember, in the Summer's Heat,
Tired with the Chase, I sought a cool Retreat;
And, walking on, a silent Current found,
Which gently glided over the grav'ly Ground.
The crystal Water was so smooth, so clear,
My Eye distinguished every Pebble there.
So soft its Motion, that I scarce perceived
The running Stream, or what I saw, believed.
The hoary Willow, and the Poplar made
Along the shelving Bank a grateful Shade.
In the cool Rivulet my Feet I dipped,
Then waded to the Knee, and then I stripped;
My Robe I careless on an Osier threw,
That near the Place commodiously grew,
Nor long upon the Border naked stood,
But plunged with Speed into the silver Flood.
My Arms a thousand ways I moved, and tried
To quicken, if I could, the lazy Tide;
Where, while I played my swimming Gambols over,
I heard a murmuring Voice, and frighted sprung to Shore.
Oh! whither, Arethusa, do thou fly?
From the Brook's Bottom did Alpheus cry;
Again, I heard him, in a hollow Tone,
Oh! whither, Arethusa, do thou run?
Naked I flew, nor could I stay to hide
My Limbs, my Robe was on the other Side;
Alpheus followed fast, the inflaming Sight
Quickened his Speed, and made his Labor light;
He sees me ready for his eager Arms,
And with a greedy Glance devours my Charms.
As trembling Doves from pressing Danger fly,
When the fierce Hawk comes sousing from the Sky;
And, as fierce Hawks the trembling Doves pursue,
From him I fled, and after me he flew.
First by Orchomenus I took my Flight,
And soon had Psophis and Cyllene in Sight;
Behind me then high Maenalus I lost,
And craggy Erimanthus scaled with Frost;
Elis was next; thus far the Ground I trod
With nimble Feet, before the distanc'd God.
But here I lagg'd, unable to sustain
The Labor longer, and my Flight maintain;
While he more strong, more patient of the Toil,
And fired with Hopes of Beauty's speedy Spoil,
Gained my lost Ground, and by redoubled Pace,
Now left between us but a narrow Space.
Unwearied I till now over Hills and Plains,
Over Rocks and Rivers ran, and felt no Pains:
The Sun behind me, and the God I kept,
But, when I fastest should have run, I stepped.
Before my Feet his Shadow now appeared,
As what I saw, or rather what I feared.
Yet there I could not be deceived by Fear,
Who felt his Breath pant on my braided Hair,
And heard his sounding Tread, and knew him to be near.
Tired and despairing, O Celestial Maid,
I Am caught, I cried, without thy heavenly Aid.
Help me, Diana, help a Nymph forlorn,
Devoted to the Woods, who long has worn
Thy Livery, and long thy Quiver born.
The Goddess heard, my pious Prayer prevailed,
In muffling Clouds my Virgin Head was veiled.
The amorous God deluded of his Hopes,
Searches the Gloom, and through the Darkness gropes;
Twice, where Diana did her Servant hide
He came, and twice, O Arethusa, cried.
How shaken was my Soul, how sunk my Heart?
The Terror seized on every trembling Part.
Thus when the Wolf about the Mountain prowls
For Prey, the Lambkin hears his horrid Howls;
The timorous Hare, the Pack approaching nigh,
Thus hearkens to the Hounds, and trembles at the Cry;
Nor dares she stir, for fear her scented Breath
Direct the Dogs, and guide the threatened Death.
Alpheus in the Cloud no Traces found
To mark my Way, yet stays to guard the Ground.
The God so near, a chilly Sweat possessed
My fainting Limbs, at every Pore expressed;
My Strength distilled in Drops, my Hair in Dew,
My Form was changed, and all my Substance new.
Each Motion was a Stream, and my whole Frame
Turned to a Fount, which still preserves my Name.
Resolved I should not his Embrace escape,
Again the God resumes his fluid Shape;
To mix his Streams with mine he fondly tries,
But still Diana his Attempt denies,
She cleaves the Ground; through Caverns dark I run
A different Current, while he keeps his own.
To dear Ortygia she conducts my Way,
And here I first review the welcome Day.
Here Arethusa stopped; then Ceres takes
Her golden Carr, and yokes her fiery Snakes;
With a just Rein, along Mid-heaven she flies
Over Earth and Seas, and cuts the yielding Skies.
She halts at Athens, dropping like a Star,
And to Triptolemus resigns her Carr.
Parent of Seed, she gave him fruitful Grain,
And bad him teach to till and plough the Plain;
The Seed to sow, as well in fallow Fields,
As where the Soil manured a richer Harvest yields.
The Transformation of LYNCUS.
The Youth over Europe, and over Asia drives,
Till at the Court of Lyncus he arrives.
The Tyrant Scythia's barbarous Empire swayed;
And, when he saw Triptolemus, he said,
How came thou, Stranger, to our Court, and why?
Thy Country, and thy Name? The Youth did thus reply;
Triptolemus my Name; my Country's known
Over all the World, Minerva's favorite Town,
Athens, the first of Cities in Renown.
By Land I neither walked, nor sailed by Sea,
But hither through the Ether made my Way.
By me, the Goddess who the Fields befriends,
These Gifts, the greatest of all Blessings, sends.
The Grain she gives if in your Soil you sow,
Thence wholesome Food in golden Crops shall grow.
Soon as the Secret to the King was known,
He grudged the Glory of the Service done,
And wickedly resolved to make it all his own.
To hide his Purpose, he invites his Guest,
The Friend of Ceres, to a royal Feast.
And when sweet Sleep his heavy Eyes had seized,
The Tyrant with his Steel attempts his Breast.
Him strait a Lynx's Shape the Goddess gives,
And home the Youth her sacred Dragons drives.
The PIERIDES transformed to Magpies.
The chosen Muse here ends her sacred Lays;
The Nymphs unanimous decree the Bays,
And give the Heliconian Goddesses the Praise.
Then, far from vain that we should thus prevail,
But much provoked to hear the Vanquished rail,
Calliope resumes; Too long we have born
Your daring Taunts, and your affronting Scorn;
Your Challenge justly merited a Curse,
And this unmanner'd Railing makes it worse.
Since you refuse us calmly to enjoy
Our Patience, next our Passions we'll employ;
The Dictates of a Mind enraged pursue,
And, what our just Resentment bids us, do.
The Railers laugh, our Threats and Wrath despise,
And clap their Hands, and make a scolding Noise:
But in the Fact they are seized; beneath their Nails
Feathers they feel, and on their Faces Scales;
Their horny Beaks at once each other scare,
Their Arms are plumed, and on their Backs they bear
Py'd Wings, and flutter in the fleeting Air.
Chatt'ring, the Scandal of the Woods they fly,
And there continue still their clamorous Cry:
The same their Eloquence, as Maids, or Birds,
Now only Noise, and nothing then but Words.
The End of the Fifth Book.
To Her Highness the Princess Anne Eldest Daughter of Their Royal Highnesses ye
Prince and Princess of Wales.

OVID'S METAMORPHOSES. BOOK VI.
Translated by Mr. CROXALL.
The Transformation of ARACHNE into a Spider.
PAllas, attending to the Muse's Song,
Approved the just Resentment of their Wrong;
And thus reflects; While tamely I commend
Those who their injured Deities defend,
My own Divinity affronted stands,
And calls aloud for Justice at my Hands;
Then takes the Hint, ashamed to lag behind,
And on Arachne bends her vengeful Mind;
One at the Loom so excellently skilled,
That to the Goddess she refused to yield.
Low was her Birth, and small her native Town,
She from her Art alone obtained Renown.
Idmon her Father made it; his Employ,
To give the spungy Fleece a purple Dye:
Of vulgar Strain her Mother, lately dead,
With her own Rank had been content to wed;
Yet she their Daughter, though her Time was spent
In a small Hamlet, and of mean Descent,
Through the great Towns of Lydia gained a Name,
And filled the neighboring Countries with her Fame.
Often to admire the Niceness of her Skill,
The Nymphs would quit their Fountain, Shade, or Hill:
Thither, from green Tymolus they repair,
And leave the Vineyards, their peculiar Care;
Thither, from famed Pactolus' golden Stream,
Drawn by her Art, the curious Naiads came.
Nor would the Work, when finished, please so much,
As, while she wrought, to view each graceful Touch;
Whether the shapeless Wool in Balls she wound,
Or with quick Motion turned the Spindle round,
Or with her Pencil drew the neat Design,
Pallas her Mistress shone in every Line.
This the proud Maid with scornful Air denies,
And even the Goddess at her Work defies;
Disowns her heavenly Mistress every Hour,
Nor asks her Aid, nor deprecates her Power.
Let us, she cries, but to a Trial come,
And, if she conquers, let her fix my Doom.
The Goddess then a Beldame's Form put on,
With silver Hairs her hoary Temples shone;
Prop'd by a Staff, she hobbles in her Walk,
And tottering thus begins her old Wive's Talk.
Young Maid attend, nor stubbornly despise
The Admonitions of the Old, and Wise;
For Age, though scorned, a ripe Experience bears,
That golden Fruit, unknown to blooming Years:
Still may remotest Fame your Labors crown,
And Mortals your superior Genius own;
But to the Goddess yield, and humbly meek
A Pardon for your bold Presumption seek;
The Goddess will forgive. At this the Maid
With Passion fired, her gliding Shuttle stayed;
And, darting Vengeance with an angry Look,
To Pallas in Disguise thus fiercely spoke.
Thou doting Thing, whose idle babbling Tongue
But too well shows the Plague of living long;
Hence, and reprove, with this your sage Advice,
Your giddy Daughter, or your awkward Neice;
Know, I despise your Counsel, and am still
A Woman, ever wedded to my Will;
And, if your skillful Goddess better knows,
Let her accept the Trial I propose.
She does, impatient Pallas strait replies,
And, clothed with heavenly Light, sprung from her odd Disguise.
The Nymphs, and Virgins of the Plain adore
The awful Goddess, and confess her Power;
The Maid alone stood unappall'd; yet showed
A transient Blush, that for a Moment glowed,
Then disappeared; as purple Streaks adorn
The opening Beauties of the rosy Morn;
Till Phoebus rising prevalently bright,
Allays the Tincture with his Silver Light.
Yet she persists, and obstinately great,
In hopes of Conquest hurries on her Fate.
The Goddess now the Challenge waves no more,
Nor, kindly good, advises as before.
Strait to their Posts appointed both repair,
And fix their threaded Looms with equal Care:
Around the solid Beam the Web is tied,
While hollow Canes the parting Warp divide;
Through which with nimble Flight the Shuttles play,
And for the Woof prepare a ready Way;
The Woof and Warp unite, pressed by the toothy Slay.
Thus both, their Mantles buttoned to their Breast,
Their skilful Fingers ply with willing haste,
And work with Pleasure; while they cheer the Eye
With glowing Purple of the Tyrian Dye:
Or, justly intermixing Shades with Light,
Their Colorings insensibly unite.
As when a Shower transpierc'd with Sunny Rays,
It Is mighty Arch along the Heaven displays;
From whence a thousand different Colors rise,
Whose fine Transition cheats the clearest Eyes;
So like the intermingled Shading seems,
And only differs in the last Extremes.
Then Threads of Gold both artfully dispose,
And, as each Part in just Proportion rose,
Some antique Fable in their Work disclose.
Pallas in Figures wrought the heavenly Powers,
And Mars's Hill among the Athenian Towers.
On lofty Thrones twice six Celestials sat,
Jove in the Midst, and held their warm Debate;
The Subject weighty, and well-known to Fame,
From whom the City should receive its Name.
Each God by proper Features was expressed,
Jove with majestic Mein excelled the rest.
His three-fork'd Mace the dewy Sea-God shook,
And, looking sternly, smote the ragged Rock;
When from the Stone leapt forth a spritely Steed,
And Neptune claims the City for the Deed.
Herself she blazons with a glittering Spear,
And crested Helm that veiled her braided Hair,
With Shield, and scaly Breast Plate, Implements of War.
Struck with her pointed Lance, the teeming Earth
Seemed to produce a new surprising Birth;
When, from the Glebe, the Pledge of Conquest sprung,
A Tree pale-green with fairest Olives hung.
And then, to let her giddy Rival learn
What just Rewards such Boldness was to earn,
Four Trials at each Corner had their Part,
Designed in Miniature, and touched with Art.
Haemus in one, and Rhodope of Thrace,
Transformed to Mountains, filled the foremost Place;
Who claimed the Titles of the Gods above,
And vainly used the Epithets of Jove.
Another showed, where the Pigmaean Dame,
Profaning Juno's venerable Name,
Turned to an airy Crane, descends from far,
And with her Pigmy Subjects wages War.
In a third Part, the Rage of Heaven's great Queen,
Displayed on proud Antigone, was seen;
Who with presumptuous Boldness dared to vye,
For Beauty, with the Empress of the Sky.
Ah! what avails her ancient Princely Race,
Her Sire a King, and Troy her native Place?
Now, to a noisy Stork transformed, she flies,
And with her whitened Pinions cleaves the Skies.
And in the last remaining Part was drawn
Poor Cinyras, that seemed to weep in Stone;
Clasping the Temple Steps, he sadly mourned
His lovely Daughters, now to Marble turned.
With her own Tree the finished Piece is crowned,
And Wreaths of peaceful Olive all the Work surround.
Arachne drew the famed Intreagues of Jove,
Changed to a Bull to gratify his Love;
How through the briny Tide all foaming Hoar,
Lovely Europa on his Back he bore.
The Sea seemed waving, and the trembling Maid
Shrunk up her tender Feet, as if afraid;
And, looking back on the forsaken Strand,
To her Companions wafts her distant Hand.
Next she designed Asteria's fabled Rape,
When Jove assumed a soaring Eagle's Shape:
And showed how Leda lay supinely pressed,
Whilst the soft snowy Swan sat hovering over her Breast.
How in a Satyr's Form the God beguiled,
When fair Antiope with Twins he filled.
Then, like Amphitryon, but a real Jove,
In fair Alcmena's Arms he cooled his Love.
In fluid Gold to Danae's Heart he came,
Aegina felt him in a lambent Flame.
He took Mnemosyne in Shepherd's Make,
And for Deois was a speckled Snake.
She made thee, Neptune, like a wanton Steer,
Pacing the Meads for Love of Arne dear;
Next like a Stream, thy burning Flame to slake,
And like a Ram, for fair Bisaltis' sake.
Then Ceres in a Steed your Vigor tried,
Nor could the Mare the yellow Goddess hide.
Next to a Fowl transformed, you won by Force
The Snake-hair'd Mother of the winged Horse;
And, in a Dolphin's fishy Form, subdued
Melantho sweet beneath the oozy Flood.
All these the Maid with lively Features drew,
And opened proper Landskips to the View.
There Phoebus, roving like a Country Swain,
Attunes his jolly Pipe along the Plain;
For lovely Isse's sake in Shepherd's Weeds,
Over Pastures green his bleating Flock he feeds.
There Bacchus, imag'd like the clust'ring Grape,
Melting bedrops Erigone's fair Lap;
And there old Saturn, stung with youthful Heat,
Formed like a Stallion, rushes to the Feat.
Fresh Flowers, which Twists of Ivy intertwine,
Mingling a running Foliage, close the neat Design.
This the bright Goddess, passionately moved,
With Envy saw, yet inwardly approved.
The Scene of heavenly Guilt with haste she tore,
Nor longer the Affront with Patience bore;
A boxen Shuttle in her Hand she took,
And more than once Arachne's Forehead struck.
The unhappy Maid, impatient of the Wrong,
Down from a Beam her injured Person hung;
When Pallas, pitying her wretched State,
At once prevented, and pronounced her Fate;
Live; but depend, vile Wretch, the Goddess cried,
Doomed in Suspense for ever to be tied;
That all your Race, to utmost Date of Time,
May feel the Vengeance, and detest the Crime.
Then, going off, she sprinkled her with Juice,
Which Leaves of baleful Aconite produce.
Touched with the poisonous Drug, her flowing Hair
Fell to the Ground, and left her Temples bare;
Her usual Features vanished from their Place,
Her Body lessened all, but most her Face.
Her slender Fingers, hanging on each Side
With many Joints, the use of Legs supplied:
A Spider's Bag the rest, from which she gives
A Thread, and still by constant Weaving lives.
The Story of NIOBE.
Swift through the Phrygian Towns the Rumor flies,
And the strange News each female Tongue employs:
Niobe, who before she married knew
The famous Nymph, now found the Story true;
Yet, unreclaim'd by poor Arachne's Fate,
Vainly above the Gods assumed a State.
Her Husband's Fame, their Family's Descent,
Their Power, and rich Dominion's wide Extent,
Might well have justified a decent Pride;
But not on these alone the Dame relied.
Her lovely Progeny, that far excelled,
The Mother's Heart with vain Ambition swelled:
The happiest Mother not unjustly styled,
Had no conceited Thoughts her towering Fancy filled.
For once a Prophetess with Zeal inspired,
Their slow Neglect to warm Devotion fired;
Through every Street of Thebes who ran possessed,
And thus in Accents wild her Charge expressed:
Haste, haste, ye Theban Matrons, and adore,
With hallowed Rites, Latona's mighty Power;
And, to the heavenly Twins that from her spring,
With Laurel crowned, your smoking Incense bring.
Strait the great Summons every Dame obeyed,
And due Submission to the Goddess paid;
Graceful, with Laurel Chaplets dressed, they came,
And offered Incense in the sacred Flame.
Mean while, surrounded with a courtly Guard,
The royal Niobe in State appeared;
Attired in Robes embroidered over with Gold,
And mad with Rage, yet lovely to behold:
Her comely Tresses, trembling as she stood,
Down her fine Neck with easy Motion flowed;
Then, darting round a proud disdainful Look,
In haughty Tone her hasty Passion broke,
And thus began; What Madness this, to court
A Goddess founded merely on Report?
Dare ye a poor pretended Power invoke,
While yet no Altars to my Godhead smoke?
Mine, whose immediate Lineage stands confessed
From Tantalus, the only mortal Guest
That ever the Gods admitted to their Feast.
A Sister of the Pleiads gave me Birth;
And Atlas, mightiest Mountain upon Earth,
Who bears the Globe of all the Stars above,
My Grandsire was, and Atlas sprung from Jove.
The Theban Towns my Majesty adore,
And neighboring Phrygia trembles at my Power:
Raised by my Husband's Lute, with Turrets crowned,
Our lofty City stands secured around.
Within my Court, wherever I turn my Eyes,
Unbounded Treasures to my Prospect rise:
With these my Face I modestly may name,
As not unworthy of so high a Claim;
Seven are my Daughters, of a Form Divine,
With seven fair Sons, an indefective Line.
Go, Fools! consider this; and ask the Cause
From which my Pride its strong Presumption draws;
Consider this; and then prefer to me
Caeus the Titan's vagrant Progeny;
To whom, in Travel, the whole spacious Earth
No Room afforded for her spurious Birth.
Not the least Part in Earth, in Heaven, or Seas,
Would grant your outlawed Goddess any Ease:
Till pitying here is, from his own wandering Case,
Delos, the floating Island, gave a Place.
There she a Mother was, of two at most;
Only the seventh Part of what I boast.
My Joys all are beyond Suspicion fixed,
With no Pollutions of Misfortune mix d;
Safe on the Basis of my Power I stand,
Above the Reach of Fortune's fickle Hand.
Lessen she may my inexhausted Store,
And much destroy, yet still must leave me more.
Suppose it possible that some may dye
Of this my numerous lovely Progeny;
Still with Latona I might safely vye.
Who, by her scanty Breed, scarce fit to name,
But just escapes the childless Woman's Shame.
Go then, with Speed your laureled heads uncrown,
And leave the silly Farce you have begun.
The timorous Throng their sacred Rites forbore,
And from their Heads the verdant Laurel tore;
Their haughty Queen they with Regret obeyed,
And still in gentle Murmurs softly prayed.
High, on the Top of Cynthus' shady Mount,
With Grief the Goddess saw the base Affront;
And, the Abuse revolving in her Breast,
The Mother her Twin-offspring thus addressed.
Lo I, my Children, who with Comfort knew
Your God-like Birth, and thence my Glory drew;
And thence have claimed Precedence of Place
From all but Juno of the heavenly Race,
Must now despair, and languish in Disgrace.
My Godhead questioned, and all Rites Divine,
Unless you succor, banished from my Shrine.
Nay more, the Imp of Tantalus has flung
Reflections with her vile paternal Tongue;
Has dared prefer her mortal Breed to mine,
And called me childless; which, just Fate, may she repine!
When to urge more the Goddess was prepared,
Phoebus in haste replies, Too much we have heard,
And every Moment's lost, while Vengeance is deferred.
Diana spoke the same. Then both enshroud
Their heavenly Bodies in a sable Cloud;
And to the Theban Towers descending light,
Through the soft yielding Air direct their Flight.
Without the Wall there lies a champian Ground
With even Surface, far extending round,
Beaten and levelled, while it daily feels
The trampling Horse, and Chariot's grinding Wheels.
Part of proud Niobe's young rival Breed,
Practicing there to ride the managed Steed;
Their Bridles boss'd with Gold, were mounted high
On stately Furniture of Tyrian Dye.
Of these, Ismenos, who by Birth had been
The first fair Issue of the fruitful Queen,
Just as he drew the Rein to guide his Horse
Around the Compass of the circling Course,
Sighed deeply, and the Pangs of Smart expressed,
While the Shaft stuck, engor'd within his Breast:
And, the Reins dropping from his dying Hand,
He sunk quite down, and tumbled on the Sand.
Sipylus next the rattling Quiver heard,
And with full Speed for his Escape prepared;
As when the Pilot from the black'ning Skies
A gathering Storm of wintry Rain descries,
His Sails unfurled, and crowded all with Wind,
He strives to leave the threatening Cloud behind:
So fled the Youth; but an unerring Dart
O'ertook him, quick discharged, and sped with Art;
Fixed in his Neck behind, it trembling stood,
And at his Throat displayed the Point besmeared with Blood.
Prone, as his Posture was, he tumbled over,
And bathed his Courser's Mane with steaming Gore.
Next at young Phaedimus they took their Aim,
And Tantalus, who bore his Grandsire's Name:
These, when their other Exercise was done,
To try the Wrestler's oily Sport begun;
And, straining every Nerve, their Skill expressed
In closest Grapple, joining Breast to Breast;
When from the bending Bow an Arrow sent,
Joined as they were, through both their Bodies went:
Both groaned, and writhing both their Limbs with Pain,
They fell together bleeding on the Plain;
Then both their languid Eye Balls faintly roll,
And thus together breath away their Soul.
With Grief Alphenor saw their doleful Plight,
And smote his Breast, and sicken'd at the Sight;
Then to their Succor ran with eager haste,
And, fondly grieved, their stiff'ning Limbs embraced:
But in the Action falls: A thrilling Dart,
By Phoebus guided, pierced him to the Heart.
This, as they drew it forth, his Midriff tore,
It Is barbed Point the fleshy Fragments bore,
And let the Soul gush out in Streams of purple Gore.
But Damasiethon, by a double Wound,
Beardless, and young, lay gasping on the Ground.
Fixed in his sinewy Ham, the steely Point
Stuck through his Knee, and pierced the nervous Joint:
And, as he stooped to tug the painful Dart,
Another struck him in a vital Part;
Shot through his Wezon, by the Wing it hung,
The Lifeblood forced it out, and darting upward sprung.
Ilioneus, the last, with Terror stands,
Lifting in Prayer his unavailing Hands;
And, ignorant from whom his Griefs arise,
Spare me, O all ye heavenly Powers, he cries:
Phoebus was touched too late, the sounding Bow
Had sent the Shaft, and struck the fatal Blow;
Which yet but gently gored his tender Side,
So by a slight, and easy Wound he died.
Swift to the Mother's Ears the Rumor came,
And doleful Sighs the heavy News proclaim;
With Anger and Surprise inflamed by turns,
In furious Rage her haughty Stomach burns:
First she disputes the Effects of heavenly Power,
Then at their daring Boldness wonders more;
For poor Amphion with sore Grief distressed,
Hoping to sooth his Cares by endless Rest,
Had sheathed a Dagger in his wretched Breast.
And she, who tossed her high disdainful Head,
When through the Streets in solemn Pomp she led
The Throng that from Latona's Altar fled,
Assuming State beyond the proudest Queen;
Was now the miserablest Object seen.
Prostrate among the clay-cold Dead she fell,
And kissed an undistinguished last Farewell.
Then, her pale Arms advancing to the Skies,
Cruel Latona! triumph now she cries.
My grieving Soul in bitter Anguish drench,
And with my Woes your thirsty Passion quench;
Feast your black Malice at a Price thus dear,
While the sore Pangs of sev'n such Deaths I bear.
Triumph, too cruel Rival, and display
Your conquering Standard; for you have won the Day.
Yet I Will excel; for yet, though sev'n are slain,
Superior still in Number I remain.
Scarce had she spoke; the Bow-string's twanging Sound
Was heard, and dealt fresh Terrors all around;
Which all, but Niobe alone, confound.
Stunned, and obdurate by her Load of Grief,
Insensible she sits, nor hopes Relief.
Before the funeral Biers, all weeping sad,
Her Daughters stood, in Vests of Sable clad.
When one, surpised, and stung with sudden Smart,
In vain attempts to draw the sticking Dart:
But to grim Death her blooming Youth resigns,
And over her Brother's Corpse her dying Head reclines.
This, to assuage her Mother's Anguish tries,
And, silenced in the pious Action, dies;
Shot by a secret Arrow, winged with Death,
Her fault'ring Lips but only gasp'd for Breath.
One, on her dying Sister, breathes her last;
Vainly in Flight another's Hopes are placed:
This hiding, from her Fate a Shelter seeks;
That trembling stands, and fills the Air with Shrieks.
And all in vain; for now all six had found
Their Way to Death, each by a different Wound.
The last, with eager Care the Mother veiled,
Behind her spreading Mantle close concealed,
And with her Body guarded, as a Shield.
Only for this, this youngest, I implore,
Grant me this one Request, I ask no more;
O grant me this! she passionately cries,
But while she speaks, the destined Virgin dies.
The Transformation of NIOBE.
Widowed, and Childless, lamentable State!
A doleful Sight, among the Dead she sat:
Hardened with Woes, a Statue of Despair,
To every Breath of Wind unmoved her Hair;
Her Cheek still red'ning, but its Color dead,
Faded her Eyes, and set within her Head.
No more her pliant Tongue its Motion keeps,
But stands congealed within her frozen Lips.
Stagnate, and dull, within her purple Veins,
Its Current stopped, the lifeless Blood remains.
Her Feet their usual Offices refuse,
Her Arms, and Neck their graceful Gestures lose:
Action, and Life from every Part are gone,
And even her Entrails turn to solid Stone;
Yet still she weeps, and whirled by stormy Winds,
Born through the Air, her native Country finds;
There fixed, she stands upon a bleaky Hill,
There yet her marble Cheeks eternal Tears distill.
The Peasants of LYCIA transformed to Frogs.
Then all, reclaimed by this Example, showed
A due Regard for each peculiar God:
Both Men, and Women their Devoirs expressed,
And great Latona's awful Power confessed.
Then, tracing Instances of older Time,
To suit the Nature of the present Crime,
Thus one begins his Tale. -- Where Lycia yields
A golden Harvest from its fertile Fields,
Some churlish Peasants, in the Days of Yore,
Provoked the Goddess to exert her Power.
The thing indeed the Meanness of the Place
Has made obscure, surprising as it was;
But I my self once happened to behold
This famous Lake of which the Story's told.
My Father then, worn out by Length of Days,
Nor able to sustain the tedious Ways,
Me with a Guide had sent the Plains to roam,
And drive his well-fed straggling Heifers home.
Here, as we saunter'd through the verdant Meads,
We spied a Lake o'er-grown with trembling Reeds,
Whose wavy Tops an opening Scene disclose,
From which an antique smoaky Altar rose.
I, as my superstitious Guide had done,
Stopped short, and blessed my self, and then went on;
Yet I inquired to whom the Altar stood,
Faunus, the Naiads, or some native God?
No Silvan Deity, my Friend replies,
Enshrined within this hallowed Altar lies:
For this, O Youth, to that famed Goddess stands,
Whom, at the imperial Juno's rough Commands,
Of every Quarter of the Earth bereaved,
Delos, the floating Isle, at length received.
Who there, in spite of Enemies, brought forth,
Beneath an Olive's Shade, her great Twin-birth.
Hence too she fled the furious Stepdame's Power,
And in her Arms a double Godhead bore;
And now the Borders of fair Lycia gained,
Just when the Summer Solstice parched the Land.
With Thirst the Goddess languishing, no more
Her emptied Breast would yield its milky Store;
When, from below, the smiling Valley showed
A silver Lake that in its Bottom flowed:
A sort of Clowns were reaping, near the Bank,
The bending Osier, and the Bullrush dank;
The Cresse, and Water-lilly, fragrant Weed,
Whose juicy Stalk the liquid Fountains feed.
The Goddess came, and kneeling on the Brink,
Stooped at the fresh Repast, prepared to drink.
Then thus, being hindered by the Rabble Race,
In Accents mild expostulates the Case.
Water I only ask, and sure it is hard
From Nature's common Rights to be debarred:
This, as the genial Sun, and vital Air,
Should flow alike to every Creature's Share.
Yet still I ask, and as a Favor crave,
That, which a public Bounty, Nature gave.
Nor do I seek my weary Limbs to drench;
Only, with one cool Draught, my Thirst I Would quench.
Now from my Throat the usual Moisture dries,
And even my Voice in broken Accents dies:
One Draught as dear as Life I should esteem,
And Water, now I thirst, would Nectar seem.
Oh! let my little Babes your Pity move,
And melt your Hearts to charitable Love;
They (as by chance they did) extend to you
Their little Hands, and my Request pursue.
Whom would these soft Persuasions not subdue,
Though the most rustic and unmanner'd Crew?
Yet they the Goddess's Request refuse,
And with rude Words reproachfully abuse:
Nay more, with spiteful Feet the Villains trod
Over the soft Bottom of the marshy Flood,
And blackened all the Lake with Clouds of rising Mud.
Her Thirst by Indignation was suppressed;
Bent on Revenge, the Goddess stood confessed.
Her suppliant Hands uplifting to the Skies,
For a Redress, to Heaven she now applies.
And, May you live, she passionately cried,
Doomed in that Pool for ever to abide.
The Goddess has her Wish; for now they choose
To plunge and dive among the watery Ooze;
Sometimes they show their Head above the Brim,
And on the glassy Surface spread to swim;
Often upon the Bank their Station take,
Then spring, and leap into the cooly Lake.
Still, void of Shame, they lead a clamorous Life,
And, croaking, still scold on in endless Strife;
Compelled to live beneath the liquid Stream,
Where still they quarrel, and attempt to skream.
Now, from their bloated Throat, their Voice puts on
Imperfect Murmurs in a hoarser Tone;
Their noisy Jaws, with Bawling now grown wide,
An ugly Sight! extend on either Side:
Their motly Back, streaked with a List of Green,
Joined to their Head, without a Neck is seen;
And, with a Belly broad and white, they look
Mere Frogs, and still frequent the muddy Brook.
The Fate of MARSYAS.
Scarce had the Man this famous Story told,
Of Vengeance on the Lycians shown of old,
When strait Another pictures to their View
The Satyr's Fate, whom angry Phoebus slew;
Who, raised with high Conceit, and puffed with Pride,
At his own Pipe, the skilful God defied.
Why do you tear me from my self, he cries?
Ah cruel! must my Skin be made the Prize?
This for a silly Pipe? he roaring said,
Mean while the Skin from off his Limbs was flayed.
All bare, and raw, one large continued Wound,
With Streams of Blood his Body bathed the Ground.
The blueish Veins their trembling Pulse disclosed,
The stringy Nerves lay naked, and exposed;
His Guts appeared, distinctly each expressed,
With every shining Fiber of his Breast.
The Fauns, and Silvans, with the Nymphs that rove
Among the Satyrs in the shady Grove;
Olympus, known of old, and every Swain
That fed, or Flock, or Herd upon the Plain,
Bewailed the Loss; and with their Tears that flowed,
A kindly Moisture on the Earth bestowed;
That soon, conjoined, and in a Body ranged,
Sprung from the Ground, to limpid Water changed;
Which, down through Phrygia's Rocks, a mighty Stream,
Comes tumbling to the Sea, and Marsya is its Name.
The Story of PELOPS.
From these Relations strait the People turn
To present Truths, and lost Amphion mourn:
The Mother most was blamed, yet some relate
That Pelops pitied, and bewailed her Fate,
And stripped his Clothes, and laid his Shoulder bare,
And made the Ivory Miracle appear.
This Shoulder, from the first, was formed of Flesh,
As lively as the other, and as fresh;
But, when the Youth was by his Father slain,
The Gods restored his mangled Limbs again;
Only that Place which joins the Neck, and Arm,
The rest untouched, was found to suffer Harm:
The Loss of which an Ivory Piece sustained;
And thus the Youth his Limbs, and Life regained.
The Story of TEREUS, PROCNE, and PHILOMELA.
To Thebes the neighboring Princes all repair,
And with Condolance the Misfortune share.
Each bord'ring State in solemn Form addressed,
And each betimes a friendly Grief expressed.
Argos, with Sparta's, and Mycenae's Towns,
And Calydon, yet free from fierce Diana's Frowns.
Corinth for finest Brass well famed of old,
Orchomenos for Men of Courage bold:
Cleonae lying in the lowly Dale,
And rich Messene with its fertile Vale:
Pylos, for Nestor's City after famed,
And Troezen, not as yet from Pittheus named.
And those fair Cities, which are hemmed around
By double Seas within the Isthmian Ground;
And those, which farther from the Seacoast stand,
Lodged in the Bosom of the spacious Land.
Who can believe it? Athens was the last:
Though for Politeness famed for Ages past.
For a strait Siege, which then their Walls enclosed,
Such Acts of kind Humanity opposed:
And thick with Ships, from foreign Nations bound,
Sea-ward their City lay invested round.
These, with auxiliar Forces led from far,
Tereus of Thrace, brave, and inured to War,
Had quite defeated, and obtained a Name,
The Warrior's Due, among the Sons of Fame.
This, with his Wealth, and Power, and ancient Line,
From Mars derived, Pandion's Thoughts incline
His Daughter Procne with the Prince to join.
Nor Hymen, nor the Graces here preside,
Nor Juno to befriend the blooming Bride;
But Fiends with funeral Brands the Process led,
And Furies waited at the Genial Bed:
And all Night long the scrieching Owl aloof,
With baleful Notes, sat brooding over the Roof.
With such ill Omens was the Match begun,
That made them Parents of a hopeful Son.
Now Thrace congratulates their seeming Joy,
And they, in thankful Rites, their Minds employ.
If the fair Queen's Espousals pleased before,
Itys, the newborn Prince, now pleases more;
And each bright Day, the Birth, and Bridal Feast,
Were kept with hallowed Pomp above the rest.
So far true Happiness may lie concealed,
When, by false Lights, we fancy it is revealed!
Now, since their Nuptials, had the golden Sun
Five Courses round his ample Zodiac run;
When gentle Procne thus her Lord addressed,
And spoke the secret Wishes of her Breast:
If I, she said, have ever Favor found,
Let my Petition with Success be crowned:
Let me at Athens my dear Sister see,
Or let her come to Thrace, and visit me.
And, lest my Father should her Absence mourn,
Promise that she shall make a quick Return.
With Thanks I Would own the Obligation due
Only, O Tereus, to the Gods, and you.
Now, plied with Oar, and Sail at his Command,
The nimble Galleys reached the Athenian Land,
And anchored in the famed Piraean Bay,
While Tereus to the Palace takes his Way;
The King salutes, and Ceremonies past,
Begins the fatal Embassy at last;
The Occasion of his Voyage he declares,
And, with his own, his Wife's Request prefers;
Asks Leave that, only for a little Space,
Their lovely Sister might embark for Thrace.
Thus, while he spoke, appeared the royal Maid,
Bright Philomela, splendidly arrayed;
But most attractive in her charming Face,
And comely Person, turned with every Grace:
Like those fair Nymphs, that are described to rove
Across the Glades, and Op'nings of the Grove;
Only that these are dressed for Silvan Sports,
And less become the Finery of Courts.
Tereus beheld the Virgin, and admired,
And with the Coals of burning Lust was fired:
Like crackling Stubble, or the Summer Hay,
When forked Lightnings over the Meadows play.
Such Charms in any Breast might kindle Love,
But him the Heats of inbred Lewdness move;
To which, though Thrace is naturally prone,
Yet his is still superior, and his own.
Strait her Attendants he designs to buy,
And with large Bribes her Governess would try:
Herself with ample Gifts resolves to bend,
And his whole Kingdom in the Attempt expend.
Or, snatched away by Force of Arms, to bear,
And justify the Rape with open War.
The boundless Passion boils within his Breast,
And his projecting Soul admits no Rest.
And now, impatient of the least Delay,
By pleading Procne's Cause, he speeds his Way:
The Eloquence of Love his Tongue inspires,
And, in his Wife's, he speaks his own Desires*
Hence all his Importunities arise,
And Tears unmanly trickle from his Eyes.
Ye Gods! what thick involving Darkness blinds
The stupid Faculties of mortal Minds!
Tereus the Credit of Goodnature gains
From these his Crimes; so well the Villain feigns.
And, unsuspecting of his base Designs,
In the Request fair Philomela joins;
Her snowy Arms her aged Sire embrace,
And clasp his Neck with an endearing Grace:
Only to see her Sister she entreats,
A seeming Blessing, which a Curse compleats.
Tereus surveys her with a luscious Eye,
And in his Mind forestalls the blissful Joy:
Her circling Arms a Scene of Lust inspire,
And every Kiss foments the raging Fire.
Fondly he wishes for the Father's Place,
To feel, and to return the warm Embrace;
Since not the nearest Ties of filial Blood,
Would damp his Flame, and force him to be good.
At length, for both their sakes, the King agrees;
And Philomela, on her bended Knees,
Thanks him for what her Fancy calls Success,
When cruel Fate intends her nothing less.
Now Phoebus, hasting to ambrosial Rest,
His fiery Steeds drove sloping down the West:
The sculptured Gold with sparkling Wines was filled,
And, with rich Meats, each cheerful Table smiled.
Plenty, and Mirth the royal Banquet close,
Then all retire to Sleep, and sweet Repose
But the lewd Monarch, though withdrawn apart,
Still feels Love's Poison rankling in his Heart:
Her Face Divine is stamped within his Breast,
Fancy imagines, and improves the rest;
And thus, kept waking by intense Desire,
He nourishes his own prevailing Fire.
Next Day the good old King for Tereus sends,
And to his Charge the Virgin recommends;
His Hand with Tears the indulgent Father pressed,
Then spoke, and thus with Tenderness addressed.
Since the kind Instances of pious Love,
Do all Pretense of Obstacle remove;
Since Procne's, and her own, with your Request,
O'er-rule the Fears of a Paternal Breast;
With you, dear Son, my Daughter I entrust,
And by the Gods adjure you to be just;
By Truth, and every consanguineal Tie,
To watch, and guard her with a Father's Eye.
And, since the least Delay will tedious prove,
In keeping from my Sight the Child I love,
With Speed return her, kindly to assuage
The tedious Troubles of my lingering Age.
And you, my Philomel, let it suffice,
To know your Sister's banished from my Eyes;
If any Sense of Duty sways your Mind,
Let me from you the shortest Absence find.
He wept; then kissed his Child; and while he speaks,
The Tears fall gently down his aged Cheeks.
Next, as a Pledge of Fealty, he demands,
And, with a solemn Charge, conjoyns their Hands;
Then to his Daughter, and his Grandson sends,
And by their Mouth a Blessing recommends;
While, in a Voice with dire Forebodings broke,
Sobbing, and faint, the last Farewell was spoke.
Now Philomela, scarce received on Board,
And in the royal gilded Bark secured,
Beheld the Dashes of the bending Oar,
The ruffled Sea, and the receding Shore;
When strait (his Joy impatient of Disguise)
We Have gained our Point, the rough Barbarian cries;
Now I possess the dear, the blissful Hour,
And every Wish subjected to my Power.
Transports of Lust his vicious Thoughts employ,
And he forbears, with Pain, the expected Joy.
His gloting Eyes incessantly surveyed
The Virgin Beauties of the lovely Maid:
As when the bold rapacious Bird of Jove,
With crooked Talons stooping from above,
Has snatched, and carried to his lofty Nest
A Captive Hare, with cruel Gripes oppressed;
Secure, with fixed, and unrelenting Eyes,
He sits, and views the helpless, trembling Prize.
Their Vessels now had made the intended Land,
And all with Joy descend upon the Strand;
When the false Tyrant seized the Princely Maid,
And to a Lodge in distant Woods conveyed;
Pale, sinking, and distressed with jealous Fears,
And asking for her Sister all in Tears.
The Letcher, for Enjoyment fully bent,
No longer now concealed his base Intent;
But with rude Haste the bloomy Girl deflowered,
Tender, defenseless, and with Ease o'erpowr'd.
Her piercing Accents to her Sire complain,
And to her absent Sister, but in vain:
In vain she importunes, with doleful Cries,
Each unattentive Godhead of the Skies.
She pants, and trembles, like the bleating Prey,
From some close-hunted Wolf just snatched away;
That still, with fearful Horror, looks around,
And on its Flank regards the bleeding Wound.
Or, as the timorous Dove, the Danger over,
Beholds her shining Plumes besmeared with Gore,
And, though delivered from the Faulcon's Claw,
Yet shivers, and retains a secret Awe.
But when her Mind a calm Reflection shared,
And all her scattered Spirits were repaired:
Torn, and disordered while her Tresses hung,
Her livid Hands, like one that mourned, she wrung;
Then thus, with Grief overwhelmed her languid Eyes,
Savage, inhumane, cruel Wretch! she cries;
Whom nor a Parent's strict Commands could move,
Though charged, and uttered with the Tears of Love;
Nor Virgin Innocence, nor all that is due
To the strong Contract of the Nuptial Vow:
Virtue, by this, in wild Confusion's laid,
And I compelled to wrong my Sister's Bed;
Whilst you, regardless of your Marriage Oath,
With Stains of Incest have defiled us Both.
Though I deserved some Punishment to find,
This was, ye Gods, too cruel, and unkind.
Yet, Villain, to complete your horrid Guilt,
Stab here, and let my tainted Blood be spilt.
Oh happy! had it come, before I knew
The cursed Embrace of vile perfidious you;
Then my pale Ghost, pure from incestuous Love,
Had wandered spotless through the Elysian Grove.
But, if the Gods above have Power to know,
And judge those Actions that are done below;
Unless the dreaded Thunders of the Sky,
Like me, subdued, and violated lie;
Still my Revenge shall take its proper Time,
And suit the Baseness of your hellish Crime.
My self, abandoned, and devoid of Shame,
Through the wide World your Actions will proclaim;
Or though I Am imprisoned in this lonely Den,
Obscured, and buried from the Sight of Men,
My mournful Voice the pitying Rocks shall move,
And my Complainings echo through the Grove.
Hear me, O Heaven! and, if a God be there,
Let him regard me, and accept my Prayer.
Struck with these Words, the Tyrant's guilty Breast
With Fear, and Anger, was, by turns, possessed;
Now, with Remorse his Conscience deeply stung,
He drew the Faulchion that beside him hung,
And first her tender Arms behind her bound,
Then dragged her by the Hair along the Ground.
The Princess willingly her Throat reclined,
And viewed the Steel with a contented Mind;
But soon her Tongue the girding Pinchers strain,
With Anguish, soon she feels the piercing Pain:
Oh Father! Father! she would fain have spoke,
But the sharp Torture her Intention broke;
In vain she tries, for now the Blade has cut
Her Tongue sheer off, close to the trembling Root.
The mangled Part still quiver'd on the Ground,
Murmuring with a faint imperfect Sound:
And, as a Serpent writhes his wounded Train,
Uneasy, panting, and possessed with Pain;
The Piece, while Life remained, still trembled fast,
And to its Mistress pointed to the last.
Yet, after this so damned, and black a Deed,
Fame (which I scarce can credit) has agreed,
That on her rifled Charms, still void of Shame,
He frequently indulged his lustful Flame.
At last he ventures to his Procne's Sight,
Loaded with Guilt, and cloyed with long Delight;
There, with feigned Grief, and false, dissembled Sighs,
Begins a formal Narrative of Lies;
Her Sister's Death he artfully declares,
Then weeps, and raises Credit from his Tears.
Her Vest, with Flowers of Gold embroidered over,
With Grief distressed, the mournful Matron tore,
And a beseeming Suit of gloomy Sable wore.
With Cost, an honorary Tomb she raised,
And thus the imaginary Ghost appeased.
Deluded Queen! the Fate of her you love,
Nor Grief, nor Pity, but Revenge should move.
Through the twelve Signs had passed the circling Sun,
And round the Compass of the Zodiac run;
What must unhappy Philomela do,
For ever subject to her Keeper's View?
Huge Walls of massy Stone the Lodge surround,
From her own Mouth no way of speaking's found.
But all our Wants by Wit may be supplied,
And Art makes up, what Fortune has denied:
With Skill exact a Phrygian Web she strung,
Fixed to a Loom that in her Chamber hung,
Where in-wrought Letters, upon White displayed,
In purple Notes, her wretched Case betrayed:
The Piece, when finished, secretly she gave
Into the Charge of one poor menial Slave;
And then, with Gestures, made him understand,
It must be safe conveyed to Procne's Hand.
The Slave, with Speed, the Queen's Apartment sought,
And rendered up his Charge, unknowing what he brought.
But when the Ciphers, figured in each Fold,
Her Sister's melancholy Story told,
(Strange that she could!) with Silence, she surveyed
The tragic Piece, and without weeping read:
In such tumultuous Haste her Passions sprung,
They choked her Voice, and quite disarmed her Tongue.
No Room for female Tears; the Furies rise,
Darting vindictive Glances from her Eyes;
And, stung with Rage, she bounds from Place to Place,
While stern Revenge sits lowering in her Face.
Now the triennial Celebration came,
Observed to Bacchus by each Thracian Dame;
When, in the Privacies of Night retired,
They act his Rites, with sacred Rapture fired:
By Night, the twinkling Cymbals ring around,
While the shrill Notes from Rhodope resound;
By Night, the Queen, disguised, forsakes the Court,
To mingle in the Festival Resort.
Leafs of the curling Vine her Temples shade,
And, with a circling Wreath, adorn her Head:
Adown her Back the Stag's rough Spoils appear,
Light on her Shoulder leans a Cornel Spear.
Thus, in the Fury of the God concealed,
Procne her own mad headstrong Passion veiled;
Now, with her Gang, to the thick Wood she flies,
And with religious Yellings fills the Skies;
The fatal Lodge, as 'twere by chance, she seeks,
And, through the bolted Doors, an Entrance breaks;
From thence, her Sister snatching by the Hand,
Masked like the ranting Bacchanalian Band,
Within the Limits of the Court she drew,
Shading, with Ivy green, her outward Hue.
But Philomela, conscious of the Place,
Felt new reviving Pangs of her Disgrace;
A shivering Cold prevailed in every Part,
And the chilled Blood ran trembling to her Heart.
Soon as the Queen a fit Retirement found,
Stripped of the Garlands that her Temples crowned,
She strait unveiled her blushing Sister's Face,
And fondly clasped her with a close Embrace:
But, in Confusion lost, the unhappy Maid,
With Shame dejected, hung her drooping Head,
As guilty of a Crime that stained her Sister's Bed.
That Speech, that should her injured Virtue clear,
And make her spotless Innocence appear,
Is now no more; only her Hands, and Eyes
Appeal, in Signals, to the conscious Skies.
In Procne's Breast the rising Passions boil,
And burst in Anger with a mad Recoil;
Her Sister's ill-timed Grief, with Scorn, she blames,
Then, in these furious Words her Rage proclaims.
Tears, unavailing, but defer our Time,
The stabbing Sword must expiate the Crime;
Or worse, if Wit, on bloody Vengeance bent,
A Weapon more tormenting can invent.
O Sister! I Have prepared my stubborn Heart,
To act some hellish, and unheard of Part;
Either the Palace to surround with Fire,
And see the Villain in the Flames expire;
Or, with a Knife, dig out his cursed Eyes,
Or, his false Tongue with racking Engines seize;
Or, cut away the Part that injured you,
And, through a thousand Wounds, his guilty Soul pursue.
Tortures enough my Passion has designed,
But the Variety distracts my Mind.
A while, thus wavering, stood the furious Dame,
When Itys fondling to his Mother came;
From him the cruel fatal Hint she took,
She viewed him with a stern remorseless Look;
Ah! but too like thy wicked Sire, she said,
Forming the direful Purpose in her Head.
At this a sullen Grief her Voice suppressed,
While silent Passions struggle in her Breast.
Now, at her Lap arrived, the flattering Boy
Salutes his Parent with a smiling Joy:
About her Neck his little Arms are thrown,
And he accosts her in a prattling Tone.
Then her tempestuous Anger was allayed,
And in its full Career her Vengeance stayed;
While tender Thoughts, in spite of Passion, rise,
And melting Tears disarm her threatening Eyes.
But when she found the Mother's easy Heart,
Too fondly swerving from the intended Part;
Her injured Sister's Face again she viewed:
And, as by turns surveying Both she stood,
While this fond Boy (she said) can thus express
The moving Accents of his fond Address;
Why stands my Sister of her Tongue bereft,
Forlorn, and sad, in speechless Silence left?
O Procne, see the Fortune of your House!
Such is your Fate, when matched to such a Spouse!
Conjugal Duty, if observed to him,
Would change from Virtue, and become a Crime;
For all Respect to Tereus must debase
The noble Blood of Great Pandion's Race.
Strait at these Words, with big Resentment filled,
Furious her Look, she flew, and seized her Child;
Like a fell Tigress of the savage Kind,
That drags the tender Suckling of the Hind
Through India's gloomy Groves, where Ganges laves
The shady Scene, and rouls his streamy Waves.
Now to a close Apartment they were come,
Far off retired within the spacious Dome;
When Procne, on revengeful Mischief bent,
Home to his Heart a piercing Poinyard sent.
Itys, with rueful Cries, but all too late,
Holds out his Hands, and deprecates his Fate;
Still at his Mother's Neck he fondly aims,
And strives to melt her with endearing Names;
Yet still the cruel Mother perseveres,
Nor with Concern his bitter Anguish hears.
This might suffice; but Philomela too
Across his Throat a shining Curtlass drew.
Then Both, with Knives, dissect each quivering Part,
And carve the butchered Limbs with cruel Art;
Which, whelmed in boiling Cauldrons over the Fire,
Or turned on Spits, in steamy Smoke aspire:
While the long Entries, with their slippery Floor,
Run down in purple Streams of clotted Gore.
Asked by his Wife to this inhuman Feast,
Tereus unknowingly is made a Guest:
Whilst she her Plot the better to disguise,
Styles it some unknown mystic Sacrifice;
And such the Nature of the hallowed Rite,
The Wife her Husband only could invite,
The Slaves must all withdraw, and be debarred the Sight.
Tereus, upon a Throne of antique State,
Loftily raised, before the Banquet sat;
And Glutton like, luxuriously pleased,
With his own Flesh his hungry Maw appeased.
Nay, such a Blindness over his Senses falls,
That he for Itys to the Table calls.
When Procne, now impatient to disclose
The Joy that from her full Revenge arose,
Cries out, in Transports of a cruel Mind,
Within your self your Itys you may find.
Still at this puzzling Answer, with Surprise,
Around the Room he sends his curious Eyes;
And, as he still inquired, and called aloud,
Fierce Philomela, all besmeared with Blood,
Her Hands with Murder stained, her spreading Hair
Hanging disheveled with a ghastly Air,
Stepped forth, and flung full in the Tyrant's Face
The Head of Itys, goary as it was:
Nor ever longed so much to use her Tongue,
And with a just Reproach to vindicate her Wrong.
The Thracian Monarch from the Table flings,
While with his Cries the vaulted Parlour rings;
His Imprecations echo down to Hell,
And rouse the snaky Furies from their Stygian Cell.
One while he labors to disgorge his Breast,
And free his Stomach from the cursed Feast;
Then, weeping over his lamentable Doom,
He styles himself his Son's sepulchral Tomb.
Now, with drawn Sabre, and impetuous Speed,
In close Pursuit he drives Pandion's Breed;
Whose nimble Feet spring with so swift a Force
Across the Fields, they seem to wing their Course.
And now, on real Wings themselves they raise,
And steer their airy Flight by different Ways;
One to the Woodland's shady Covert hies,
Around the smoaky Roof the other flies;
Whose Feathers yet the Marks of Murder stain,
Where, stamped upon her Breast, the crimson Spots remain.
Tereus, through Grief, and Haste to be revenged,
Shares the like Fate, and to a Bird is changed:
Fixed on his Head, the crested Plumes appear,
Long is his Beak, and sharpened like a Spear;
Thus armed, his Looks his inward Mind display,
And, to a Lapwing turned, he fans his Way.
Exceeding Trouble, for his Childrens Fate,
Shortened Pandion's Days, and changed his Date;
Down to the Shades below, with Sorrow spent,
An earlier, unexpected Ghost he went.
BOREAS in Love.
Erechtheus next the Athenian Scepter swayed,
Whose Rule the State with joint Consent obeyed;
So mixed his Justice with his Valor flowed,
His Reign one Scene of Princely Goodness showed.
Four hopeful Youths, as many Females bright,
Sprung from his Loins, and soothed him with Delight.
Two of these Sisters, of a lovelier Air,
Excelled the rest, though all the rest were fair.
Procris, to Cephalus in Wedlock tied,
Blessed the young Silvan with a blooming Bride:
For Orithyia Boreas suffered Pain,
For the coy Maid sue'd long, but sue'd in vain:
Tereus his Neighbor, and his Thracian Blood,
Against the Match a main Objection stood;
Which made his Vows, and all his suppliant Love,
Empty as Air, and ineffectual prove.
But when he found his soothing Flatt'ries fail,
Nor saw his soft Addresses could avail;
Blustering with Ire, he quickly has Recourse
To rougher Arts, and his own native Force.
It Is well, he said; such Usage is my Due,
When thus disguised by foreign ways I sue;
When my stern Airs, and Fierceness I disclaim,
And sigh for Love, ridiculously tame;
When soft Addresses foolishly I try,
Nor my own stronger Remedies apply.
By Force and Violence I chiefly live,
By them the lowering stormy Tempests drive;
In foaming Billows raise the hoary Deep,
Writhe knotted Oaks, and sandy Deserts sweep;
Congeal the falling Flakes of fleecy Snow,
And bruise, with rattling Hail, the Plains below.
I, and my Brother-Winds, when joined above,
Through the waste Champian of the Skies we rove,
With such a boisterous full Career engage,
That Heaven's whole Concave thunders at our Rage.
While, struck from nitrous Clouds, fierce Lightnings play
Dart through the Storm, and gild the gloomy Day.
Or when, in subterraneous Caverns pent,
My Breath, against the hollow Earth, is bent,
The quaking World above, and Ghosts below,
My mighty Power, by dear Experience, know,
Tremble with Fear, and dread the fatal Blow.
This is the only Cure to be applied,
Thus to Erechtheus I should be allied;
And thus the scornful Virgin should be wooed,
Not by Entreaty, but by Force subdued.
Boreas, in Passion, spoke these huffing things,
And, as he spoke, he shook his dreadful Wings;
At which, afar the shivering Sea was fan'd,
And the wide Surface of the distant Land:
His dusty Mantle over the Hills he drew,
And swept the lowly Valleys, as he flew;
Then, with his yellow Wings, embraced the Maid,
And, wrapped in dusky Clouds, far off conveyed.
The sparkling Blaze of Love's prevailing Fire
Shone brighter as he flew, and flamed the higher.
And now the God, possessed of his Delight,
To Northern Thrace pursued his airy Flight,
Where the young ravished Nymph became his Bride,
And soon the luscious Sweets of Wedlock tried.
Two lovely Twins, the Effect of this Embrace,
Crown their soft Labors, and their Nuptials grace*
Who, like their Mother, beautiful, and fair,
Their Father's Strength, and feathered Pinions share:
Yet these, at first, were wanting, as it is said,
And after, as they grew, their Shoulders spread.
Zethes and Calais, the pretty Twins,
Remained unfledged, while smooth their beardless Chins;
But when, in Time, the budding silver Down
Shaded their Face, and on their Cheeks was grown,
Two sprouting Wings upon their Shoulders sprung,
Like those in Birds, that veil the callow Young.
Then, as their Age advanced, and they began
From greener Youth to ripen into Man,
With Jason's Argonauts they crossed the Seas,
Embarked in quest of the famed Golden Fleece;
There, with the rest, the first frail Vessel tried,
And boldly ventured on the swelling Tide.
The End of the Sixth Book.
To the Rt. Honble. the Lady Comp^
E. Kirkall

OVID's METAMORPHOSES. BOOK VII.
Translated by Mr. TATE and Mr. STONESTREET.
The Story of MEDEA and JASON.
THE Argonauts now stemmed the foaming Tide,
And to Arcadia's Shore their Course applied;
Where sightless Phineus spent his Age in Grief,
But Boreas' Sons engage in his Relief;
And those unwelcome Guests, the odious Race
Of Harpyes, from the Monarch's Table chase.
With Jason then they greater Toils sustain,
And Phasis' slimy Banks at last they gain.
Here boldly they demand the Golden Prize
Of Scythia's King, who sternly thus replies:
That mighty Labors they must first overcome,
Or sail their Argo thence unfreighted home.
Mean while Medea, seized with fierce Desire,
By Reason strives to quench the raging Fire;
But strives in vain! -- Some God (she said) withstands,
And Reason's baffled Council countermands.
What unseen Power does this Disorder move?
It Is Love, -- at least it is like what Men call Love.
Else wherefore should the King's Commands appear
To me too hard? -- But so indeed they are.
Why should I for a Stranger fear, lest he
Should perish, whom I did but lately see?
His Death, or Safety, what are they to me?
Wretch, from thy Virgin-Breast this Flame expel,
And soon -- Oh could I, all would then be well!
But Love, resistless Love, my Soul invades;
Discretion this, Affection that persuades.
I see the Right, and I approve it too,
Condemn the Wrong, -- and yet the Wrong pursue.
Why, Royal Maid, should thou desire to wed
A Wanderer, and court a foreign Bed?
Thy native Land, though barbarous, can present
A Bridegroom worth a Royal Bride's Consent:
And whether this Advent'rer lives or dies,
In Fate and Fortune's fickle Pleasure lies.
Yet may he live! for to the Powers above,
A Virgin, led by no Impulse of Love,
So just a Suit may, for the Guiltless, move.
Whom would not Jason's Valor, Youth, and Blood
Invite? or could these Merits be withstood,
At least his charming Person must incline
The hardest Heart -- I Am sure it is so with mine!
Yet, if I help him not, the flaming Breath
Of Bulls, and Earth-born Foes must be his Death.
Or, should he through these Dangers force his way,
At last he must be made the Dragon's Prey.
If no Remorse for such Distress I feel,
I am a Tigress, and my Breast is Steel.
Why do I scruple then to see him slain,
And with the tragic Scene my Eyes profane?
My Magick's Art employ, not to assuage
The Salvages, but to inflame their Rage?
His Earth-born Foes to fiercer Fury move,
And accessory to his Murder prove?
The Gods forbid -- But Prayers are idle Breath,
When Action only can prevent his Death.
Shall I betray my Father and the State,
To intercept a rambling Hero's Fate;
Who may sail off next Hour, and saved from Harms
By my Assistance, bless another's Arms?
Whilst I, not only of my Hopes bereft,
But to unpitied Punishment am left.
If he is false, let the Ungrateful bleed!
But no such Symptom in his Looks I read.
Nature would never have lavished so much Grace
Upon his Person, if his Soul were base.
Besides, he first shall plight his Faith, and swear
By all the Gods; what therefore can thou fear?
Medea haste, from Danger set him free,
Jason shall thy eternal Debtor be.
And thou, his Queen, with Sovereign State enstall'd,
By Grecian Dames the Kind Preserver called.
Hence idle Dreams, by Lovesick Fancy bred!
Will thou, Medea, by vain Wishes led,
To Sister, Brother, Father bid adieu?
Forsake thy Country's Gods, and Country too?
My Father's harsh, my Brother but a Child,
My Sister rivals me, my Country's wild;
And for it is Gods, the greatest of 'em all
Inspires my Breast, and I obey his Call.
That great Endearments I forsake, is true;
But greater far the Hopes that I pursue:
The Pride of having saved the Youths of Greece,
(Each Life more precious than our Golden Fleece;)
A nobler Soil by me shall be possessed,
I shall see Towns with Arts and Manners blessed;
And, what I prize above the World beside,
Enjoy my Jason -- and when once his Bride,
Be more than Mortal, and to Gods allied.
They talk of Hazards I must first sustain,
Of floating Islands justling in the Main;
Our tender Barque exposed to dreadful Shocks
Of fierce Charybdis' Gulf, and Scylla's Rocks,
Where breaking Waves in whirling Eddies roll,
And ravenous Dogs that in deep Caverns howl:
Amidst these Terrors, while I lie possessed
Of him I love, and lean on Jason's Breast,
In Tempests unconcerned I will appear,
Or, only for my Husband's Safety fear.
Did thou say Husband? -- can thou so deceive
Thy self, fond Maid, and thy own Cheat believe?
In vain thou striv'st to varnish over thy Shame,
And grace thy Guilt with Wedlock's sacred Name.
Pull off the coz'ning Masque, and oh! in time
Discover, and avoid the fatal Crime.
She ceased -- the Graces now, with kind Surprise,
And Virtue's lovely Train, before her Eyes
Present themselves, and vanquished Cupid flies.
She then retires to Hecate's Shrine, that stood
Far in the Covert of a shady Wood:
She finds the Fury of her Flames asswag'd,
But, seeing Jason there, again they raged.
Blushes and Paleness did by turns invade
Her tender Cheeks, and secret Grief betrayed.
As Fire, that sleeping under Ashes lies,
Fresh-blown and roused, does up in Blazes rise,
So flamed the Virgin's Breast --
New kindled by her Lover's sparkling Eyes.
For Chance, that Day, had with uncommon Grace
Adorned the lovely Youth, and through his Face
Displayed an Air so pleasing, as might charm
A Goddess, and a Vestal's Bosom warm.
Her ravished Eyes survey him over and over,
As some gay Wonder never seen before;
Transported to the Skies she seems to be,
And thinks she gazes on a Deity.
But when he spoke, and pressed her trembling Hand,
And did with tender Words her Aid demand,
With Vows and Oaths to make her soon his Bride,
She wept a Flood of Tears, and thus replied:
I see my Error, yet to Ruin move,
Nor owe my Fate to Ignorance, but Love:
Your Life I Will guard, and only crave of you
To swear once more -- and to your Oath be true.
He swears by Hecate he would all fulfill,
And by her Grandfather's prophetic Skill,
By every thing that doubting Love could press,
His present Danger, and desired Success.
She credits him, and kindly does produce
Enchanted Herbs, and teaches him their use;
Their mystic Names and Virtues he admires*
And with his Booty joyfully retires.
The Dragon's Teeth transformed to Men.
Impatient for the Wonders of the Day,
Aurora drives the loyt'ring Stars away.
Now Mars's Mount the pressing People fill,
The Crowd below, the Nobles crown the Hill;
The King himself, high-thron'd above the rest,
With Ivory Scepter, and in Purple dressed.
Forthwith the Brass-hoof'd Bulls are set at large,
Whose furious Nostrils sulfurous Flame discharge:
The blasted Herbage by their Breath expires;
As Forges rumble with excessive Fires,
And Furnaces with fiercer Fury glow,
When Water on the panting Mass ye throw;
With such a Noise, from their Convulsive Breast,
Through bellowing Throats, the struggling Vapor pressed.
Yet Jason marches up without Concern,
While on the adventurous Youth the Monsters turn
Their glaring Eyes, and, eager to engage,
Brandish their Steel-tipt Horns in threatening Rage:
With brazen Hoofs they beat the Ground, and choke
The ambient Air with Clouds of Dust and Smoke:
Each gazing Grecian for his Champion shakes,
While bold Advances he securely makes
Through sindging Blasts; such Wonders Magic Art
Can work, when Love conspires, and plays his Part.
The passive Savages like Statutes stand,
While he their Dew-laps strokes with soothing Hand;
To unknown Yoaks their brawny Necks they yield,
And, like tame Oxen, plow the wondering Field.
The Colchians stare; the Graecians shout, and raise
Their Champion's Courage with inspiring Praise.
Emboldened now, on fresh Attempts he goes,
With Serpent's Teeth the fertile Furrows sows;
The Glebe, fermenting with enchanted Juice,
Makes the Snake's Teeth a human Crop produce.
For as an Infant, Prisoner to the Womb,
Contented sleeps, till to Perfection come,
Then does his Cell's obscure Confinement scorn,
He tosses, throbs, and presses to be born;
So from the laboring Earth no single Birth,
But a whole Troop of lusty Youths rush forth;
And, what is more strange, with Martial Fury warmed,
And for Encounter all completely armed;
In Rank and File, as they were sowed, they stand,
Impatient for the Signal of Command.
No Foe but the Aemonian Youth appears;
At him they level their Steel-pointed Spears;
His frighted Friends, who triumphed just before,
With Peals of Sighs his desperate Case deplore:
And where such hardy Warriors are afraid,
What must the tender and enamored Maid?
Her Spirits sink, the Blood her Check forsook;
She fears, who for his Safety undertook:
She knew the Virtue of the Spells she gave,
She knew their Force, and knew her Lover brave;
But what is a single Champion to an Host?
Yet scorning thus to see him tamely lost,
Her strong Reserve of secret Arts she brings,
And last, her never-failing Song she sings.
Wonders ensue; among his gazing Foes
The massy Fragment of a Rock he throws;
This Charm in Civil War engaged 'em all;
By mutual Wounds those Earth-born Brothers fall.
The Greeks, transported with the strange Success,
Leap from their Seats the Conqu'ror to caress;
Commend, and kiss, and clasp him in their Arms:
So would the kind Contriver of the Charms;
But her, who felt the tenderest Concern,
Honor condemns in secret Flames to burn;
Committed to a double Guard of Fame,
Awed by a Virgin's, and a Princess' Name.
But Thoughts are free, and Fancy unconfined,
She kisses, courts, and hugs him in her Mind;
To favoring Powers her silent Thanks she gives,
By whose Indulgence her loved Hero lives.
One Labor more remains, and, though the last,
In Danger far surmounting all the past;
That Enterprise by Fates in store was kept,
To make the Dragon sleep that never slept.
Whose Crest shoots dreadful Luster; from his Jaws
A tripple Tire of forked Stings he draws,
With Fangs and Wings of a prodigious Size:
Such was the Guardian of the Golden Prize.
Yet him, besprinkled with Lethaean Dew,
The fair Inchantress into Slumber threw;
And then, to fix him, thrice she did repeat
The Rhyme that makes the raging Winds retreat;
In stormy Seas can halcyon Seasons make,
Turn rapid Streams into a standing Lake;
While the soft Guest his drowzy Eyelids seals,
Th'unguarded Golden Fleece the Stranger steals;
Proud to possess the Purchase of his Toil,
Proud of his Royal Bride, the richer Spoil;
To Sea both Prize and Patroness he bore,
And Lands triumphant on his native Shore.
Old AESON restored to Youth.
Aemonian Matrons, who their Absence mourned,
Rejoice to see their prosperous Sons returned:
Rich curling Fumes of Incense feast the Skies,
An Hecatomb of voted Victims dies,
With gilded Horns, and Garlands on their Head,
And all the Pomp of Death, to the Altar led.
Congratulating Bowls go briskly round,
Triumphant Shouts in louder Music drowned.
Amidst these Revels, why that Cloud of Care
On Jason's Brow? (to whom the largest Share
Of Mirth was due) -- His Father was not there.
Aeson was absent, once the Young and Brave,
Now crushed with Years, and bending to the Grave.
At last withdrawn, and by the Crowd unseen,
Pressing her Hand, (with starting Sighs between)
He supplicates his kind and skilful Queen.
O Patroness! Preserver of my Life!
(Dear when my Mistress, and much dearer Wife)
Your Favors to so vast a Sum amount,
It Is past the Power of Numbers to recount;
Or could they be to Computation brought,
The History would a Romance be thought:
And yet, unless you add one Favor more,
Greater than all that you conferred before,
But not too hard for Love and Magic Skill,
Your past are thrown away, and Jason's wretched still.
The Morning of my Life is just begun,
But my declining Father's Race is run;
From my large Stock retrench the long Arrears,
And add 'em to expiring Aeson's Years.
Thus spoke the generous Youth, and wept the rest.
Moved with the Piety of his Request,
To his aged Sire such filial Duty shown,
So different from her Treatment of her own;
But still endeav'ring her Remorse to hide,
She checked her rising Sighs, and thus replied.
How could the Thought of such inhuman Wrong
Escape (said she) from pious Jason's Tongue?
Does the whole World another Jason bear,
Whose Life Medea can to yours prefer?
Or could I with so dire a Change dispense,
Hecat will never join in that Offense:
Unjust is the Request you make, and I
In Kindness your Petition shall deny;
Yet she that grants not what you do implore,
Shall yet essay to give her Jason more;
Find Means t'encrease the Stock of Aeson's Years,
Without Retrenchment of your Life's Arrears;
Provided that the Tripple Goddess join
A strong Confed'rate in my bold Design.
Thus was her Enterprise resolved; but still
Three tedious Nights are wanting to fulfill
The circling Crescents of the increasing Moon;
Then, in the Height of her Nocturnal Noon,
Medea steals from Court; her Ankles bare,
Her Garments closely girt, but loose her Hair;
Thus sallied, like a solitary Sprite,
She traverses the Terrors of the Night.
Men, Beasts, and Birds in soft Repose lay charmed,
No boistrous Wind the Mountain-Woods alarmed;
Nor did those Walks of Love, the Myrtle Trees,
Of amorous Zephyr hear the whispering Breeze;
All Elements chained in unactive Rest,
No Sense but what the twinkling Stars expressed;
To them (that only waked) she rears her Arms,
And thus commences her mysterious Charms.
She turned her thrice about, as often she threw
On her pale Tresses the Nocturnal Dew;
Then yelling thrice a most enormous Sound,
Her bare Knee bended on the flinty Ground,
O Night (said she) thou Confident and Guide
Of Secrets, such as Darkness ought to hide;
Ye Stars and Moon, that, when the Sun retires,
Support his Empire with succeeding Fires;
And thou, great Hecat, Friend to my Design;
Songs, mutt'ring Spells, your magic Forces join;
And thou, O Earth, the Magazine that yields
The Midnight Sorcerer Drugs; Skies, Mountains, Fields;
Ye watr'y Powers of Fountain, Stream, and Lake;
Ye Sylvan Gods, and Gods of Night, awake,
And gen'rously your Parts in my Adventure take.
Often by your Aid swift Currents I have led
Through wandering Banks, back to their Fountain Head;
Transformed the Prospect of the briny Deep,
Made sleeping Billows rave, and raving Billows sleep;
Made Clouds, or Sunshine; Tempests rise or fall;
And stubborn lawless Winds obey my Call:
With muttered Words disarmed the Viper's Jaw,
Up by the Roots vast Oaks and Rocks could draw;
Make Forests dance, and trembling Mountains come,
Like Malefactors, to receive their Doom;
Earth groan, and frighted Ghosts forsake their Tomb.
Thee, Cynthia, my resistless Rhymes drew down,
When tinkling Cymbals strove my Voice to drown;
Nor stronger Titan could their Force sustain,
In full Career compelled to stop his Wain:
Nor could Aurora's Virgin Blush avail,
With poisonous Herbs I turned her Roses pale;
The Fury of the fiery Bulls I broke,
Their stubborn Necks submitting to my Yoke;
And when the Sons of Earth with Fury burned,
Their hostile Rage upon themselves I turned;
The Brothers made with mutual Wounds to bleed,
And by their fatal Strife my Lover freed;
And, while the Dragon slept, to distant Greece,
Through cheated Guards, conveyed the Golden Fleece.
But now to bolder Action I proceed,
Of such prevailing Juices now have need,
That withered Years back to their Bloom can bring,
And in dead Winter raise a second Spring.
And you will perform't --
You will; for lo! the Stars, with sparkling Fires,
Presage as bright Success to my Desires:
And now another happy Omen see!
A Chariot drawn by Dragons waits for me.
With these last Words she leaps into the Wain,
Strokes the Snakes Necks, and shakes the Golden Rein;
That Signal given, they mount her to the Skies,
And now beneath her fruitful Tempe lies,
Whose Stores she ransacks, then to Crete she flies;
There Ossa, Pelion, Othrys, Pindus, all
To the fair Ravisher a Booty fall;
The Tribute of their Verdure she collects,
Nor proud Olympus Height his Plants protects.
Some by the Roots she plucks; the tender Tops
Of others with her culling Sickle crops.
Nor could the Plunder of the Hills suffice,
Down to the humble Vales and Meads she flies;
Apidanus, Amphrysus, the next Rape
Sustain, nor could Enipeus' Banks escape;
Through Beebe's Marsh, and through the Border ranged
Whose Pasture Glaucus to a Triton changed.
Now the Ninth Day, and Ninth successive Night,
Had wondered at the restless Rover's Flight;
Mean while her Dragons, fed with no Repast,
But her exhaling Simples odorous Blast,
Their tarnish'd Scales, and wrinkled Skins had cast.
At last returned before her Palace Gate,
Quitting her Chariot, on the Ground she sat,
The Sky her only Canopy of State.
All Conversation with her Sex she fled,
Shunned the Caresses of the Nuptial Bed:
Two Altars next of grassy Turf she rears,
This Hecat's Name, that Youth's Inscription bears;
With Forest-Boughs, and Vervain these she crowned;
Then delves a double Trench in lower Ground,
And sticks a black-fleec'd Ram, that ready stood,
And drenched the Ditches with devoted Blood:
New Wine she pours, and Milk from the Udder warm,
With mystic Murmurs to complete the Charm,
And subterranean Deities alarm.
To the stern King of Ghosts she next applied,
And gentle Proserpine, his ravished Bride,
That for old Aeson with the Laws of Fate
They would dispense, and lengthen his short Date;
Thus with repeated Prayers she long assails
The Infernal Tyrant, and at last prevails;
Then calls to have decrepit Aeson brought,
And stupifies him with a sleeping Draught;
On Earth his Body, like a Corpse, extends,
Then charges Jason and his waiting Friends
To quit the Place, that no unhallowed Eye
Into her Art's forbidden Secrets pry.
This done, the Inchantress, with her Locks unbound,
About her Altars trips a frantic Round;
Piecemeal the consecrated Wood she splits,
And dips the Splinters in the bloody Pits,
Then hurls 'em on the Piles; the sleeping Sire
She lustrates thrice, with Sulphur, Water, Fire.
In a large Cauldron now the Medicine boils,
Compounded of her late collected Spoils,
Blending into the Mesh the various Powers
Of Wonder-working Juices, Roots, and Flowers;
With Gems in the Eastern Ocean's Cell refined,
And such as ebbing Tides had left behind;
To them the Midnight's pearly Dew she flings,
A Screetch-Owl's Carcass, and ill boding Wings;
Nor could the Wizard Wolf's warm Entrails escape,
(That Wolf who counterfeits a Human Shape.)
Then, from the Bottom of her conj'ring Bag,
Snakes Skins, and Liver of a long-lived Stag;
Last a Crow's Head to such an Age arrived,
That he had now nine Centuries survived;
These, and with these a thousand more that grew
In sundry Soils, into her Pot she threw;
Then with a withered Olive-Bough she rakes
The bubling Broth; the Bough fresh Verdure takes;
Green Leaves at first the perished Plant surround.
Which the next Minute with ripe Fruit were crowned.
The foaming Juices now the Brink o'er-swell;
The barren Heath, wherever the Liquor fell,
Sprang out with vernal Grass, and all the Pride
Of blooming May -- When this Medea spied,
She cuts her Patient's Throat; th'exhausted Blood
Recruiting with her new enchanted Flood;
While at his Mouth, and through his opening Wound,
A double Inlet her Infusion found;
His feeble Frame resumes a youthful Air,
A glossy Brown his hoary Beard and Hair.
The meager Paleness from his Aspect fled,
And in its Room sprang up a florid Red;
Through all his Limbs a youthful Vigor flies,
His emptied Art'ries swell with fresh Supplies,
Gazing Spectators scarce believe their Eyes.
But Aeson is the most surpised, to find
A happy Change in Body, and in Mind;
In Sense and Constitution the same Man,
As when his Fortieth active Year began.
Bacchus, who from the Clouds this Wonder viewed,
Medea's Method instantly pursued,
And his indulgent Nurse's Youth renewed.
The Death of PELIAS.
Thus far obliging Love employed her Art,
But now Revenge must act a tragic Part;
Medea feigns a mortal Quarrel bred
Betwixt her, and the Partner of her Bed;
On this Pretense to Pelia's Court she flies,
Who languishing with Age and Sickness lies:
His innocent Daughters, with inveigling Wiles,
And well-dissembled Friendship, she beguiles:
The strange Achievements of her Art she tells,
With Aeson's Cure, and long on that she dwells;
Till them to firm Persuasion she has won,
The same for their old Father may be done:
For him they court her to employ her Skill,
And put upon the Cure what Price she will.
At first she is mute, and with a grave Pretense
Of Difficulty, holds 'em in Suspense;
Then promises, and bids 'em, from the Fold
Choose out a Ram, the most infirm and old;
That so by Fact their Doubts may be removed,
And first, on him, the Operation proved.
A wreath-horn'd Ram is brought, so far o'er-grown
With Years, his Age was to that Age unknown
Of Sense too dull the piercing Point to feel,
And scarce sufficient Blood to stain the Steel.
His Carcass she into a Cauldron threw,
With Drugs whose vital Qualities she knew;
His Limbs grow less, he casts his Horns and Years,
And tender Bleatings strike their wondering Ears.
Then instantly leaps forth a frisking Lamb,
That seeks (too young to graze) a suckling Dam.
The Sisters, thus confirmed with the Success,
Her Promise with renewed Entreaty press;
To countenance the Cheat, three Nights and Days
Before Experiment the Inchantress stays;
Then into limpid Water, from the Springs,
Weeds, and Ingredients of no Force she flings;
With antique Ceremonies for Pretense,
And rambling Rhymes without a Word of Sense.
Mean while the King with all his Guards lay bound,
In Magic Sleep, scarce that of Death so sound;
The Daughters now are by the Sorc'ress led
Into his Chamber, and surround his Bed.
Your Father's Health's concerned, and can ye stay?
Unnat'ral Nymphs, why this unkind Delay?
Unsheath your Swords, dismiss his lifeless Blood,
And I Will recruit it with a vital Flood:
Your Father's Life and Health is in your Hand,
And can ye thus like idle Gazers stand?
Unless you are of common Sense bereft,
If yet one Spark of Piety is left,
Dispatch a Father's Cure, and disengage
The Monarch from his toilsome Load of Age:
Come -- drench your Weapons in his putrid Gore,
It Is Charity to wound, when Wounding will restore.
Thus urged, the poor deluded Maids proceed,
Betrayed by Zeal, to an inhumane Deed,
And, in Compassion, make a Father bleed.
Yes, she who had the kindest, tenderest Heart,
Is foremost to perform the bloody Part.
Yet, though to act the Butchery betrayed,
They could not bear to see the Wounds they made;
With Looks averted, backward they advance,
Then strike, and stab, and leave the Blows to Chance.
Waking in Consternation, he essays
(Weltring in Blood) his feeble Arms to raise:
Environed with so many Swords -- from whence
This barbarous Usage? what is my Offense?
What fatal Fury, what infernal Charm,
Against a kind Father does his Daughters arm?
Hearing his Voice, as Thunderstruck, they stopped,
Their Resolution, and their Weapons dropped:
Medea then the mortal Blow bestows,
And that performed, the tragic Scene to close,
His Corpse into the boiling Cauldron throws.
Then, dreading the Revenge that must ensue,
High mounted on her Dragon-Coach she flew;
And in her stately Progress through the Skies,
Beneath her shady Pelion first she spies,
With Othrys, that above the Clouds did rise;
With skilful Chiron's Cave, and neighboring Ground,
For old Cerambus' strange Escape renowned,
By Nymphs delivered when the World was drowned;
Who him with unexpected Wings supplied,
When deluged Hills a safe Retreat denied.
Aeolian Pitane on her Left Hand
She saw, and there the statu'd Dragon stand;
With Ida's Grove, where Bacchus, to disguise
His Son's bold Theft, and to secure the Prize,
Made the stolen Steer a Stag to represent;
Cocytus' Father's sandy Monument;
And Fields that held the murdered Sire's Remains,
Where howling Moera frights the startled Plains.
Euryphilus' high Town, with Towers defaced
By Hercules, and Matrons more disgraced
With sprouting Horns, in signal Punishment,
From Juno, or resenting Venus sent.
Then Rhodes, which Phoebus did so dearly prize,
And Jove no less severely did chastize;
For he the Wizzard Native's pois'ning Sight,
That used the Farmer's hopeful Crops to blight,
In Rage overwhelmed with everlasting Night.
Cartheia's ancient Walls come next in view,
Where once the Sire almost a Statue grew
With Wonder, which a strange Event did move,
His Daughter turned into a Turtle-Dove.
Then Hyrie's Lake, and Tempe's Field o'er-ran,
Famed for the Boy who there became a Swan;
For there enamored Phyllius, like a Slave,
Performed what Tasks his Paramour would crave.
For Presents he had Mountain-Vultures caught,
And from the Desert a tame Lion brought;
Then a wild Bull commanded to subdue,
The conquered Savage by the Horns he drew;
But, mocked so often, the Treatment he disdains,
And from the craving Boy this Prize detains.
Then thus in Choler the resenting Lad;
Will Not you deliver him? -- You Will wish you had;
Nor sooner said, but, in a peevish Mood,
Leapt from the Precipice on which he stood:
The Standers-by were struck with fresh Surprise,
Instead of falling, to behold him rise
A snowy Swan, and soaring to the Skies.
But dearly the rash Prank his Mother cost,
Who ignorantly gave her Son for lost;
For his Misfortune wept, till she became
A Lake, and still renowned with Hyrie's Name.
Thence to Latona's Isle, where once were seen,
Transformed to Birds, a Monarch, and his Queen.
Far off she saw how old Cephisus mourned
His Son, into a Seele by Phoebus turned;
And where, astonished at a stranger Sight,
Eumelus gazed on his winged Daughter's Flight.
Aetolian Pleuron she did next survey,
Where Sons a Mother's Murder did essay,
But sudden Plumes the Matron bore away.
On her Right Hand, Cyllene, a fair Soil,
Fair, till Menephron there the beauteous Hill
Attempted with fowl Incest to defile.
Her harnessed Dragons now direct she drives
For Corinth, and at Corinth she arrives;
Where, if what old Tradition tells, be true,
In former Ages Men from Mushrooms grew.
But here Medea finds her Bed supplied,
During her Absence, by another Bride;
And hopeless to recover her lost Game,
She sets both Bride and Palace in a Flame.
Nor could a Rival's Death her Wrath assuage,
Nor stopped at Creon's Family her Rage;
She murders her own Infants, in Despite
To faithless Jason, and in Jason's Sight;
Yet ever his Sword could reach her, up she springs,
Securely mounted on her Dragons Wings.
The Story of AEGEUS.
From hence to Athens she directs her Flight,
Where Phineus, so renowned for doing Right;
Where Periphas, and Polyphemon's Niece,
Soaring with sudden Plumes, amazed the Towns of Greece.
Here Aegeus so engaging she addressed,
That first he treats her like a Royal Guest;
Then takes the Sorc'ress for his wedded Wife;
The only Blemish of his prudent Life.
Mean while his Son, from Actions of Renown,
Arrives at Court, but to his Sire unknown.
Medea, to dispatch a dangerous Heir,
(She knew him) did a poisonous Draught prepare;
Drawn from a Drug, was long reserved in store
For desperate Uses, from the Scythian Shore;
That from the Echydnaean Monster's Jaws
Derived it is Origin, and this the Cause.
Through a dark Cave a craggy Passage lies,
To ours ascending from the nether Skies;
Through which, by Strength of Hand, Alcides drew
Chained Cerberus, who lagg'd, and restive grew,
With his blear'd Eyes our brighter Day to view.
Thrice he repeated his enormous Yell,
With which he scares the Ghosts, and startles Hell;
At last outrageous (though compelled to yield)
He sheds his Foam in Fury on the Field;
Which, with its own, and Rankness of the Ground,
Produced a Weed, by Sorcerers renowned,
The strongest Constitution to confound;
Called Aconite, because it can unlock
All Bars, and force its Passage through a Rock.
The pious Father, by her Wheedles won,
Presents this deadly Potion to his Son;
Who, with the same Assurance takes the Cup,
And to the Monarch's Health had drank it up,
But in the very Instant he applied
The Goblet to his Lips, old Aegeus spied
The Iv'ry-hilted Sword that graced his Side.
That certain Signal of his Son he knew,
And snacht the Bowl away; the Sword he drew,
Resolved, for such a Son's endangered Life,
To sacrifice the most perfidious Wife.
Revenge is swift, but her more active Charms
A Whirlwind raised, that snatched her from his Arms.
While conjured Clouds their baffled Sense surprise,
She vanishes from their deluded Eyes,
And through the Hurricane triumphant flies.
The generous King, although o'er-joy'd to find
His Son was safe, yet bearing still in mind
The Mischief by his treacherous Queen designed;
The Horror of the Deed, and then how near
The Danger drew, he stands congealed with Fear.
But soon that Fear into Devotion turns,
With grateful Incense every Altar burns;
Proud Victims! and unconscious of their Fate,
Stalk to the Temple, there to die in state.
In Athens never had a Day been found
For Mirth, like that grand Festival, renowned.
Promiscuously the Peers and People dine,
Promiscuously their thankful Voices join,
In Songs of Wit, sublimed by spritely Wine.
To listening Spheres their joint Applause they raise,
And thus resound their matchless Theseus' Praise.
Great Theseus! Thee the Marathonian Plain
Admires, and wears with Pride the noble Stain
Of the dire Monster's Blood, by valiant Theseus slain.
That now Cromyon's Swains in Safety sow,
And reap their fertile Field, to Thee they owe.
By Thee the infested Epidaurian Coast
Was cleared, and now can a free Commerce boast.
The Traveller his Journey can pursue,
With Pleasure the late dreaded Valley view,
And cry, Here Theseus the grand Robber slew.
Cephysus' Flood cries to his rescued Shore,
The merciless Procrustes is no more.
In Peace, Eleusis, Cenes' Rites renew,
Since Theseus' Sword the fierce Cercyon slew.
By him the Tort'rer Sinis was destroyed,
Of Strength (but Strength to barbarous use employed)
That Tops of tallest Pines to Earth could bend,
And thus in Pieces wretched Captives rend.
Inhuman Scyron now has breathed his last,
And now Alcathoe's Road's securely past;
By Theseus slain, and thrown into the Deep:
But Earth nor Sea his scattered Bones would keep,
Which, after floating long, a Rock became,
Still infamous with Scyron's hated Name.
When Fame to count thy Acts and Years proceeds,
Thy Years appear but Ciphers to thy Deeds.
For Thee, brave Youth, as for our Commonwealth,
We pray; and drink, in yours, the Public Health.
Your Praise the Senate and Plebeians sing,
With your loved Name the Court and Cottage ring.
You make our Shepherds and our Sailors glad,
And not a House in this vast City's sad.
But mortal Bliss will never come sincere,
Pleasure may lead, but Grief brings up the Rear;
While for his Son's Arrival, rev'ling Joy
Aegeus and all his Subjects does employ;
While they for only costly Feasts prepare,
His neighboring Monarch, Minos, threatens War:
Weak in Landforces, nor by Sea more strong,
But powerful in a deep resented Wrong
For a Son's Murder, armed with pious Rage;
Yet prudently, before he would engage,
To raise Auxiliaries resolved to sail,
And with the powerful Princes to prevail.
First Anaphe, then proud Astypalaea gains,
By Presents that, and this by Threats obtains:
Low Mycone, Cymolus, chalky Soil,
Tall Cythnos, Scyros, flat Seriphos' Isle;
Paros, with Marble Cliffs afar displayed;
Impregnable Sithonia; yet betrayed
To a weak Foe by a Gold-admiring Maid.
Who, changed into a Daw of sable Hue,
Still hoards up Gold, and hides it from the View.
But as these Islands cheerfully combine,
Others refuse to embark in his Design.
Now Leftward with an easy Sail he bore,
And prosperous Passage to O Enopia's Shore;
O Enopia once, but now Aegina called,
And with his Royal Mother's Name installed
By Aeacus, under whose Reign did spring
The Myrmidons, and now their reigning King.
Down to the Port, amidst the Rabble, run
The Princes of the Blood; with Telamon,
Peleus the next, and Phocus the third Son:
Then Aeacus, although oppressed with Years,
To ask the Cause of their Approach appears.
That Question does the Gnossian's Grief renew,
And Sighs from his afflicted Bosom drew;
Yet after a short solemn Respite made,
The Ruler of the hundred Cities said;
Assist our Arms, raised for a murdered Son,
In this religious War no Risque you will run:
Revenge the Dead -- for who refuse to give
Rest to their Urns, unworthy are to live.
What you request, thus Aeacus replies,
Not I, but Truth and common Faith denies;
Athens and we have long been sworn Allies:
Our Leagues are fixed, confed'rate are our Powers,
And who declare themselves Their Foes, are Ours.
Minos rejoins, Your League shall dearly cost;
(Yet, mindful how much safer 'twas to boast,
Than there to waste his Forces and his Fame,
Before in Field with his grand Foe he came)
Parts without Blows -- Nor long had left the Shore,
Ever int Port another Navy bore,
With Cephalus, and all his jolly Crew;
The Aeacides their old Acquaintance knew:
The Princes bid him welcome, and in State
Conduct the Hero to their Palace Gate;
Who entering, seemed the charming Mein to wear,
As when in Youth he paid his Visit there.
In his Right Hand an Olive Branch he holds,
And, Salutation past, the Chief unfolds
His Embassy from the Athenian State,
Their mutual Friendship, Leagues of ancient Date;
Their common Danger, every thing could wake
Concern, and his Address successful make:
Strengthening his Plea with all the Charms of Sense,
And those, with all the Charms of Eloquence.
Then thus the King: Like Suitors do you stand
For that Assistance which you may command?
Athenians, all our listed Forces use,
(They Are such as no bold Service will refuse;)
And when you have drawn them off, the Gods be praised,
Fresh Legions can within our Isle be raised:
So stocked with People, that we can prepare
Both for domestic, and for distant War,
Ours, or our Friends Insulters to chastize.
Long may ye flourish thus, the Prince replies.
Strange Transport seized me as I passed along,
To meet so many Troops, and all so young,
As if your Army did of Twins consist;
Yet amongst them my late Acquaintance missed:
Even all that to your Palace did resort,
When first you entertained me at your Court;
And cannot guess the Cause from whence could spring
So vast a Change -- Then thus the sighing King:
Illustrious Guest, to my strange Tale attend,
Of sad Beginning, but a joyful End:
The whole to a vast History would swell,
I shall but half, and that confusedly, tell.
That Race whom so deserv'dly you admired,
Are all into their silent Tombs retired:
They fell; and falling, how they shook my State,
Thought may conceive, but Words can never relate.
The Story of Ants changed to Men.
By Mr. STONESTREET.
A dreadful Plague from angry Juno came,
To scourge the Land that bore her Rival's Name;
Before her fatal Anger was revealed,
And teeming Malice lay as yet concealed,
All Remedies we try, all Medicines use,
Which Nature could supply, or Art produce;
The unconquered Foe derides the vain Design,
And Art and Nature foiled, declare the Cause Divine.
At first we only felt the oppressive Weight
Of gloomy Clouds, then teeming with our Fate,
And laboring to discharge unactive Heat:
But e're four Moons alternate Changes knew,
With deadly Blasts the fatal South Wind blew,
Infected all the Air, and poisoned as it flew.
Our Fountains too a dire Infection yield,
For Crowds of Vipers creep along the Field,
And with polluted Gore, and baneful Steams,
Taint all the Lakes, and venom all the Streams.
The young Disease with milder Force began,
And raged on Birds and Beasts, excusing Man.
The laboring Oxen fall before the Plow,
The unhappy Plow-men stare, and wonder how:
The tabid Sheep, with sickly Bleatings, pines;
Its Wool decreasing, as its Strength declines:
The warlike Steed, by inward Foes compelled,
Neglects his Honors, and deserts the Field;
Unnerv'd and languid, seeks a base Retreat,
And at the Manger groans, but wished a nobler Fate:
The Stags forget their Speed, the Boars their Rage,
Nor can the Bears the stronger Herds engage:
A general Faintness does invade 'em all,
And in the Woods and Fields promiscuously they fall.
The Air receives the Stench, and (strange to say)
The ravenous Birds and Beasts avoid the Prey:
The offensive Bodies rot upon the Ground,
And spread the dire Contagion all around.
But now the Plague, grown to a larger Size,
Riots on Man, and scorns a meaner Prize.
Intestine Heats begin the Civil War,
And Flushings first the latent Flame declare,
And Breath inspired, which seemed like fiery Air.
Their black dry Tongues are swelled, and scarce can move,
And short thick Sighs from panting Lungs are drove.
They gape for Air, with flattering Hopes t'abate
Their raging Flames, but that augments their Heat.
No Bed, no Covering can the Wretches bear,
But on the Ground, exposed to open Air,
They lie, and hope to find a pleasing Coolness there.
The suffering Earth, with that Oppression cursed,
Returns the Heat which they imparted first.
In vain Physicians would bestow their Aid,
Vain all their Art, and useless all their Trade;
And they, even they, who fleeting Life recall,
Feel the same Powers, and undistinguished fall.
If any proves so daring to attend
His sick Companion, or his darling Friend,
The officious Wretch sucks in contagious Breath,
And with his Friend does sympathize in Death.
And now the Care and Hopes of Life are past,
They please their Fancies, and indulge their Taste;
At Brooks and Streams, regardless of their Shame,
Each Sex, promiscuous, strives to quench their Flame;
Nor do they strive in vain to quench it there,
For Thirst and Life at once extinguished are.
Thus in the Brooks the dying Bodies sink,
But heedless still the rash Survivors drink.
So much uneasy Down the Wretches hate,
They fly their Beds to struggle with their Fate;
But if decaying Strength forbids to rise,
The Victim crawls and rouls, till on the Ground he lies.
Each shuns his Bed, as each would shun his Tomb,
And thinks the Infection only lodged at home.
Here one, with fainting steps, does slowly creep
Over Heaps of Dead, and straight augments a Heap;
Another, while his Strength and Tongue prevailed,
Bewails his Friend, and falls himself bewailed:
This with imploring Looks surveys the Skies,
The last dear Office of his closing Eyes,
But finds the Heavens implacable, and dies.
What now, ah! what employed my troubled Mind?
But only Hopes my Subjects Fate to find.
What Place soever my weeping Eyes survey,
There in lamented Heaps the Vulgar lay;
As Acorns scatter when the Winds prevail,
Or mellow Fruit from shaken Branches fall.
You see that Dome which rears its Front so high:
It Is sacred to the Monarch of the Sky:
How many there, with unregarded Tears,
And fruitless Vows, sent up successless Prayers?
There Fathers for expiring Sons implored,
And there the Wife bewailed her gasping Lord;
With pious Offerings they would appease the Skies,
But they, e're yet the attoning Vapors rise,
Before the Altars fall, themselves a Sacrifice:
They fall, while yet their Hands the Gums contain,
The Gums surviving, but their Off'rers slain.
The destined Ox, with holy Garlands crowned,
Prevents the Blow, and feels an unexpected Wound:
When I my self invoked the Powers Divine,
To drive the fatal Pest from Me and Mine;
When now the Priest with Hands uplifted stood,
Prepared to strike, and shed the sacred Blood,
The Gods themselves the mortal Stroke bestow,
The Victim falls, but They impart the Blow:
Scarce was the Knife with the pale Purple stained,
And no Presages could be then obtained,
From putrid Entrails, where the Infection reigned.
Death stalked around with such resistless Sway,
The Temples of the Gods his Force obey,
And Suppliants feel his Stroke while yet they pray.
Go now, said he, your Deities implore
For fruitless Aid, for I defy their Power.
Then with a cursed malicious Joy surveyed
The very Altars, stained with Trophies of the Dead.
The rest grown mad, and frantic with Despair,
Urge their own Fate, and so prevent the Fear.
Strange Madness, that, when Death pursued so fast,
TO anticipate the Blow with impious Haste.
No decent Honor to their Urns are paid,
Nor could the Graves receive the numerous Dead;
For, or they lay unbury'd on the Ground,
Or unadorned a needy Funeral found:
All Reverence past, the fainting Wretches fight
For Funeral Piles which were another's Right.
Unmourn'd they fall, for who survived to mourn?
And Sires and Mothers unlamented burn:
Parents and Sons sustain an equal Fate,
And wandering Ghosts their kindred Shadows meet.
The Dead a larger Space of Ground require,
Nor are the Trees sufficient for the Fire.
Despairing under Grief's oppressive Weight,
And sunk by these tempestuous Blasts of Fate,
O Jove, said I, if common Fame says true,
If ever Aegina gave those Joys to you,
If ever you lay enclosed in her Embrace,
Fond of her Charms, and eager to possess;
O Father, if you do not yet disclaim
Paternal Care, nor yet disown the Name;
Grant my Petitions, and with Speed restore
My Subjects numerous as they were before,
Or make me Partner of the Fate they bore.
I spoke, and glorious Lightning shone around,
And rattling Thunder gave a prosperous Sound;
So let it be, and may these Omens prove
A Pledge, said I, of your returning Love.
By chance a reverend Oak was near the Place,
Sacred to Jove, and of Dodona's Race,
Where frugal Ants laid up their Winter Meat,
Whose little Bodies bear a mighty Weight:
We saw them march along, and hide their Store,
And much admired their Number, and their Power;
Admired at first, but after envied more.
Full of Amazement, thus to Jove I prayed,
O grant, since thus my Subjects are decayed,
As many Subjects to supply the Dead.
I prayed, and strange Convulsions moved the Oak,
Which murmured, though by ambient Winds unshook:
My trembling Hands, and stiff erected Hair,
Expressed all Tokens of uncommon Fear;
Yet both the Earth and sacred Oak I kissed,
And scarce could hope, yet still I hoped the best;
For Wretches, whatsoever the Fates divine,
Expound all Omens to their own Design.
But now 'twas Night, when even Distraction wears
A pleasing Look, and Dreams beguile our Cares.
Lo! The same Oak appears before my Eyes,
Nor altered in its Shape, nor former Size;
As many Ants the numerous Branches bear,
The same their Labor, and their frugal Care;
The Branches too a like Commotion found,
And shook the industrious Creatures on the Ground,
Who, by degrees (what is scarce to be believed)
A nobler Form, and larger Bulk received,
And on the Earth walked an unusual Pace,
With manly Strides, and an erected Face;
Their numerous Legs, and former Color lost,
The Insects could a Human Figure boast.
I wake, and waking find my Cares again,
And to the unperforming Gods complain,
And call their Promise and Pretenses vain.
Yet in my Court I heard the murmuring Voice
Of Strangers, and a mixed uncommon Noise:
But I suspected all was still a Dream,
'Till Telamon to my Apartment came,
Opening the Door with an impetuous Haste,
O come, said he, and see your Faith and Hopes surpast:
I follow, and, confused with Wonder, view
Those Shapes which my presaging Slumbers drew:
I saw, and owned, and called them Subjects; they
Confessed my Power, submissive to my Sway.
To Jove, Restorer of my Race decayed,
My Vows were first with due Oblations paid.
I then divide with an impartial Hand
My empty City, and my ruined Land,
To give the Newborn Youth an equal Share,
And call them Myrmidons, from what they were.
You saw their Persons, and they still retain
The Thrift of Ants, though now transformed to Men.
A frugal People, and inured to Sweat,
Laboring to gain, and keeping what they get.
These, equal both in Strength and Years, shall join
Their willing Aid, and follow your Design,
With the first Southern Gale that shall present
To fill your Sails, and favor your Intent.
Continued by Mr. TATE.
With such Discourse they entertain the Day;
The Evening past in Banquets, Sport, and Play:
Then, having crowned the Night with sweet Repose,
Aurora (with the Wind at East) arose.
Now Pallas' Sons to Cephalus resort,
And Cephalus with Pallas' Sons to Court,
To the King's Levee; him Sleep's silken Chain,
And pleasing Dreams, beyond his Hour detain;
But then the Princes of the Blood, in State,
Expect and meet 'em at the Palace Gate.
The Story of CEPHALUS and PROCRIS.
To th'inmost Courts the Grecian Youths were led,
And placed by Phocus on a Tyrian Bed;
Who, soon observing Cephalus to hold
A Dart of unknown Wood, but armed with Gold;
None better loves (said he) the Hunts-man's Sport,
Or does more often to the Woods resort;
Yet I that Jav'lin's Stem with Wonder view,
Too brown for Box, too smooth a Grain for Yew.
I cannot guess the Tree; but never Art
Did form, or Eyes behold so fair a Dart!
The Guest then interrupts him -- 'Twou'd produce
Still greater Wonder, if you knew its Use.
It never fails to strike the Game, and then
Comes bloody back into your Hand again.
Then Ph^^^ each Particular desires,
And the Author of the wondrous Gift enquires.
To which the Owner thus, with weeping Eyes,
And Sorrow for his Wife's sad Fate, replies,
This Weapon here (O Prince!) can you believe
This Dart the Cause for which so much I grieve;
And shall continue to grieve on, 'till Fate
Afford such wretched Life no longer Date.
Would I this fatal Gift had never enjoyed,
This fatal Gift my tender Wife destroyed:
Procris her Name, allied in Charms and Blood
To fair Orythia courted by a God.
Her Father sealed my Hopes with Rites Divine,
But firmer Love before had made her mine.
Men called me blessed, and blessed I was indeed.
The second Month our Nuptials did succeed;
When (as upon Hymettus' dewy Head,
For Mountain Stags, my Net betimes I spread)
Aurora spied, and ravished me away,
With Reverence to the Goddess, I must say,
Against my Will, for Procris had my Heart,
Nor would her Image from my Thoughts depart.
At last, in Rage she cried, Ungrateful Boy
Go to your Procris, take your fatal Joy;
And so dismissed me: Musing, as I went,
What those Expressions of the Goddess meant,
A thousand jealous Fears possess me now,
Lest Procris had profaned her Nuptial Vow:
Her Youth and Charms did to my Fancy paint
A lewd Adultress, but her Life a Saint.
Yet I was absent long, the Goddess too
Taught me how far a Woman could be true.
Aurora's Treatment much Suspicion bred;
Besides, who truly love, even Shadows dread.
I strait impatient for the Trial grew,
What Courtship backed with richest Gifts could do.
Aurora's Envy aided my Design,
And lent me Features far unlike to mine.
In this Disguise to my own House I came,
But all was chaste, no conscious Sign of Blame:
With thousand Arts I scarce Admittance found,
And then beheld her weeping on the Ground
For her lost Husband; hardly I retained
My Purpose, scarce the wished Embrace refrained.
How charming was her Grief! Then, Phocus, guess
What killing Beauties waited on her Dress.
Her constant Answer, when my Suit I pressed,
Forbear, my Lord's dear Image guards this Breast;
Wherever he is, whatever Cause detains,
Who-e'er has his, my Heart unmoved remains.
What greater Proofs of Truth than these could be?
Yet I persist, and urge my Destiny.
At length, she found, when my own Form returned,
Her jealous Lover there, whose Loss she mourned.
Enraged with my Suspicion, swift as Wind,
She fled at once from me and all Mankind;
And so became, her Purpose to retain,
A Nymph, and Huntress in Diana's Train:
Forsaken thus, I found my Flames increase,
I owned my Folly, and I su'd for Peace.
It was a Fault, but not of Guilt, to move
Such Punishment, a Fault of too much Love.
Thus I retrieved her to my longing Arms,
And many happy Days possessed her Charms.
But with herself she kindly did confer,
What Gifts the Goddess had bestowed on her;
The fleetest Greyhound, with this lovely Dart,
And I of both have Wonders to impart.
Near Thebes a Savage Beast, of Race unknown,
Laid waste the Field, and bore the Vineyards down;
The Swains fled from him, and with one Consent
Our Grecian Youth to chase the Monster went;
More swift than Lightning he the Toils surpast,
And in his Course Spears, Men, and Trees o'er-cast.
We slipped our Dogs, and last my Lelaps too,
When none of all the mortal Race would do:
He long before was struggling from my Hands,
And, e're we could unloose him, broke his Bands.
That Minute where he was we could not find,
And only saw the Dust he left behind.
I climbed a neighboring Hill to view the Chase,
While in the Plain they held an equal Race;
The Savage now seems caught, and now by Force
To quit himself, nor holds the same strait Course;
But running counter, from the Foe withdraws,
And with short Turning cheats his gaping Jaws:
Which he retrieves, and still so closely pressed,
You Would fear at every Stretch he were possessed;
Yet for the Gripe his Fangs in vain prepare,
The Game shoots from him, and he chops the Air.
To cast my Javelin then I took my Stand;
But as the Thongs were fitting to my Hand,
While to the Valley I o'er-look'd the Wood,
Before my Eyes two Marble Statues stood.
That, as pursued, appearing at full Stretch,
This barking after, and at point to catch.
Some God their Course did with this Wonder grace,
That neither might be conquered in the Chase;
A sudden Silence here his Tongue suppressed,
He here stops short, and fain would wave the rest.
The eager Prince then urged him to impart,
The Fortune that attended on the Dart.
First then (said he) past Joys let me relate,
For Bliss was the Foundation of my Fate.
No Language can those happy Hours express,
Did from our Nuptials me and Procris bless:
The kindest Pair! What more could Heaven confer?
For She was all to me, and I to her.
Had Jove made Love, great Jove had been despised;
And I my Procris more than Venus prized:
Thus while no other Joy we did aspire,
We grew at last one Soul, and one Desire.
Forth to the Woods I went at Break of Day,
(The constant Practice of my Youth) for Prey:
Nor yet for Servant, Horse, or Dog did call,
I found this single Dart to serve for all.
With Slaughter tired, I sought the cooler Shade,
And Winds that from the Mountains pierced the Glade:
Come, gentle Air, (so was I wont to say)
Come, gentle Air, sweet Aura come away.
This always was the Burden of my Song,
Come 'swage my Flames, sweet Aura come along.
Thou always art most welcome to my Breast;
I faint; approach, thou dearest, kindest Guest!
These Blandishments, and more than these, I said,
(By Fate to unsuspected Ruin led)
Thou art my Joy, for thy dear sake I love
Each desert Hill and solitary Grove;
When (faint with Labor) I Refreshment need,
For Cordials on thy fragrant Breath I feed.
At last a wandering Swain in hearing came,
And cheated with the Sound of Aura's Name,
He thought I had some Assignation made;
And to my Procris' Ear the News conveyed.
Great Love is soonest with Suspicion fired,
She swoon'd, and with the Tale almost expired.
Ah! wretched Heart, (she cried) ah! faithless Man!
And then to curse the imagined Nymph began:
Yet often she doubts, often hopes she is deceived,
And chides herself that ever she believed
Her Lord to such Injustice could proceed,
Till she herself were Witness of the Deed.
Next Morn I to the Woods again repair,
And, weary with the Chase, invoke the Air;
Approach, dear Aura, and my Bosom cheer:
At which a mournful Sound did strike my Ear;
Yet I proceeded, 'till the Thicket by,
With rustling Noise and Motion, drew my Eye;
I thought some Beast of Prey was sheltered there,
And to the Covert threw my certain Spear;
From whence a tender Sigh my Soul did wound,
Ah me! it cried, and did like Procris sound.
Procris was there, too well the Voice I knew,
And to the Place with headlong Horror flew;
Where I beheld her gasping on the Ground,
In vain attempting from the deadly Wound
To draw the Dart, her Love's dear fatal Gift!
My guilty Arms had scarce the Strength to lift
The beauteous Load; my Silks and Hair I tore
(If possible) to stanch the pressing Gore;
For Pity begged her keep her flitting Breath,
And not to leave me guilty of her Death.
While I entreat she fainted fast away,
And these few Words had only Strength to say;
By all the sacred Bonds of plighted Love,
By all your Reverence to the Powers above,
By all that made me charming once appear,
By all the Truth for which you held me dear,
And last by Love, the Cause through which I bleed,
Let Aura never to my Bed succeed.
I then perceived the Error of our Fate,
And told it her, but found and told too late!
I felt her lower to my Bosom fall,
And while her Eyes had any Sight at all,
On mine she fixed them; in her Pangs still pressed
My Hand, and sighed her Soul into my Breast;
Yet, being undeceived, resigned her Breath
Methought more cheerfully, and smiled in Death.
With such Concern the weeping Hero told
This Tale, that none who heard him could withold
From melting into sympathizing Tears,
Till Aeacus with his two Sons appears;
Whom he commits, with their new-levy'd Bands,
To Fortune's, and so brave a Gen'ral's Hands.
The End of the Seventh Book.
To Her Grace the Duchess of Rutla^
(...) Du Guernier

OVID's METAMORPHOSES. BOOK VIII.
Translated by Mr. DRYDEN and Others.
The Story of NISUS and SCYLLA.
By Mr. CROXALL.
NOW shone the Morning Star in bright Array,
To vanquish Night, and usher in the Day:
The Wind veers Southward, and moist Clouds arise,
That blot with Shades the Blue Meridian Skies.
Cephalus feels with Joy the kindly Gales,
His new Allies unfurl the swelling Sails;
Steady their Course, they cleave the yielding Main,
And, with a Wish, the intended Harbor gain.
Mean while King Minos, on the Attick Strand,
Displays his martial Skill, and wastes the Land.
His Army lies encampt upon the Plains,
Before Alcathoe's Walls, where Nisus reigns;
On whose gray Head a Lock of Purple Hue,
The Strength and Fortune of his Kingdom, grew.
Six Moons were gone and past, when still from far
Victoria hovered over the doubtful War.
So long, to both inclined, the impartial Maid
Between 'em both her equal Wings displayed.
High on the Walls, by Phoebus vocal made,
A Turret of the Palace raised its Head;
And where the God his tuneful Harp resigned,
The Sound within the Stones still lay enshrined.
Hither the Daughter of the Purple King
Ascended often, to hear its Music ring;
And, striking with a Pebble, would release
The enchanted Notes, in Times of happy Peace.
Now too, from thence, the curious Maid beheld
Rough Feats of Arms, and Combats of the Field:
And, since the Siege was long, had learnt the Name
Of every Chief, his Character, and Fame;
Their Arms, their Horse, and Quiver she descried,
Nor could the Dress of War the Warrior hide.
Europa's Son she knew above the Rest,
And more, than well became a Virgin Breast:
In vain the crested Morion veils his Face,
She thinks it adds a more peculiar Grace:
His ample Shield, embost with burnished Gold,
Still makes the Bearer lovelier to behold:
When the tough Javelin, with a Whirl, he sends,
His Strength and Skill the sighing Maid commends;
Or, when he strains to draw the circling Bow,
And his fine Limbs a manly Posture show,
Compared with Phoebus, he performs so well,
Let her be Judge, and Minos shall excel.
But when the Helm, put off, displayed to Sight,
And set his Features in an open Light;
When, vaulting to his Seat, his Steed he pressed,
Caparison'd in Gold, and richly dressed;
Himself in Scarlet sumptuously arrayed,
New Passions rise, and fire the frantic Maid.
O happy Spear! she cries, that feels his Touch;
Nay, even the Reins he holds are blessed too much.
Oh! were it lawful, she could wing her Way
Through the stern hostile Troops without Dismay;
Or throw her Body to the distant Ground,
And in the Cretans happy Camp be found.
Would Minos but desire it! she would expose
Her native Country to her Country's Foes;
Unbar the Gates, the Town with Flames infest,
Or any thing that Minos should request.
And, as she sat, and pleased her longing Sight,
Viewing the King's Pavilion veiled with White,
Should Joy, or Grief, she said, possess my Breast,
To see my Country by a War oppressed?
I Am in Suspense: For, though it is Grief to know
I love a Man that is declared my Foe;
Yet, in my own Despite, I must approve
That lucky War, which brought the Man I love.
Yet, were I tendered as a Pledge of Peace,
The Cruelties of War might quickly cease.
Oh! with what Joy I Would wear the Chains he gave!
A patient Hostage, and a willing Slave.
Thou lovely Object! if the Nymph that bare
Thy charming Person, were but half so fair;
Well might a God her Virgin Bloom desire,
And with a Rape indulge his amorous Fire.
Oh! had I Wings to glide along the Air,
To his dear Tent I Would fly, and settle there:
There tell my Quality, confess my Flame,
And grant him any Dowry that he would name.
All, all I Would give; only my native Land,
My dearest Country, should excepted stand.
For, perish Love, and all expected Joys,
E're, with so base a Thought, my Soul complies.
Yet, often the Vanquished some Advantage find,
When conquered by a noble, generous Mind.
Brave Minos justly has the War begun,
Fired with Resentment for his murdered Son:
The righteous Gods a righteous Cause regard,
And will, with Victory, his Arms reward:
We must be conquered; and the Captive's Fate
Will surely seize us, though it seize us late.
Why then should Love be idle, and neglect
What Mars, by Arms and Perils, will effect?
Oh! Prince, I dye, with anxious Fear oppressed,
Lest some rash Hand should wound my Charmer's Breast
For, if they saw, no barbarous Mind could dare
Against that lovely Form to raise a Spear.
But I Am resolved, and fixed in this Decree,
My Father's Country shall my Dowry be.
Thus I prevent the Loss of Life and Blood,
And, in Effect, the Action must be good.
Vain Resolution! for, at every Gate
The trusty Sentinels, successive, wait:
The Keys my Father keeps; ah! there is my Grief;
It Is he obstructs all Hopes of my Relief.
Gods! that this hated Light I Would never seen!
Or, all my Life, without a Father been!
But Gods we all may be; for those that dare,
Are Gods, and Fortune's chiefest Favors share.
The ruling Powers a lazy Prayer detest,
The bold Adventurer succeeds the best.
What other Maid, inspired with such a Flame,
But would take Courage, and abandon Shame?
But would, though Ruin should ensue, remove
Whatever opposed, and clear the Way to Love?
This, shall another's feeble Passion dare?
While I sit tame, and languish in Despair:
No; for though Fire and Sword before me lay,
Impatient Love through both should force its Way.
Yet I have no such Enemies to fear,
My sole Obstruction is my Father's Hair;
His Purple Lock my sanguine Hope destroys,
And clouds the Prospect of my rising Joys.
Whilst thus she spoke, amid the thick'ning Air
Night supervenes, the greatest Nurse of Care:
And, as the Goddess spreads her sable Wings,
The Virgin's Fears decay, and Courage springs.
The Hour was come, when Man's o'er-labour'd Breast
Surceas'd its Care, by downy Sleep possessed:
All things now hushed, Scylla with silent Tread
Urged her Approach to Nisus' Royal Bed:
There, of the fatal Lock (accursed Theft!)
She her unwitting Father's Head bereft.
In safe Possession of her impious Prey,
Out at a Postern Gate she takes her Way.
Emboldened, by the Merit of the Deed,
She traverses the adverse Camp with Speed,
Till Minos' Tent she reached: The righteous King
She thus bespoke, who shivered at the thing.
Behold the Effect of Love's resistless Sway!
I, Nisus' Royal Seed, to thee betray.
My Country, and my Gods. For this strange Task,
Minos, no other Boon but Thee I ask.
This Purple Lock, a Pledge of Love, receive;
No worthless Present, since in it I give
My Father's Head. -- Moved at a Crime so new,
And with Abhorrence filled, back Minos drew,
Nor touched the unhallowed Gift; but thus exclaimed,
(With Mein indignant, and with Eyes inflamed)
Perdition seize thee, thou, thy Kind's Disgrace!
May thy devoted Carcass find no Place
In Earth, or Air, or Sea, by all outcast!
Shall Minos, with so foul a Monster, blast
His Cretan World, where cradled Jove was nursed?
Forbid it Heaven! -- away, thou most accursed.
And now Alcathoe, its Lord exchanged,
Was under Minos' Domination ranged.
While the most equal King his Care applies
To curb the Conquered, and new Laws devise,
The Fleet, by his Command, with hoisted Sails,
And ready Oars, invites the murmuring Gales.
At length the Cretan Hero Anchor weighed,
Repaying, with Neglect, the abandoned Maid.
Deaf to her Cries, he furrows up the Main:
In vain she prays, sollicits him in vain.
And now she furious grows; in wild Despair
She wrings her Hands, and throws aloft her Hair.
Where run'st thou? (thus she vents her deep Distress)
Why shun'st thou her that crowned thee with Success?
Her, whose fond Love to thee could sacrifice
Her Country, and her Parent, sacred Ties!
Can nor my Love, nor proffered Presents find
A Passage to thy Heart, and make thee kind?
Can nothing move thy Pity? O Ingrate,
Can thou behold my lost, forlorn Estate,
And not be softened? Can thou throw off One
Who has no Refuge left but Thee alone?
Where shall I seek for Comfort? whither fly?
My native Country does in Ashes lie:
Or were it not so, my Treason bars me there,
And bids me wander. Shall I next repair
To a wronged Father, by my Guilt undone? --
Me all Mankind deservedly will shun.
I, out of all the World, my self have thrown,
To purchase an Access to Crete alone;
Which, since refused, ungen'rous Man, give over
To boast thy Race; Europa never bore
A thing so savage. Thee some Tygress bred,
On the bleak Syrt's inhospitable Bed;
Or where Charybdis pours its rapid Tide
Tempestuous. Thou art not to Jove allied;
Nor did the King of Gods thy Mother meet
Beneath a Bull's forged Shape, and bear to Crete.
That Fable of thy glorious Birth is feigned;
Some wild outrageous Bull thy Dam sustained.
O Father Nisus, now my Death behold;
Exult, O City, by my Baseness sold:
Minos, obdurate, has avenged ye all;
But 'twere more just by those I wronged to fall:
For why should thou, who only did subdue
By my offending, my Offense pursue?
Well art thou matched to one whose amorous Flame
Too fiercely raged, for Human-kind to tame;
One who, within a wooden Heifer thrust,
Courted a lowering Bull's mistaken Lust;
And, from whose Monster-teeming Womb, the Earth
Received, what much it mourned, a bi-form Birth.
But what avail my Plaints? the whistling Wind
Which bears him far away, leaves them behind.
Well weighed Pasiphae, when she preferred
A Bull to thee, more brutish than the Herd.
But ah! Time presses, and the labored Oars
To Distance drive the Fleet, and lose the lessening Shores.
Think not, ungrateful Man, the liquid Way
And threatening Billows shall enforce my Stay.
I Will follow thee in Spite: My Arms I Will throw
Around thy Oars, or grasp thy crooked Prow,
And drag through drenching Seas. Her eager Tongue
Had hardly closed the Speech, when forth she sprung
And proved the Deep. Cupid with added Force
Recruits each Nerve, and aids her watery Course.
Soon she the Ship attains, unwelcome Guest;
And, as with close Embrace its Sides she pressed,
A Hawk from upper Air came pouring down:
('It Was Nisus cleft the Sky with Wings new-grown.)
At Scylla's Head his horny Bill he aims;
She, fearful of the Blow, the Ship disclaims,
Quitting her Hold: And yet she fell not far,
But wondering, finds herself sustained in Air.
Changed to a Lark, she mottled Pinions shook,
And, from the ravished Lock, the Name of Ciris took.
The Labyrinth.
Now Minos, landed on the Cretan Shore,
Performs his Vows to Jove's protecting Power;
A hundred Bullocks, of the largest Breed,
With Flowrets crowned, before his Altar bleed:
While Trophies of the Vanquished, brought from far,
Adorn the Palace with the Spoils of War.
Mean while the Monster of a Human-Beast,
His Family's Reproach, and Stain, increased.
His double Kind the Rumor swiftly spread,
And evidenced the Mother's beastly Deed.
When Minos, willing to conceal the Shame
That sprung from the Reports of tattling Fame,
Resolves a dark Enclosure to provide,
And, far from Sight, the two-form'd Creature hide.
Great Daedalus of Athens was the Man
That made the Draught, and formed the wondrous Plan;
Where Rooms within themselves encircled lie,
With various Windings, to deceive the Eye.
As soft Maeander's wanton Current plays,
When through the Phrygian Fields it loosely strays;
Backward, and forward rouls the dimpl'd Tide,
Seeming, at once, two different Ways to glide:
While circling Streams their former Banks survey,
And Waters past succeeding Waters see:
Now floating to the Sea with downward Course,
Now pointing upward to its ancient Source.
Such was the Work, so intricate the Place,
That scarce the Workman all its Turns could trace;
And Daedalus was puzzled how to find
The secret Ways of what himself designed.
These private Walls the Minotaure include,
Who twice was glutted with Athenian Blood:
But the third Tribute more successful proved,
Slew the foul Monster, and the Plague removed.
When Theseus, aided by the Virgin's Art,
Had traced the guiding Thread through every Part,
He took the gentle Maid that set him free,
And, bound for Dias, cut the briny Sea.
There, quickly cloyed, ungrateful, and unkind,
Left his fair Consort in the Isle behind.
Whom Bacchus saw, and straining in his Arms
Her rifl'd Bloom, and violated Charms,
Resolves, for this, the dear engaging Dame
Should shine for ever in the Rolls of Fame;
And bids her Crown among the Stars be placed,
With an eternal Constellation graced.
The golden Circlet mounts; and, as it flies,
Its Diamonds twinkle in the distant Skies;
There, in their pristin Form, the gemmy Rays
Between Alcides and the Dragon blaze.
The Story of DAEDALUS and ICARUS.
In tedious Exile now too long detained,
Daedalus languish'd for his native Land:
The Sea foreclos'd his Flight; yet thus he said;
Though Earth and Water in Subjection laid,
O cruel Minos, thy Dominion be,
We'll go through Air; for sure the Air is free.
Then to new Arts his cunning Thought applies,
And to improve the Work of Nature tries.
A Row of Quills in gradual Order placed,
Rise by Degrees in Length from first to last;
As on a Cliff the ascending Thicket grows,
Or, different Reeds the rural Pipe compose.
Along the Middle runs a Twine of Flax,
The Bottom Stems are joined by pliant Wax.
Thus, well compact, a hollow Bending brings
The fine Composure into real Wings.
His Boy, young Icarus, that near him stood,
Unthinking of his Fate, with Smiles pursued
The floating Feathers, which the moving Air
Bore loosely from the Ground, and wafted here and there.
Or with the Wax impertinently played,
And with his childish Tricks the great Design delayed.
The final Master-stroke at last imposed,
And now, the neat Machine completely closed;
Fitting his Pinions, on a Flight he tries,
And hung self-ballanc'd in the beaten Skies.
Then thus instructs his Child; My Boy, take Care
To wing your Course along the middle Air;
If low, the Surges wet your flagging Plumes,
If high, the Sun the melting Wax consumes:
Steer between both: Nor to the Northern Skies,
Nor South Orion turn your giddy Eyes;
But follow me: Let me before you lay
Rules for the Flight, and mark the pathless Way.
Then teaching, with a fond Concern, his Son,
He took the untried Wings, and fixed 'em on;
But fixed with trembling Hands; and, as he speaks,
The Tears roll gently down his aged Cheeks.
Then kissed, and in his Arms embraced him fast,
But knew not this Embrace must be the last.
And mounting upward, as he wings his Flight,
Back on his Charge he turns his aching Sight;
As Parent Birds, when first their callow Care
Leave the high Nest to tempt the liquid Air.
Then chears him on, and often, with fatal Art,
Reminds the Stripling to perform his Part.
These, as the Angler at the silent Brook,
Or Mountain-Shepherd leaning on his Crook,
Or gaping Plowman from the Vale descries,
They stare, and view 'em with religious Eyes,
And strait conclude 'em Gods; since none, but they,
Through their own azure Skies could find a Way.
Now Delos, Paros on the Left are seen,
And Samos, favored by Jove's haughty Queen;
Upon the Right, the Isle Lebynthos named,
And fair Calymne for its Honey famed.
When now the Boy, whose childish Thoughts aspire
To loftier Aims, and make him ramble higher,
Grown wild and wanton, more emboldened flies
Far from his Guide, and soars among the Skies.
The softening Wax, that felt a nearer Sun,
Dissolved apace, and soon began to run.
The Youth in vain his melting Pinions shakes,
His Feathers gone, no longer Air he takes:
Oh! Father, Father, as he strove to cry,
Down to the Sea he tumbled from on high,
And found his Fate; yet still subsists by Fame,
Among those Waters that retain his Name.
The Father, now no more a Father, cries,
Ho Icarus! where are you? as he flies;
Where shall I seek my Boy? he cries again,
And saw his Feathers scattered on the Main.
Then cursed his Art; and funeral Rites conferred,
Naming the Country from the Youth interred.
A Partridge, from a neighboring Stump, beheld
The Sire his monumental Marble build;
Who, with peculiar Call, and fluttering Wing,
Chirpt joyful, and malicious seemed to sing:
The only Bird of all its Kind, and late
Transformed in Pity to a feathered State:
From whence, O Daedalus, thy Guilt we date.
His Sister's Son, when now twelve Years were past,
Was, with his Uncle, as a Scholar placed;
The unsuspecting Mother saw his Parts,
And Genius fitted for the finest Arts.
This soon appeared; for when the spiny Bone
In Fishes Backs was by the Stripling known,
A rare Invention thence he learnt to draw,
Filled Teeth in Iron, and made the grating Saw.
He was the first, that from a Knob of Brass
Made two strait Arms with widening Stretch to pass;
That, while one stood upon the Center's Place,
The other round it drew a circling Space.
Daedalus envied this, and from the Top
Of fair Minerva's Temple let him drop;
Feigning that, as he leaned upon the Tower,
Careless he stooped too much, and tumbled over.
The Goddess, who the Ingenious still befriends,
On this Occasion her Assistance lends;
His Arms with Feathers, as he fell, she veils,
And in the Air a new-made Bird he sails.
The Quickness of his Genius, once so fleet,
Still in his Wings remains, and in his Feet:
Still, though transformed, his ancient Name he keeps,
And with low Flight the new-shorn Stubble sweeps.
Declines the lofty Trees, and thinks it best
To brood in Hedge-rows over it is humble Nest;
And, in Remembrance of the former Ill,
Avoids the Heights and Precipices still.
At length, fatigued with long laborious Flights,
On fair Sicilia's Plains the Artist lights;
Where Cocalus the King, that gave him Aid,
Was, for his Kindness, with Esteem repaid.
Athens no more her doleful Tribute sent,
That Hardship gallant Theseus did prevent;
Their Temples hung with Garlands, they adore
Each friendly God, but most Minerva's Power:
To her, to Jove, to All, their Altars smoke,
They each with Victims and Perfumes invoke.
Now talking Fame, through every Grecian Town,
Had spread, immortal Theseus, thy Renown.
From him, the neighboring Nations in Distress,
In suppliant Terms implore a kind Redress.
The Story of MELEAGER and ATALANTA.
By Mr. DRYDEN.
From him, the Caledonians sought Relief;
Though valiant Meleagrus was their Chief.
The Cause, a Boar, who ravaged far and near:
Of Cynthia's Wrath, the avenging Minister.
For Oeneus with Autumnal Plenty blessed,
By Gifts to Heaven his Gratitude expressed:
Culled Sheafs, to Ceres; to Lyaeus, Wine;
To Pan, and Pales, offered Sheep and Kine;
And Fat of Olives, to Minerva's Shrine.
Beginning from the Rural Gods, his Hand
Was liberal to the Powers of high Command:
Each Deity in every Kind was blessed,
Till at Diana's Fane the invidious Honor ceased.
Wrath touches even the Gods; the Queen of Night,
Fired with Disdain, and jealous of her Right,
Unhonour'd though I am, at least, said she,
Not unrevenged that impious Act shall be.
Swift as the Word, she sped the Boar away,
With Charge on those devoted Fields to prey.
No larger Bulls the Egyptian Pastures feed,
And none so large Sicilian Meadows breed:
His Eye Balls glare with Fire suffus'd with Blood;
His Neck shoots up a thick-set thorny Wood;
His bristled Back a Trench impaled appears,
And stands erected, like a Field of Spears.
Froth fills his Chaps, he sends a grunting Sound,
And part he churns, and part befoams the Ground.
For Tusks with Indian Elephants he strove,
And Jove's own Thunder from his Mouth he drove.
He burns the Leaves; the scorching Blast invades
The tender Corn, and shrivels up the Blades:
Or suffering not their yellow Beards to rear,
He tramples down the Spikes, and intercepts the Year.
In vain the Barns expect their promised Load,
Nor Barns at home, nor Reeks are heaped abroad:
In vain the Hinds the Threshing-Floor prepare,
And exercise their Flails in empty Air.
With Olives ever-green the Ground is strow'd,
And Grapes ungather'd shed their generous Blood.
Amid the Fold he rages, nor the Sheep
Their Shepherds, nor the Grooms their Bulls can keep.
From Fields to Walls the frighted Rabble run,
Nor think themselves secure within the Town:
Till Mcleagros, and his chosen Crew,
Contemn the Danger, and the Praise pursue.
Fair Leda's Twins (in time to Stars decreed)
One fought on Foot, one curbed the fiery Steed;
Then issued forth famed Jason after these,
Who manned the foremost Ship that sailed the Seas;
Then Theseus joined with bold Perithous came;
A single Concord in a double Name:
The Thestian Sons, Idas who swiftly ran,
And Ceneus, once a Woman, now a Man.
Lynceus, with Eagle's Eyes, and Lion's Heart;
Leucippus, with his never-erring Dart;
Acastus, Phileus, Phoenix, Telamon,
Echion, Lelex, and Eurytion,
Achilles' Father, and great Phocus' Son;
Dryas the Fierce, and Hippasus the Strong;
With twice old Iolas, and Nestor then but young.
Laertes active, and Ancaeus bold;
Mopsus the Sage, who future things foretold;
And the other Seer, yet by his Wife Amphiarus.
unsold.
A thousand others of immortal Fame;
Among the rest, fair Atalanta came,
Grace of the Woods: A Diamond Buckle bound
Her Vest behind, that else had flowed upon the Ground,
And showed her buskined Legs; her Head was bare,
But for her native Ornament of Hair;
Which in a simple Knot was tied above,
Sweet Negligence! unheeded Bait of Love!
Her sounding Quiver, on her Shoulder tied,
One Hand a Dart, and one a Bow supplied.
Such was her Face, as in a Nymph displayed
A fair fierce Boy, or in a Boy betrayed
The blushing Beauties of a modest Maid.
The Caledonian Chief at once the Dame
Beheld, at once his Heart received the Flame,
With Heavens averse. O happy Youth, he cried;
For whom thy Fates reserve so fair a Bride!
He sighed, and had no Leisure more to say;
His Honor called his Eyes another way,
And forced him to pursue the now neglected Prey.
There stood a Forest on a Mountain's Brow,
Which overlooked the shaded Plains below.
No sounding Ax presumed those Trees to bite;
Coeval with the World, a venerable Sight.
The Heroes there arrived, some spread around
The Toils; some search the Footsteps on the Ground:
Some from the Chains the faithful Dogs unbound.
Of Action eager, and intent in Thought,
The Chiefs their honorable Danger sought:
A Valley stood below; the common Drain
Of Waters from above, and falling Rain:
The Bottom was a moist and marshy Ground,
Whose Edges were with bending Oziers crowned:
The knotty Bulrush next in order stood,
And all within of Reeds a trembling Wood.
From hence the Boar was roused, and sprung amain,
Like Lightning sudden, on the Warrior-Train;
Beats down the Trees before him, shakes the Ground,
The Forest echoes to the crackling Sound;
Shout the fierce Youth, and Clamours ring around.
All stood with their protended Spears prepared,
With broad Steel Heads the brandished Weapons glar'd.
The Beast impetuous with his Tusks aside
Deals glancing Wounds; the fearful Dogs divide:
All spend their Mouth aloof, but none abide.
Echion threw the first, but missed his Mark,
And stuck his Boar-spear on a Maple's Bark.
Then Jason; and his Javelin seemed to take,
But failed with Over-force, and whiz'd above his Back.
Mopsus was next; but ever he threw, addressed
To Phoebus, thus: O Patron, help thy Priest:
If I adore, and ever have adored
Thy Power Divine, thy present Aid afford;
That I may reach the Beast. The God allowed
His Prayer, and smiling, gave him what he could:
He reached the Savage, but no Blood he drew,
Dian unarmed the Javelin as it flew.
This chafed the Boar, his Nostrils Flames expire,
And his red Eye Balls roll with living Fire.
Whirled from a Sling, or from an Engine thrown,
Amid the Foes, so flies a mighty Stone,
As flew the Beast: The Left Wing put to Flight,
The Chiefs o'er-born, he rushes on the Right.
Empalamos and Pelagon he laid
In Dust, and next to Death, but for their Fellows Aid.
Onesimus fared worse, prepared to fly,
The fatal Fang drove deep within his Thigh,
And cut the Nerves: The Nerves no more sustain
The Bulk; the Bulk unprop'd, falls headlong on the Plain.
Nestor had failed the Fall of Troy to see,
But leaning on his Lance, he vaulted on a Tree;
Then gathering up his Feet, looked down with Fear,
And thought his monstrous Foe was still too near.
Against a Stump his Tusk the Monster grinds,
And in the sharpened Edge new Vigor finds;
Then, trusting to his Arms, young Othrys sound,
And ranch'd his Hips with one continued Wound.
Now Leda's Twins, the future Stars, appear;
White were their Habits, white their Horses were:
Conspicuous both, and both in Act to throw,
Their trembling Lances brandished at the Foe:
Nor had they missed; but he to Thickets fled,
Concealed from aiming Spears, not pervious to the Steed.
But Telamon rushed in, and happ'd to meet
A rising Root, that held his fastened Feet;
So down he fell, whom, sprawling on the Ground,
His Brother from the wooden Gyves unbound.
Mean time the Virgin-Huntress was not slow
TO expel the Shaft from her contracted Bow:
Beneath his Ear the fastened Arrow stood,
And from the Wound appeared the trickling Blood.
She blushed for Joy: But Meleagros raised
His Voice with loud Applause, and the fair Archer praised.
He was the first to see, and first to show
His Friends the Marks of the successful Blow.
Nor shall thy Valor want the Praises due,
He said; a virtuous Envy seized the Crew.
They shout; the Shouting animates their Hearts,
And all at once employ their thronging Darts:
But out of Order thrown, in Air they join,
And Multitude makes frustrate the Design.
With both his Hands the proud Ancaeus takes,
And flourishes his double-biting Ax:
Then, forward to his Fate, he took a Stride
Before the rest, and to his Fellows cried,
Give place, and mark the Difference, if you can,
Between a Woman Warrior, and a Man;
The Boar is doomed; nor though Diana lend
Her Aid, Diana can her Beast defend.
Thus boasted he; then stretched, on Tiptoe stood,
Secure to make his empty Promise good.
But the more wary Beast prevents the Blow,
And upward rips the Groin of his audacious Foe.
Ancaeus falls; his Bowels from the Wound
Rush out, and clotter'd Blood distains the Ground.
Perithous, no small Portion of the War,
Pressed on, and shook his Lance: To whom from far
Thus Theseus cried; O stay, my better Part,
My more than Mistress; of my Heart, the Heart.
The Strong may fight aloof; Ancaeus tried
His Force too near, and by presuming died:
He said, and while he spoke his Javelin threw,
Hissing in Air the unerring Weapon flew;
But on an Arm of Oak, that stood betwixt
The Marks-man and the Mark, his Lance he fixed.
Once more bold Jason threw, but failed to wound
The Boar, and slew an undeserving Hound,
And through the Dog the Dart was nailed to Ground.
Two Spears from Meleager's Hand were sent,
With equal Force, but various in the Event:
The first was fixed in Earth, the second stood
On the Boar's bristled Back, and deeply drank his Blood.
Now while the tortured Savage turns around,
And flings about his Foam, impatient of the Wound,
The Wound's great Author close at Hand provokes
His Rage, and plies him with redoubled Strokes;
Wheels as he wheels; and with his pointed Dart
Explores the nearest Passage to his Heart.
Quick and more quick he spins in giddy Gires,
Then falls, and in much Foam his Soul expires.
This Act with Shouts Heav'n-high the friendly Band
Applaud, and strain in theirs the Victor's Hand.
Then all approach the Slain with vast Surprise,
Admire on what a Breadth of Earth he lies,
And scarce secure, reach out their Spears afar,
And blood their Points, to prove their Partnership of War.
But he, the conquering Chief, his Foot impressed
On the strong Neck of that destructive Beast;
And gazing on the Nymph with ardent Eyes,
Accept, said he, fair Nonacrine, my Prize,
And, though inferior, suffer me to join
My Labors, and my Part of Praise, with thine:
At this presents her with the Tusky Head
And Chine, with rising Bristles roughly spread.
Glad, she received the Gift; and seemed to take
With double Pleasure, for the Giver's sake.
The rest were seized with sullen Discontent,
And a deaf Murmur through the Squadron went:
All envied; but the Theslyan Brethren showed
The least Respect, and thus they vent their Spleen aloud:
Lay down those honored Spoils, nor think to share,
Weak Woman as thou art, the Prize of War:
Ours is the Title, thine a foreign Claim,
Since Meleagros from our Lineage came.
Trust not thy Beauty; but restore the Prize,
Which he, besotted on that Face and Eyes,
Would rend from us: At this, enflamed with Spite,
From her they snatch the Gift, from him the Giver's Right.
But soon the impatient Prince his Fauchion drew,
And cried, Ye Robbers of another's Due,
Now learn the Difference, at your proper Cost,
Betwixt true Valor, and an empty Boast.
At this advanced, and sudden as the Word,
In proud Plexippus' Bosom plunged the Sword:
Toxeus amazed, and with Amazement slow,
Or to revenge, or ward the coming Blow,
Stood doubting; and while doubting thus he stood,
Received the Steel bathed in his Brother's Blood.
Pleased with the first, unknown the second News;
Althaea to the Temples pays their Dues
For her Son's Conquest; when at length appear
Her grisly Brethren stretched upon the Bier:
Pale at the sudden Sight, she changed her Cheer,
And with her Cheer her Robes; but hearing tell
The Cause, the Manner, and by whom they fell,
'Twas Grief no more, or Grief and Rage were one
Within her Soul; at last 'twas Rage alone;
Which burning upwards in Succession, dries
The Tears that stood consid'ring in her Eyes.
There lay a Log unlighted on the Hearth,
When she was laboring in the Throws of Birth
For the unborn Chief; the fatal Sisters came,
And raised it up, and tossed it on the Flame:
Then on the Rock a scanty Measure place
Of vital Flax, and turned the Wheel apace;
And turning sung, To this red Brand and thee,
O newborn Babe, we give an equal Destiny:
So vanished out of View. The frighted Dame
Sprung hasty from her Bed, and quenched the Flame:
The Log, in secret locked, she kept with Care,
And that, while thus preserved, preserved her Heir.
This Brand she now produced; and first she strows
The Hearth with Heaps of Chips, and after blows:
Thrice heaved her Hand, and heaved, she thrice repressed:
The Sister and the Mother long contest,
Two doubtful Titles, in one tender Breast:
And now her Eyes and Cheeks with Fury glow,
Now pale her Cheeks, her Eyes with Pity flow:
Now lowering Looks presage approaching Storms,
And now prevailing Love her Face reforms:
Resolved, she doubts again; the Tears she dried
With burning Rage, are by new Tears supplied;
And as a Ship, which Winds and Waves assail,
Now with the Current drives, now with the Gale,
Both opposite, and neither long prevail:
She feels a double Force, by Turns obeys
The imperious Tempest, and the impetuous Seas:
So fares Althaea's Mind, she first relents
With Pity, of that Pity then repents:
Sister and Mother long the Scales divide,
But the Beam nodded on the Sister's Side.
Sometimes she softly sighed, then roared aloud;
But Sighs were stifled in the Cries of Blood.
The pious, impious Wretch at length decreed,
To please her Brothers Ghost, her Son should bleed:
And when the funeral Flames began to rise,
Receive, she said, a Sister's Sacrifice;
A Mother's Bowels burn: High in her Hand,
Thus while she spoke, she held the fatal Brand;
Then thrice before the kindled Pile she bowed,
And the three Furies thrice invoked aloud:
Come, come, revenging Sisters, come and view
A Sister paying her dead Brothers Due:
A Crime I punish, and a Crime commit;
But Blood for Blood, and Death for Death is fit:
Great Crimes must be with greater Crimes repaid,
And second Funerals on the former laid.
Let the whole Household in one Ruin fall,
And may Diana's Curse overtake us all.
Shall Fate to happy Oeneus still allow
One Son, while Thestius stands deprived of two?
Better Three lost, than One unpunished go.
Take then, dear Ghosts, (while yet admitted new
In Hell you wait my Duty) take your Due:
A costly Offering on your Tomb is laid,
When with my Blood the Price of yours is paid.
Ah! whither am I hurried? Ah! forgive,
Ye Shades, and let your Sister's Issue live:
A Mother cannot give him Death; though he
Deserves it, he deserves it not from me.
Then shall th'unpunish'd Wretch insult the Slain,
Triumphant live, nor only live, but reign?
While you, thin Shades, the Sport of Winds, are tossed
Over dreary Plains, or tread the burning Coast.
I cannot, cannot bear; it is past, it is done;
Perish this impious, this detested Son:
Perish his Sire, and perish I withal;
And let the House's Heir, and the hoped Kingdom fall.
Where is the Mother fled, her pious Love,
And where the Pains with which ten Months I strove!
Ah! had thou died, my Son, in Infant Years,
Thy little Hearse had been bedewed with Tears.
Thou liv'st by me; to me thy Breath resign;
Mine is the Merit, the Demerit thine.
Thy Life by double Title I require;
Once given at Birth, and once preserved from Fire:
One Murder pay, or add one Murder more,
And me to them who fell by thee restore.
I would, but cannot: My Son's Image stands
Before my Sight; and now their angry Hands
My Brothers hold, and Vengeance these exact,
This pleads Compassion, and repents the Fact.
He pleads in vain, and I pronounce his Doom:
My Brothers, though unjustly, shall overcome.
But having paid their injured Ghosts their Due,
My Son requires my Death, and mine shall his pursue.
At this, for the last time, she lifts her Hand,
Averts her Eyes, and, half unwilling, drops the Brand.
The Brand, amid the flaming Fuel thrown,
Or drew, or seemed to draw, a dying Groan:
The Fires themselves but faintly licked their Pr^^
Then loathed their impious Food, and would have shrunk away.
Just then the Hero cast a doleful Cry,
And in those absent Flames began to fry:
The blind Contagion raged within his Veins;
But he with manly Patience bore his Pains:
He feared not Fate, but only grieved to die
Without an honest Wound, and by a Death so dry.
Happy Ancaeus, thrice aloud he cried,
With what becoming Fate in Arms he died!
Then called his Brothers, Sisters, Sire around,
And her to whom his Nuptial Vows were bound;
Perhaps his Mother; a long Sigh he drew,
And his Voice failing, took his last Adieu.
For as the Flames augment, and as they stay
At their full Height, then languish to decay,
They rise and sink by Fits; at last they soar
In one bright Blaze, and then descend no more:
Just so his inward Heats, at height, impair,
Till the last burning Breath shoots out the Soul in Air.
Now lofty Calidon in Ruins lies;
All Ages, all Degrees unsluice their Eyes;
And Heaven and Earth resound with Murmurs, Groans and Cries.
Matrons and Maidens beat their Breasts, and tear
Their Habits, and root up their scattered Hair:
The wretched Father, Father now no more,
With Sorrow sunk, lies prostrate on the Floor,
Deforms his hoary Locks with Dust obscene,
And curses Age, and loathes a Life prolonged with Pain.
By Steel her stubborn Soul his Mother freed,
And punished on her self her impious Deed.
Had I a hundred Tongues, a Wit so large
As could their hundred Offices discharge;
Had Phoebus all his Helicon bestowed
In all the Streams inspiring all the God;
Those Tongues, that Wit, those Streams, that God in vain
Would offer to describe his Sister's Pain:
They beat their Breasts with many a bruizing Blow,
Till they turn livid, and corrupt the Snow.
The Corpse they cherish, while the Corpse remains,
And exercise and rub with fruitless Pains;
And when to funeral Flames it is born away,
They kiss the Bed on which the Body lay:
And when those funeral Flames no longer burn,
(The Dust composed within a pious Urn)
Even in that Urn their Brother they confess,
And hug it in their Arms, and to their Bosoms press.
His Tomb is raised; then, stretched along the Ground,
Those living Monuments his Tomb surround:
Even to his Name, inscribed, their Tears they pay,
Till Tears and Kisses wear his Name away.
But Cynthia now had all her Fury spent,
Not with less Ruin than a Race content:
Excepting Gorge, perished all the Seed,
And Dejanira.
her whom Heaven for Hercules decreed.
Satiate at last, no longer she pursued
The weeping Sisters; but with Wings endu'd,
And horny Beaks, and sent to flit in Air;
Who yearly round the Tomb in feathered Flocks repair.
The Transformation of the NAIADS.
By Mr. VERNON.
Theseus mean while acquitting well his Share
In the bold Chase confed'rate like a War,
To Athens' lofty Towers his March ordained,
By Pallas loved, and where Erectheus reigned.
But Achelous stopped him on the Way,
By Rains a Deluge, and constrained his Stay.
O famed for glorious Deeds, and great by Blood,
Rest here, says he, nor trust the rapid Flood;
It solid Oaks has from its Margin tore,
And rocky Fragments down its Current bore,
The Murmur hoarse, and terrible the Roar.
Often have I seen Herds with their sheltering Fold
Forced from the Banks, and in the Torrent roul'd;
Nor Strength the bulky Steer from Ruin freed,
Nor matchless Swiftness saved the racing Steed.
In Cataracts when the dissolving Snow
Falls from the Hills, and floods the Plains below;
Tossed by the Eddies with a giddy Round,
Strong Youths are in the sucking Whirlpools drowned.
It Is best with me in Safety to abide,
Till usual Bounds restrain the cbbing Tide,
And the low Waters in their Channel glide.
Theseus persuaded, in Compliance bowed;
So kind an Offer, and Advice so good,
O Achelous, cannot be refused;
I Will use them both, said he; and both he used.
The Grot he entered, Pumice built the Hall,
And Tophi made the Rustic of the Wall;
The Floor, soft Moss, an humid Carpet spread,
And various Shells the checkered Roof inlaid.
'Twas now the Hour when the declining Sun
Two Thirds had of his daily Journey run;
At the spread Table Theseus took his Place,
Next his Companions in the daring Chase;
Perithous here, there elder Lelex lay,
His Locks betraying Age with sprinkled Gray.
Acharnia's River-God disposed the rest,
Graced with the equal Honor of the Feast,
Elate with Joy, and proud of such a Guest.
The Nymphs were Waiters, and with naked Feet
In order served the Courses of the Meat.
The Banquet done, delicious Wine they brought,
Of one transparent Gem the Cup was wrought.
Then the great Hero of this gallant Train,
Surveying far the Prospect of the Main;
What is that Land, says he, the Waves embrace?
(And with his Finger pointed at the Place;)
Is it one parted Isle which stands alone?
How named? and yet methinks it seems not one.
To whom the watery God made this Reply;
It Is not one Isle, but five; distinct they lie;
It Is Distance which deceives the cheated Eye.
But that Diana's Act may seem less strange,
These once proud Naiads were, before their Change.
T was on a Day more solemn than the rest,
Then Bullocks slain, a Sacrificial Feast:
The rural Gods of all the Region near
They bid to dance, and taste the hallowed Cheer.
Me they forgot: Affronted with the Slight,
My Rage and Stream swelled to the greatest Height;
And with the Torrent of my flooding Store,
Large Woods from Woods, and Fields from Fields I tore.
The guilty Nymphs, Oh! then, remembering me,
I, with their Country, washed into the Sea;
And joining Waters with the social Main,
Rent the gross Land, and split the firm Champagne.
Since, the Echinades, remote from Shore,
Are viewed as many Isles, as Nymphs before.
PERIMELE turned into an Island.
But yonder far, lo, yonder does appear
An Isle, a Part to me for ever dear.
From that (it Sailors Perimele name)
I doting, forced by Rape a Virgin's Fame.
Hippodamas's Passion grew so strong,
Galled with the Abuse, and fretted at the Wrong,
He cast his pregnant Daughter from a Rock;
I spread my Waves beneath, and broke the Shock;
And as her swimming Weight my Stream conveyed,
I su'd for Help Divine, and thus I prayed:
O powerful Thou, whose Trident does command
The Realm of Waters, which surround the Land;
We sacred Rivers, wheresoe'er begun,
End in thy Lot, and to thy Empire run.
With Favor hear, and help with present Aid;
Her whom I bear 'twas guilty I betrayed.
Yet if her Father had been just, or mild,
He would have been less impious to his Child;
In her, have pitied Force in the Abuse;
In me, admitted Love for my Excuse.
O let Relief for her hard Case be found,
Her whom Paternal Rage expelled from Ground,
Her whom Paternal Rage relentless drowned.
Grant her some Place, or change her to a Place,
Which I may ever clasp with my Embrace.
His nodding Head the Sea's great Ruler bent,
And all his Waters shook with his Assent.
The Nymph still swam, though with the Fright distressed,
I felt her Heart leap trembling in her Breast;
But hardening soon, whilst I her Pulse explore,
A crusting Earth cased her stiff Body over;
And as Accretions of new cleaving Soil
Enlarged the Mass, the Nymph became an Isle.
The Story of BAUCIS and PHILEMON.
By Mr. DRYDEN.
Thus Achelous ends: His Audience hear
With Admiration, and admiring, fear
The Powers of Heaven; except Ixion's Son,
Who laughed at all the Gods, believed in none:
He shook his impious Head, and thus replies,
These Legends are no more than pious Lies:
You attribute too much to Heavenly Sway,
To think they give us Forms, and take away.
The rest of better Minds, their Sense declared
Against this Doctrine, and with Horror heard.
Then Lelex rose, an old experienced Man,
And thus with sober Gravity began;
Heaven's Power is infinite: Earth, Air, and Sea,
The Manufacture Mass, the making Power obey:
By Proof to clear your Doubt; In Phrygian Ground
Two neighboring Trees, with Walls encompassed round,
Stand on a moderate Rise, with Wonder shown,
One a hard Oak, a softer Linden one:
I saw the Place, and them, by Pittheus sent
To Phrygian Realms, my Grandsire's Government.
Not far from thence is seen a Lake, the Haunt
Of Coots, and of the fishing Cormorant:
Here Jove with Hermes came; but in Disguise
Of mortal Men concealed their Deities;
One laid aside his Thunder, one his Rod;
And many toilsome Steps together trod:
For Harbor at a thousand Doors they knocked,
Not one of all the thousand but was locked.
At last an hospitable House they found,
A homely Shed; the Roof, not far from Ground,
Was thatched with Reeds and Straw together bound.
There Baucis and Philemon lived, and there
Had lived long married, and a happy Pair:
Now old in Love, though little was their Store,
Inured to Want, their Poverty they bore,
Nor aimed at Wealth, professing to be poor.
For Master or for Servant here to call,
Was all alike, where only Two were All.
Command was none, where equal Love was paid,
Or rather both commanded, both obeyed.
From lofty Roofs the Gods repulsed before,
Now stooping, entered through the little Door:
The Man (their hearty Welcome first expressed)
A common Settle drew for either Guest,
Inviting each his weary Limbs to rest.
But ere they sat, officious Baucis lays
Two Cushions stuffed with Straw, the Seat to raise;
Course, but the best she had; then rakes the Load
Of Ashes from the Hearth, and spreads abroad
The living Coals; and, lest they should expire,
With Leaves and Bark she feeds her Infant Fire:
It smoaks; and then with trembling Breath she blows,
Till in a cheerful Blaze the Flames arose.
With Brush-wood, and with Chips she strengthens these,
And adds at last the Boughs of rotten Trees.
The Fire thus formed, she sets the Kettle on,
(Like burnished Gold the little Seether shone)
Next took the Coleworts which her Husband got
From his own Ground, (a small well-water'd Spot;)
She stripped the Stalks of all their Leaves; the best
She culled, and them with handy Care she dressed.
High over the Hearth a Chine of Bacon hung;
Good old Philemon seized it with a Prong,
And from the sooty Rafter drew it down,
Then cut a Slice, but scarce enough for one;
Yet a large Portion of a little Store,
Which for their sakes alone he wished were more.
This in the Pot he plunged without Delay,
To tame the Flesh, and drain the Salt away.
The Time between, before the Fire they sat,
And shortened the Delay by pleasing Chat.
A Beam there was, on which a Beechen Pail
Hung by the Handle, on a driven Nail:
This filled with Water, gently warmed, they set
Before their Guests; in this they bathed their Feet,
And after with clean Towels dried their Sweat.
This done, the Host produced the genial Bed,
Sallow the Feet, the Borders, and the Sted,
Which with no costly Coverlet they spread,
But course old Garments; yet such Robes as these
They laid alone, at Feasts, on Holydays.
The good old Houswife, tucking up her Gown,
The Table sets; th'invited Gods lie down.
The Trivet-Table of a Foot was lame,
A Blot which prudent Baucis overcame,
Who thrusts beneath the limping Leg a Sherd,
So was the mended Board exactly reared:
Then rubbed it over with newly-gather'd Mint,
A wholesome Herb, that breathed a grateful Scent.
Pallas began the Feast, where first was seen
The party-colored Olive, Black, and Green:
Autumnal Cornels next in order served,
In Lees of Wine well pickled, and preserved.
A Garden-Sallad was the third Supply,
Of Endive, Radishes, and Succory:
Then Curds and Cream, the Flower of Country Fare,
And new-laid Eggs, which Baucis' busy Care
Turned by a gentle Fire, and roasted rare.
All these in Earthen Ware were served to Board;
And next in place, an Earthen Pitcher stored,
With Liquor of the best the Cottage could afford.
This was the Table's Ornament, and Pride,
With Figures wrought: Like Pages at his Side
Stood Beechen Bowls; and these were shining clean.
Varnished with Wax without, and lined within.
By this the boiling Kettle had prepared,
And to the Table sent, the smoking Lard;
On which with eager Appetite they dine,
A sav'ry Bit, that served to relish Wine:
The Wine itself was suiting to the rest,
Still working in the Must, and lately pressed.
The second Course succeeds like that before,
Plums, Apples, Nuts; and of their wintry Store
Dry Figs, and Grapes, and wrinkled Dates were set
In Canisters, t'enlarge the little Treat:
All these a Milk-white Honeycomb surround,
Which in the Midst the Country-Banquet crowned:
But the kind Hosts their Entertainment grace
With hearty Welcome, and an open Face:
In all they did, you might discern with Ease
A willing Mind, and a Desire to please.
Mean time the Beechen Bowls went round, and still,
Though often emptied, were observed to fill;
Filled without Hands, and of their own Accord
Ran without Feet, and danced about the Board.
Devotion seized the Pair, to see the Feast
With Wine, and of no common Grape, increased;
And up they held their Hands, and fell to Prayer,
Excusing, as they could, their Country Fare.
One Goose they had, ('it was all they could allow)
A wakeful Centry, and on Duty now,
Whom to the Gods for Sacrifice they vow:
Her, with malicious Zeal, the Couple viewed;
She ran for Life, and limping they pursued:
Full well the Fowl perceived their bad Intent,
And would not make her Master's Compliment;
But persecuted, to the Powers she flies,
And close between the Legs of Jove she lies:
He with a gracious Ear the Suppliant heard,
And saved her Life; then what he was declared,
And owned the God. The Neighborhood, said he,
Shall justly perish for Impiety:
You stand alone exempted; but obey
With Speed, and follow where we lead the Way:
Leave these accursed; and to the Mountain's Height
Ascend; nor once look backward in your Flight.
They haste, and what their tardy Feet denied,
The trusty Staff (their better Leg) supplied.
An Arrow's Flight they wanted to the Top,
And there secure, but spent with Travel, stop;
Then turn their now no more forbidden Eyes;
Lost in a Lake the floated Level lies:
A watery Desert covers all the Plains,
Their Cot alone, as in an Isle, remains.
Wondering with weeping Eyes, while they deplore
Their Neighbors Fate, and Country now no more,
Their little Shed, scarce large enough for Two,
Seems, from the Ground increased, in Height and Bulk to grow.
A stately Temple shoots within the Skies,
The Crotches of their Cot in Columns rise:
The Pavement polished Marble they behold,
The Gates with Sculpture graced, the Spires and Tiles of Gold.
Then thus the Sire of Gods, with Looks serene,
Speak thy Desire, thou only. Just of Men;
And thou, O Woman, only worthy found
To be with such a Man in Marriage bound.
Awhile they whisper; then, to Jove addressed,
Philemon thus prefers their joint Request:
We crave to serve before your sacred Shrine,
And offer at your Altars Rites Divine:
And since not any Action of our Life
Has been polluted with Domestic Strife;
We beg one Hour of Death; that neither she
With Widow's Tears may live to bury me,
Nor weeping I, with withered Arms may bear
My breathless Baucis to the Sepulcher.
The Godheads sign their Suit. They run their Race
In the same Tenor all the appointed Space:
Then, when their Hour was come, while they relate
These past Adventures at the Temple Gate,
Old Baucis is by old Philemon seen
Sprouting with sudden Leaves of spritely Green:
Old Baucis looked where old Philemon stood,
And saw his lengthened Arms a sprouting Wood:
New Roots their fastened Feet begin to bind,
Their Bodies stiffen in a rising Rind:
Then, ere the Bark above their Shoulders grew,
They give, and take at once their last Adieu.
At once, Farewell, O faithful Spouse, they said;
At once the incroaching Rinds their closing Lips invade.
Even yet, an ancient Tyanaean shows
A spreading Oak, that near a Linden grows;
The Neighborhood confirm the Prodigy,
Grave Men, not vain of Tongue, or like to lie.
I saw my self the Garlands on their Boughs,
And Tablets hung for Gifts of granted Vows;
And offering fresher up, with pious Prayer,
The Good, said I, are God's peculiar Care,
And such as honor Heaven, shall heavenly Honor share.
Continued by Mr. VERNON.
The Changes of PROTEUS.
He ceased in his Relation to proceed,
Whilst all admired the Author, and the Deed;
But Theseus most, inquisitive to know
From Gods what wondrous Alterations grow.
Whom thus the Calydonian Stream addressed,
Raised high to speak, the Couch his Elbow pressed.
Some, when transformed, fix in the lasting Change;
Some, with more Right, through various Figures range.
Proteus, thus large thy Privilege was found,
Thou Inmate of the Seas, which Earth surround.
Sometimes a blooming Youth you graced the Shore;
Often a fierce Lion, or a furious Boar:
With glist'ring Spires now seemed an hissing Snake,
The Bold would tremble in his Hands to take:
With Horns assumed a Bull; sometimes you proved
A Tree by Roots, a Stone by Weight unmoved:
Sometimes two wavering Contraries became,
Flowed down in Water, or aspired in Flame.
The Story of ERISICHTHON.
In various Shapes thus to deceive the Eyes,
Without a settled Stint of her Disguise,
Rash Erisichthon's Daughter had the Power,
And brought it to Autolicus in Dower.
Her Atheist Sire the slighted Gods defied,
And ritual Honors to their Shrines denied.
As Fame reports, his Hand an Ax sustained,
Which Ceres' consecrated Grove profaned;
Which durst the venerable Gloom invade,
And violate with Light the awful Shade.
An ancient Oak in the dark Center stood,
The Covert's Glory, and itself a Wood;
Garlands embraced its Shaft, and from the Boughs
Hung Tablets, Monuments of prosperous Vows.
In the cool Dusk its unpierc'd Verdure spread,
The Dryads often their hallowed Dances led;
And often, when round their gaging Arms they cast,
Full fifteen Else it measured in the Waste:
Its Height all under Standards did surpass,
As they aspired above the humbler Grass.
These Motives, which would gentler Minds restrain,
Could not make Triope's bold Son abstain;
He sternly charged his Slaves with strict Decree,
To fell with gashing Steel the sacred Tree.
But whilst they, lingering, his Commands delayed,
He snatched an Ax, and thus blaspheming said:
Was this no Oak, nor Ceres' favorite Care,
But Ceres' self, this Arm, unawed, should dare
Its leafy Honors in the Dust to spread,
And level with the Earth its airy Head.
He spoke, and as he poised a slanting Stroke,
Sighs heaved, and Tremblings shook the frighted Oak;
Its Leaves looked sickly, pale its Acorns grew,
And its long Branches sweat a chilly Dew.
But when his impious Hand a Wound bestowed,
Blood from the mangled Bark in Currents flowed.
When a devoted Bull of mighty Size,
A sinning Nation's grand Atonement, dies;
With such a Plenty from the spouting Veins,
A crimson Stream the turfy Altar stains.
The Wonder all amazed; yet one more bold,
The Fact dissuading, strove his Ax to hold.
But the Thessalian, obstinately bent,
Too proud to change, too hardened to repent,
On his kind Monitor his Eyes, which burned
With Rage, and with his Eyes his Weapon turned;
Take the Reward, says he, of pious Dread:
Then with a Blow lop'd off his parted Head.
No longer checked, the Wretch his Crime pursued,
Doubled his Strokes, and Sacrilege renewed;
When from the groaning Trunk a Voice was heard,
A Dryad I, by Ceres' Love preferred,
Within the Circle of this clasping Rind
Coeval grew, and now in Ruin joined;
But instant Vengeance shall thy Sin pursue,
And Death is cheered with this prophetic View.
At last the Oak with Cords enforced to bow,
Strained from the Top, and sap'd with Wounds below,
The humbler Wood, Partaker of its Fate,
Crushed with its Fall, and shivered with its Weight.
The Grove destroyed, the Sister Dryads moan,
Grieved at its Loss, and frighted at their own.
Strait, Suppliants for Revenge, to Ceres go,
In sable Weeds, expressive of their Woe.
The beauteous Goddess with a graceful Air
Bowed in Consent, and nodded to their Prayer.
The awful Motion shook the fruitful Ground,
And waved the Fields with golden Harvests crowned.
Soon she contrived in her projecting Mind
A Plague severe, and piteous in its Kind,
(If Plagues for Crimes of such presumptuous Height
Could Pity in the softest Breast create.)
With pinching Want, and Hunger's keenest Smart,
To tear his Vitals, and corrode his Heart.
But since her near Approach by Fate's denied
To Famine, and broad Climes their Powers divide,
A Nymph, the Mountain's Ranger, she addressed,
And thus resolved, her high Commands expressed.
The Description of FAMINE.
Where frozen Scythia's utmost Bound is placed,
A Desert lies, a melancholy Waste:
In yellow Crops there Nature never smiled,
No fruitful Tree to shade the barren Wild.
There sluggish Cold its icy Station makes,
There Paleness, Frights, and aguish Trembling shakes.
Of pining Famine this the fated Seat,
To whom my Orders in these Words repeat:
Bid her this Miscreant with her sharpest Pains
Chastise, and sheath herself into his Veins;
Be unsubdu'd by Plenty's baffled Store,
Reject my Empire, and defeat my Power.
And lest the Distance, and the tedious Way,
Should with the Toil, and long Fatigue dismay,
Ascend my Chariot, and conveyed on high,
Guide the rein'd Dragons through the parting Sky.
The Nymph, accepting of the granted Carr,
Sprung to the Seat, and posted through the Air;
Nor stopped till she to a bleak Mountain came
Of wondrous Height, and Caucasus its Name.
There in a stony Field the Fiend she found,
Herbs gnawing, and Roots scratching from the Ground.
Her Elfelock Hair in matted Tresses grew,
Sunk were her Eyes, and pale her ghastly Hue,
Wan were her Lips, and foul with clammy Glue.
Her Throat was furred, her Guts appeared within
With snaky Crawlings through her Parchment Skin.
Her jutting Hips seemed starting from their Place,
And for a Belly was a Belly's Space.
Her Dugs hung dangling from her craggy Spine,
Loose to her Breast, and fastened to her Chine.
Her Joints protuberant by Leanness grown,
Consumption sunk the Flesh, and raised the Bone.
Her Knees large Orbits bunch'd to monstrous Size,
And Ancles to undue Proportion rise.
This Plague the Nymph, not daring to draw near,
At Distance hailed, and greeted from afar.
And though she told her Charge without Delay,
Though her Arrival late, and short her Stay,
She felt keen Famine, or she seemed to feel,
Invade her Blood, and on her Vitals steal.
She turned from the Infection to remove,
And back to Thessaly the Serpents drove.
The Fiend obeyed the Goddess's Command,
(Though their Effects in Opposition stand)
She cut her Way, supported by the Wind,
And reached the Mansion by the Nymph assigned.
'Twas Night, when entering Erisichthon's Room,
Dissolved in Sleep, and thoughtless of his Doom,
She clasped his Limbs, by impious Labor tired,
With battish Wings, but her whole self inspired;
Breathed on his Throat and Chest a tainting Blast,
And in his Veins infused an endless Fast.
The Task dispatched, away the Fury flies
From plenteous Regions, and from ripening Skies;
To her old barren North she wings her Speed,
And Cottages distressed with pinching Need.
Still Slumbers Erisichthon's Senses drown,
And sooth his Fancy with their softest Down.
He dreams of Viands delicate to eat,
And revels on imaginary Meat.
Chaws with his working Mouth, but chaws in vain,
And tires his grinding Teeth with fruitless Pain;
Deludes his Throat with visionary Fare,
Feasts on the Wind, and banquets on the Air.
The Morning came, the Night and Slumbers past,
But still the furious Pangs of Hunger last;
The cank'rous Rage still gnaws with griping Pains,
Stings in his Throat, and in his Bowels reigns.
Strait he requires, impatient in Demand,
Provisions from the Air, the Seas, the Land.
But though the Land, Air, Seas Provisions grant,
Starves at full Tables, and complains of Want.
What to a People might in Dole be paid,
Or victual Cities for a long Blockade,
Could not one Wolfish Appetite assuage,
For glutting Nourishment increased its Rage.
As Rivers poured from every distant Shore,
The Sea insatiate drinks, and thirsts for more;
Or as the Fire, which all Materials burns,
And wasted Forests into Ashes turns,
Grows more voracious, as the more it preys,
Recruits dilate the Flame, and spread the Blaze;
So impious Erisichthon's Hunger raves,
Receives Refreshments, and Refreshments craves.
Food raises a Desire for Food, and Meat
Is but a new Provocative to eat.
He grows more empty, as the more supplied,
And endless Cramming but extends the Void.
The Transformations of ERISICHTHON's Daughter.
Now Riches hoarded by Paternal Care
Were sunk, the Glutton swallowing up the Heir.
Yet the devouring Flame no Stores abate,
Nor less his Hunger grew with his Estate.
One Daughter left, as left his keen Desire,
A Daughter worthy of a better Sire:
Her too he sold, spent Nature to sustain;
She scorned a Lord with generous Disdain,
And flying, spread her Hands upon the Main.
Then prayed; Grant, Thou, I Bondage may escape,
And with my Liberty reward thy Rape;
Repay my Virgin Treasure with thy Aid,
('It Was Neptune who deflowered the beauteous Maid.)
The God was moved, at what the Fair had su'd,
When she so lately by her Master viewed
In her known Figure, on a sudden took
A Fisher's Habit, and a manly Look.
To whom her Owner hasted to enquire;
O thou, said he, whose Baits hide treacherous Wire;
Whose Art can manage, and experienced Skill
The taper Angle, and the bobbing Quill,
So may the Sea be ruffled with no Storm,
But smooth with Calms, as you the Truth inform;
So your Deceit may no shy Fishes feel,
Till struck, and fastened on the bearded Steel.
Did not you standing view upon the Strand
A wandering Maid? I Am sure I saw her stand;
Her Hair disordered, and her homely Dress
Betrayed her Want, and witnessed her Distress.
Me heedless, she replied, whoever you are,
Excuse, attentive to another Care.
I settled on the Deep my steady Eye,
Fixed on my Float, and bent on my Employ.
And that you may not doubt what I impart,
So may the Ocean's God assist my Art,
If on the Beach since I my Sport pursued,
Or Man, or Woman but my self I viewed.
Back over the Sands, deluded, he withdrew,
Whilst she for her old Form put off her new.
Her Sire her shifting Power to change perceived,
And various Chapmen by her Sale deceived.
A Fowl with spangled Plumes, a brinded Steer,
Sometimes a crested Mare, or antler'd Deer:
Sold for a Price she parted, to maintain
Her starving Parent with dishonest Gain.
At last all Means, as all Provisions, failed;
For the Disease by Remedies prevailed.
His Muscles with a furious Bite he tore,
Gorged his own tattered Flesh, and gulph'd his Gore.
Wounds were his Feast, his Life to Life a Prey,
Supporting Nature by its own Decay.
But foreign Stories why should I relate?
I too my self can to new Forms translate,
Though the Variety's not unconfined,
But fixed in Number, and restrained in Kind:
For often I this present Shape retain,
Often curl a Snake the Volumes of my Train.
Sometimes my Strength into my Horns transferred,
A Bull I march, the Captain of the Herd.
But whilst I once those goring Weapons wore,
Vast wresting Force one from my Forehead tore.
Lo, my maimed Brows the Injury still own;
He ceased; his Words concluding with a Groan.
The End of the Eighth Book.
To the Rt. Honbl. the Countess of Linc^^
E Kirkall

OVID's METAMORPHOSES. BOOK IX.
Translated by Mr. DRYDEN and Others.
The Story of ACHELOUS and HERCULES.
By Mr. GAY.
THeseus requests the God to tell his Woes,
Whence his maimed Brow, and whence his Groans arose:
When thus the Calydonian Stream replied,
With twining Reeds his careless Tresses tied.
Ungrateful is the Tale; for who can bear,
When conquered, to rehearse the shameful War?
Yet I Will the melancholy Story trace;
So great a Conqu'ror softens the Disgrace:
Nor was it still so mean the Prize to yield,
As great and glorious to dispute the Field.
Perhaps you have heard of Deianira's Name,
For all the Country spoke her Beauty's Fame.
Long was the Nymph by numerous Suitors wooed,
Each with Address his envied Hopes pursued:
I joined the loving Band; to gain the Fair,
Revealed my Passion to her Father's Ear.
Their vain Pretensions all the rest resign,
Alcides only strove to equal mine;
He boasts his Birth from Jove, recounts his Spoils,
His Step-dame's Hate subdued, and finished Toils.
Can Mortals then (said I) with Gods compare?
Behold a God; mine is the watery Care:
Through your wide Realms I take my mazy Way,
Branch into Streams, and over the Region stray:
No foreign Guest your Daughter's Charms adores,
But one who rises in your native Shores.
Let not his Punishment your Pity move;
Is Juno's Hate an Argument for Love?
Though you your Life from fair Alomena drew,
Jove's a feigned Father, or by Fraud a true.
Choose then; confess thy Mother's Honor lost,
Or thy Descent from Jove no longer boast.
While thus I spoke, he looked with stern Disdain,
Nor could the Sallies of his Wrath restrain,
Which thus break forth. This Arm decides our Right;
Vanquish in Words, be mine the Prize in Fight.
Bold he rushed on. My Honor to maintain,
I fling my verdant Garments on the Plain,
My Arms stretch forth, my pliant Limbs prepare,
And with bent Hands expect the furious War.
Over my sleek Skin now gathered Dust he throws,
And yellow Sand his mighty Muscles strows.
Often he my Neck and nimble Legs assails,
He seems to grasp me, but as often fails.
Each Part he now invades with eager Hand;
Safe in my Bulk, immovable I stand.
So when loud Storms break high, and foam and roar
Against some Mole, that stretches from the Shore;
The firm Foundation lasting Tempests braves,
Defies the warring Winds, and driving Waves.
Awhile we breathe, then forward rush amain,
Renew the Combat, and our Ground maintain;
Foot strove with Foot, I prone extend my Breast,
Hands war with Hands, and Forehead Forehead pressed.
Thus have I seen two furious Bulls engage,
Inflamed with equal Love, and equal Rage;
Each claims the fairest Heifer of the Grove,
And Conquest only can decide their Love:
The trembling Herds survey the Fight from far,
Till Victory decides the important War.
Three times in vain he strove my Joints to wrest,
To force my Hold, and throw me from his Breast;
The fourth he broke my Gripe, that clasped him round,
Then with new Force he stretched me on the Ground;
Close to my Back the mighty Burden clung,
As if a Mountain over my Limbs were flung.
Believe my Tale; nor do I, boastful, aim
By feigned Narration to extol my Fame.
No sooner from his Grasp I Freedom get,
Unlock my Arms, that flowed with trickling Sweat,
But quick he seized me, and renewed the Strife,
As my exhausted Bosom pants for Life:
My Neck he gripes, my Knee to Earth he strains;
I fall, and bite the Sand with Shame and Pains.
O'er-match'd in Strength, to Wiles and Arts I take,
And slip his Hold, in Form of speckled Snake;
Who, when I wreathed in Spires my Body round,
Or showed my forky Tongue with hissing Sound,
Smiles at my Threats; Such Foes my Cradle knew,
He cries, dire Snakes my Infant Hand o'erthrew;
A Dragon's Form might other Conquests gain,
To war with me you take that Shape in vain.
Art thou proportioned to the Hydra's Length,
Who by his Wounds received augmented Strength?
He raised a hundred hissing Heads in Air,
When one I lopt, up-sprung a dreadful Pair.
By his Wounds fertile, and with Slaughter strong,
Singly I quelled him, and stretched dead along.
What can thou do, a Form precarious, prone,
To rouse my Rage with Terrors not thy own?
He said; and round my Neck his Hands he cast,
And with his straining Fingers wrung me fast;
My Throat he tortured, close as Pincers clasp,
In vain I strove to loose the forceful Grasp.
Thus vanquished too, a third Form still remains,
Changed to a Bull, my Lowing fills the Plains.
Strait on the Left his nervous Arms were thrown
Upon my brindled Neck, and tugged it down;
Then deep he struck my Horn into the Sand,
And felled my Bulk along the dusty Land.
Nor yet his Fury cooled; 'twixt Rage and Scorn,
From my maimed Front he tore the stubborn Horn:
This, heaped with Flowers and Fruits, the Naiads bear,
Sacred to Plenty, and the bounteous Year.
He spoke; when lo, a beauteous Nymph appears,
Girt like Diana's Train, with flowing Hairs;
The Horn she brings in which all Autumn's stored,
And ruddy Apples for the second Board.
Now Morn begins to dawn, the Sun's bright Fire
Gilds the high Mountains, and the Youths retire;
Nor stayed they, till the troubled Stream subsides,
And in its Bounds with peaceful Current glides.
But Achelous in his oozy Bed
Deep hides his Brow deformed, and rustic Head:
No real Wound the Victor's Triumph showed,
But his lost Honors grieved the watery God;
Yet even that Loss the Willow's Leaves overspread,
And verdant Reeds, in Garlands, bind his Head.
The Death of NESSUS the Centaur.
This Virgin too, thy Love, O Nessus, found,
To her alone you owe the fatal Wound.
As the strong Son of Jove his Bride conveys,
Where his Paternal Lands their Bulwarks raise;
Where from her slopy Urn, Evenus pours
Her rapid Current, swelled by wintry Showers,
He came. The frequent Eddies whirled the Tide,
And the deep rolling Waves all Pass denied.
As, for himself, he stood unmoved by Fears,
For now his Bridal Charge employed his Cares,
The strong-limb'd Nessus thus officious cried,
(For he the Shallows of the Stream had tried)
Swim thou, Alcides, all thy Strength prepare,
On yonder Bank I Will lodge thy Nuptial Care.
The Aonian Chief to Nessus trusts his Wife,
All pale and trembling for her Hero's Life:
Clothed as he stood in the fierce Lion's Hide,
The laden Quiver over his Shoulder tied,
(For cross the Stream his Bow and Club were cast)
Swift he plunged in; These Billows shall be past,
He said, nor sought where smoother Waters glide,
But stem'd the rapid Dangers of the Tide.
The Bank he reached; again the Bow he bears;
When, hark! his Bride's known Voice alarms his Ears.
Nessus, to thee I call (aloud he cries)
Vain is thy Trust in Flight, be timely wise:
Thou Monster double-shap'd, my Right set free;
If thou no Reverence owe my Fame and me,
Yet Kindred should thy lawless Lust deny;
Think not, perfidious Wretch, from me to fly,
Though winged with Horse's Speed; Wounds shall pursue;
Swift as his Words the fatal Arrow flew:
The Centaur's Back admits the feathered Wood,
And through his Breast the barbed Weapon stood;
Which, when in Anguish, through the Flesh he tore,
From both the Wounds gushed forth the spumy Gore
Mixed with Lernaean Venom; this he took,
Nor dire Revenge his dying Breast forsook.
His Garment, in the reeking Purple died,
To rouse Love's Passion, he presents the Bride.
The Death of HERCULES.
Now a long Interval of Time succeeds,
When the great Son of Jove's immortal Deeds,
And Stepdame's Hate, had filled Earth's utmost Round;
He from O Echalia, with new Laurels crowned,
In Triumph was returned. He Rites prepares,
And to the King of Gods directs his Prayers;
When Fame (who Falsehood clothes in Truth's Disguise,
And swells her little Bulk with growing Lies)
Thy tender Ear, O Deianira, moved,
That Hercules the fair Iole loved.
Her Love believes the Tale; the Truth she fears
Of his new Passion, and gives way to Tears.
The flowing Tears diffused her wretched Grief.
Why seek I thus, from streaming Eyes, Relief?
She cries; indulge not thus these fruitless Cares,
The Harlot will but triumph in thy Tears:
Let something be resolved, while yet there is Time;
My Bed not conscious of a Rival's Crime.
In Silence shall I mourn, or loud complain?
Shall I seek Calydon, or here remain?
What though, allied to Meleager's Fame,
I boast the Honors of a Sister's Name?
My Wrongs, perhaps, now urge me to pursue
Some desperate Deed, by which the World shall view
How far Revenge and Woman's Rage can rise,
When weltring in her Blood the Harlot dies.
Thus various Passions ruled by turns her Breast.
She now resolves to send the fatal Vest,
Died with Lernaean Gore, whose Power might move
His Soul anew, and rouse declining Love.
Nor knew she what her sudden Rage bestows,
When she to Lychas trusts her future Woes;
With soft Endearments she the Boy commands,
To bear the Garment to her Husband's Hands.
The unwitting Hero takes the Gift in haste,
And over his Shoulders Lerna's Poison cast,
As first the Fire with Frankincense he strows,
And utters to the Gods his holy Vows;
And on the Marble Altar's polished Frame
Pours forth the grapy Stream; the rising Flame
Sudden dissolves the subtle poisonous Juice,
Which taints his Blood, and all his Nerves bedews.
With wonted Fortitude he bore the Smart,
And not a Groan confessed his burning Heart*
At length his Patience was subdued by Pain,
He rends the sacred Altar from the Plain;
OEte's wide Forests echo with his Cries:
Now to rip off the deathful Robe he tries,
Wherever he plucks the Vest, the Skin he tears,
The mangled Muscles and huge Bones he bares,
(A ghastful Sight!) or raging with his Pain,
To rend the sticking Plague he tugs in vain.
As the red Iron hisses in the Flood,
So boils the Venom in his curdling Blood.
Now with the greedy Flame his Entrails glow,
And livid Sweats down all his Body flow;
The cracking Nerves burnt up are burst in twain,
The lurking Venom melts his swimming Brain.
Then, lifting both his Hands aloft, he cries,
Glut thy Revenge, dread Empress of the Skies;
Sat with my Death the Rancour of thy Heart,
Look down with Pleasure, and enjoy my Smart.
Or, if ever Pity moved an hostile Breast,
(For here I stand thy Enemy professed)
Take hence this hateful Life with Tortures torn,
Inured to Trouble, and to Labors born.
Death is the Gift most welcome to my Woe,
And such a Gift a Stepdame may bestow.
Was it for this Busiris was subdued,
Whose barbarous Temples reek'd with Stranger's Blood?
Pressed in these Arms his Fate Antaeus found,
Nor gained recruited Vigor from the Ground.
Did I not triple-form'd Geryon fell?
Or did I fear the triple Dog of Hell?
Did not these Hands the Bull's armed Forehead hold?
Are not our mighty Toils in Elis told?
Do not Stymphalian Lakes proclaim thy Fame?
And fair Parthenian Woods resound thy Name?
Who seized the golden Belt of Thermodon?
And who the Dragon-guarded Apples won?
Could the fierce Centaur's Strength my Force withstand,
Or the fell Boar that spoiled the Arcadian Land?
Did not these Arms the Hydra's Rage subdue,
Who from his Wounds to double Fury grew?
What if the Thracian Horses, fat with Gore,
Who human Bodies in their Mangers tore,
I saw, and with their barbarous Lord o'erthrew?
What if these Hands Nemaea's Lion slew?
Did not this Neck the heavenly Globe sustain?
The female Partner of the Thund'rer's Reign
Fatigued, at length suspends her harsh Commands,
Yet no Fatigue has slack'd these valiant Hands.
But now new Plagues pursue me; neither Force,
Nor Arms, nor Darts can stop their raging Course.
Devouring Flame through my racked Entrails strays,
And on my Lungs and shrivelled Muscles preys.
Yet still Eurystheus breathes the vital Air.
What Mortal now shall seek the Gods with Prayer?
The Transformation of LYCHAS into a Rock.
The Hero said; and with the Torture stung,
Furious over OEte's lofty Hills he sprung.
Stuck with the Shaft, thus scours the Tiger round,
And seeks the flying Author of his Wound.
Now might you see him trembling, now he vents
His anguish'd Soul in Groans and loud Laments;
He strives to tear the clinging Vest in vain,
And with up-rooted Forests strows the Plain;
Now kindling into Rage, his Hands he rears,
And to his kindred Gods directs his Prayers.
When Lychas, lo, he spies; who trembling flew,
And in a hollow Rock concealed from View,
Had shunned his Wrath. Now Grief renewed his Pain,
His Madness chaff'd, and thus he raves again.
Lychas, to thee alone my Fate I owe,
Who bore the Gift, the Cause of all my Woe.
The Youth all pale, with shivering Fear was stung,
And vain Excuses faulter'd on his Tongue.
Alcides snatched him, as with suppliant Face
He strove to clasp his Knees, and beg for Grace:
He tossed him over his Head with airy Course,
And hurled with more than with an Engine's Force;
Far over the Eubaean Main aloof he flies,
And hardens by Degrees amid the Skies.
So show'ry Drops, when chilly Tempests blow,
Thicken at first, then whiten into Snow,
In Balls congealed the rolling Fleeces bound
In solid Hail result upon the Ground.
Thus, whirled with nervous Force through distant Air,
The Purple Tide forsook his Veins, with Fear;
All Moisture left his Limbs. Transformed to Stone,
In ancient Days the craggy Flint was known;
Still in the Eubaean Waves his Front he rears,
Still the small Rock in human Form appears,
And still the Name of hapless Lychas bears.
The Apotheosis of HERCULES.
But now the Hero of immortal Birth
Fells OEte's Forests on the groaning Earth;
A Pile he builds; to Philoctetes' Care
He leaves his deathful Instruments of War;
To him commits those Arrows, which again
Shall see the Bulwarks of the Trojan Reign.
The Son of Paean lights the lofty Pyre,
High round the Structure climbs the greedy Fire;
Placed on the Top, thy nervous Shoulders spread
With the Nemaean Spoils, thy careless Head
Raised on the knotty Club, with Look Divine,
Here thou, dread Hero, of Celestial Line,
Were stretched at Ease; as when a cheerful Guest,
Wine crowned thy Bowls, and Flowers thy Temples dressed.
Now on all Sides the potent Flames aspire,
And crackle round those Limbs that mock the Fire:
A sudden Terror seized the immortal Host,
Who thought the World's professed Defender lost.
This when the Thund'rer saw, with Smiles he cries,
It Is from your Fears, ye Gods, my Pleasures rise;
Joy swells my Breast, that my all-ruling Hand
Over such a grateful People boasts Command,
That you my suffering Progeny would aid;
Though to his Deeds this just Respect be paid,
Me you have obliged. Be all your Fears forborne,
The OEtean Fires do thou, great Hero, scorn.
Who vanquished all things, shall subdue the Flame.
That Part alone of gross maternal Frame
Fire shall devour; while what from me he drew
Shall live immortal, and its Force subdue;
That, when he is dead, I Will raise to Realms above;
May all the Powers the righteous Act approve
If any God dissent, and judge too great
The sacred Honors of the heavenly Seat,
Even he shall own his Deeds deserve the Sky,
Even he reluctant, shall at length comply.
Th'assembled Powers assent. No Frown till now
Had marked with Passion vengeful Juno's Brow.
Mean while whatever was in the Power of Flame
Was all consumed; his Body's nervous Frame
No more was known, of human Form bereft,
The eternal Part of Jove alone was left.
As an old Serpent casts his scaly Vest,
Wreathes in the Sun, in youthful Glory dressed;
So when Alcides mortal Mold resigned,
His better Part enlarged, and grew refined;
August his Visage shone; Almighty Jove
In his swift Carr his honored Offspring drove;
High over the hollow Clouds the Coursers fly,
And lodge the Hero in the starry Sky.
The Transformation of GALANTHIS.
Atlas perceived the Load of Heaven's new Guest.
Revenge still rancour'd in Eurystheus' Breast
Against Alcides' Race. Alcmena goes
To Iole, to vent maternal Woes;
Here she pours forth her Grief, recounts the Spoils
Her Son had bravely reaped in glorious Toils.
This Iole, by Hercules' Commands,
Hyllus had loved, and joined in nuptial Bands.
Her swelling Womb the teeming Birth confessed,
To whom Alcmena thus her Speech addressed.
O, may the Gods protect thee, in that Hour,
When, midst thy Throws, thou call'st the Ilithyian Power!
May no Delays prolong thy racking Pain,
As when I su'd for Juno's Aid in vain.
When now Alcides' mighty Birth drew nigh,
And the tenth Sign rolled forward on the Sky,
My Womb extends with such a mighty Load,
As Jove the Parent of the Burden showed.
I could no more the increasing Smart sustain,
My Horror kindles to recount the Pain;
Cold chills my Limbs while I the Tale pursue,
And now methinks I feel my Pangs anew.
Seven Days and Nights amidst incessant Throws,
Fatigued with Ills I lay, nor knew Repose;
When lifting high my Hands, in Shrieks I prayed,
Implored the Gods, and called Lucina's Aid.
She came, but prejudiced, to give my Fate
A Sacrifice to vengeful Juno's Hate.
She hears the groaning Anguish of my Fits,
And on the Altar at my Door she sits.
Over her left Knee her crossing Leg she cast,
Then knits her Fingers close, and wrings them fast:
This stayed the Birth; in mutt'ring Verse she prayed,
The mutt'ring Verse the unfinished Birth delayed.
Now with fierce Struggles, raging with my Pain,
At Jove's Ingratitude I rave in vain.
How did I wish for Death! such Groans I sent,
As might have made the flinty Heart relent.
Now the Cadmeian Matrons round me press,
Offer their Vows, and seek to bring Redress;
Among the Theban Dames Galanthis stands,
Strong limbed, red hair'd, and just to my Commands:
She first perceived that all these racking Woes
From the persisting Hate of Juno rose.
As here and there she passed, by chance she sees
The scated Goddess; on her close-press'd Knees
Her fast-knit Hands she leans; with cheerful Voice
Galanthis cries, Whoever thou art, rejoice,
Congratulate the Dame, she lies at Rest,
At length the Gods Alcmena's Womb have blessed.
Swift from her Seat the startled Goddess springs,
No more concealed, her Hands abroad she flings;
The Charm unloos'd, the Birth my Pangs relieved;
Galanthis' Laughter vexed the Power deceived.
Fame says, the Goddess dragged the laughing Maid
Fast by the Hair; in vain her Force essayed
Her groveling Body from the Ground to rear;
Changed to Fore-feet her shrinking Arms appear:
Her hairy Back her former Hue retains,
The Form alone is lost; her Strength remains;
Who, since the Lie did from her Mouth proceed,
Shall from her pregnant Mouth bring forth her Breed;
Nor shall she quit her long frequented Home,
But haunt those Houses where she loved to roam.
The Fable of DRYOPE.
By Mr. POPE.
She said, and for her lost Galanthis sighs;
When the fair Consort of her Son replies;
Since you a Servant's ravished Form bemoan,
And kindly sigh for Sorrows not your own,
Let me (if Tears and Grief permit) relate
A nearer Woe, a Sister's stranger Fate.
No Nymph of all Oechalia could compare
For beauteous Form with Dryope the Fair;
Her tender Mother's only Hope and Pride,
(My self the Offspring of a second Bride.)
This Nymph, compressed by him who rules the Day,
Whom Delphi and the Delian Isle obey,
Andraemon loved; and blessed in all those Charms
That pleased a God, succeeded to her Arms.
A Lake there was, with shelving Banks around,
Whose verdant Summit fragrant Myrtles crowned.
Those Shades, unknowing of the Fates, she sought,
And to the Naiads flowery Garlands brought;
Her smiling Babe (a pleasing Charge) she pressed
Between her Arms, and nourished at her Breast.
Not distant far a watery Lotos grows;
The Spring was new, and all the verdant Boughs,
Adorned with Blossoms, promised Fruits that vye
In glowing Colors with the Tyrian Dye.
Of these she cropped, to please her Infant Son,
And I my self the same rash Act had done,
But, lo! I saw (as near her Side I stood)
The violated Blossoms drop with Blood;
Upon the Tree I cast a frightful Look,
The trembling Tree with sudden Horror shook.
Lotis the Nymph (if rural Tales be true)
As from Priapus' lawless Lust she flew,
Forsook her Form; and fixing here, became
A flowery Plant, which still preserves her Name.
This Change unknown, astonished at the Sight,
My trembling Sister strove to urge her Flight;
Yet first the Pardon of the Nymphs implored,
And those offended Sylvan Powers adored:
But when she backward would have fled, she found
Her stiff'ning Feet were rooted to the Ground:
In vain to free her fastened Feet she strove,
And as she struggles, only moves above;
She feels the incroaching Bark around her grow,
By slow Degrees, and cover all below:
Surprised at this, her trembling Hand she heaves
To rend her Hair; her Hand is filled with Leaves;
Where late was Hair, the shooting Leaves are seen
To rise, and shade her with a sudden Green.
The Child Amphisus, to her Bosom pressed,
Perceived a colder and a harder Breast,
And found the Springs, that never 'till then denied
Their milky Moisture, on a sudden dried.
I saw, unhappy, what I now relate,
And stood the helpless Witness of thy Fate;
Embraced thy Boughs, the rising Bark delayed,
There wished to grow, and mingle Shade with Shade.
Behold Andraemon and the unhappy Sire
Appear, and for their Dryope enquire;
A springing Tree for Dryope they find,
And print warm Kisses on the panting Rind;
Prostrate, with Tears their Kindred Plant bedew,
And close embraced, as to the Roots they grew.
The Face was all that now remained of thee;
No more a Woman, nor yet quite a Tree:
Thy Branches hung with humid Pearls appear,
From every Leaf distills a trickling Tear;
And strait a Voice, while yet a Voice remains,
Thus through the trembling Boughs in Sighs complains.
If to the Wretched any Faith be given,
I swear by all the unpitying Powers of Heaven,
No wilful Crime this heavy Vengeance bred,
In mutual Innocence our Lives we led.
If this be false, let these new Greens decay,
Let sounding Axes lop my Limbs away,
And crackling Flames on all my Honors prey.
Now from my branching Arms this Infant bear,
Let some kind Nurse supply a Mother's Care;
Yet to his Mother let him often be led,
Sport in her Shades, and in her Shades be fed;
Teach him, when first his Infant Voice shall frame
Imperfect Words, and lisp his Mother's Name,
To hail this Tree, and say with weeping Eyes,
Within this Plant my hapless Parent lies;
And when in Youth he seeks the shady Woods,
Oh, let him fly the crystal Lakes and Floods,
Nor touch the fatal Flowers; but warned by me,
Believe a Goddess shrin'd in every Tree.
My Sire, my Sister, and my Spouse farewell!
If in your Breasts or Love or Pity dwell,
Protect your Plant, nor let my Branches feel
The browzing Cattle, or the piercing Steel.
Farewell! and since I cannot bend to join
My Lips to yours, advance at least to mine.
My Son, thy Mother's parting Kiss receive,
While yet thy Mother has a Kiss to give.
I can no more; the creeping Rind invades
My closing Lips, and hides my Head in Shades:
Remove your Hands; the Bark shall soon suffice,
Without their Aid, to seal these dying Eyes.
She ceased at once to speak, and ceased to be;
And all the Nymph was lost within the Tree:
Yet latent Life through her new Branches reigned,
And long the Plant a human Heat retained.
Continued by Mr. GAY.
IOLAUS restored to Youth.
While Iole the fatal Change declares,
Alcmena's pitying Hand often wiped her Tears.
Grief too streamed down her Cheeks; soon Sorrow flies,
And rising Joy the trickling Moisture dries,
Lo Iolaus stands before their Eyes.
A Youth he stood; and the soft Down began
Over his smooth Chin to spread, and promise Man.
Hebe submitted to her Husband's Prayers,
Instilled new Vigor, and restored his Years.
The Prophecy of THEMIS.
Now from her Lips a solemn Oath had past,
That Iolaus this Gift alone should taste,
Had not just Themis thus maturely said,
(Which checked her Vow, and awed the blooming Maid.)
Thebes is embroiled in War. Capaneus stands
Invincible, but by the Thund'rer's Hands.
Ambition shall the guilty Eteocles and Polynices.
Brothers fire,
Both rush to mutual Wounds, and both expire.
The reeling Earth shall open her gloomy Womb,
Where the Amphiaraus.
yet breathing Bard shall find his Tomb.
The Alemaeon.
Son shall bathe his Hands in Parent's Blood,
And in one Act be both unjust and good.
Of Home and Sense deprived, wherever he flies,
The Furies and his Mother's Ghost he spies.
His Wife the fatal Bracelet shall implore,
And Phegeus stain his Sword in Kindred Gore.
Callirhoe shall then with suppliant Prayer
Prevail on Jupiter's relenting Ear.
Jove shall with Youth her Infant Sons inspire,
And bid their Bosoms glow with manly Fire.
The Debate of the Gods.
When Themis thus with prescient Voice had spoke,
Among the Gods a various Murmur broke;
Dissension rose in each immortal Breast,
That one should grant what was denied the rest.
Aurora for her aged Spouse complains,
And Ceres grieves for Jason's freezing Veins;
Vulcan would Erichthonius' Years renew,
Her future Race the Care of Venus drew,
She would Anchises' blooming Age restore;
A different Care employed each heavenly Power:
Thus various Interests did their Jars increase,
Till Jove arose; he spoke, their Tumults cease.
Is any Reverence to our Presence given,
Then why this Discord among the Powers of Heaven?
Who can the settled Will of Fate subdue?
'Twas by the Fates that Iolaus knew
A second Youth. The Fate's determined Doom
Shall give Callirhoe's Race a youthful Bloom.
Arms nor Ambition can this Power obtain;
Quell your Desires; even me the Fates restrain.
Could I their Will control, no rolling Years
Had Aeacus bent down with Silver Hairs;
Then Rhadamanthus still had Youth possessed,
And Minos with eternal Bloom been blessed.
Jove's Words the Synod moved; the Powers give over,
And urge in vain unjust Complaint no more.
Since Rhadamanthus' Veins now slowly flowed,
And Aeacus and Minos bore the Load;
Minos, who in the Flower of Youth and Fame,
Made mighty Nations tremble at his Name,
Infirm with Age, the proud Miletus fears,
Vain of his Birth, and in the Strength of Years,
And now regarding all his Realms as lost,
He durst not force him from his native Coast.
But you by choice, Miletus, fled his Reign,
And thy swift Vessel plowed the Aegean Main;
On Asiatick Shores a Town you frame,
Which still is honored with the Founder's Name.
Here you Cyanee knew, the beauteous Maid,
As on her Maeander.
Father's winding Banks she strayed:
Caunus and Byblis hence their Lineage trace,
The double Offspring of your warm Embrace.
The Passion of BYBLIS.
By STEPHEN HARVEY, Esquire
Let the sad Fate of wretched Byblis prove
A dismal Warning to unlawful Love;
One Birth gave Being to the hapless Pair,
But more was Caunus than a Sister's Care;
Unknown she loved, for yet the gentle Fire
Rose not in Flames, nor kindled to Desire;
'Twas thought no Sin to wonder at his Charms,
Hang on his Neck, and languish in his Arms;
Thus winged with Joy, fled the soft Hours away,
And all the fatal Guilt on harmless Nature lay.
But Love (too soon from Piety declined)
Insensibly depraved her yielding Mind.
Dressed she appears, with nicest Art adorned,
And every Youth, but her loved Brother, scorned;
For him alone she labored to be fair,
And cursed all Charms that might with hers compare.
'Twas she, and only she, must Caunus please,
Sick at her Heart, yet knew not her Disease:
She called him Lord, for Brother was a Name
Too cold, and dull for her aspiring Flame;
And when he spoke, if Sister, he replied,
For Byblis change that frozen Word, she cried;
Yet waking still she watched her struggling Breast,
And Love's Approaches were in vain addressed,
Till gentle Sleep an easy Conquest made,
And in her soft Embrace the Conqueror was laid.
But oh too soon the pleasing Vision fled,
And left her blushing on the conscious Bed:
Ah me! (she cried) how monstrous do I seem?
Why these wild Thoughts? and this incestuous Dream?
Envy herself ('it is true) must own his Charms,
But what is Beauty in a Sister's Arms?
Oh were I not that despicable she,
How blessed, how pleased, how happy should I be!
But unregarded now must bear my Pain,
And, but in Dreams, my Wishes can obtain.
O Sea-born Goddess! with thy wanton Boy!
Was ever such a charming Scene of Joy?
Such perfect Bliss! such ravishing Delight!
Never hid before in the kind Shades of Night.
How pleased my Heart! in what sweet Raptures tossed?
Even Life itself in the soft Combat lost,
While breathless he on my heaved Bosom lay,
And snatched the Treasures of my Soul away.
If the bare Fancy so affects my Mind,
How should I rave if to the Substance joined?
Oh, gentle Caunus! quit thy hated Line,
Or let thy Parents be no longer mine!
Oh that in common all things were enjoyed,
But those alone who have our Hopes destroyed.
Were I a Princess, thou an humble Swain,
The proudest Kings should rival thee in vain.
It cannot be, alas! the dreadful Ill
Is fixed by Fate, and he is my Brother still.
Hear me, ye Gods! I must have Friends in Heaven,
For Jove himself was to a Sister given:
But what are their Prerogatives above,
To the short Liberties of humane Love?
Fantastic Thoughts! down, down, forbidden Fires,
Or instant Death extinguish my Desires,
Strict Virtue, then, with thy malicious Leave,
Without a Crime I may a Kiss receive:
But say should I in spite of Laws comply,
Yet cruel Caunus might himself deny,
No Pity take of an afflicted Maid,
(For Love's sweet Game must be by Couples played.)
Yet why should Youth and Charms like mine despair?
Such Fears never startled the Aeolian Pair;
No Ties of Blood could their full Hopes destroy,
They broke through all for the prevailing Joy;
And who can tell but Caunus too may be
Racked and tormented in his Breast for me?
Like me, to the extremest Anguish drove,
Like me, just waking from a Dream of Love?
But stay! Oh whither would my Fury run!
What Arguments I urge to be undone!
Away fond Byblis, quench these guilty Flames;
Caunus thy Love but as a Brother claims;
Yet had he first been touched with Love of me,
The charming Youth could I despairing see?
Oppressed with Grief, and dying by Disdain?
Ah no! too sure I should have eased his Pain?
Since then, if Caunus asked me, it were done;
Asking my self, what Dangers can I run?
But can thou ask? and see that Right betrayed,
From Pyrrha down to thy whole Sex conveyed?
That self-denying Gift we all enjoy,
Of wishing to be won, yet seeming to be coy.
Well then, for once, let a fond Mistress woe,
The Force of Love no Custom can subdue;
This frantic Passion he by Words shall know,
Soft as the melting Heart from whence they flow.
The Pencil then in her fair Hand she held,
By Fear discouraged, but by Love compelled;
She writes, then blots, writes on, and blots again,
Likes it as fit, then razes it as vain:
Shame and Assurance in her Face appear,
And a faint Hope just yielding to Despair;
Sister was wrote, and blotted as a Word
Which she, and Caunus too (she hoped) abhorred;
But now resolved to be no more controlled
By scrup'lous Virtue, thus her Grief she told.
Thy Lover (gentle Caunus) wishes thee
That Health, which thou alone can give to me.
O charming Youth, the Gift I ask bestow,
E're thou the Name of the fond Writer know;
To thee without a Name I would be known,
Since knowing that, my Frailty I must own.
Yet why should I my wretched Name conceal?
When thousand Instances my Flames reveal*
Wan Looks and weeping Eyes have spoke my Pain,
And Sighs discharged from my heaved Heart in vain;
Had I not wished my Passion might be seen,
What could such Fondness and Embraces mean?
Such Kisses too! (Oh heedless lovely Boy)
Without a Crime no Sister could enjoy:
Yet (though extremest Rage has racked my Soul,
And raging Fires in my parched Bosom roll)
Be Witness, Gods! how piously I strove,
To rid my Thoughts of this enchanting Love.
But who could escape so fierce and sure a Dart,
Aimed at a tender and defenseless Heart?
Alas! what Maid could suffer I have born,
E're the dire Secret from my Breast was torn;
To thee a helpless vanquished Wretch I come,
It Is you alone can save, or give my Doom;
My Life or Death this Moment you may choose,
Yet think, Oh think, no hated Stranger sues,
No Foe, but one, alas! too near allied,
And wishing still much nearer to be tied.
The Forms of Decency let Age debate,
And Virtue's Rules by their cold Morals state;
Their ebbing Joys give Leisure to enquire,
And blame those noble Flights our Youth inspire:
Where Nature kindly summons let us go,
Our sprightly Years no Bounds in Love should know,
Should feel no Check of Guilt, and fear no Ill;
Lovers and Gods act all things at their Will:
We gain one Blessing from our hated Kin,
Since our Paternal Freedom hides the Sin;
Uncensur'd in each others Arms we lie,
Think then how easy to complete our Joy.
Oh pardon, and oblige a blushing Maid,
Whose Rage the Pride of her vain Sex betrayed;
Nor let my Tomb thus mournfully complain,
Here Byblis lies, by her loved Caunus slain.
Forced here to end, she with a falling Tear
Tempered the pliant Wax, which did the Signet bear:
The curious Cipher was impressed by Art,
But Love had stamped one deeper in her Heart;
Her Page, a Youth of Confidence and Skill,
(Secret as Night) stood waiting on her Will;
Sighing (she cried) bear this, thou faithful Boy,
To my sweet Part'ner in eternal Joy:
Here a long Pause her secret Guilt confessed,
And when at length she would have spoke the rest,
Half the dear Name lay buried in her Breast.
Thus as he listened to her vain Command,
Down fell the Letter from her trembling Hand.
The Omen shocked her Soul: Yet go, she cried;
Can a Request from Byblis be denied?
To the Maeandrian Youth's this Message born,
The half-read Lines by his fierce Rage were torn;
Hence, hence, he cried, thou Pandar to her Lust,
Bear hence the Triumph of thy impious Trust:
Thy instant Death will but divulge her Shame,
Or thy Life's Blood should quench the guilty Flame.
Frighted, from threatening Caunus he withdrew,
And with the dreadful News to his lost Mistress flew
The sad Repulse so struck the wounded Fair,
Her Sense was buried in her wild Despair;
Pale was her Visage, as the ghastly Dead,
And her scared Soul from the sweet Mansion fled;
Yet with her Life renewed, her Love returns,
And faintly thus her cruel Fate she mourns:
It Is just, ye Gods! was my false Reason blind?
To write a Secret of this tender kind?
With female Craft I should at first have strove,
By dubious Hints to sound his distant Love;
And tried those useful, though dissembled, Arts
Which Women practice on disdainful Hearts:
I should have watched whence the black Storm might rise,
E're I had trusted the unfaithful Skies.
Now on the rouling Billows I am tossed,
And with extended Sails, on the blind Shelves am lost.
Did not indulgent Heaven my Doom foretell,
When from my Hand the fatal Letter fell?
What Madness seized my Soul? and urged me on
To take the only Course to be undone?
I could my self have told the moving Tale
With such alluring Grace as must prevail;
Then had his Eyes beheld my blushing Fears,
My rising Sighs, and my descending Tears;
Round his dear Neck these Arms I then had spread,
And, if rejected, at his Feet been dead:
If singly these had not his Thoughts inclined,
Yet all united would have shocked his Mind.
Perhaps, my careless Page might be in fault,
And in a luckless Hour the fatal Message brought;
Business, and worldly Thoughts might fill his Breast,
Sometimes even Love itself may be an irksome Guest:
He could not else have treated me with Scorn,
For Caunus was not of a Tygress born;
Nor Steel nor Adamant has fenced his Heart,
Like mine it is naked to the burning Dart.
Away false Fears! he must, he shall be mine,
In Death alone I will my Claim resign;
It Is vain to wish my written Crime unknown,
And for my Guilt much vainer to atone.
Repulsed, and baffled, fiercer still she burns,
And Caunus with Disdain her impious Love returns.
He saw no End of her injurious Flame,
And fled his Country to avoid the Shame.
Forsaken Byblis, who had Hopes no more,
Burst out in Rage, and her loose Robes she tore;
With her fair Hands she smote her tender Breast,
And to the wondering World her Love confessed;
Over Hills and Dales, over Rocks and Streams she flew,
But still in vain did her wild Lust pursue:
Wearied at length, on the cold Earth she fell,
And now in Tears alone could her sad Story tell.
Relenting Gods, in Pity, fixed her there,
And to a Fountain turned the weeping Fair.
The Fable of IPHIS and IANTHE.
By Mr. DRYDEN.
The Fame of this, perhaps, through Crete had flown:
But Crete had newer Wonders of her own,
In Iphis changed: For, near the Gnossian Bounds,
(As loud Report the Miracle resounds)
At Phoestus dwelt a Man of honest Blood,
But meanly born, and not so rich as good;
Esteemed and loved by all the Neighborhood;
Who to his Wife, before the Time assigned
For Childbirth came, thus bluntly spoke his Mind.
If Heaven, said Lygdus, will vouchsafe to hear,
I have but two Petitions to prefer;
Short Pains for thee, for me a Son and Heir.
Girls cost as many Throws in bringing forth;
Besides, when born, the Titts are little worth;
Weak puling things, unable to sustain
Their Share of Labor, and their Bread to gain.
If, therefore, thou a Creature shall produce,
Of so great Charges, and so little Use,
(Bear witness, Heaven, with what Reluctance)
Her hapless Innocence I doom to dye.
He said, and Tears the common Grief display,
Of him who bad, and her who must obey.
Yet Telethusa still persists, to find
Fit Arguments to move a Father's Mind;
TO extend his Wishes to a larger Scope,
And in one Vessel not confine his Hope.
Lygdus continues hard: Her Time drew near,
And she her heavy Load could scarcely bear;
When, slumbering, in the latter Shades of Night,
Before the Approaches of returning Light,
She saw, or thought she saw, before her Bed,
A glorious Train, and Isis at their Head:
Her moony Horns were on her Forehead placed,
And yellow Sheaves her shining Temples graced:
A Mitre, for a Crown, she wore on high;
The Dog and dappl'd Bull were waiting by;
Osyris, sought along the Banks of Nile;
The silent God; the sacred Crocodile:
And, last, a long Procession moving on,
With Timbrels, that assist the laboring Moon.
Her Slumbers seemed dispelled, and, broad awake,
She heard a Voice, that thus distinctly spoke.
My Votary, thy Babe from Death defend,
Nor fear to save whatever the Gods will send.
Delude with Art thy Husband's dire Decree;
When Danger calls, repose thy Trust on me:
And know thou have not served a thankless Deity.
This Promise made, with Night the Goddess fled;
With Joy the Woman wakes, and leaves her Bed;
Devoutly lifts her spotless Hands on high,
And prays the Powers their Gift to ratify.
Now grinding Pains proceed to bearing Throws,
Till its own Weight the Burden did disclose.
'Twas of the beauteous Kind, and brought to Light
With Secrecy, to shun the Father's Sight.
The indulgent Mother did her Care employ,
And passed it on her Husband for a Boy.
The Nurse was conscious of the Fact alone;
The Father paid his Vows as for a Son;
And called him Iphis, by a common Name,
Which either Sex with equal Right may claim.
Iphis his Grandsire was; the Wife was pleased,
Of half the Fraud by Fortune's Favor eased:
The doubtful Name was used without Deceit,
And Truth was covered with a pious Cheat.
The Habit showed a Boy, the beauteous Face
With manly Fierceness mingled female Grace.
Now thirteen Years of Age were swiftly run,
When the fond Father thought the time drew on
Of settling in the World his only Son.
Ianthe was his Choice; so wondrous fair,
Her Form alone with Iphis could compare;
A Neighbor's Daughter of his own Degree,
And not more blessed with Fortune's Goods than he.
They soon espoused; for they with Ease were joined,
Who were before contracted in the Mind.
Their Age the same, their Inclinations too;
And bred together, in one School they grew.
Thus, fatally disposed to mutual Fires,
They felt, before they knew, the same Desires.
Equal their Flame, unequal was their Care;
One loved with Hope, one languish'd in Despair.
The Maid accused the lingering Days alone:
For whom she thought a Man, she thought her own.
But Iphis bends beneath a greater Grief;
As fiercely burns, but hopes for no Relief.
Even her Despair adds Fuel to her Fire;
A Maid with Madness does a Maid desire.
And, scarce refraining Tears, Alas, said she,
What Issue of my Love remains for me!
How wild a Passion works within my Breast,
With what prodigious Flames am I possessed!
Could I the Care of Providence deserve,
Heaven must destroy me, if it would preserve.
And that is my Fate; or sure it would have sent
Some usual Evil for my Punishment:
Not this unkindly Curse; to rage and burn,
Where Nature shows no Prospect of Return.
Nor Cows for Cows consume with fruitless Fire,
Nor Mares, when hot, their Fellow-Mares desire:
The Father of the Fold supplies his Ewes;
The Stag through secret Woods his Hind pursues;
And Birds for Mates the Males of their own Species choose.
Her Females Nature guards from Female Flame,
And joins two Sexes to preserve the Game:
Would I were nothing, or not what I am!
Crete, famed for Monsters, wanted of her Store,
Till my new Love produced one Monster more.
The Daughter of the Sun a Bull desired,
And yet even then a Male a Female fired:
Her Passion was extravagantly new,
But mine is much the madder of the two.
To things impossible she was not bent,
But found the Means to compass her Intent.
To cheat his Eyes she took a different Shape;
Yet still she gained a Lover and a Leap.
Should all the Wit of all the World conspire,
Should Daedalus assist my wild Desire,
What Art can make me able to enjoy,
Or what can change Ianthe to a Boy?
Extinguish then thy Passion, hopeless Maid,
And recollect thy Reason for thy Aid.
Know what thou art, and love as Maidens ought,
And drive these Golden Wishes from thy Thought.
Thou can not hope thy fond Desires to gain;
Where Hope is wanting, Wishes are in vain.
And yet no Guards against our Joys conspire;
No jealous Husband hinders our Desire:
My Parents are propitious to my Wish,
And she herself consenting to the Bliss.
All things concur to prosper our Design;
All things to prosper any Love but mine.
And yet I never can enjoy the Fair;
It Is past the Power of Heaven to grant my Prayer.
Heaven has been kind, as far as Heaven can be;
Our Parents with our own Desires agree;
But Nature, stronger than the Gods above,
Refuses her Assistance to my Love;
She sets the Bar that causes all my Pain;
One Gift refused, makes all their Bounty vain.
And now the happy Day is just at hand,
To bind our Hearts in Hymen's holy Band:
Our Hearts, but not our Bodies: Thus accursed,
In midst of Water I complain of Thirst.
Why come thou, Juno, to these barren Rites,
To bless a Bed defrauded of Delights?
But why should Hymen lift his Torch on high,
To see two Brides in cold Embraces lie?
Thus Lovesick Iphis her vain Passion mourns;
With equal Ardour fair Ianthe burns,
Invoking Hymen's Name and Juno's Power,
To speed the Work, and haste the happy Hour.
She hopes, while Telethusa fears the Day,
And strives to interpose some new Delay:
Now feigns a Sickness, now is in a Fright
For this bad Omen, or that boding Sight.
But having done whatever she could devise,
And emptied all her Magazine of Lies,
The Time approached; the next ensuing Day
The fatal Secret must to Light betray.
Then Telethusa had recourse to Prayer,
She, and her Daughter with dishevelled Hair;
Trembling with Fear, great Isis they adored,
Embraced her Altar, and her Aid implored.
Fair Queen, who do on fruitful Egypt smile,
Who sway'st the Scepter of the Pharian Isle,
And sev'n-fold Falls of disemboguing Nile;
Relieve, in this our last Distress, she said,
A suppliant Mother, and a mournful Maid.
Thou, Goddess, thou were present to my Sight;
Revealed I saw thee, by thy own fair Light:
I saw thee in my Dream, as now I see,
With all thy Marks of awful Majesty:
The glorious Train that compassed thee around;
And heard the hollow Timbrels holy Sound.
Thy Words I noted, which I still retain;
Let not thy sacred Oracles be vain.
That Iphis lives, that I my self am free
From Shame and Punishment, I owe to thee.
On thy Protection all our Hopes depend:
Thy Counsel saved us, let thy Power defend.
Her Tears pursued her Words; and while she spoke
The Goddess nodded, and her Altar shook:
The Temple Doors, as with a Blast of Wind,
Were heard to clap; the Lunar Horns that bind
The Brows of Isis, cast a Blaze around;
The trembling Timbrel made a murmuring Sound.
Some Hopes these happy Omens did impart;
Forth went the Mother with a beating Heart:
Not much in Fear, nor fully satisfied;
But Iphis followed with a larger Stride:
The Whiteness of her Skin forsook her Face;
Her Looks emboldened, with an awful Grace;
Her Features and her Strength together grew,
And her long Hair to curling Locks withdrew.
Her sparkling Eyes with manly Vigor shone,
Big was her Voice, audacious was her Tone.
The latent Parts, at length revealed, began
To shoot, and spread, and burnish into Man.
The Maid becomes a Youth; no more delay
Your Vows, but look, and confidently pay.
Their Gifts the Parents to the Temple bear:
The Votive Tables this Inscription wear;
Iphis the Man, has to the Goddess paid
The Vows that Iphis offered when a Maid.
Now when the Star of Day had shown his Face,
Venus and Juno with their Presence grace
The Nuptial Rites, and Hymen from above
Descending to complete their happy Love:
The Gods of Marriage lend their mutual Aid;
And the warm Youth enjoys the lovely Maid.
The End of the Ninth Book.
To the Rt. Honble. ye Lady Viscountess Scudamo^

OVID's METAMORPHOSES. BOOK X.
Translated by Mr. DRYDEN, Mr. CONGREVE, and Others.
The Story of ORPHEUS and EURYDICE.
By Mr. CONGREVE.
THENCE, in his Saffron Robe, for distant Thrace,
Hymen departs, through Air's unmeasured Space;
By Orpheus called, the Nuptial Power attends,
But with ill-omen'd Augury descends;
Nor cheerful looked the God, nor prosperous spoke,
Nor blazed his Torch, but wept in hissing Smoke.
In vain they whirl it round, in vain they shake,
No rapid Motion can its Flames awake.
With Dread these inauspicious Signs were viewed,
And soon a more disastrous End ensued;
For as the Bride, amid the Naiad Train,
Ran joyful, sporting over the flowery Plain,
A venomed Viper bit her as she passed;
Instant she fell, and sudden breathed her last.
When long his Loss the Thracian had deplored,
Not by superior Powers to be restored;
Inflamed by Love, and urged by deep Despair,
He leaves the Realms of Light, and upper Air;
Daring to tread the dark Tenarian Road,
And tempt the Shades in their obscure Abode;
Through gliding Specter of th'Interr'd to go,
And Phantom People of the World below:
Persephone he seeks, and him who reigns
Over Ghosts, and Hell's uncomfortable Plains.
Arrived, he, tuning to his Voice his Strings,
Thus to the King and Queen of Shadows sings.
Ye Powers, who under Earth your Realms extend,
To whom all Mortals must one Day descend;
If here it is granted sacred Truth to tell:
I come not curious to explore your Hell;
Nor come to boast (by vain Ambition fired)
How Cerberus at my Approach retired.
My Wife alone I seek; for her loved sake
These Terrors I support, this Journey take.
She, luckless wandering, or by Fate misled,
Chanced on a lurking Viper's Crest to tread;
The vengeful Beast, enflamed with Fury, starts,
And through her Heel his deathful Venom darts.
Thus was she snatched untimely to her Tomb;
Her growing Years cut short, and springing Bloom.
Long I my Loss endeavored to sustain,
And strongly strove, but strove, alas, in vain:
At length I yielded, won by mighty Love;
Well known is that Omnipotence above!
But here, I doubt, his unfelt Influence fails;
And yet a Hope within my Heart prevails,
That here, even here, he has been known of old;
At least, if Truth be by Tradition told;
If Fame of former Rapes Belief may find,
You both by Love, and Love alone, were joined.
Now, by the Horrors which these Realms surround;
By the vast Chaos of these Depths profound;
By the sad Silence which eternal reigns
Over all the Waste of these wide-stretching Plains;
Let me again Eurydice receive,
Let Fate her quick-spun Thread of Life re-weave.
All our Possessions are but Loans from you,
And soon, or late, you must be paid your Due;
Hither we haste to Human-kind's last Seat,
Your endless Empire, and our sure Retreat.
She too, when ripened Years she shall attain,
Must, of avoidless Right, be yours again:
I but the transient use of that require,
Which soon, too soon, I must resign entire.
But if the Destinies refuse my Vow,
And no Remission of her Doom allow;
Know, I Am determined to return no more;
So both retain, or both to Life restore.
Thus, while the Bard melodiously complains,
And to his Lyre accords his vocal Strains,
The very bloodless Shades Attention keep,
And silent, seem compassionate to weep;
Even Tantalus his Flood unthirsty views,
Nor flies the Stream, nor he the Stream pursues;
Ixion's wondering Wheel its Whirl suspends,
And the voracious Vultur, charmed, attends;
No mroe the Belides their Toil bemoan,
And Sisiphus reclined, sits listening on his Stone.
Then first ('it is said) by sacred Verse subdued,
The Furies felt their Cheeks with Tears bedewed:
Nor could the rigid King or Queen of Hell,
The Impulse of Pity in their Hearts, repel.
Now, from a Troop of Shades that last arrived,
Eurydice was called, and stood revived.
Slow she advanced, and halting seemed to feel
The fatal Wound, yet painful in her Heel.
Thus he obtains the Suit so much desired,
On strict Observance of the Terms required:
For if, before he reach the Realms of Air,
He backward cast his Eyes to view the Fair,
The forfeit Grant, that Instant, void is made,
And she for ever left a lifeless Shade.
Now through the noiseless Throng their Way they bend,
And both with Pain the rugged Road ascend;
Dark was the Path, and difficult, and steep,
And thick with Vapors from the smoaky Deep.
They well-nigh now had passed the Bounds of Night,
And just approached the Margin of the Light,
When, he mistrusting, lest her Steps might stray,
And gladsom of the Glimpse of dawning Day,
His longing Eyes, impatient, backward cast
To catch a Lover's Look, but looked his last;
For, instant dying, she again descends,
While he to empty Air his Arms extends.
Again she died, nor yet her Lord reproved;
What could she say, but that too well he loved?
One last Farewell she spoke, which scarce he heard;
So soon she dropped, so sudden disappeared.
All stunned he stood, when thus his Wife he viewed
By second Fate and double Death subdued:
Not more Amazement by that Wretch was shown,
Whom Cerberus beholding, turned to Stone;
Nor Ollenus could more astonished look,
When on himself Lethaea's Fault he took,
His beauteous Wife, who too secure had dared
Her Face to vye with Goddesses compared:
Once joined by Love, they stand united still,
Turned to contiguous Rocks, on Ida's Hill.
Now to repass the Styx in vain he tries,
Charon averse, his pressing Suit denies.
Seven Days entire, along the infernal Shores,
Disconsolate, the Bard Eurydice deplores;
Defiled with Filth his Robe, with Tears his Cheeks,
No Sustenance but Grief and Cares he seeks:
Of rigid Fate incessant he complains,
And Hell's inexorable Gods arraigns.
This ended, to high Rhodope he hastes,
And Haemus' Mountain, bleek with Northern Blasts.
And now his yearly Race the circling Sun
Had thrice complete through watery Pisces run,
Since Orpheus fled the Face of Womankind,
And all soft Union with the Sex declined.
Whether his ill Success this Change had bred,
Or binding Vows made to his former Bed;
Whatever the Cause, in vain the Nymphs contest,
With rival Eyes to warm his frozen Breast:
For every Nymph with Love his Lays inspired,
But every Nymph repulsed, with Grief retired.
A Hill there was, and on that Hill a Mead,
With Verdure thick, but destitute of Shade.
Where, now, the Muse's Son no sooner sings,
No sooner strikes his sweet resounding Strings,
But distant Groves the flying Sounds receive,
And listening Trees their roots Stations leave;
Themselves transplanting, all around they grow,
And various Shades their various Kinds bestow.
Here, tall Chaonian Oaks their Branches spread,
While weeping Poplars, there erect their Head.
The foodful Esculus, here shoots his Leaves,
That Turf soft Lime-tree, this, fat Beach receives;
Here, brittle Hazels, Laurels here advance,
And there tough Ash to form the Hero's Lance;
Here, Silver Firs with knotless Trunks ascend,
There, Scarlet Oaks beneath their Acorns bend.
That Spot admits the hospitable Plane,
On this, the Maple grows with clouded Grain;
Here, watery Willows are with Lotus seen,
There, Tamarisk, and Box for ever green.
With double Hue here Mirtles grace the Ground,
And Laurestines with purple Berries crowned.
With pliant Feet, now, Ivies this way wind,
Vines yonder rise, and Elms with Vines entwined.
Wild Ornus now, the Pitch-tree next takes root,
And Arbutus adorned with blushing Fruit.
Then, easy-bending Palms, the Victor's Prize,
And Pines erect with bristly Tops arise.
To Rhea grateful still the Pine remains,
For Atys still some Favor she retains,
He once in Human Shape her Breast had warmed,
And now is cherished to a Tree transformed.
The Fable of CYPARISSUS.
Amid the Throng of this promiscuous Wood,
With pointed Top, the taper Cypress stood;
A Tree, which once a Youth, and heavenly fair,
Was of that Deity the darling Care,
Whose Hand adapts, with equal Skill, the Strings
To Bows with which he kills, and Harps to which he sings.
For, heretofore, a mighty Stag was bred,
Which on the fertile Fields of Caea fed;
In Shape and Size he all his Kind excelled,
And to Carthaean Nymphs was sacred held.
His beamy Head, with Branches high displayed,
Afforded to itself an ample Shade;
His Horns were gilt, and his smooth Neck was graced
With Silver Collars thick with Gems enchas'd:
A Silver Boss upon his Forehead hung,
And brazen Pendants in his Earrings rung.
Frequenting Houses, he familiar grew,
And learnt by Custom, Nature to subdue;
Till by degrees, of Fear and Wildness, broke,
Even Stranger Hands his proffered Neck might stroke.
Much was the Beast by Caea's Youth caressed,
But thou, sweet Cyparissus, lov'dst him best:
By thee, to Pastures fresh, he often was led,
By thee, often watered at the Fountain's Head:
His Horns with Garlands, now, by thee were tied,
And, now, thou on his Back would wanton ride;
Now here, now there would bound along the Plains,
Ruling his tender Mouth with purple Reins.
'Twas when the Summer Sun at Noon of Day,
Through glowing Cancer, shot his burning Ray,
'Twas then, the favorite Stag in cool Retreat,
Had sought a Shelter from the scorching Heat;
Along the Grass his weary Limbs he laid,
Inhaling Freshness from the breezy Shade:
When Cyparissus with his pointed Dart,
Unknowing, pierced him to the panting Heart.
But when the Youth, surpised, his Error found,
And saw him dying of the cruel Wound,
Himself he would have slain through desperate Grief;
What said not Phoebus, that might yield Relief!
To cease his Mourning, he the Boy desired,
Or mourn no more than such a Loss required.
But, he, incessant grieved: At length addressed
To the superior Powers a last Request;
Praying, in Expiation of his Crime,
Thenceforth to mourn to all succeeding Time.
And now, of Blood exhausted he appears,
Drained by a Torrent of continual Tears;
The fleshy Color in his Body fades,
And a green Tincture all his Limbs invades;
From his fair Head, where curling Locks late hung,
A horrid Bush with bristled Branches sprung,
Which stiffning by Degrees, its Stem extends,
Till to the starry Skies the Spire ascends.
Apollo sad looked on, and sighing, cried,
Then, be for ever, what thy Prayer implied:
Bemoaned by me, in others, Grief excite;
And still preside at every Funeral Rite.
Continued by Mr. CROXALL.
Thus the sweet Artist in a wondrous Shade
Of verdant Trees, which Harmony had made,
Encircled sat, with his own Triumphs crowned,
Of listening Birds, and Savages around.
Again the trembling Strings he dext'rous tries,
Again from Discord makes soft Music rise.
Then tunes his Voice: O Muse, from whom I sprung,
Jove be my Theme, and Thou inspire my Song.
To Jove my greteful Voice I often have raised,
Often his Almighty Power with Pleasure praised.
I sung the Giants, in a solemn Strain,
Blasted and Thunderstruck on Phlegra's Plain.
Now be my Lire in softer Accents moved,
To sing of blooming Boys, by Gods beloved;
And to relate what Virgins, void of Shame,
Have suffered Vengeance for a lawless Flame.
The King of Gods once felt the burning Joy,
And sighed for lovely Ganimede of Troy:
Long was he puzzled to assume a Shape
Most fit and expeditious for the Rape;
A Bird's was proper, yet he scorns to wear
Any but That which might his Thunder bear.
Down with his masquerading Wings he flies,
And bears the little Trojan to the Skies;
Where now, in Robes of heavenly Purple dressed,
He serves the Nectar at the Almighty's Feast,
To slighted Juno an unwelcome Guest.
HYACINTHUS transformed into a Flower.
By Mr. OZELL.
Phoebus for Thee too, Hyacinth, designed
A Place among the Gods, had Fate been kind:
Yet this he gave; as often as wintry Rains
Are past, and vernal Breezes sooth the Plains,
From the green Turf a purple Flower you rise,
And with your fragrant Breath perfume the Skies.
You when alive were Phoebus' darling Boy;
In you he placed his Heaven, and fixed his Joy:
Their God the Delphic Priests consult in vain;
Eurotas now he loves, and Sparta's Plain:
His Hands the use of Bow, and Harp forget,
And hold the Dogs, or bear the corded Net;
Over hanging Cliffs swift he pursues the Game;
Each Hour his Pleasure, each augments his Flame.
The midday Sun now shone with equal Light
Between the past, and the succeeding Night;
They strip, then, smoothed with suppling Oil, essay
To pitch the rounded Quoit, their wonted Play:
A well-pois'd Disk first hasty Phoebus threw,
It cleft the Air, and whistled as it flew;
It reached the Mark, a most surprising Length;
Which spoke an equal Share of Art, and Strength.
Scarce was it fallen, when with too eager Hand
Young Hyacinth ran to snatch it from the Sand;
But the cursed Orb, which met a stony Soil,
Flew in his Face with violent Recoil.
Both faint, both pale, and breathless now appear,
The Boy with Pain, the amorous God with Fear.
He ran, and raised him bleeding from the Ground,
Chafes his cold Limbs, and wipes the fatal Wound:
Then Herbs of noblest Juice in vain applies;
The Wound is mortal, and his Skill defies.
As in a watered Garden's blooming Walk,
When some rude Hand has bruised its tender Stalk,
A fading Lilly droops its languid Head,
And bends to Earth, its Life and Beauty fled:
So Hyacinth, with Head reclined, decays,
And, sickening, now no more his Charms displays.
O thou art gone, my Boy, Apollo cried,
Defrauded of thy Youth in all its Pride!
Thou, once my Joy, art all my Sorrow now;
And to my guilty Hand my Grief I owe.
Yet from my self I might the Fault remove,
Unless to sport, and play a Fault should prove,
Unless it too were called a Fault to love.
Oh could I for thee, or but with thee, dye!
But cruel Fates to me that Power deny.
Yet on my Tongue thou shall for ever dwell;
Thy Name my Lyre shall sound, my Verse shall tell;
And to a Flower transformed, unheard of yet,
Stamped on thy Leaves my Cries thou shall repeat.
The time shall come, prophetic I foreknow,
When, joined to thee, a mighty Ajax.
Chief shall grow,
And with my Plaints his Name thy Leaf shall show.
While Phoebus thus the Laws of Fate revealed,
Behold, the Blood which stained the verdant Field,
Is Blood no longer; but a Flower full blown
Far brighter than the Tyrian Scarlet shone.
A Lilly's Form it took; its purple Hue
Was all that made a Difference to the View.
Nor stopped he here; the God upon its Leaves
The sad Expression of his Sorrow weaves;
And to this Hour the mournful Purple wears
Ai, Ai, inscribed in funeral Characters.
Nor are the Spartans, who so much are famed
For Virtue, of their Hyacinth ashamed;
But still with pompous Woe and solemn State,
The Hyacinthian Feasts they yearly celebrate.
The Transformations of the CERASTAE, and PROPAETIDES.
Enquire of Amathus, whose wealthy Ground
With Veins of every Metal does abound,
If she to her Propaetides would show
The Honor Sparta does to him allow?
No more, she would say, such Wretches would we grace,
Than those whose crooked Horns deformed their Face,
From thence Cerastae called; an impious Race:
Before whose Gates a reverend Altar stood,
To Jove inscribed, the hospitable God:
This had some Stranger seen with Gore besmeared,
The Blood of Lambs, and Bulls it had appeared:
Their slaughtered Guests it was; not Flock nor Herd.
Venus these barbarous Sacrifices viewed
With just Abhorrence, and with Wrath pursued:
At first, to punish such nefarious Crimes,
Their Towns she meant to leave, her once-lov'd Climes.
But why, said she, for their Offense should I
My dear delightful Plains, and Cities fly?
No, let the impious People, who have sinned,
A Punishment in Death, or Exile find:
If Death, or Exile too severe be thought,
Let them in some vile Shape bemoan their Fault.
While next her Mind a proper Form employs,
Admonished by their Horns, she fixed her Choice.
Their former Crest remains upon their Heads,
And their strong Limbs an Ox's Shape invades.
The blasphemous Propaetides denied
Worship of Venus, and her Power defied:
But soon that Power they felt, the first that sold
Their lewd Embraces to the World for Gold.
Unknowing how to blush, and shameless grown,
A small Transition changes 'em to Stone.
The Story of PYGMALION, and the STATUE.
By Mr. DRYDEN.
Pygmalion loathing their lascivious Life,
Abhorred all Womankind, but most a Wife:
So single chose to live, and shunned to wed,
Well pleased to want a Consort of his Bed.
Yet fearing Idleness, the Nurse of Ill,
In Sculpture exercised his happy Skill;
And carved in Ivory such a Maid, so fair,
As Nature could not with his Art compare,
Were she to work; but in her own Defense
Must take her Pattern here, and copy hence.
Pleased with his Idol, he commends, admires,
Adores; and last, the Thing adored, desires.
A very Virgin in her Face was seen,
And had she moved, a living Maid had been:
One would have thought she could have stirred, but strove
With Modesty, and was ashamed to move.
Art hid with Art, so well performed the Cheat,
It caught the Carver with his own Deceit:
He knows it is Madness, yet he must adore,
And still the more he knows it, loves the more:
The Flesh, or what so seems, he touches often,
Which feels so smooth, that he believes it soft.
Fired with this Thought, at once he strained the Breast,
And on the Lips a burning Kiss impressed.
It Is true, the hardened Breast resists the Gripe,
And the cold Lips return a Kiss unripe:
But when, retiring back, he looked again,
To think it Ivory, was a Thought too mean:
So would believe she kissed, and courting more,
Again embraced her naked Body over;
And straining hard the Statue, was afraid
His Hands had made a Dint, and hurt his Maid:
Explored her Limb by Limb, and feared to find
So rude a Gripe had left a livid Mark behind:
With Flattery now he seeks her Mind to move,
And now with Gifts, (the powerful Bribes of Love:)
He furnishes her Closet first; and fills
The crowded Shelves with Rarities of Shells;
Adds Orient Pearls, which from the Conchs he drew,
And all the sparkling Stones of various Hue:
And Parrots, imitating Human Tongue,
And Singing-birds in Silver Cages hung;
And every fragrant Flower, and odorous Green
Were sorted well, with Lumps of Amber laid between:
Rich fashionable Robes her Person deck,
Pendants her Ears, and Pearls adorn her Neck:
Her taper'd Fingers too with Rings are graced,
And an embroidered Zone surrounds her slender Waste.
Thus like a Queen arrayed, so richly dressed,
Beauteous she showed, but naked showed the best.
Then, from the Floor, he raised a Royal Bed,
With Cov'rings of Sydonian Purple spread:
The solemn Rites performed, he calls her Bride,
With Blandishments invites her to his Side;
And as she were with vital Sense possessed,
Her Head did on a plumy Pillow rest.
The Feast of Venus came, a solemn Day,
To which the Cypriots due Devotion pay;
With gilded Horns the Milk-white Heifers led,
Slaughtered before the sacred Altars, bled:
Pygmalion offering, first, approached the Shrine,
And then with Prayers implored the Powers Divine;
Almighty Gods, if all we Mortals want,
If all we can require, be yours to grant;
Make this fair Statue mine, he would have said,
But changed his Words for Shame; and only prayed,
Give me the Likeness of my Ivory Maid.
The Golden Goddess, present at the Prayer,
Well knew he meant the inanimated Fair,
And gave the Sign of granting his Desire;
For thrice in cheerful Flames ascends the Fire.
The Youth, returning to his Mistress, hies,
And impudent in Hope, with ardent Eyes,
And beating Breast, by the dear Statue lies.
He kisses her white Lips, renews the Bliss,
And looks, and thinks they redden at the Kiss;
He thought them warm before: Nor longer stays,
But next his Hand on her hard Bosom lays:
Hard as it was, beginning to relent,
It seemed, the Breast beneath his Fingers bent;
He felt again, his Fingers made a Print,
'Twas Flesh, but Flesh so firm, it rose against the Dint:
The pleasing Task he fails not to renew;
Soft, and more soft at every Touch it grew;
Like pliant Wax, when chafing Hands reduce
The former Mass to Form, and frame for Use.
He would believe, but yet is still in Pain,
And tries his Argument of Sense again,
Presses the Pulse, and feels the leaping Vein.
Convinced, o'erjoy'd, his studied Thanks, and Praise,
To her who made the Miracle he pays:
Then Lips to Lips he joined; now freed from Fear,
He found the Savor of the Kiss sincere:
At this the wakened Image opened her Eyes,
And viewed at once the Light, and Lover with Surprise.
The Goddess present at the Match she made,
So blessed the Bed, such Fruitfulness conveyed,
That e're ten Months had sharpened either Horn,
To crown their Bliss, a lovely Boy was born;
Paphos his Name, who grown to Manhood, walled
The City Paphos, from the Founder called.
The Story of CINYRAS, and MYRRHA.
Nor him alone produced the fruitful Queen;
But Cinyras, who like his Sire had been
A happy Prince, had he not been a Sire.
Daughters, and Fathers from my Song retire;
I sing of Horror; and, could I prevail,
You should not hear, or not believe my Tale.
Yet if the Pleasure of my Song be such,
That you will hear, and credit me too much,
Attentive listen to the last Event,
And with the Sin believe the Punishment:
Since Nature could behold so dire a Crime,
I gratulate at least my Native Clime,
That such a Land, which such a Monster bore,
So far is distant from our Thracian Shore.
Let Araby extol her happy Coast,
Her Cinnamon, and sweet Amomum boast,
Her fragrant Flowers, her Trees with precious Tears,
Her second Harvests, and her double Years;
How can the Land be called so blessed that Myrrha bears?
Nor all her odorous Tears can cleanse her Crime,
Her Plant alone deforms the happy Clime:
Cupid denies to have inflamed thy Heart,
Disowns thy Love, and vindicates his Dart:
Some Fury gave thee those infernal Pains,
And shot her venomed Vipers in thy Veins.
To hate thy Sire, had merited a Curse;
But such an impious Love deserved a worse.
The neighboring Monarchs, by thy Beauty led,
Contend in Crowds, ambitious of thy Bed:
The World is at thy Choice; except but one,
Except but him, thou can not choose, alone.
She knew it too, the miserable Maid,
E're impious Love her better Thoughts betrayed,
And thus within her secret Soul she said:
Ah Myrrha! whither would thy Wishes tend?
Ye Gods, ye sacred Laws, my Soul defend
From such a Crime as all Mankind detest,
And never lodged before in Human Breast!
But is it Sin? Or makes my Mind alone
The imagined Sin? For Nature makes it none.
What Tyrant then these envious Laws began,
Made not for any other Beast, but Man!
The Father-Bull his Daughter may bestride,
The Horse may make his Mother-Mare a Bride;
What Piety forbids the lusty Ram,
Or more salacious Goat, to rut their Dam?
The Hen is free to wed the Chick she bore,
And make a Husband, whom she hatched before.
All Creatures else are of a happier Kind,
Whom nor ill-natured Laws from Pleasure bind,
Nor Thoughts of Sin disturb their Peace of Mind.
But Man a Slave of his own making lives;
The Fool denies himself what Nature gives:
Too busy Senates, with an Over-care
To make us better than our Kind can bear,
Have dashed a Spice of Envy in the Laws,
And straining up too high, have spoiled the Cause.
Yet some wise Nations break their cruel Chains,
And own no Laws, but those which Love ordains;
Where happy Daughters with their Sires are joined,
And Piety is doubly paid in Kind.
O that I had been born in such a Clime,
Not here, where it is the Country makes the Crime!
But whither would my impious Fancy stray?
Hence Hopes, and ye forbidden Thoughts away!
His Worth deserves to kindle my Desires,
But with the Love, that Daughters bear to Sires.
Then had not Cinyras my Father been,
What hindered Myrrha's Hopes to be his Queen?
But the Perverseness of my Fate is such,
That he is not mine, because he is mine too much:
Our Kindred-Blood debars a better Tie;
He might be nearer, were he not so nigh.
Eyes, and their Objects never must unite,
Some Distance is required to help the Sight:
Fain would I travel to some foreign Shore,
Never to see my Native Country more,
So might I to my self my self restore;
So might my Mind these impious Thoughts remove,
And ceasing to behold, might cease to love.
But stay I must, to feed my famished Sight,
To talk, to kiss, and more, if more I might:
More, impious Maid! What more can thou design,
To make a monstrous Mixture in thy Line,
And break all Statutes Human and Divine?
Can thou be called (to save thy wretched Life)
Thy Mother's Rival, and thy Father's Wife?
Confound so many sacred Names in one,
Thy Brother's Mother! Sister to thy Son!
And fear thou not to see The Infernal Bands,
Their Heads with Snakes, with Torches armed their Hands;
Full at thy Face the avenging Brands to bear,
And shake the Serpents from their hissing Hair?
But thou in time th'increasing Ill control,
Nor first debauch the Body by the Soul;
Secure the sacred Quiet of thy Mind,
And keep the Sanctions Nature has designed.
Suppose I should attempt, The Attempt were vain,
No Thoughts like mine, his sinless Soul profane:
Observant of the Right; and O that he
Could cure my Madness, or be mad like me!
Thus she: But Cinyras, who daily sees
A Crowd of noble Suitors at his Knees,
Among so many, knew not whom to choose,
Irresolute to grant, or to refuse.
But having told their Names, inquired of her
Who pleased her best, and whom she would prefer.
The blushing Maid stood silent with Surprise,
And on her Father fixed her ardent Eyes,
And looking sighed, and as she sighed, began
Round Tears to shed, that scalded as they ran.
The tender Sire, who saw her blush, and cry,
Ascribed it all to Maiden Modesty,
And dried the falling Drops, and yet more kind,
He stroak'd her Cheeks, and holy Kisses joined.
She felt a secret Venom fire her Blood,
And found more Pleasure, than a Daughter should;
And asked again what Lover of the Crew
She liked the best, she answered, One like you.
Mistaking what she meant, her pious Will
He praised, and bad her so continue still:
The Word of Pious heard, she blushed with Shame
Of secret Guilt, and could not bear the Name.
'Twas now the Mid of Night, when Slumbers close
Our Eyes, and sooth our Cares with soft Repose;
But no Repose could wretched Myrrha find,
Her Body rouling, as she roul'd her Mind:
Mad with Desire, she ruminates her Sin,
And wishes all her Wishes over again:
Now she despairs, and now resolves to try;
Would not, and would again, she knows not why;
Stops, and returns, makes and retracts the Vow;
Fain would begin, but understands not how.
As when a Pine is hewed upon the Plains,
And the last mortal Stroke alone remains,
Laboring in Pangs of Death, and threatening all,
This way, and that she nods, consid'ring where to fall:
So Myrrha's Mind, impelled on either Side,
Takes every Bent, but cannot long abide;
Irresolute on which she should rely,
At last, unfix'd in all, is only fixed to die.
On that sad Thought she rests, resolved on Death,
She rises, and prepares to choke her Breath:
Then while about the Beam her Zone she ties,
Dear Cinyras farewell, she softly cries;
For thee I die, and only wish to be
Not hated, when thou know I die for thee:
Pardon the Crime, in Pity to the Cause:
This said, about her Neck the Noose she draws,
The Nurse, who lay without, her faithful Guard,
Though not the Words, the Murmurs overheard,
And Sighs, and hollow Sounds: Surpised with Fright,
She starts, and leaves her Bed, and springs a Light;
Unlocks the Door, and entering out of Breath,
The Dying saw, and Instruments of Death;
She shrieks, she cuts the Zone with trembling Haste,
And in her Arms her fainting Charge embraced:
Next, (for she now had Leisure for her Tears)
She weeping asked, in these her blooming Years,
What unforeseen Misfortune caused her Care,
To loath her Life, and languish in Despair!
The Maid, with down-cast Eyes, and mute with Grief
For Death unfinished, and ill-timed Relief,
Stood sullen to her Suit: The Beldame pressed
The more to know, and barred her withered Breast,
Adjur'd her by the kindly Food she drew
From those dry Founts, her secret Ill to show.
Sad Myrrha sighed, and turned her Eyes aside;
The Nurse still urged, and would not be denied:
Nor only promised Secrecy, but prayed
She might have Leave to give her offered Aid.
Good Will, she said, my want of Strength supplies,
And Diligence shall give what Age denies:
If strong Desires thy Mind to Fury move,
With Charms, and Medicines I can cure thy Love:
If envious Eyes their hurtful Rays have cast,
More powerful Verse shall free thee from the Blast:
If Heaven offended sends thee this Disease,
Offended Heaven with Prayers we can appease.
What then remains, that can these Cares procure?
Thy House is flourishing, thy Fortune sure:
Thy careful Mother yet in Health survives,
And, to thy Comfort, thy kind Father lives.
The Virgin started at her Father's Name,
And sighed profoundly, conscious of the Shame:
Nor yet the Nurse her impious Love divined,
But yet surmis'd that Love disturbed her Mind:
Thus thinking, she pursued her Point, and laid,
And lulled within her Lap the mourning Maid;
Then softly soothed her thus; I guess your Grief:
You love, my Child; your Love shall find Relief.
My long-experienc'd Age shall be your Guide;
Rely on that, and lay Distrust aside:
No Breath of Air shall on the Secret blow,
Nor shall (what most you fear) your Father know.
Struck once again, as with a Thunderclap,
The guilty Virgin bounded from her Lap,
And threw her Body prostrate on the Bed,
And, to conceal her Blushes, hid her Head;
There silent lay, and warned her with her Hand
To go: But she received not the Command;
Remaining still importunate to know:
Then Myrrha thus; Or ask no more, or go:
I prithee go, or staying spare my Shame;
What thou would hear, is impious even to name.
At this, on high the Beldame holds her Hands,
And trembling both with Age, and Terror stands;
Adjures, and falling at her Feet entreats,
Sooths her with Blandishments, and frights with Threats,
To tell the Crime intended, or disclose
What Part of it she knew, if she no farther knows.
And last; if conscious to her Counsel made,
Confirms anew the Promise of her Aid.
Now Myrrha raised her Head; but soon oppressed
With Shame, reclined it on her Nurse's Breast;
Bathed it with Tears, and strove to have confessed:
Twice she began, and stopped; again she tried;
The falt'ring Tongue its Office still denied.
At last her Veil before her Face she spread,
And drew a long preluding Sigh, and said,
O happy Mother, in thy Marriage Bed!
Then groaned, and ceased. The good old Woman shook,
Stiff were her Eyes, and ghastly was her Look:
Her hoary Hair upright with Horror stood,
Made (to her Grief) more knowing than she would.
Much she reproached, and many things she said,
To cure the Madness of the unhappy Maid,
In vain: For Myrrha stood convict of Ill;
Her Reason vanquished, but unchanged her Will:
Perverse of Mind, unable to reply;
She stood resolved, or to possess or die.
At length the Fondness of a Nurse prevailed.
Against her better Sense, and Virtue failed:
Enjoy, my Child, since such is thy Desire,
Thy Love, she said; she durst not say, thy Sire:
Live, though unhappy, live on any Terms;
Then with a second Oath her Faith confirms.
The solemn Feast of Ceres now was near,
When long white Linen Stoles the Matrons wear;
Ranked in Procession walk the pious Train,
Offering First Fruits, and Spikes of yellow Grain:
For nine long Nights the Nuptial-Bed they shun,
And sanctifying Harvest, lie alone.
Mixed with the Crowd, the Queen forsook her Lord,
And Ceres' Power with secret Rites adored:
The Royal Couch, now vacant for a Time,
The crafty Crone, officious in her Crime,
The first Occasion took: The King she found
Easy with Wine, and deep in Pleasures drowned,
Prepared for Love: The Beldame blew the Flame,
Confessed the Passion, but concealed the Name.
Her Form she praised; the Monarch asked her Years;
And she replied, The same thy Myrrha bears.
Wine and commended Beauty fired his Thought;
Impatient, he commands her to be brought.
Pleased with her Charge performed, she hies her home,
And gratulates the Nymph, the Task was overcome.
Myrrha was joy'd the welcome News to hear;
But clogged with Guilt, the Joy was unsincere:
So various, so discordant is the Mind,
That in our Will a different Will we find.
Ill she presaged, and yet pursued her Lust;
For guilty Pleasures give a double Gust.
'Twas Depth of Night: Arctophylax had driven
His lazy Wain half round the Northern Heaven,
When Myrrha hastened to the Crime desired:
The Moon beheld her first, and first retired:
The Stars amazed, ran backward from the Sight,
And (shrunk within their Sockets) lost their Light.
Icarius first withdraws his holy Flame:
The Virgin Sign, in Heaven the second Name,
Slides down the Belt, and from her Station flies,
And Night with sable Clouds involves the Skies.
Bold Myrrha still pursues her black Intent;
She stumbled thrice, (an Omen of The Event;)
Thrice shrieked the Funeral Owl, yet on she went,
Secure of Shame, because secure of Sight;
Even bashful Sins are impudent by Night.
Linked Hand in Hand, th'Accomplice, and the Dame,
Their Way exploring, to the Chamber came:
The Door was open, they blindly grope their Way,
Where dark in Bed th'expecting Monarch lay.
Thus far her Courage held, but here forsakes;
Her faint Knees knock at every Step she makes.
The nearer to her Crime, the more within
She feels Remorse, and Horror of her Sin;
Repents too late her criminal Desire,
And wishes, that unknown she could retire.
Her, lingering thus, the Nurse (who feared Delay
The fatal Secret might at length betray)
Pulled forward, to complete the Work begun,
And said to Cinyras, Receive thy own.
Thus saying, she delivered Kind to Kind,
Accursed, and their devoted Bodies joined.
The Sire, unknowing of the Crime, admits
His Bowels, and profanes the hallowed Sheets;
He found she trembled, but believed she strove
With Maiden Modesty, against her Love,
And sought with flattering Words vain Fancies to remove.
Perhaps he said, My Daughter, cease thy Fears,
(Because the Title suited with her Years;)
And Father, she might whisper him again,
That Names might not be wanting to the Sin.
Full of her Sire, she left the incestuous Bed,
And carried in her Womb the Crime she bred.
Another, and another Night she came;
For frequent Sin had left no Sense of Shame:
Till Cinyras desired to see her Face,
Whose Body he had held in close Embrace,
And brought a Taper; the Revealer, Light,
Exposed both Crime, and Criminal to Sight.
Grief, Rage, Amazement, could no Speech afford,
But from the Sheath he drew the avenging Sword:
The Guilty fled: The Benefit of Night,
That favored first the Sin, secured the Flight.
Long wandering through the spacious Fields, she bent
Her Voyage to the Arabian Continent;
Then passed the Region which Panchaea joined,
And flying, left the palmy Plains behind.
Nine times the Moon had mewed her Horns; at length
With Travel weary, unsupply'd with Strength,
And with the Burden of her Womb oppressed,
Sabaean Fields afford her needful Rest:
There, loathing Life, and yet of Death afraid,
In Anguish of her Spirit, thus she prayed.
Ye Powers, if any so propitious are
T'accept my Penitence, and hear my Prayer;
Your Judgments, I confess, are justly sent;
Great Sins deserve as great a Punishment:
Yet since my Life the Living will profane,
And since my Death the happy Dead will stain,
A middle State your Mercy may bestow,
Betwixt the Realms above, and those below:
Some other Form to wretched Myrrha give,
Nor let her wholly die, nor wholly live.
The Prayers of Penitents are never vain;
At least, she did her last Request obtain:
For while she spoke, the Ground began to rise,
And gathered round her Feet, her Legs, and Thighs;
Her Toes in Roots descend, and spreading wide,
A firm Foundation for the Trunk provide:
Her solid Bones convert to solid Wood,
To Pith her Marrow, and to Sap her Blood:
Her Arms are Boughs, her Fingers change their Kind,
Her tender Skin is hardened into Rind.
And now the rising Tree her Womb invests,
Now, shooting upwards still, invades her Breasts,
And shades the Neck; when, weary with Delay,
She sunk her Head within, and met it half the way.
And though with outward Shape she lost her Sense,
With bitter Tears she wept her last Offense;
And still she weeps; nor sheds her Tears in vain;
For still the precious Drops her Name retain.
Mean time the mis-begotten Infant grows,
And, ripe for Birth, distends with deadly Throws
The swelling Rind, with unavailing Strife,
To leave the wooden Womb, and pushes into Life.
The Mother-Tree, as if oppressed with Pain,
Writhes here, and there, to break the Bark, in vain;
And, like a laboring Woman, would have prayed,
But wants a Voice to call Lucina's Aid:
The bending Bole sends out a hollow Sound,
And trickling Tears fall thicker on the Ground.
The mild Lucina came uncalled, and stood
Beside the struggling Boughs, and heard the groaning Wood:
Then reached her Midwife-Hand to speed the Throws,
And spoke the powerful Spells that Babes to Birth disclose.
The Bark divides, the living Load to free,
And safe delivers the Convulsive Tree.
The ready Nymphs receive the crying Child,
And wash him in the Tears the Parent-Plant distilled.
They swathed him with their Scarfs; beneath him spread
The Ground with Herbs; with Roses raised his Head.
The lovely Babe was born with every Grace,
Even Envy must have praised so fair a Face:
Such was his Form, as Painters when they show
Their utmost Art, on naked Loves bestow:
And that their Arms no Difference might betray,
Give him a Bow, or his from Cupid take away.
Time glides along with undiscovered Haste,
The Future but a Length behind the Past;
So swift are Years. The Babe whom just before
His Grandsire got, and whom his Sister bore;
The Drop, the Thing, which late the Tree enclosed,
And late the yawning Bark to Life exposed;
A Babe, a Boy, a beauteous Youth appears,
And lovelier than himself at riper Years.
Now to the Queen of Love he gave Desires,
And, with her Pains, revenged his Mother's Fires.
The Story of VENUS, and ADONIS.
By Mr. EUSDEN.
For Cytherea's Lips while Cupid pressed,
He with a heedless Arrow razed her Breast.
The Goddess felt it, and with Fury stung,
The wanton Mischief from her Bosom flung:
Yet thought at first the Danger slight, but found
The Dart too faithful, and too deep the Wound.
Fired with a mortal Beauty, she disdains
To haunt the Idalian Mount, or Phrygian Plains.
She seeks not Cnidos, nor her Paphian Shrines,
Nor Amathus, that teems with brazen Mines:
Even Heaven it self with all its Sweets unsought,
Adonis far a sweeter Heaven is thought.
On him she hangs, and fonds with every Art,
And never, never knows from him to part.
She, whose soft Limbs had only been displayed
On rosy Beds beneath the Myrtle Shade,
Whose pleasing Care was to improve each Grace,
And add more Charms to an unrivaled Face,
Now buskined, like the Virgin Huntress, goes
Through Woods, and pathless Wilds, and Mountain-Snows.
With her own tuneful Voice she joys to cheer
The panting Hounds, that chase the flying Deer.
She runs the Labyrinths of fearful Hares,
But fearless Beasts, and dangerous Prey forbears:
Hunts not the grinning Wolf, or foamy Boar,
And trembles at the Lion's hungry Roar.
Thee too, Adonis, with a Lover's Care
She warns, if warned thou would avoid the Snare.
To furious Animals advance not nigh,
Fly those that follow, follow those that fly;
It Is Chance alone must the Survivers save,
Whenever brave Spirits will attempt the Brave.
O! lovely Youth! in harmless Sports delight;
Provoke not Beasts, which, armed by Nature, fight.
For me, if not thy self, vouchsafe to fear;
Let not thy Thirst of Glory cost me dear.
Boars know not how to spare a blooming Age;
No sparkling Eyes can sooth the Lion's Rage.
Not all thy Charms a savage Breast can move,
Which have so deeply touched the Queen of Love.
When bristled Boars from beaten Thickets spring,
In grinded Tusks a Thunderbolt they bring.
The daring Hunters Lions roused devour,
Vast is their Fury, and as vast their Power:
Cursed be their tawny Race! If thou would hear
What kindled thus my Hate; then lend an Ear:
The wondrous Tale I will to thee unfold,
How the fell Monsters rose from Crimes of old.
But by long Toils I faint: See! wide-display'd,
A grateful Poplar courts us with a Shade.
The grassy Turf, beneath, so verdant shows,
We may secure delightfully repose.
With her Adonis here be Venus blessed,
And swift at once the Grass, and him she pressed.
Then sweetly smiling, with a raptured Mind,
On his loved Bosom she her Head reclined,
And thus began; but mindful still of Bliss,
Sealed the soft Accents with a softer Kiss.
Perhaps thou may have heard a Virgin's Name,
Who still in Swiftness swiftest Youths o'ercame.
Wondrous! that female Weakness should outdo
A manly Strength; the Wonder yet is true.
'Twas doubtful, if her Triumphs in the Field
Did to her Form's triumphant Glories yield;
Whether her Face could with more Ease decoy
A Crowd of Lovers, or her Feet destroy.
For once Apollo she implored to show
If courteous Fates a Consort would allow:
A Consort brings thy Ruin, he replied;
Oh! learn to want the Pleasures of a Bride!
Nor shall thou want them to thy wretched Cost,
And Atalanta living shall be lost.
With such a rueful Fate the affrighted Maid
Sought green Recesses in the wood-land Glade.
Not sighing Suitors her Resolves could move,
She bad them show their Speed to show their Love.
He only, who could conquer in the Race,
Might hope the conquered Virgin to embrace;
While he, whose tardy Feet had lagg'd behind,
Was doomed the sad Reward of Death to find.
Though great the Prize, yet rigid the Decree,
But blind with Beauty, who can Rigor see?
Even on these Laws the Fair they rashly sought,
And Danger in Excess of Love forgot.
There sat Hippomenes, prepared to blame
In Lovers such Extravagance of Flame.
And must, he said, the Blessing of a Wife
Be dearly purchased by a Risk of Life?
But when he saw the Wonders of her Face,
And her Limbs naked, springing to the Race,
Her Limbs, as exquisitely turned, as mine,
Or if a Woman thou, might vie with thine,
With lifted Hands, he cried, forgive the Tongue
Which durst, ye Youths, your well-tim'd Courage wrong.
I knew not, that the Nymph, for whom you strove,
Deserved th'unbounded Transports of your Love.
He saw, admired, and thus her spotless Frame
He praised, and praising, kindled his own Flame.
A Rival now to all the Youths, who run,
Envious he fears, they should not be undone.
But why (reflects he) idly thus is shown
The Fate of others, yet untried my own?
The Coward must not on Love's Aid depend;
The God was ever to the Bold a Friend.
Mean time the Virgin flies, or seems to fly,
Swift as a Scythian Arrow cleaves the Sky:
Still more, and more the Youth her Charms admires,
The Race it self to exalt her Charms conspires.
The golden Pinions, which her Feet adorn,
In wanton Flutt'rings by the Winds are born.
Down from her Head the long, fair Tresses flow,
And sport with lovely Negligence below.
The waving Ribbands, which her Buskins tie,
Her snowy Skin with waving Purple die;
As crimson Veils, in Palaces displayed,
To the white Marble lend a blushing Shade.
Nor long he gazed, yet while he gazed, she gained
The Goal, and the victorious Wreath obtained.
The Vanquished sigh, and as the Law decreed,
Pay the dire Forfeit, and prepare to bleed.
Then rose Hippomenes, not yet afraid,
And fixed his Eyes full on the beauteous Maid.
Where is (he cried) the mighty Conquest won,
To distance those, who want the Nerves to run?
Here prove superior Strength, nor shall it be
Thy Loss of Glory, if excelled by me.
High my Descent, near Neptune I aspire,
For Neptune was Grand-Parent to my Sire.
From that great God the fourth my self I trace,
Nor sink my Virtues yet beneath my Race.
Thou from Hippomenes, o'er-come, may claim
An envied Triumph, and a deathless Fame.
While thus the Youth the Virgin's Power defies,
Silent she views him still with softer Eyes.
Thoughts in her Breast a doubtful Strife begin,
If it is not happier now to lose, than win.
What God, a Foe to Beauty, would destroy
The promised Ripeness of this blooming Boy?
With his Life's Danger does he seek my Bed?
Scarce am I half so greatly Worth, she said.
Nor has his Beauty moved my Breast to love,
And yet, I own, such Beauty well might move:
It Is not his Charms, it is Pity would engage
My Soul to spare the Greeness of his Age.
What, that heroic Courage fires his Breast,
And shines through brave Disdain of Fate confessed?
What, that his Patronage by close Degrees
Springs from the imperial Ruler of the Seas?
Then add the Love, which bids him undertake
The Race, and dare to perish for my sake.
Of bloody Nuptials, heedless Youth, beware!
Fly, timely fly from a too barbarous Fair.
At Pleasure choose; thy Love will be repaid
By a less foolish, and more beauteous Maid.
But why this Tenderness, before unknown?
Why beats, and pants my Breast for him alone?
His Eyes have seen his numerous Rivals yield,
Let him too share the Rigor of the Field,
Since by their Fates untaught, his own he courts,
And thus with Ruin insolently sports.
Yet for what Crime shall he his Death receive?
Is it a Crime with me to wish to live?
Shall his kind Passion his Destruction prove?
Is this the fatal Recompense of Love?
So fair a Youth, destroyed, would Conquest shame,
And Nymphs eternally detest my Fame.
Still why should Nymphs my guiltless Fame upbraid?
Did I the fond Adventurer persuade?
Alas! I wish thou would the Course decline,
Or that my Swiftness was excelled by thine.
See! what a Virgin's Bloom adorns the Boy!
Why will thou run? and why thy self destroy?
Hippomenes! O that I never had been
By those bright Eyes unfortunately seen!
Ah! tempt not thus a swift, untimely Fate;
Thy Life is worthy of the longest Date.
Were I less wretched, did the galling Chain
Of rigid Gods not my free Choice restrain,
By thee alone I could with Joy be led
To taste the Raptures of a Nuptial Bed.
Thus she disclosed the Woman's secret Heart,
Young, innocent, and new to Cupid's Dart.
Her Thoughts, her Words, her Actions wildly rove,
With Love she burns, yet knows not that it is Love.
Her Royal Sire now with the murmuring Crowd
Demands the Race impatiently aloud.
Hippomenes then with true Fervor prayed,
My bold Attempt let Venus kindly aid.
By her sweet Power I felt this amorous Fire,
Still may she succor, whom she did inspire.
A soft, unenvious Wind, with speedy Care,
Wafted to Heaven the Lover's tender Prayer.
Pity, I own, soon gained the wished Consent,
And all the Assistance he implored I lent.
The Cyprian Lands, though rich, in Richness yield
To that, surnamed the Tamasenian Field.
That Field of old was added to my Shrine,
And its choice Products consecrated mine.
A Tree there stands, full glorious to behold,
Gold are the Leafs, the crackling Branches Gold.
It chanced, three Apples in my Hands I bore,
Which newly from the Tree I sportive tore;
Seen by the Youth alone, to him I brought
The Fruit, and when, and how to use it, taught.
The Signal sounding by the King's Command,
Both start at once, and sweep th'unprinted Sand.
So swiftly move their Feet, they might with Ease,
Scarce moistened, skim along the glassie Seas;
Or with a wondrous Levity be born
Over yellow Harvests of unbending Corn.
Now favoring Peals resound from every Part,
Spirit the Youth, and fire his fainting Heart.
Hippomenes! (they cried) thy Life preserve,
Intensely labor, and stretch every Nerve.
Base Fear alone can baffle thy Design,
Shoot boldly onward, and the Goal is thine.
It Is doubtful whether Shouts, like these, conveyed
More Pleasures to the Youth, or to the Maid.
When a long Distance often she could have gained,
She checked her Swiftness, and her Feet restrained:
She sighed, and dwelt, and languish'd on his Face,
Then with unwilling Speed pursued the Race.
O'er-spent with Heat, his Breath he faintly drew,
Parched was his Mouth, nor yet the Goal in view,
And the first Apple on the Plain he threw.
The Nymph stopped sudden at th'unusual Sight,
Struck with the Fruit so beautifully bright.
Aside she starts, the Wonder to behold,
And eager stoops to catch the rouling Gold.
Th'observant Youth past by, and scoured along,
While Peals of Joy rung from the applauding Throng.
Unkindly she corrects the short Delay,
And to redeem the Time fleets swift away,
Swift, as the Lightning, or the Northern Wind,
And far she leaves the panting Youth behind.
Again he strives the flying Nymph to hold
With the Temptation of the second Gold:
The bright Temptation fruitlesly was tossed,
So soon, alas! she won the Distance lost.
Now but a little Interval of Space
Remained for the Decision of the Race.
Fair Author of the precious Gift, he said,
Be thou, O Goddess, Author of my Aid!
Then of the shining Fruit the last he drew,
And with his full-collected Vigor threw:
The Virgin still the longer to detain,
Threw not directly, but across the Plain.
She seemed awhile perplexed in dubious Thought,
If the far-distant Apple should be sought:
I lured her backward Mind to seize the Bait,
And to the massy Gold gave double Weight.
My Favor to my Votary was showed,
Her Speed I lessened, and increased her Load.
But least, though long, the rapid Race be run,
Before my longer, tedious Tale is done,
The Youth the Goal, and so the Virgin won.
Might I, Adonis, now not hope to see
His grateful Thanks poured out for Victory?
His pious Incense on my Altars laid?
But he nor grateful Thanks, nor Incense paid.
Enraged I vowed, that with the Youth the Fair,
For his Contempt, should my keen Vengeance share;
That future Lovers might my Power revere,
And from their sad Examples learn to fear.
The silent Fanes, the sanctified Abodes
Of Cybele, great Mother of the Gods,
Raised by Echion in a lonely Wood,
And full of brown, religious Horror stood.
By a long painful Journey faint, they chose
Their weary Limbs here secret to repose.
But soon my Power inflamed the lustful Boy,
Careless of Rest he sought untimely Joy.
A hallowed, gloomy Cave, with Moss o'er-grown,
The Temple joined, of native Pumice-stone,
Where antique Images by Priests were kept,
And wooden Deities securely slept.
Thither the rash Hippomenes retires,
And gives a Loose to all his wild Desires,
And the chaste Cell pollutes with wanton Fires.
The sacred Statues trembled with Surprise,
The tow'ry Goddess, blushing, veiled her Eyes;
And the lewd Pair to Stygian Sounds had sent,
But unrevengeful seemed that Punishment.
A heavier Doom such black Profaneness draws,
Their taper Fingers turn to crooked Paws.
No more their Necks the Smoothness can retain,
Now covered sudden with a yellow Mane.
Arms change to Legs: Each finds the hard'ning Breast
Of Rage unknown, and wondrous Strength possessed.
Their altered Looks with Fury grim appear,
And on the Ground their brushing Tails they hear.
They haunt the Woods: Their Voices, which before
Were musically sweet, now hoarsly roar.
Hence Lions, dreadful to the laboring Swains,
Are tamed by Cybele, and curbed with Reins,
And humbly draw her Car along the Plains.
But thou, Adonis, my delightful Care,
Of these, and Beasts, as fierce as these, beware!
The Savage, which not shuns thee, timely shun,
For by rash Prowess should thou be undone,
A double Ruin is contained in one.
Thus cautious Venus schooled her favorite Boy,
But youthful Heat all Cautions will destroy.
His sprightly Soul beyond grave Counsels flies,
While with yoked Swans the Goddess cuts the Skies.
His faithful Hounds, led by the tainted Wind,
Lodged in thick Coverts chanced a Boar to find.
The callow Hero showed a manly Heart,
And pierced the Savage with a side-long Dart.
The flying Savage, wounded, turned again,
Wrench'd out the gory Dart, and foamed with Pain.
The trembling Boy by Flight his Safety sought,
And now recalled the Lore, which Venus taught:
But now too late to fly the Boar he strove,
Who in the Groin his Tusks impetuous drove*
On the discolored Grass Adonis lay,
The Monster trampling over his beauteous Prey.
Fair Cytherea, Cyprus scarce in view,
Heard from afar his Groans, and owned them true,
And turned her snowy Swans, and backward flew.
But as she saw him gasp his latest Breath,
And quivering agonize in Pangs of Death,
Down with swift Flight she plunged, nor Rage forbore,
At once her Garments, and her Hair she tore.
With cruel Blows she beat her guiltless Breast,
The Fates upbraided, and her Love confessed.
Nor shall they yet (she cried) the Whole devour
With uncontrolled, inexorable Power:
For thee, lost Youth, my Tears and restless Pain
Shall in immortal Monuments remain.
With solemn Pomp in annual Rites returned,
Be thou for ever, my Adonis, mourned.
Could Pluto's Queen with jealous Fury storm,
And Menthe to a fragrant Herb transform?
Yet dares not Venus with a Change surprise,
And in a Flower bid her fallen Hero rise?
Then on the Blood sweet Nectar she bestows,
The scented Blood in little Bubbles rose:
Little, as rainy Drops, which fluttering fly,
Born by the Winds, along a lowering Sky.
Short time ensued, till where the Blood was shed,
A Flower began to rear its purple Head:
Such, as on Punick Apples is revealed,
Or in the filmy Rind but half concealed.
Still here the Fate of lovely Forms we see,
So sudden fades the sweet Anemone.
The feeble Stems, to stormy Blasts a Prey,
Their sickly Beauties droop, and pine away.
The Winds forbid the Flowers to flourish long,
Which owe to Winds their Names in Greecian Song.
The End of the Tenth Book.
To the Rt. Honble. ye Viscountess Townshe^
R Smith Sculp.

OVID's METAMORPHOSES. BOOK XI.
Translated by Mr. DRYDEN and Others.
The Death of ORPHEUS.
By Mr. CROXALL.
HERE, while the Thracian Bard's enchanting Strain
Sooths Beasts, and Woods, and all the listening Plain,
The Female Bacchanals, devoutly mad,
In shaggy Skins, like savage Creatures, clad,
Warbling in Air perceived his lovely Lay,
And from a rising Ground beheld him play.
When one, the wildest, with disheveled Hair,
That loosely streamed, and ruffled in the Air;
Soon as her frantic Eye the Lyrist spied,
See, see! the Hater of our Sex, she cried.
Then at his Face her missive Javelin sent,
Which whiz'd along, and brusht him as it went;
But the soft Wreaths of Ivy twisted round,
Prevent a deep Impression of the Wound.
Another, for a Weapon, hurls a Stone,
Which, by the Sound subdued as soon as thrown,
Falls at his Feet, and with a seeming Sense
Implores his Pardon for its late Offense.
But now their frantic Rage unbounded grows,
Turns all to Madness, and no Measure knows:
Yet this the Charms of Music might subdue,
But that, with all its Charms, is conquered too;
In louder Strains their hideous Yellings rise,
And squeaking Horn-pipes echo through the Skies,
Which, in hoarse Consort with the Drum, confound
The moving Lyre and every gentle Sound:
Then 'twas the deafen'd Stones flew on with Speed,
And saw, unsooth'd, their tuneful Poet bleed.
The Birds, the Beasts, and all the Savage Crew
Which the sweet Lyrist to Attention drew,
Now, by the Female Mob's more furious Rage,
Are driven, and forced to quit the shady Stage.
Next their fierce Hands the Bard himself assail,
Nor can his Song against their Wrath prevail:
They flock, like Birds; when, in a clustring Flight,
By Day they chase the boding Fowl of Night.
So, crowded Amphitheatres survey
The Stag to greedy Dogs a future Prey.
Their steely Javelins, which soft Curls entwine
Of budding Tendrils from the leafy Vine,
For sacred Rites of mild Religion made,
Are flung promiscuous at the Poet's Head.
Those Clods of Earth or Flints discharge, and These
Hurl prickly Branches sliver'd from the Trees.
And, lest their Passion should be unsupply'd,
The rabble Crew, by chance, at Distance spied
Where Oxen, straining at the heavy Yoke,
The fallow'd Field with slow Advances broke;
Nigh which the brawny Peasants dug the Soil,
Procuring Food with long laborious Toil.
These, when they saw the ranting Throng draw near,
Quitted their Tools, and fled possessed with Fear.
Long Spades and Rakes of mighty Size were found,
Carelessly left upon the broken Ground.
With these the furious Lunaticks engage,
And first the laboring Oxen feel their Rage;
Then to the Poet they return with Speed,
Whose Fate was, past Prevention, now decreed:
In vain he lifts his suppliant Hands, in vain
He tries, before, his never-failing Strain.
And, from those sacred Lips, whose thrilling Sound
Fierce Tigers and insensate Rocks could wound,
Ah Gods! how moving was the mournful Sight!
To see the fleeting Soul now take its Flight.
Thee the soft Warblers of the feathered Kind
Bewailed; for Thee thy savage Audience pined;
Those Rocks and Woods that often thy Strain had led,
Mourn for their Charmer, and lament him dead;
And drooping Trees their leafy Glories shed.
Naids and Dryads with disheveled Hair
Promiscuous weep, and Scarfs of Sable wear;
Nor could the River-Gods conceal their Moan,
But with new Floods of Tears augment their own.
His mangled Limbs lay scattered all around,
His Head and Harp a better Fortune found;
In Hebrus' Streams they gently roul'd along,
And soothed the Waters with a mournful Song.
Soft deadly Notes the lifeless Tongue inspire,
A doleful Tune sounds from the floating Lyre;
The hollow Banks in solemn Consort mourn,
And the sad Strain in ecchoing Groans return.
Now with the Current to the Sea they glide,
Born by the Billows of the briny Tide;
And driven where Waves round rocky Lesbos roar,
They strand, and lodge upon Methymna's Shore.
But here, when landed on the foreign Soil,
A venomed Snake, the Product of the Isle,
Attempts the Head, and sacred Locks embru'd
With clotted Gore, and still fresh-dropping Blood.
Phoebus, at last, his kind Protection gives,
And from the Fact the greedy Monster drives:
Whose marbled Jaws his impious Crime atone,
Still grinning ghastly, though transformed to Stone.
His Ghost flies downward to the Stygian Shore,
And knows the Places it had seen before:
Among the Shadows of the pious Train
He finds Euridice, and loves again;
With Pleasure views the beauteous Phantom's Charms,
And clasps her in his unsubstantial Arms.
There Side by Side they unmolested walk,
Or pass their blissful Hours in pleasing Talk;
Aft or before the Bard securely goes,
And, without Danger, can review his Spouse.
The THRACIAN Women transformed to Trees.
Bacchus, resolving to revenge the Wrong,
Of Orpheus murdered, on the madding Throng,
Decreed that each Accomplice Dame should stand
Fixed by the Roots along the conscious Land.
Their wicked Feet, that late so nimbly ran
To wreak their Malice on the guiltless Man,
Sudden with twisted Ligatures were bound,
Like Trees, deep planted in the turfy Ground.
And, as the Fowler with his subtle Gins,
His feathered Captives by the Feet entwines,
That fluttering pant and struggle to get loose,
Yet only closer draw the fatal Noose;
So these were caught; and, as they strove in vain
To quit the Place, they but increased their Pain.
They flounce and toil, yet find themselves controlled,
The Root, though pliant, toughly keeps its Hold.
In vain their Toes and Feet they look to find,
For even their shapely Legs are clothed with Rind.
One smites her Thighs with a lamenting Stroke,
And finds the Flesh transformed to solid Oak;
Another, with Surprise and Grief distressed,
Lays on above, but beats a wooden Breast.
A rugged Bark their softer Neck invades,
Their branching Arms shoot up delightful Shades;
At once they seem, and are a real Grove,
With mossy Trunks below, and verdant Leaves above.
The Fable of MIDAS.
Nor this sufficed; the God's Disgust remains,
And he resolves to quit their hated Plains;
The Vineyards of Tymole ingross his Care,
And, with a better Choir, he fixes there;
Where the smooth Streams of clear Pactolus rolled,
Then undistinguished for its Sands of Gold.
The Satyrs with the Nymphs, his usual Throng,
Come to salute their God, and jovial danced along.
Silenus only missed; for while he reeled,
Feeble with Age and Wine, about the Field,
The hoary Drunkard had forgot his Way,
And to the Phrygian Clowns became a Prey;
Who to King Midas drag the Captive God,
While on his totty Pate the Wreaths of Ivy nod.
Midas from Orpheus had been taught his Lore,
And knew the Rites of Bacchus long before.
He, when he saw his venerable Guest,
In Honor of the God ordained a Feast.
Ten Days in Course, with each continued Night,
Were spent in genial Mirth and brisk Delight:
Then on the Eleventh, when with brighter Ray
Phosphor had chased the fading Stars away,
The King through Lydia's Fields young Bacchus sought,
And to the God his Foster Father brought.
Pleased with the welcome Sight, he bids him soon
But name his Wish, and swears to grant the Boon.
A glorious Offer! yet but ill bestowed
On him whose Choice so little Judgment showed.
Give me, says he, (nor thought he asked too much)
That with my Body whatsoever I touch,
Changed from the Nature which it held of old,
May be converted into yellow Gold.
He had his Wish; but yet the God repined,
To think the Fool no better Wish could find.
But the brave King departed from the Place,
With Smiles of Gladness sparkling in his Face;
Nor could contain, but, as he took his Way,
Impatient longs to make the first Essay.
Down from a lowly Branch a Twig he drew,
The Twig strait glittered with a golden Hue:
He takes a Stone, the Stone was turned to Gold;
A Clod he touches, and the crumbling Mold
Acknowledged soon the great transforming Power,
In Weight and Substance like a Mass of Ore.
He plucked the Corn, and strait his Grasp appears
Filled with a bending Tuft of Golden Ears.
An Apple next he takes, and seems to hold
The bright Hesperian vegetable Gold.
His Hand he careless on a Pillar lays;
With shining Gold the fluted Pillars blaze:
And while he washes, as the Servants pour,
His Touch converts the Stream to Danae's Shower.
To see these Miracles so finely wrought,
Fires with transporting Joy his giddy Thought.
The ready Slaves prepare a sumptuous Board,
Spread with rich Dainties for their happy Lord;
Whose powerful Hands the Bread no sooner hold,
But its whole Substance is transformed to Gold:
Up to his Mouth he lifts the sav'ry Meat,
Which turns to Gold as he attempts to eat:
His Patron's noble Juice of purple Hue,
Touched by his Lips, a gilded Cordial grew;
Unfit for Drink, and wondrous to behold,
It trickles from his Jaws a fluid Gold.
The rich poor Fool, confounded with Surprise,
Starving in all his various Plenty lies:
Sick of his Wish, he now detests the Power,
For which he asked so earnestly before;
Amidst his Gold with pinching Famine cursed,
And justly tortured with an equal Thirst.
At last his shining Arms to Heaven he rears,
And in Distress, for Refuge, flies to Prayers.
O Father Bacchus, I have sinned, he cried,
And foolishly thy gracious Gift applied;
Thy Pity now, repenting, I implore;
Oh! may I feel the golden Plague no more.
The hungry Wretch, his Folly thus confessed,
Touched the kind Deity's good-natured Breast;
The gentle God annulled his first Decree,
And from the cruel Compact set him free.
But then, to cleanse him quite from further Harm,
And to dilute the Relics of the Charm,
He bids him seek the Stream that cuts the Land
Nigh where the Towers of Lydian Sardis stand;
Then trace the River to the Fountain Head,
And meet it rising from its rocky Bed;
There, as the bubling Tide pours forth amain,
To plunge his Body in, and wash away the Stain.
The King instructed to the Fount retires,
But with the golden Charm the Stream inspires:
For while this Quality the Man forsakes,
An equal Power the limpid Water takes;
Informs with Veins of Gold the neighboring Land,
And glides along a Bed of golden Sand.
Now loathing Wealth, the Occasion of his Woes,
Far in the Woods he sought a calm Repose;
In Caves and Grottos, where the Nymphs resort,
And keep with Mountain Pan their Silvan Court.
Ah! had he left his stupid Soul behind!
But his Condition altered not his Mind.
For where high Tmolus rears his shady Brow,
And from his Cliffs surveys the Seas below,
In his Descent, by Sardis bounded here,
By the small Confines of Hypaepae there,
Pan to the Nymphs his frolic Ditties played,
Tuning his Reeds beneath the checkered Shade.
The Nymphs are pleased, the boasting Sylvan plays,
And speaks with Slight of great Apollo's Lays.
Tmolus was Arbiter; the Boaster still
Accepts the Trial with unequal Skill.
The venerable Judge was seated high
On his own Hill, that seemed to touch the Sky.
Above the whispering Trees his Head he rears,
From their encumbring Boughs to free his Ears;
A Wreath of Oak alone his Temples bound,
The pendant Acorns loosely dangled round.
In me your Judge, says he, there is no Delay:
Then bids the Goatherd God begin and play.
Pan tuned the Pipe, and with his rural Song
Pleased the low Taste of all the vulgar Throng;
Such Songs a vulgar Judgment mostly please,
Midas was there, and Midas judged with these.
The Mountain Sire with grave Deportment now
To Phoebus turns his venerable Brow;
And, as he turns, with him the listening Wood
In the same Posture of Attention stood.
The God his own Parnassian Laurel crowned,
And in a Wreath his golden Tresses bound,
Graceful his purple Mantle swept the Ground.
High on the Left his Ivory Lute he raised,
The Lute, embossed with glittering Jewels, blazed.
In his right Hand he nicely held the Quill,
His easy Posture spoke a Master's Skill.
The Strings he touched with more than human Art,
Which pleased the Judge's Ear and soothed his Heart;
Who soon judiciously the Palm decreed,
And to the Lute postpon'd the squeaking Reed.
All, with Applause, the rightful Sentence heard,
Midas alone dissatisfied appeared;
To him unjustly given the Judgment seems;
For Pan's barbarick Notes he most esteems.
The Lyrick God, who thought his untuned Ear
Deserved but ill a human Form to wear,
Of that deprives him, and supplies the Place
With some more fit, and of an ampler Space:
Fixed on his Noddle an unseemly Pair,
Flagging, and large, and full of whitish Hair;
Without a total Change from what he was,
Still in the Man preserve the simple Ass.
He, to conceal the Scandal of the Deed,
A purple Turbant folds about his Head;
Veils the Reproach from public View, and fears
The laughing World would spy his monstrous Ears.
One trusty Barber-Slave, that used to dress
His Master's Hair, when lengthened to Excess,
The mighty Secret knew, but knew alone,
And, though impatient, durst not make it known.
Restless, at last, a private Place he found,
Then dug a Hole and told it to the Ground;
In a low Whisper he revealed the Case,
And covered in the Earth, and silent left the Place.
In Time, of trembling Reeds a plenteous Crop
From the confided Furrow sprouted up;
Which, high advancing with the ripening Year,
Made known the Tiller, and his fruitless Care:
For then the rustling Blades and whispering Wind
To tell the important Secret both combined.
The Building of TROY.
Phoebus, with full Revenge, from Tmolus flies,
Darts through the Air, and cleaves the liquid Skies;
Near Hellespont he lights, and treads the Plains
Where great Laomedon sole Monarch reigns;
Where, built between the two projecting Strands,
To Panomphaean Jove an Altar stands.
Here first aspiring Thoughts the King employ,
To found the lofty Towers of future Troy.
The Work, from Schemes magnificent begun,
At vast Expense was slowly carried on:
Which Phoebus seeing, with the Trident God
Who rules the swelling Surges with his Nod,
Assuming each a mortal Shape, combine
At a set Price to finish his Design.
The Work was built; the King their Price denies,
And his Injustice backs with Perjuries.
This Neptune could not brook, but drove the Main,
A mighty Deluge, over the Phrygian Plain:
'Twas all a Sea; the Waters of the Deep
From every Vale the copious Harvest sweep;
The briny Billows overflow the Soil,
Ravage the Fields, and mock the Plowman's Toil.
Nor this appeased the God's revengeful Mind,
For still a greater Plague remains behind;
A huge Sea Monster lodges on the Sands,
And the King's Daughter for his Prey demands.
To him that saved the Damsel, was decreed
A Set of Horses of the Sun's fine Breed:
But when Alcides from the Rock untied
The trembling Fair, the Ransom was denied,
He, in Revenge, the new-built Walls attacked,
And the twice-perjur'd City bravely sacked.
Telamon aided, and in Justice shared
Part of the Plunder as his due Reward:
The Princess, rescued late, with all her Charms
Hesione was yielded to his Arms;
For Peleus, with a Goddess Bride, was more
Proud of his Spouse than of his Birth before:
Grandsons to Jove there might be more than One,
But he the Goddess had enjoyed alone.
The Story of THETIS and PELEUS, etc.
For Proteus thus to Virgin Thetis said,
Fair Goddess of the Waves, consent to wed,
And take some spritely Lover to your Bed.
A Son you will have, the Terror of the Field,
To whom in Fame and Power his Sire shall yield.
Jove, who adored the Nymph with boundless Love,
Did from his Breast the dangerous Flame remove.
He knew the Fates, nor cared to raise up One
Whose Fame and Greatness should eclipse his own.
On happy Peleus he bestowed her Charms,
And blessed his Grandson in the Goddess' Arms
A silent Creek Thessalia's Coast can show;
Two Arms project, and shape it like a Bow;
'Twould make a Bay, but the transparent Tide
Does scarce the yellow-gravell'd Bottom hide;
For the quick Eye may through the liquid Wave
A firm unweedy level Beach perceive.
A Grove of fragrant Myrtle near it grows,
Whose Boughs, though thick, a beauteous Grot disclose;
The well-wrought Fabric to discerning Eyes
Rather by Art than Nature seems to rise.
A bridled Dolphin often fair Thetis bore
To this her loved Retreat, her favorite Shore.
Here Peleus seized her, slumbring while she lay,
And urged his Suit with all that Love could say:
But when he found her obstinately coy,
Resolved to force her, and command the Joy.
The Nymph, o'erpower'd, to Art for Succor flies,
And various Shapes the eager Youth surprise:
A Bird she seems, but plies her Wings in vain,
His Hands the fleeting Substance still detain:
A branchy Tree high in the Air she grew;
About its Bark his nimble Arms he threw:
A Tiger next she glares with flaming Eyes;
The frightened Lover quits his Hold and flies:
The Sea-Gods he with sacred Rites adores,
Then a Libation on the Ocean pours;
While the fat Entrails crackle in the Fire,
And Sheets of Smoke in sweet Perfume aspire;
Till Proteus rising from his oozy Bed,
Thus to the poor desponding Lover said:
No more in anxious Thoughts your Mind employ,
For yet you shall possess the dear expected Joy.
You must once more the unwary Nymph surprise,
As in her cooly Grot she slumbring lies;
Then bind her fast with unrelenting Hands,
And strain her tender Limbs with knotted Bands.
Still hold her under every different Shape,
Till tired she tries no longer to escape.
Thus he: Then sunk beneath the glassy Flood,
And broken Accents fluttered where he stood.
Bright Sol had almost now his Journey done,
And down the steepy western Unequal run;
When the fair Nereid left the briny Wave,
And, as she used, retreated to her Cave.
He scarce had bound her fast, when she arose,
And into various Shapes her Body throws:
She went to move her Arms, and found 'em tied;
Then with a Sigh, Some God assists ye, cried,
And in her proper Shape stood blushing by his Side.
About her Waiste his longing Arms he flung,
From which Embrace the Great Achilles sprung.
The Transformation of DAEDALION.
Peleus unmixed Felicity enjoyed;
(Blessed in a valiant Son and virtuous Bride)
Till Fortune did in Blood his Hands imbrue,
And his own Brother by cursed Chance he slew:
Then driven from Thessaly, his native Clime,
Trachinia first gave Shelter to his Crime;
Where peaceful Ceyx mildly filled the Throne,
And like his Sire the Morning Planet shone;
But now, unlike himself, bedewed with Tears,
Mourning a Brother lost, his Brow appears.
First to the Town with Travel spent and Care,
Peleus and his small Company repair:
His Herds and Flocks the while at Leisure feed
On the rich Pasture of a neighboring Mead.
The Prince before the Royal Presence brought,
Showed by the suppliant Olive what he sought;
Then tells his Name, and Race, and Country right,
But hides the unhappy Reason of his Flight.
He begs the King some little Town to give,
Where they may safe his faithful Vassals live.
Ceyx replied: To all my Bounty flows,
A hospitable Realm your Suit has chose.
Your glorious Race, and far-resounding Fame,
And Grandsire Jove, peculiar Favors claim.
All you can wish, I grant; Entreaties spare;
My Kingdom (would 'twere worth the sharing) share.
Tears stopped his Speech: Astonished Peleus pleads
To know the Cause from whence his Grief proceeds.
The Prince replied: There Is none of ye but deems
This Hawk was ever such as now it seems:
Know 'twas a Hero once, Daedalion named,
For warlike Deeds and haughty Valor famed;
Like me to that bright Luminary born,
Who wakes Aurora, and brings on the Morn*
His Fierceness still remains, and Love of Blood,
Now Dread of Birds, and Tyrant of the Wood.
My Make was softer, Peace my greatest Care;
But this my Brother wholly bent on War;
Late Nations feared, and routed Armies fled
That Force, which now the timorous Pigeons dread.
A Daughter he possessed, divinely fair,
And scarcely yet had seen her Fifteenth Year;
Young Chione A thousand Rivals strove
To win the Maid, and teach her how to love.
Phoebus and Mercury by chance one Day
From Delphi and Cyllene past this Way;
Together they the Virgin saw: Desire
At once warmed both their Breasts with amorous Fire.
Phoebus resolved to wait till Close of Day;
But Mercury's hot Love brook'd no Delay;
With his entrancing Rod the Maid he charms,
And unresisted revels in her Arms.
'Twas Night, and Phoebus in a Beldam's Dress,
To the late rifled Beauty got Access.
Her time complete nine circling Moons had run;
To either God she bore a lovely Son:
To Mercury Autolycus she brought,
Who turned to Thefts and Tricks his subtle Thought;
Possessed he was of all his Father's Slight,
At Will made White look black, and Black look white,
Philammon born to Phoebus, like his Sire,
The Muses loved, and finely struck the Lyre,
And made his Voice and Touch in Harmony conspire.
In vain, fond Maid, you boast this double Birth,
The Love of Gods and Royal Father's Worth,
And Jove among your Ancestors rehearse!
Could Blessings such as these ever prove a Curse?
To her they did, who with audacious Pride,
Vain of her own, Diana's Charms decry'd.
Her Taunts the Goddess with Resentment fill;
My Face you like not, you shall try my Skill.
She said; and strait her vengeful Bow she strung,
And sent a Shaft that pierced her guilty Tongue:
The bleeding Tongue in vain its Accents tries;
In the red Stream her Soul reluctant flies.
With Sorrow wild I ran to her Relief,
And tried to moderate my Brother's Grief.
He, deaf as Rocks by stormy Surges beat,
Loudly laments, and hears me not entreat.
When on the Funeral Pile he saw her laid,
Thrice he to rush into the Flames assayed,
Thrice with officious Care by us was stayed.
Now, mad with Grief, away he fled amain,
Like a stung Heifer that resents the Pain,
And bellowing wildly bounds along the Plain.
Over the most rugged Ways so fast he ran,
He seemed a Bird already, not a Man:
He left us breathless all behind; and now
In quest of Death had gained Parnassus' Brow:
But when from thence headlong himself he threw,
He fell not, but with airy Pinions flew.
Phoebus in Pity changed him to a Fowl,
Whose crooked Beak and Claws the Birds control,
Little of Bulk, but of a warlike Soul.
A Hawk become, the feathered Race's Foe,
He tries to ease his own by other's Woe.
A Wolf turned into Marble.
While they astonished heard the King relate
These Wonders of his hapless Brother's Fate;
The Prince's Herdsman at the Court arrives,
And fresh Surprise to all the Audience gives.
O Peleus, Peleus, dreadful News I bear,
He said; and trembled as he spoke for Fear.
The worst, affrighted Peleus bid him tell,
Whilst Ceyx too grew pale with friendly Zeal.
Thus he began: When Sol Mid-heav'n had gained,
And half his Way was past, and half remained,
I to the level Shore my Cattle drove,
And let them freely in the Meadows rove;
Some stretched at length admire the watery Plain,
Some crop'd the Herb, some wanton swam the Main.
A Temple stands of antique Make hard by,
Where no gilt Domes nor Marble lure the Eye;
Unpolished Rafters bear its lowly Height,
Hid by a Grove, as ancient, from the Sight.
Here Nereus and the Nereids they adore;
I learnt it from the Man who thither bore
His Net, to dry it on the sunny Shore.
Adjoyns a Lake, enclosed with Willows round,
Where swelling Waves have over-flow'd the Mound,
And, muddy, stagnate on the lower Ground.
From thence a russling Noise increasing flies,
Strikes the still Shore, and frights us with Surprise.
Strait a huge Wolf rushed from the marshy Wood,
His Jaws besmeared with mingled Foam and Blood.
Though equally by Hunger urged and Rage,
His Appetite he minds not to assuage;
Naught that he meets, his rabid Fury spares,
But the whole Herd with mad Disorder tears.
Some of our Men who strove to drive him thence,
Torn by his Teeth, have died in their Defense.
The ecchoing Lakes, the Sea, and Fields, and Shore,
Impurpled blush with Streams of reeking Gore.
Delay is Loss, nor have we time for Thought;
While yet some few remain alive, we ought
To seize our Arms, and with confed'rate Force
Try if we so can stop his bloody Course.
But Peleus cared not for his ruined Herd;
His Crime he called to Mind, and thence inferred,
That Psammathe's Revenge this Havoc made,
In Sacrifice to murdered Phocus' Shade.
The King commands his Servants to their Arms,
Resolved to go; but the loud Noise alarms
His lovely Queen, who from her Chamber flew,
And her half-plaited Hair behind her threw:
About his Neck she hung with loving Fears,
And now with Words, and now with pleading Tears,
Entreated that he would send his Men alone,
And stay himself to save two Lives in one.
Then Peleus: Your just Fears, O Queen, forget;
Too much the Offer leaves me in your Debt.
No Arms against the Monster I shall bear,
But the Sea-Nymphs appease with humble Prayer.
The Citadel's high Turrets pierce the Sky,
Which home-bound Vessels, glad, from far descry;
This they ascend, and thence with Sorrow ken
The mangled Heifers lie, and bleeding Men;
The inexorable Ravager they view,
With Blood discolored, still the rest pursue:
There Peleus prayed submissive toward the Sea,
And deprecates the Ire of injured Psamathe.
But deaf to all his Prayers the Nymph remained,
Till Thetis for her Spouse the Boon obtained.
Pleased with the Luxury, the furious Beast,
Unstop'd, continues still his bloody Feast:
While yet upon a sturdy Bull he flew,
Changed by the Nymph, a Marble Block he grew.
No longer dreadful now the Wolf appears,
Buried in Stone, and vanished like their Fears.
Yet still the Fates unhappy Peleus vexed;
To the Magnesian Shore he wanders next.
Acastus there, who ruled the peaceful Clime,
Grants his Request, and expiates his Crime.
The Story of CEYX and ALCYONE
By Mr. DRYDEN.
These Prodigies affect the pious Prince,
But more perplexed with those that happened since,
He purposes to seek the Clarian God,
Avoiding Delphos, his more famed Abode,
Since Phlegyan Robbers made unsafe the Road.
Yet could he not from her he loved so well,
the fatal Voyage, he resolved, conceal;
But when she saw her Lord prepared to part,
A deadly Cold ran shivering to her Heart;
Her faded Cheeks are changed to boxen Hue,
And in her Eyes the Tears are ever new.
She thrice essayed to speak; her Accents hung,
And falt'ring died unfinished on her Tongue,
Or vanished into Sighs: With long Delay
Her Voice returned, and found the wonted way.
Tell me, my Lord, she said, what Fault unknown
Thy once beloved Alcyone has done?
Whither, ah whither, is thy Kindness gone!
Can Ceyx then sustain to leave his Wife,
And unconcerned forsake the Sweets of Life?
What can thy Mind to this long Journey move?
Or need'st thou Absence to renew thy Love?
Yet, if thou go by Land, though Grief possess
My Soul even then, my Fears will be the less.
But ah! be warned to shun the watery Way,
The Face is frightful of the stormy Sea:
For late I saw a-drift disjointed Planks,
And empty Tombs erected on the Banks.
Nor let false Hopes to Trust betray thy Mind,
Because my Sire in Caves constrains the Wind,
Can with a Breath their clamorous Rage appease,
They fear his Whistle, and forsake the Seas:
Not so; for once indulged, they sweep the Main;
Deaf to the Call, or hearing hear in vain;
But bent on Mischief bear the Waves before,
And not content with Seas, insult the Shore,
When Ocean, Air, and Earth at once engage,
And rooted Forests fly before their Rage:
At once the clashing Clouds to Battle move,
And Lightnings run across the Fields above:
I know them well, and marked their rude Comport,
While yet a Child, within my Father's Court:
In times of Tempest they command alone,
And he but sits precarious on the Throne:
The more I know, the more my Fears augment,
And Fears are often prophetic of the Event.
But if not Fears, or Reasons will prevail,
If Fate has fixed thee obstinate to sail,
Go not without thy Wife, but let me bear
My Part of Danger with an equal Share,
And present, what I suffer only fear:
Then over the bounding Billows shall we fly,
Secure to live together, or to die.
These Reasons moved her starlike Husband's Heart,
But still he held his Purpose to depart:
For as he loved her equal to his Life,
He would not to the Seas expose his Wife;
Nor could be wrought his Voyage to refrain,
But sought by Arguments to sooth her Pain:
Nor these availed; at length he lights on one,
With which so difficult a Cause he won:
My Love, so short an Absence cease to fear,
For by my Father's holy Flame, I swear,
Before two Moons their Orb with Light adorn.
If Heaven allow me Life, I will return.
This Promise of so short a Stay prevails;
He soon equips the Ship, supplies the Sails,
And gives the Word to launch; she trembling views
This Pomp of Death, and parting Tears renews:
Last with a Kiss, she took a long Farewell,
Sighed with a sad Presage, and swooning fell:
While Ceyx seeks Delays, the lusty Crew,
Raised on their Banks, their Oars in order drew
To their broad Breasts, the Ship with Fury flew.
The Queen recovered rears her humid Eyes,
And first her Husband on the Poop espies,
Shaking his Hand at Distance on the Main;
She took the Sign, and shook her Hand again.
Still as the Ground recedes, contracts her View
With sharpened Sight, till she no longer knew
The much-loved Face; that Comfort lost supplies
With less, and with the Galley feeds her Eyes;
The Galley born from View by rising Gales,
She followed with her Sight the flying Sails:
When even the flying Sails were seen no more,
Forsaken of all Sight, she left the Shore.
Then on her Bridal-Bed her Body throws,
And sought in Sleep her wearied Eyes to close:
Her Husband's Pillow, and the widowed part
Which once he pressed, renewed the former Smart.
And now a Breeze from Shore began to blow,
The Sailors ship their Oars, and cease to row;
Then hoist their Yards a-trip, and all their Sails
Let fall, to court the Wind, and catch the Gales:
By this the Vessel half her Course had run,
And as much rested till the rising Sun;
Both Shoars were lost to Sight, when at the Close
Of Day a stiffer Gale at East arose:
The Sea grew white, the rolling Waves from far,
Like Heralds, first denounce the watery War.
This seen, the Master soon began to cry,
Strike, strike the Top-sail; let the Main-sheet fly,
And furl your Sails: The Winds repel the Sound,
And in the Speaker's Mouth the Speech is drowned.
Yet of their own Accord, as Danger taught
Each in his Way, officiously they wrought;
Some stow their Oars, or stop the leaky Sides,
Another bolder yet the Yard bestrides,
And folds the Sails; a fourth with Labor laves
The intruding Seas, and Waves ejects on Waves.
In this Confusion while their Work they ply,
The Winds augment the Winter of the Sky,
And wage intestine Wars; the suffering Seas
Are tossed, and mingled as their Tyrants please.
The Master would command, but in despair
Of Safety, stands amazed with stupid Care,
Nor what to bid, or what forbid he knows,
The ungoverned Tempest to such Fury grows:
Vain is his Force, and vainer is his Skill;
With such a Concourse comes the Flood of Ill:
The Cries of Men are mixed with rattling Shrowds;
Seas dash on Seas, and Clouds encounter Clouds:
At once from East to West, from Pole to Pole,
The forky Lightnings flash, the roaring Thunders roll.
Now Waves on Waves ascending scale the Skies,
And in the Fires above the Water fries:
When yellow Sands are sifted from below,
The glittering Billows give a golden Show:
And when the fouler Bottom spews the Black,
The Stygian Dye the tainted Waters take:
Then frothy White appear the flatted Seas,
And change their Color, changing their Disease.
Like various Fits the Trachin Vessel finds,
And now sublime, she rides upon the Winds;
As from a lofty Summit looks from high,
And from the Clouds beholds the nether Sky;
Now from the Depth of Hell they lift their Sight,
And at a Distance see superior Light:
The lashing Billows make a loud Report,
And beat her Sides, as batt'ring Rams a Fort:
Or as a Lion bounding in his way,
With Force augmented, bears against his Prey,
Sidelong to seize; or unapal'd with Fear,
Springs on the Toils, and rushes on the Spear:
So Seas impelled by Winds, with added Power
Assault the Sides, and over the Hatches tower.
The Planks (their pitchy Covering washed away)
Now yield; and now a yawning Breach display:
The roaring Waters with a hostile Tide
Rush through the Ruins of her gaping Side.
Mean time in Sheets of Rain the Sky descends,
And Ocean swelled with Waters upwards tends;
One rising, falling one, the Heavens and Sea
Meet at their Confines, in the middle Way:
The Sails are drunk with Showers, and drop with Rain,
Sweet Waters mingle with the briny Main.
No Star appears to lend his friendly Light;
Darkness and Tempest make a double Night;
But flashing Fires disclose the Deep by turns,
And while the Lightenings blaze, the Water burns.
Now all the Waves their scattered Force unite,
And, as a Soldier, foremost in the Fight,
Makes way for others, and an Host alone
Still presses on, and urging gains the Town;
So while the invading Billows come abreast,
The Hero Tenth advanced before the rest,
Sweeps all before him with impetuous Sway,
And from the Walls descends upon the Prey;
Part following enter, Part remain without,
With Envy hear their Fellows conquering Shout,
And mount on others Backs, in hope to share
The City, thus become the Seat of War.
An universal Cry resounds aloud,
The Sailors run in Heaps, a helpless Crowd;
Art fails, and Courage falls, no Succor near;
As many Waves, as many Deaths appear.
One weeps, and yet despairs of late Relief;
One cannot weep, his Fears congeal his Grief,
But stupid, with dry Eyes expects his Fate:
One with loud Shrieks laments his lost Estate,
And calls those happy whom their Fun'rals wait.
This Wretch with Prayers and Vows the Gods implores,
And even the Skies he cannot see, adores.
That other on his Friends his Thoughts bestows,
His careful Father, and his faithful Spouse.
The covetous Wordling in his anxious Mind,
Thinks only on the Wealth he left behind.
All Ceyx his Alcyone employs,
For her he grieves, yet in her Absence joys:
His Wife he wishes, and would still be near,
Not her with him, but wishes him with her:
Now with last Looks he seeks his native Shore,
Which Fate has destined him to see no more;
He sought, but in the dark tempestuous Night
He knew not whither to direct his Sight.
So whirl the Seas, such Darkness blinds the Sky,
That the black Night receives a deeper Dye.
The giddy Ship ran round; the Tempest tore
Her Mast, and overboard the Rudder bore.
One Billow mounts; and with a scornful Brow,
Proud of her Conquest gained, insults the Waves below;
Nor lighter falls, than if some Giant tore
Pindus and Athos, with the Freight they bore,
And tossed on Seas; pressed with the ponderous Blow,
Down sinks the Ship within the Abyss below:
Down with the Vessel sink into the Main,
The many, never more to rise again.
Some few on scattered Planks, with fruitless Care,
Lay hold and swim, but while they swim, despair.
Even he who late a Scepter did command,
Now grasps a floating Fragment in his Hand;
And while he struggles on the stormy Main,
Invokes his Father, and his Wife's, in vain.
But yet his Consort is his greatest Care;
Alcyone he names amidst his Prayer;
Names as a Charm against the Waves and Wind;
Most in his Mouth, and ever in his Mind.
Tired with his Toil, all Hopes of Safety past,
From Prayers to Wishes he descends at last;
That his dead Body, wafted to the Sands,
Might have its Burial from her friendly Hands.
As often as he can catch a Gulp of Air,
And peep above the Seas, he names the Fair;
And even when plunged beneath, on her he raves,
Murmuring Alcyone below the Waves:
At last a falling Billow stops his Breath,
Breaks over his Head, and whelms him underneath.
Bright Lucifer unlike himself appears
That Night, his heavenly Form obscured with Tears,
And since he was forbid to leave the Skies,
He muffled with a Cloud his mournful Eyes.
Mean time Alcyone (his Fate unknown)
Computes how many Nights he had been gone,
Observes the waning Moon with hourly View,
Numbers her Age, and wishes for a new;
Against the promised Time provides with Care,
And hastens in the Woof the Robes he was to wear:
And for her Self employs another Loom,
New-dress'd to meet her Lord returning home,
Flattering her Heart with Joys that never were to come:
She fumed the Temples with an odorous Flame,
And often before the sacred Altars came,
To pray for him, who was an empty Name.
All Powers implored, but far above the rest
To Juno she her pious Vows addressed,
Her much-loved Lord from Perils to protect,
And safe over Seas his Voyage to direct:
Then prayed that she might still possess his Heart,
And no pretending Rival share a Part;
This last Petition heard of all her Prayer,
The rest, dispersed by Winds, were lost in Air.
But she, the Goddess of the Nuptial Bed,
Tired with her vain Devotions for the Dead,
Resolved the tainted Hand should be repelled,
Which Incense offered, and her Altar held:
Then Iris thus bespoke; Thou faithful Maid,
By whom thy Queen's Commands are well conveyed,
Haste to the House of Sleep, and bid the God
Who rules the Night by Visions with a Nod,
Prepare a Dream, in Figure and in Form
Resembling him who perished in the Storm;
This Form before Alcyone present,
To make her certain of the sad Event.
Indu'd with Robes of various Hue she flies,
And flying draws an Arch, (a Segment of the Skies:)
Then leaves her bending Bow, and from the Steep
Descends, to search the silent House of Sleep.
The House of SLEEP.
Near the Cymmerians, in his dark Abode,
Deep in a Cavern, dwells the drowzy God;
Whose gloomy Mansion nor the rising Sun,
Nor setting, visits, nor the lightsome Noon;
But lazy Vapors round the Region fly,
Perpetual Twilight, and a doubtful Sky:
No crowing Cock does there his Wings display,
Nor with his horny Bill provoke the Day;
Nor watchful Dogs, nor the more wakeful Geese,
Disturb with nightly Noise the sacred Peace;
Nor Beast of Nature, nor the Tame are nigh,
Nor Trees with Tempests rocked, nor human Cry;
But safe Repose without an Air of Breath
Dwells here, and a dumb Quiet next to Death.
An Arm of Lethe, with a gentle Flow
Arising upwards from the Rock below,
The Palace moats, and over the Pebbles creeps,
And with soft Murmurs calls the coming Sleeps.
Around its Entry nodding Poppies grow,
And all cool Simples that sweet Rest bestow;
Night from the Plants their sleepy Virtue drains,
And passing, sheds it on the silent Plains:
No Door there was the unguarded House to keep,
On creaking Hinges turned, to break his Sleep.
But in the gloomy Court was raised a Bed,
Stuffed with black Plumes, and on an Ebon-sted:
Black was the Covering too, where lay the God,
And slept supine, his Limbs displayed abroad:
About his Head fantastic Visions fly,
Which various Images of things supply,
And mock their Forms; the Leaves on Trees not more,
Nor bearded Ears in Fields, nor Sands upon the Shore.
The Virgin entering bright, indulged the Day
To the brown Cave, and brushed the Dreams away:
The God disturbed with this new Glare of Light,
Cast sudden on his Face, unsealed his Sight,
And raised his tardy Head, which sunk again,
And sinking, on his Bosom knocked his Chin;
At length shook off himself, and asked the Dame,
(And asking yawn'd) for what Intent she came.
To whom the Goddess thus: O sacred Rest,
Sweet pleasing Sleep, of all the Powers the best!
O Peace of Mind, Repairer of Decay,
Whose Balms renew the Limbs to Labors of the Day,
Care shuns thy soft Approach, and sullen flies away!
Adorn a Dream, expressing human Form,
The Shape of him who suffered in the Storm,
And send it flitting to the Trachin Court,
The Wreck of wretched Ceyx to report:
Before his Queen bid the pale Spectre stand,
Who begs a vain Relief at Juno's Hand.
She said, and scarce awake her Eyes could keep,
Unable to support the Fumes of Sleep;
But fled, returning by the way she went,
And swerved along her Bow with swift Ascent.
The God, uneasy till he slept again,
Resolved at once to rid himself of Pain;
And, though against his Custom, called aloud,
Exciting Morpheus from the sleepy Crowd:
Morpheus, of all his numerous Train, expressed
The Shape of Man, and imitated best;
The Walk, the Words, the Gesture could supply,
The Habit mimick, and the Mein belly;
Plays well, but all his Action is confined,
Extending not beyond our human Kind.
Another Birds, and Beasts, and Dragons apes,
And dreadful Images, and Monster Shapes:
This Demon, Icelos, in Heavens high Hall
The Gods have named; but Men Phobetor call.
A third is Phantasus, whose Actions roll
On meaner Thoughts, and Things devoid of Soul;
Earth, Fruits, and Flowers he represents in Dreams,
And solid Rocks unmoved, and running Streams.
These three to Kings and Chiefs their Scenes display,
The rest before the ignoble Commons play.
Of these the chosen Morpheus is dispatched;
Which done, the lazy Monarch, over-watch'd,
Down from his propping Elbow drops his Head,
Dissolved in Sleep, and shrinks within his Bed.
Darkling the Demon glides, for Flight prepared,
So soft, that scarce his fanning Wings are heard.
To Trachin, swift as Thought, the flitting Shade,
Through Air his momentary Journey made:
Then lays aside the Steerage of his Wings,
Forsakes his proper Form, assumes the King's;
And pale as Death, despoiled of his Array,
Into the Queen's Apartment takes his way,
And stands before the Bed at Dawn of Day:
Unmoved his Eyes, and wet his Beard appears;
And shedding vain, but seeming real Tears;
The briny Water dropping from his Hairs.
Then staring on her with a ghastly Look,
And hollow Voice, he thus the Queen bespoke.
Know thou not me? Not yet, unhappy Wife?
Or are my Features perished with my Life?
Look once again, and for thy Husband lost,
Lo all that is left of him, thy Husband's Ghost!
Thy Vows for my Return were all in vain;
The stormy South o'ertook us in the Main,
And never shall thou see thy living Lord again.
Bear witness, Heaven, I called on thee in Death,
And while I called, a Billow stopped my Breath.
Think not that flying Fame reports my Fate;
I present, I appear, and my own Wreck relate.
Rise, wretched Widow, rise; nor undeplor'd
Permit my Soul to pass the Stygian Ford;
But rise, prepared in Black, to mourn thy perished Lord.
Thus said the Player-God; and adding Art
Of Voice and Gesture, so performed his Part,
She thought (so like her Love the Shade appears)
That Ceyx spoke the Words, and Ceyx shed the Tears:
She groaned, her inward Soul with Grief oppressed,
She sighed, she wept, and sleeping beat her Breast;
Then stretched her Arms to embrace his Body bare;
Her clasping Arms enclose but empty Air:
At this, not yet awake, she cried, O stay;
One is our Fate, and common is our Way!
So dreadful was the Dream, so loud she spoke,
That starting sudden up, the Slumber broke:
Then cast her Eyes around, in hope to view
Her vanished Lord, and find the Vision true:
For now the Maids, who waited her Commands,
Ran in with lighted Tapers in their Hands.
Tired with the Search, not finding what she seeks,
With cruel Blows she pounds her blubbered Cheeks;
Then from her beaten Breast the Linen tare,
And cut the golden Caul that bound her Hair.
Her Nurse demands the Cause; with louder Cries,
She prosecutes her Griefs, and thus replies.
No more Alcyone she suffered Death
With her loved Lord, when Ceyx lost his Breath:
No Flattery, no false Comfort, give me none,
My shipwrecked Ceyx is for ever gone:
I saw, I saw him manifest in View,
His Voice, his Figure, and his Gestures knew:
His Luster lost, and every living Grace,
Yet I retained the Features of his Face;
Though with pale Cheeks, wet Beard, and dropping Hair,
None but my Ceyx could appear so fair:
I would have strained him with a strict Embrace,
But through my Arms he slipped, and vanished from the Place:
There, even just there he stood; and as she spoke,
Where last the Spectre was she cast her Look:
Fain would she hope, and gazed upon the Ground,
If any printed Footsteps might be found.
Then sighed and said; This I too well foreknew,
And my prophetic Fears presaged too true:
'Twas what I begged, when with a bleeding Heart
I took my Leave, and suffered thee to part;
Or I to go along, or Thou to stay,
Never, ah never to divide our Way!
Happier for me, that all our Hours assigned
Together we had lived; even not in Death disjoined!
So had my Ceyx still been living here,
Or with my Ceyx I had perished there:
Now I die absent, in the vast Profound;
And Me, without my Self, the Seas have drowned:
The Storms were not so cruel; should I strive
To lengthen Life, and such a Grief survive;
But neither will I strive, nor wretched Thee
In Death forsake, but keep thee Company.
If not one common Sepulcher contains
Our Bodies, or one Urn our last Remains,
Yet Ceyx and Alcyone shall join,
Their Names remembered in one common Line.
No farther Voice her mighty Grief affords,
For Sighs come rushing in betwixt her Words,
And stopped her Tongue; but what her Tongue denied,
Soft Tears, and Groans, and dumb Complaints supplied.
'Twas Morning; to the Port she takes her way,
And stands upon the Margin of the Sea:
That Place, that very Spot of Ground she sought,
Or thither by her Destiny was brought,
Where last he stood: And while she sadly said,
'Twas here he left me, lingering here delayed
His parting Kiss, and there his Anchors weighed.
Thus speaking, while her Thoughts past Actions trace,
And call to mind, admonished by the Place,
Sharp at her utmost Ken she cast her Eyes,
And somewhat floating from afar descries:
It seemed a Corpse adrift, to distant Sight,
But at a Distance who could judge aright?
It wafted nearer yet, and then she knew
That what before she but surmis'd, was true:
A Corpse it was, but whose it was, unknown,
Yet moved, however, she made the Case her own:
Took the bad Omen of a shipwrecked Man,
As for a Stranger wept, and thus began.
Poor Wretch, on stormy Seas to lose thy Life,
Unhappy thou, but more thy widowed Wife!
At this she paused; for now the flowing Tide
Had brought the Body nearer to the Side:
The more she looks, the more her Fears increase,
At nearer Sight; and she is her self the less:
Now driven ashore, and at her Feet it lies,
She knows too much, in knowing whom she sees:
Her Husband's Corpse; at this she loudly shrieks,
It Is he, it is he, she cries, and tears her Cheeks,
Her Hair, and Vest; and stooping to the Sands,
About his Neck she cast her trembling Hands.
And is it thus, O dearer than my Life,
Thus, thus return'st Thou to thy longing Wife!
She said, and to the neighboring Mole she strode,
(Raised there to break th'Incursions of the Flood;)
Headlong from hence to plunge her self she springs,
But shoots along supported on her Wings;
A Bird new-made, about the Banks she plies,
Not far from Shore, and short Excursions tries;
Nor seeks in Air her humble Flight to raise,
Content to skim the Surface of the Seas:
Her Bill, though slender, sends a creaking Noise,
And imitates a lamentable Voice.
Now lighting where the bloodless Body lies,
She with a Funeral Note renews her Cries:
At all her Stretch her little Wings she spread,
And with her feathered Arms embraced the Dead:
Then flick'ring to his palid Lips, she strove
To print a Kiss, the last Essay of Love.
Whether the vital Touch revived the Dead,
Or that the moving Waters raised his Head
To meet the Kiss, the Vulgar doubt alone;
For sure a present Miracle was shown.
The Gods their Shapes to Winter-Birds translate
But both obnoxious to their former Fate.
Their conjugal Affection still is tied,
And still the mournful Race is multiplied:
They bill, they tread; Alcyone compressed,
Sev'n Days sits brooding on her floating Nest:
A wintry Queen: Her Sire at length is kind,
Calms every Storm, and hushes every Wind;
Prepares his Empire for his Daughter's Ease,
And for his hatching Nephews smooths the Seas.
AESACUS transformed into a Cormorant.
These some old Man sees wanton in the Air,
And praises the unhappy constant Pair.
Then to his Friend the long-neck'd Corm'rant shows,
The former Tale reviving others Woes:
That sable Bird, he cries, which cuts the Flood
With slender Legs, was once of Royal Blood;
His Ancestors from mighty Tros proceed,
The brave Laomedon and Ganymede,
(Whose Beauty tempted Jove to steal the Boy)
And Priam, hapless Prince! who fell with Troy.
Himself was Hector's Brother, and (had Fate
But given his hopeful Youth a longer Date)
Perhaps had rivaled warlike Hector's Worth,
Though on the Mother's Side of meaner Birth;
Fair Alyxothoe, a Country Maid,
Bare Aesacus by stealth in Ida's Shade.
He fled the noisy Town and pompous Court,
Loved the lone Hills and simple rural Sport,
And seldom to the City would resort.
Yet he no rustic Clownishness professed.
Nor was soft Love a Stranger to his Breast:
The Youth had long the Nymph Hesperie wooed,
Often through the Thicket or the Mead pursued:
Her happily on her Father's Bank he spied,
While fearless she her silver Tresses dried;
Away she fled: Not Stags with half such Speed,
Before the prowling Wolf, scud over the Mead;
Not Ducks, when they the safer Flood forsake,
Pursued by Hawks, so swift regain the Lake.
As fast he followed in the hot Career;
Desire the Lover winged, the Virgin Fear.
A Snake unseen now pierced her heedless Foot;
Quick through the Veins the venomed Juices shoot:
She fell, and 'scap'd by Death his fierce Pursuit.
Her lifeless Body, frighted, he embraced,
And cried, Not this I dreaded, but thy Haste:
O had my Love been less, or less thy Fear!
The Victory, thus bought, is far too dear.
Accursed Snake! Yet I more cursed than he!
He gave the Wound; the Cause was given by me.
Yet none shall say that unrevenged you died.
He spoke; then climbed a Cliff's o'er-hanging Side,
And, resolute, leaped on the foaming Tide.
Tethys received him gently on the Wave;
The Death he sought denied, and Feathers gave*
Debarred the surest Remedy of Grief,
And forced to live, he cursed the unasked Relief.
Then on his airy Pinions upward flies,
And at a second Fall successless tries;
The downy Plume a quick Descent denies.
Enraged, he often dives beneath the Wave,
And there in vain expects to find a Grave.
His ceaseless Sorrow for the unhappy Maid,
Meager'd his Look, and on his Spirits preyed.
Still near the sounding Deep he lives; his Name
From frequent Diving and Emerging came.
The End of the Eleventh Book.
To Mrs Walpole.
R. Smith Sculp

OVID's METAMORPHOSES. BOOK XII.
Translated by Mr. DRYDEN.
The TROJAN War.
PRIAM, to whom the Story was unknown,
As dead, deplored his Metamorphos'd Son:
A Cenotaph his Name and Title kept,
And Hector round the Tomb, with all his Brothers, wept.
This pious Office Paris did not share,
Absent alone; and Author of the War,
Which, for the Spartan Queen, the Grecians drew
TO avenge the Rape; and Asia to subdue.
A thousand Ships were manned, to sail the Sea:
Nor had their just Resentments found Delay,
Had not the Winds and Waves opposed their Way.
At Aulis, with United Powers they meet,
But there, Cross-winds or Calms detained the Fleet.
Now, while they raise an Altar on the Shore,
And Jove with solemn Sacrifice adore;
A boding Sign the Priests and People see:
A Snake of Size immense ascends a Tree,
And, in the leasie Summit, spied a Nest,
Which over her Callow Young, a Sparrow pressed.
Eight were the Birds unfledged; their Mother flew,
And hovered round her Care; but still in view:
Till the fierce Reptile first devoured the Brood;
Then seized the fluttering Dam, and drunk her Blood.
This dire Ostent, the fearful People view;
Calchas alone, by Phoebus taught, foreknew
What Heaven decreed; and with a smiling Glance,
Thus gratulates to Greece her happy Chance.
O Argives, we shall Conquer: Troy is ours,
But long Delays shall first afflict our Powers:
Nine Years of Labor, the nine Birds portend;
The Tenth shall in the Town's Destruction end.
The Serpent, who his Maw obscene had filled,
The Branches in his curled Embraces held:
But, as in Spires he stood, he turned to Stone:
The stony Snake retained the Figure still his own.
Yet, not for this, the Wind-bound Navy weighed;
Slack were their Sails; and Neptune disobeyed.
Some thought him loath the Town should be destroyed,
Whose Building had his Hands Divine employed:
Not so the Seer; who knew, and known foreshow'd,
The Virgin Phoebe, with a Virgin's Blood
Must first be reconciled: The common Cause
Prevailed; and Pity yielding to the Laws,
Fair Iphigenia the devoted Maid
Was, by the weeping Priests, in Linnen-Robes arrayed;
All mourn her Fate; but no Relief appeared:
The Royal Victim bound, the Knife already reared:
When that offended Power, who caused their Woe,
Relenting ceased her Wrath; and stopped the coming Blow.
A Mist before the Ministers she cast,
And, in the Virgin's room, a Hind she placed.
The Oblation slain, and Phaebe reconciled,
The Storm was hushed, and dimpled Ocean smiled:
A favorable Gale arose from Shore,
Which to the Port desired, the Grecian Galleys bore.
The House of FAME.
Full in the midst of this created Space,
Betwixt Heaven, Earth, and Skies, there stands a Place,
Confining on all three, with triple Bound;
Whence all Things, though remote, are viewed around;
And thither bring their undulating Sound.
The Palace of loud Fame, her Seat of Power,
Placed on the Summet of a lofty Tower;
A thousand winding Entries long and wide,
Receive of fresh Reports a flowing Tide.
A thousand Crannies in the Walls are made;
Nor Gate nor Bars exclude the busy Trade.
It Is built of Brass, the better to diffuse
The spreading Sounds, and multiply the News:
Where Eccho's in repeated Eccho's play:
A Mart for ever full; and open Night and Day.
Nor Silence is within, nor Voice express,
But a deaf Noise of Sounds that never cease.
Confused, and chiding, like the hollow Roar
Of Tides, receding from the insulted Shore.
Or like the broken Thunder, heard from far,
When Jove to distance drives the rolling War.
The Courts are filled with a tumultuous Din
Of Crowds, or issuing forth, or entering in:
A thorough-fare of News: Where some devise
Things never heard, some mingle Truth with Lies,
The troubled Air with empty Sounds they beat,
Intent to hear, and eager to repeat.
Error sits brooding there, with added Train
Of vain Credulity, and Joys as vain:
Suspicion, with Sedition joined, are near;
And Rumors raised, and Murmurs mixed, and Panique Fear.
Fame sits aloft, and sees the subject Ground;
And Seas about, and Skies above; enquiring all around.
The Goddess gives the Alarm; and soon is known
The Grecian Fleet, descending on the Town.
Fixed on Defense the Trojans are not slow
To guard their Shore, from an expected Foe.
They meet in Fight: By Hector's fatal Hand
Protesilaus falls, and bites the Strand:
Which with Expense of Blood the Grecians won;
And proved the Strength unknown of Priam's Son.
And to their Cost the Trojan Leaders felt
The Grecian Heroes; and what Deaths they dealt.
The Story of CYGNUS.
From these first Onsets, the Sigaean Shore
Was strewn with Carcasses, and stained with Gore:
Neptunian Cygnus Troops of Greeks had slain;
Achilles in his Carr had scoured the Plain,
And cleared the Trojan Ranks: Wherever he fought,
Cygnus, or Hector, through the Fields he sought:
Cygnus he found; on him his Force essayed:
For Hector was to the tenth Year delayed.
His white manned Steeds, that bowed beneath the Yoke,
He cheered to Courage, with a gentle Stroke;
Then urged his fiery Chariot on the Foe;
And rising shook his Lance; in act to throw.
But first he cried, O Youth, be proud to bear
Thy Death, ennobled by Pelides' Spear.
The Lance pursued the Voice without delay,
Nor did the whizzing Weapon miss the way;
But pierced his Cuirass, with such Fury sent,
And signed his Bosom with a Purple Dint.
At this the Seed of Neptune; Goddess-born,
For Ornament, not Use, these Arms are worn;
This Helm, and heavy Buckler, I can spare;
As only Decorations of the War:
So Mars is armed for Glory, not for Need.
It Is somewhat more from Neptune to proceed,
Than from a Daughter of the Sea to spring:
Thy Sire is Mortal; mine is Ocean's King.
Secure of Death, I should contemn thy Dart,
Though naked; and impassible depart:
He said, and threw: The trembling Weapon passed
Through nine Bull-hides, each under other placed,
On his broad Shield; and stuck within the last.
Achilles wrench'd it out; and sent again
The hostile Gift: The hostile Gift was vain.
He tried a third, a tough well-chosen Spear;
The inviolable Body stood sincere,
Though Cygnus then did no Defense provide,
But scornful offered his unshielded Side.
Not otherwise the impatient Hero fared,
Than as a Bull, encompassed with a Guard,
Amid the Circus roars, provoked from far
By sight of Scarlet, and a sanguine War:
They quit their Ground, his bended Horns elude;
In vain pursuing, and in vain pursued.
Before to farther Fight he would advance,
He stood considering, and surveyed his Lance.
Doubts if he wielded not a wooden Spear
Without a Point: He looked, the Point was there.
This is my Hand, and this my Lance, he said;
By which so many thousand Foes are dead.
O whither is their usual Virtue fled!
I had it once; and the Lyrnessian Wall,
And Tenedos, confessed it in their Fall.
Thy Streams, Caicus, rolled a Crimson-Flood;
And Thebes ran red with her own Natives Blood.
Twice Telephus employed their piercing Steel,
To wound him first, and afterward to heal.
The Vigor of this Arm was never vain:
And that my wonted Prowess I retain,
Witness these Heaps of Slaughter on the Plain.
He said; and, doubtful of his former Deeds,
To some new Trial of his Force proceeds.
He chose Menaetes from among the rest;
At him he lanch'd his Spear, and pierced his Breast:
On the hard Earth the Lycian knocked his Head,
And lay supine; and forth the Spirit fled.
Then thus the Hero; Neither can I blame
The Hand, or Javelin; both are still the same.
The same I will employ against this Foe;
And wish but with the same Success to throw.
So spoke the Chief; and while he spoke he threw;
The Weapon with unerring Fury flew,
At his left Shoulder aimed: Nor Entrance found;
But back, as from a Rock, with swift Rebound
Harmless returned: A bloody Mark appeared,
Which with false Joy the flattered Hero cheered.
Wound there was none; the Blood that was in view,
The Lance before from slain Menaetes drew.
Headlong he leaps from off his lofty Car,
And in close Fight on Foot renews the War.
Raging with high Disdain, repeats his Blows;
Nor Shield nor Armor can their Force oppose;
Huge Cantlets of his Buckler strew the Ground,
And no Defense in his bored Arms is found.
But on his Flesh, no Wound or Blood is seen;
The Sword it self is blunted on the Skin.
This vain Attempt the Chief no longer bears;
But round his hollow Temples and his Ears
His Buckler beats: The Son of Neptune, stunned
With these repeated Buffets, quits his Ground;
A sickly Sweat succeeds, and Shades of Night;
Inverted Nature swims before his Sight:
The insulting Victor presses on the more,
And treads the Steps the Vanquished trod before.
Nor Rest, nor Respite gives. A Stone there lay
Behind his trembling Foe, and stopped his Way:
Achilles took the Advantage which he found,
O'er-turn'd, and pushed him backward on the Ground.
His Buckler held him under, while he pressed,
With both his Knees above, his panting Breast.
Unlac'd his Helm: About his Chin the Twist
He tied; and soon the strangled Soul dismissed.
With eager Haste he went to strip the Dead:
The vanished Body from his Arms was fled.
His Sea-God Sire, t'immortalize his Frame,
Had turned it to the Bird that bears his Name.
A Truce succeeds the Labors of this Day,
And Arms suspended with a long Delay.
While Trojan Walls are kept with Watch and Ward;
The Greeks before their Trenches mount the Guard;
The Feast approached; when to the blue-ey'd Maid
His Vows for Cygnus slain the Victor paid,
And a white Heyfer on her Altar laid.
The reeking Entrails on the Fire they threw,
And to the Gods the grateful Odor flew:
Heaven had its Part in Sacrifice: The rest
Was broiled and roasted for the future Feast.
The chief invited Guests were set around:
And Hunger first asswag'd, the Bowls were crowned,
Which in deep Draughts their Cares and Labors drowned.
The mellow Harp did not their Ears employ:
And mute was all the Warlike Symphony:
Discourse, the Food of Souls, was their Delight,
And pleasing Chat prolonged the Summers-night.
The Subject, Deeds of Arms; and Valor shown,
Or on the Trojan Side, or on their own.
Of Dangers undertaken, Fame achieved,
They talked by turns; the Talk by turns relieved.
What Things but these could fierce Achilles tell,
Or what could fierce Achilles hear so well?
The last great Act performed, of Cygnus slain,
Did most the Martial Audience entertain:
Wondering to find a Body free by Fate
From Steel; and which could even that Steel rebate:
Amazed, their Admiration they renew;
And scarce Pelides could believe it true.
The Story of CAENEUS.
Then Nestor thus: What once this Age has known,
In fated Cygnus, and in him alone,
These Eyes have seen in Caeneus long before;
Whose Body not a thousand Swords could bore.
Caeneus, in Courage, and in Strength, excelled;
And still his Othry's with his Fame is filled:
But what did most his Martial Deeds adorn,
(Though since he changed his Sex) a Woman born.
A Novelty so strange, and full of Fate,
His listening Audience asked him to relate.
Achilles thus commends their common Suit;
O Father, first for Prudence in Repute,
Tell, with that Eloquence, so much thy own,
What thou have heard, or what of Caeneus known:
What was he, whence his Change of Sex begun,
What Trophies, joined in Wars with thee, he won?
Who conquered him, and in what fatal Strife
The Youth, without a Wound, could lose his Life?
Neleides then; Though tardy Age, and Time,
Have shrunk my Sinews, and decayed my Prime;
Though much I have forgotten of my Store,
Yet not exhausted, I remember more.
Of all that Arms achieved, or Peace designed,
That Action still is fresher in my Mind
Than ought beside. If reverend Age can give
To Faith a Sanction, in my third I live.
'Twas in my second Cent'ry, I surveyed
Young Caenis, then a fair Thessalian Maid:
Caenis the bright, was born to high Command;
A Princess, and a Native of thy Land,
Divine Achilles; every Tongue proclaimed
Her Beauty, and her Eyes all Hearts inflamed.
Peleus, thy Sire, perhaps had sought her Bed,
Among the rest; but he had either led
Thy Mother then; or was by Promise tied;
But she to him, and all, alike her Love denied.
It was her Fortune once, to take her Way
Along the sandy Margin of the Sea:
The Power of Ocean viewed her as she passed,
And, loved as soon as seen, by Force embraced.
So Fame reports. Her Virgin-Treasure seized,
And his new Joys, the Ravisher so pleased,
That thus, transported, to the Nymph he cried;
Ask what thou will, no Prayer shall be denied.
This also Fame relates: The haughty Fair,
Who not the Rape even of a God could bear,
This Answer, proud, returned: To mighty Wrongs
A mighty Recompense, of right, belongs.
Give me no more to suffer such a Shame;
But change the Woman, for a better Name;
One Gift for all: She said; and while she spoke,
Aster n, majestic, manly Tone she took.
A Man she was: And as the Godhead swore,
To Caeneus turned, who Caenis was before.
To this the Lover adds, without Request,
No force of Steel should violate his Breast.
Glad of the Gift, the new-made Warrior goes;
And Arms among the Greeks, and longs for equal Foes.
The Skirmish between the CENTAURS and LAPITHITES.
Now brave Perithous, bold Ixion's Son,
The Love of fair Hippodame had won.
The Cloud-begotten Race, half Men, half Beast,
Invited, came to grace the Nuptial Feast:
In a cool Cave's Recess the Treat was made,
Whose Entrance, Trees with spreading Boughs o'ershade.
They sat: And summoned by the Bridegroom, came,
To mix with those, the Lapythaean Name:
Nor wanted I: The Roofs with Joy resound:
And Hymen, Io Hymen, rung around.
Raised Altars shone with holy Fires; the Bride,
Lovely her self (and lovely by her Side
A Bevy of bright Nymphs, with sober Grace,)
Came glittering like a Star, and took her Place.
Her Heavenly Form beheld, all wished her Joy;
And little wanted, but in vain, their Wishes all employ.
For One, most Brutal, of the Brutal Brood,
Or whether Wine or Beauty fired his Blood,
Or both at once, beheld with lustful Eyes
The Bride; at once resolved to make his Prize.
Down went the Board; and fastening on her Hair,
He seized with sudden Force the frighted Fair.
It Was Eurytus began: His bestial Kind
His Crime pursued; and each as pleased his Mind,
Or her, whom Chance presented, took: The Feast
An Image of a taken Town expressed.
The Cave resounds with Female Shrieks; we rise,
Mad with Revenge, to make a swift Reprise:
And Theseus first; What Frenzy has possessed,
O Eurytus, he cried, thy brutal Breast,
To wrong Perithous, and not him alone,
But while I live, two Friends conjoined in one?
To justify his Threat, he thrusts aside
The Crowd of Centaurs; and redeems the Bride:
The Monster naught replied: For Words were vain;
And Deeds could only Deeds unjust maintain:
But answers with his Hand; and forward pressed,
With Blows redoubled, on his Face and Breast.
An ample Goblet stood, of antic Mold,
And rough with Figures of the rising Gold;
The Hero snatched it up, and tossed in Air,
Full at the Front of the foul Ravisher.
He falls; and falling vomits forth a Flood
Of Wine, and Foam and Brains, and mingled Blood.
Half roaring, and half neighing through the Hall,
Arms, Arms, the double-form'd with Fury call;
To wreak their Brother's Death: A Medley-Flight
Of Bowls and Jars, at first supply the Fight.
Once Instruments of Feasts; but now of Fate;
Wine animates their Rage, and arms their Hate.
Bold Amycus, from the robbed Vestry brings
The Chalices of Heaven; and holy Things
Of precious Weight: A Sconce, that hung on high,
With Tapers filled, to light the Sacristy,
Torn from the Cord, with his unhallowed Hand
He threw amid the Lapythaean Band.
On Celadon the Ruin fell; and left
His Face of Feature and of Form bereft:
So, when some brawny Sacrificer knocks,
Before an Altar led, an offered Ox,
His Eye Balls rooted out, are thrown to Ground;
His Nose, dismantled, in his Mouth is found;
His Jaws, Cheeks, Front, one undistinguished Wound.
This, Belates, the Avenger, could not brook;
But, by the Foot, a Maple-board he took;
And hurled at Amycus; his Chin it bent
Against his Chest, and down the Centaur sent:
Whom sputtring bloody Teeth, the second Blow
Of his drawn Sword, dispatched to Shades below.
Grineus was near; and cast a furious Look
On the Side-Altar, cens'd with sacred Smoke,
And bright with flaming Fires; The Gods, he cried,
Have with their holy Trade our Hands supplied:
Why use we not their Gifts? Then from the Floor
An Altar-Stone he heaved, with all the Load it bore:
Altar and Altar's Freight together flew,
Where thickest thronged the Lapythaean Crew:
And, at once, Broteas and Oryus slew.
Oryus' Mother, Mycale, was known
Down from her Sphere to draw the laboring Moon.
Exadius cried, unpunished shall not go
This Fact, if Arms are found against the Foe.
He looked about, where on a Pine were spread
The votive Horns of a Stag's branching Head:
At Grineus these he throws; so just they fly,
That the sharp Antlers stuck in either Eye:
Breathless and Blind he fell; with Blood besmeared;
His Eye Balls beaten out, hung dangling on his Beard.
Fierce Rhaetus, from the Hearth a burning Brand
Selects, and whirling waves; till, from his Hand
The Fire took Flame; then dashed it from the right,
On fair Charaxus' Temples, near the Sight:
The whistling Pest came on, and pierced the Bone,
And caught the yellow Hair, that shrivel'd while it shone.
Caught, like dry Stubble fired; or like Seerwood;
Yet from the Wound ensued no Purple Flood;
But looked a bubbling Mass, of frying Blood.
His blazing Locks sent forth a crackling Sound;
And hissed, like red hot Iron within the Smithy drowned.
The wounded Warrior shook his flaming Hair,
Then (what a Team of Horse could hardly rear)
He heaves the Threshold-Stone; but could not throw;
The Weight it self forbad the threatened Blow;
Which dropping from his lifted Arms, came down
Full on Cometes' Head; and crushed his Crown.
Nor Rhaetus then retained his Joy; but said,
So by their Fellows may our Foes be sped;
Then, with redoubled Strokes he plies his Head:
The burning Lever not deludes his Pains;
But drives the battered Skull within the Brains.
Thus flushed, the Conqueror, with Force renewed,
Evagrus, Dryas, Corythus, pursued:
First, Corythus, with downy Cheeks, he slew;
Whose Fall, when fierce Evagrus had in view,
He cried, What Palm is from a beardless Prey?
Rhaetus prevents what more he had to say;
And drove within his Mouth the fiery Death,
Which entered hissing in, and choked his Breath.
At Dryas next he flew: But weary Chance,
No longer would the same Success advance.
For while he whirled in fiery Circles round
The Brand, a sharpened Stake strong Dryas found;
And in the Shoulder's Joint inflicts the Wound.
The Weapon stuck; which, roaring out with Pain,
He drew; nor longer durst the Fight maintain,
But turned his Back, for Fear; and fled amain.
With him fled Orneus, with like Dread possessed;
Thaumas, and Medon wounded in the Breast;
And Mermcros, in the late Race renowned,
Now limping ran, and tardy with his Wound.
Pholus and Melaneus from Fight withdrew,
And Abas maimed, who Boars encountering slew:
And Augur Astylos, whose Art in vain,
From Fight dissuaded the four-footed Train,
Now beat the Hoof with Nessus on the Plain;
But to his Fellow cried, Be safely slow,
Thy Death deferred is due to Great Alcides' Bow.
Mean time strong Dryas urged his Chance so well,
That Lycidas, Areos, Imbreus fell;
All, one by one, and fighting Face to Face:
Crenaeus fled, to fall with more Disgrace:
For, fearful, while he looked behind, he bore,
Betwixt his Nose and Front, the Blow before.
Amid the Noise and Tumult of the Fray,
Snoring, and drunk with Wine, Aphidas lay.
Even then the Bowl within his Hand he kept:
And on a Bear's rough Hide securely slept.
Him Phorbas with his flying Dart transfixed;
Take thy next Draught, with Stygian Waters mixed,
And sleep thy fill, the insulting Victor cried;
Surpised with Death unfelt, the Centaur died;
The ruddy Vomit, as he breathed his Soul,
Repassed his Throat, and filled his empty Bowl.
I saw Petraeus' Arms employed around
A well-groan Oak, to root it from the Ground.
This way, and that, he wrench'd the fibrous Bands;
The Trunk was like a Sappling in his Hands,
And still obeyed the Bent: While thus he stood,
Perithous' Dart drove on; and nailed him to the Wood.
Lycus, and Chromys fell, by him oppressed:
Helops, and Dictys added to the rest
A nobler Palm: Helops, through either Ear
Transfixed, received the penetrating Spear.
This Dictys saw; and, seized with sudden Fright,
Leapt headlong from the Hill of steepy height;
And crushed an Ash beneath, that could not bear his weight.
The shattered Tree receives his Fall; and strikes,
Within his full-blown Paunch, the sharpened Spikes.
Strong Aphareus had heaved a mighty Stone,
The Fragment of a Rock; and would have thrown;
But Theseus, with a Club of hardened Oak,
The Cubit-bone of the bold Centaur broke;
And left him maimed; nor seconded the Stroke.
Then leapt on tall Bianor's Back: (Who bore
No mortal Burden but his own, before)
Pressed with his Knees his Sides; the double Man,
His speed with Spurs increased, unwilling ran.
One Hand the Hero fastened on his Locks;
His other plied him with repeated Strokes.
The Club rung round his Ears, and battered Brows;
He falls; and lashing up his Heels, his Rider throws.
The same Herculean Arms, Nedymnus wound;
And lay by him Lycotas on the Ground.
And Hippasus, whose Beard his Breast invades;
And Ripheus, Haunter of the Woodland Shades:
And Tereus, used with Mountain-Bears to strive;
And from their Dens to draw th'indignant Beasts alive.
Demoleon could not bear this hateful Sight,
Or the long Fortune of the Athenian Knight:
But pulled with all his Force, to disengage
From Earth a Pine, the Product of an Age:
The Root stuck fast: The broken Trunk he sent
At Theseus: Theseus frustrates his Intent,
And leaps aside; by Pallas warned, the Blow
To shun: (for so he said; and we believed it so.)
Yet not in vain the enormous Weight was cast;
Which Crantor's Body sunder'd at the Waist:
Thy Father's 'Squire, Achilles, and his Care;
Whom conquered in the Polopeian War,
Their King, his present Ruin to prevent,
A Pledge of Peace implored, to Peleus sent.
Thy Sire, with grieving Eyes, beheld his Fate;
And cried, Not long, loved Crantor, shall thou wait
Thy vowed Revenge. At once he said, and threw
His Ashen-Spear; which quiver'd, as it flew;
With all his Force, and all his Soul applied;
The sharp Point entered in the Centaur's Side:
Both Hands, to wrench it out, the Monster joined;
And wrench'd it out; but left the Steel behind.
Stuck in his Lungs it stood: Enraged he rears
His Hoofs, and down to Ground thy Father bears.
Thus trampled under Foot, his Shield defends
His Head; his other Hand the Lance protends.
Even while he lay extended on the Dust,
He sped the Centaur, with one single Thrust.
Two more, his Lance before transfixed from far;
And two, his Sword had slain, in closer War.
To these was added Dorylas, who spread
A Bull's two goring Horns around his Head.
With these he pushed; in Blood already died,
Him, fearless, I approached; and thus defied:
Now Monster, now, by Proof it shall appear,
Whether thy Horns are sharper, or my Spear.
At this, I threw: For want of other Ward,
He lifted up his Hand, his Front to guard.
His Hand it passed; and fixed it to his Brow:
Loud Shouts of ours attend the lucky Blow.
Him Peleus finished, with a second Wound,
Which through the Navel pierced: He reeled around;
And dragged his dangling Bowels on the Ground.
Trod what he dragged; and what he trod he crushed:
And to his Mother-Earth, with empty Belly, rushed.
The Story of CYLLARUS and HYLONOME.
Nor could thy Form, O Cyllarus, foreslow
Thy Fate; (if Form to Monsters Men allow:)
Just bloomed thy Beard: Thy Beard of golden Hue:
Thy Locks, in golden Waves, about thy Shoulders flew.
Sprightly thy Look: Thy Shapes in every Part
So clean, as might instruct the Sculptor's Art;
As far as Man extended: Where began
The Beast, the Beast was equal to the Man.
Add but a Horse's Head and Neck; and he,
O Castor, was a Courser worthy thee.
So was his Back proportioned for the Seat;
So rose his brawny Chest; so swiftly moved his Feet.
Coal-black his Color, but like Jet it shone;
His Legs and flowing Tail were white alone.
Beloved by many Maidens of his Kind;
But Fair Hylonome possessed his Mind;
Hylonome, for Features, and for Face,
Excelling all the Nymphs of double Race:
Nor less her Blandishments, than Beauty, move;
At once both loving, and confessing Love.
For him she dressed: For him with Female Care
She combed, and set in Curls, her auborn Hair.
Of Roses, Violets, and Lillies mixed,
And Sprigs of flowing Rosemary betwixt,
She formed the Chaplet, that adorned her Front:
In Waters of the Pagasaean Fount,
And in the Streams that from the Fountain play,
She washed her Face; and bathed her twice a Day.
The Scarf of Furs, that hung below her Side,
Was Ermin, or the Panther's spotted Pride;
Spoils of no common Beast: With equal Flame
They loved: Their Silvan Pleasures were the same:
All Day they hunted: And when Day expired,
Together to some shady Cave retired:
Invited to the Nuptials, both repair:
And, Side by Side, they both engage in War.
Uncertain from what Hand, a flying Dart
At Cyllarus was sent; which pierced his Heart.
The Javelin drawn from out the mortal Wound,
He faints with stagg'ring Steps; and seeks the Ground:
The Fair, within her Arms received his Fall,
And strove his wandering Spirits to recall:
And while her Hand the streaming Blood opposed,
Joined Face to Face, his Lips with hers she closed.
Stifled with Kisses, a sweet Death he dies;
She fills the Fields with undistinguished Cries:
At least her Words were in her Clamor drowned;
For my stunned Ears received no vocal Sound.
In madness of her Grief, she seized the Dart
New-drawn, and reeking from her Lover's Heart;
To her bare Bosom the sharp Point applied;
And wounded fell; and falling by his Side,
Embraced him in her Arms; and thus embracing, died.
Even still methinks, I see Phaeocomes;
Strange was his Habit, and as odd his Dress.
Six Lions Hides, with Thongs together fast,
His upper Part defended to his Waist:
And where Man ended, the continued Vest,
Spread on his Back, the Houss and Trappings of a Beast.
A Stump too heavy for a Team to draw,
(It seems a Fable, though the Fact I saw;)
He threw at Pholon; the descending Blow
Divides the Skull, and cleaves his Head in two.
The Brains, from Nose and Mouth, and either Ear,
Came issuing out, as through a Colendar
The curdled Milk; or from the Press the Whey,
Driven down by Weights above, is drained away.
But him, while stooping down to spoil the Slain,
Pierced through the Paunch, I tumbled on the Plain.
Then Chthonyus, and Teleboas I slew:
A Fork the former armed; a Dart his Fellow threw.
The Javelin wounded me; (behold the Scar.)
Then was my Time to seek the Trojan War;
Then I was Hector's Match in open Field;
But he was then unborn; at least a Child:
Now, I am nothing. I forbear to tell
By Periphantas how Pyretus fell;
The Centaur by the Knight: Nor will I stay
On Amphyx, or what Deaths he dealt that Day:
What Honor, with a pointless Lance, he won,
Stuck in the Front of a Four-footed Man.
What Fame young Macareus obtained in Fight:
Or dwell on Nessus, now returned from Flight.
How Prophet Mopsus not alone divined,
Whose Valor equaled his foreseeing Mind.
CAENEUS transformed to an EAGLE.
Already Caeneus, with his conquering Hand,
Had slaughtered five the boldest of their Band.
Pyrachmus, Helymus, Antimachus,
Bromus the Brave, and stronger Stiphelus,
Their Names I numbered, and remember well,
No Trace remaining, by what Wounds they fell.
Latreus, the bulkiest of the double Race,
Whom the spoiled Arms of slain Halesus grace,
In Years retaining still his Youthful Might,
Though his black Hairs were interspersed with White,
Betwixt th'imbattled Ranks began to prance,
Proud of his Helm, and Macedonian Lance;
And rode the Ring around; that either Host
Might hear him, while he made this empty Boast.
And from a Strumpet shall we suffer Shame,
For Caenis still, not Caeneus is thy Name:
And still the Native Softness of thy Kind
Prevails; and leaves the Woman in thy Mind?
Remember what thou were; what Price was paid
To change thy Sex; to make thee not a Maid;
And but a Man in show: Go, card and spin;
And leave the Business of the War to Men.
While thus the Boaster exercised his Pride,
The fatal Spear of Caeneus reached his Side:
Just in the mixture of the Kinds it ran;
Betwixt the nether Beast, and upper Man:
The Monster mad with Rage, and stung with Smart,
His Lance directed at the Hero's Heart:
It struck; but bounded from his hardened Breast,
Like Hail from Tiles, which the safe House invest.
Nor seemed the Stroke with more effect to come,
Than a small Pebble falling on a Drum.
He next his Fauchion tried, in closer Fight;
But the keen Fauchion had no Power to bite.
He thrust; the blunted Point returned again:
Since downright Blows, he cried, and Thrusts are vain,
I Will prove his Side; in strong Embraces held
He proved his Side; his Side the Sword repelled:
His hollow Belly echoed to the Stroke;
Untouched his Body, as a solid Rock;
Aimed at his Neck at last, the Blade in Shivers broke.
Th'Impassive Knight stood Idle, to deride
His Rage, and offered often his naked Side;
At length, now Monster, in thy turn, he cried,
Try thou the Strength of Caeneus: At the Word
He thrust; and in his Shoulder plunged the Sword.
Then writhed his Hand; and as he drove it down,
Deep in his Breast, made many Wounds in one.
The Centaurs saw, enraged, th'unhop'd Success;
And rushing on, in Crowds, together press;
At him, and him alone, their Darts they threw:
Repulsed they from his fated Body flew.
Amazed they stood; till Monychus began,
O Shame, a Nation conquered by a Man!
A Woman-Man; yet more a Man is He,
Than all our Race; and what He was, are We.
Now, what avail our Nerves? the united Force,
Of two the strongest Creatures, Man and Horse;
Nor Goddess-born; nor of Ixion's Seed
We seem; (a Lover built for Juno's Bed;)
Mastered by this half Man. Whole Mountains throw
With Woods at once, and bury him below.
This only way remains. Nor need we doubt
To choke the Soul within; though not to force it out:
Heap Weights, instead of Wounds. He chanced to see
Where Southern Storms had rooted up a Tree;
This, raised from Earth, against the Foe he threw;
The Example shown, his Fellow-Brutes pursue.
With Forest-loads the Warrior they invade;
Othrys and Pelion soon were void of Shade;
And spreading Groves were naked Mountains made.
Pressed with the Burden, Caeneus pants for Breath;
And on his Shoulders bears the Wooden Death.
To heave th'intolerable Weight he tries;
At length it rose above his Mouth and Eyes:
Yet still he heaves; and, struggling with Despair,
Shakes all aside, and gains a gulp of Air:
A short Relief, which but prolongs his Pain;
He faints by Fits; and then respires again:
At last, the Burden only nods above,
As when an Earthquake stirs the Idaean Grove.
Doubtful his Death: He suffocated seemed,
To most; but otherwise our Mopsus deemed.
Who said he saw a yellow Bird arise
From out the Pile, and cleave the liquid Skies:
I saw it too, with golden Feathers bright;
Nor ever before beheld so strange a Sight.
Whom Mopsus viewing, as it soared around
Our Troop, and heard the Pinions rattling Sound,
All hail, he cried, thy Country's Grace and Love;
Once first of Men below, now first of Birds above.
Its Author to the Story gave Belief:
For us, our Courage was increased by Grief:
Ashamed to see a single Man, pursued
With odds, to sink beneath a Multitude,
We pushed the Foe; and, forced to shameful Flight,
Part fell, and Part escaped by Favor of the Night.
The Fate of PERICLYMENOS.
This Tale by Nestor told did much displease
Tlepolemus the Seed of Hercules:
For, often he had heard his Father say,
That he himself was present at the Fray;
And more than shared the Glories of the Day.
Old Chronicle, he said, among the rest,
You might have named Alcides at the least:
Is he not worth your Praise? The Pylian Prince
Sighed ere he spoke; then made this proud Defense.
My former Woes in long Oblivion drowned,
I would have lost; but you renew the Wound:
Better to pass him over, than to relate
The Cause I have your mighty Sire to hate.
His Fame has filled the World, and reached the Sky;
(Which, Oh, I wish, with Truth, I could deny!)
We praise not Hector; though his Name, we know,
Is great in Arms; it is hard to praise a Foe.
He, your great Father, levelled to the Ground
Messenia's Towers: Nor better Fortune found
Elis, and Pylos; That a neighboring State,
And This my own: Both guiltless of their Fate.
To pass the rest, twelve, wanting one, he slew;
My Brethren, who their Birth from Neleus drew.
All Youths of early Promise, had they lived;
By him they perished: I alone survived.
The rest were easy Conquest: But the Fate
Of Periclymenos, is wondrous to relate.
To him, our common Grandsire of the Main,
Had given to change his Form, and changed, resume again.
Varied at Pleasure, every Shape he tried;
And in all Beasts Alcides still defied:
Vanquished on Earth, at length he soared above;
Changed to the Bird, that bears the Bolt of Jove:
The new-dissembled Eagle, now endu'd
With Beak and Pounces, Hercules pursued,
And cuff'd his manly Cheeks, and tore his Face;
Then, safe retired, and tour'd in empty space.
Alcides bore not long his flying Foe;
But bending his inevitable Bow,
Reached him in Air, suspended as he stood;
And in his Pinion fixed the feathered Wood.
Light was the Wound; but in the Sinew hung
The Point; and his disabled Wing unstrung.
He wheeled in Air, and stretched his Vans in vain;
His Vans no longer could his Flight sustain:
For while one gathered Wind, one unsupply'd
Hung drooping down, nor poised his other Side.
He fell: The Shaft that slightly was impressed,
Now from his heavy Fall with weight increased,
Drove through his Neck, aslant; he spurns the Ground,
And the Soul issues through the Weazon's Wound.
Now, brave Commander of the Rhodian Seas,
What Praise is due from me, to Hercules?
Silence is all the Vengeance I decree
For my slain Brothers; but it is Peace with thee.
Thus with a flowing Tongue old Nestor spoke:
Then, to full Bowls each other they provoke:
At length, with Weariness and Wine oppressed,
They rise from Table; and withdraw to Rest.
The Death of ACHILLES.
The Sire of Cygnus, Monarch of the Main,
Mean time, laments his Son, in Battle slain,
And vows the Victor's Death; nor vows in vain.
For nine long Years the smothered Pain he bore;
( Achilles was not ripe for Fate, before:)
Then when he saw the promised Hour was near,
He thus bespoke the God, that guides the Year.
Immortal Offspring of my Brother Jove;
My brightest Nephew, and whom best I love,
Whose Hands were joined with mine, to raise the Wall
Of tottring Troy, now nodding to her Fall,
Do thou not mourn our Power employed in vain;
And the Defenders of our City slain?
To pass the rest, could noble Hector lie
Unpitied, dragged around his Native Troy?
And yet the Murderer lives: Himself by far
A greater Plague, than all the wasteful War:
He lives: the proud Pelides lives, to boast
Our Town destroyed, our common Labor lost.
O, could I meet him! But I wish too late:
To prove my Trident is not in his Fate!
But let him try (for that is allowed) thy Dart,
And pierce his only penetrable Part.
Apollo bows to the superior Throne;
And to his Uncle's Anger, adds his own.
Then in a Cloud involved, he takes his Flight,
Where Greeks and Trojans mixed in mortal Fight;
And found out Paris, lurking where he stood,
And stained his Arrows with Plebeian Blood:
Phoebus to him alone the God confessed,
Then to the recreant Knight, he thus addressed.
Do thou not blush, to spend thy Shafts in vain
On a degenerate and ignoble Train?
If Fame, or better Vengeance, by thy Care,
There aim: And, with one Arrow, end the War.
He said; and showed from far the blazing Shield
And Sword, which, but Achilles, none could wield;
And how he moved a God, and mowed the standing Field.
The Deity himself directs aright
The envenomed Shaft; and wings the fatal Flight.
Thus fell the foremost of the Grecian Name;
And He, the base Adult'rer, boasts the Fame.
A Spectacle to glad the Trojan Train;
And please old Priam, after Hector slain.
If by a Female Hand he had foreseen
He was to die, his Wish had rather been
The Lance and double Ax of the fair Warrior Queen.
And now the Terror of the Trojan Field,
The Grecian Honor, Ornament, and Shield,
High on a Pile, the Unconquered Chief is placed,
The God that armed him first, consumed at last.
Of all the mighty Man, the small Remains
A little Urn, and scarcely filled, contains.
Yet great in Homer, still Achilles lives;
And equal to himself, himself survives.
His Buckler owns its former Lord; and brings
New cause of Strife, betwixt contending Kings;
Who Worthiest after him, his Sword to wield,
Or wear his Armor, or sustain his Shield.
Even Diomede sat mute, with down-cast Eyes;
Conscious of wanted Worth to win the Prize:
Nor Menelaus presumed these Arms to claim,
Nor He the King of Men, a greater Name.
Two Rivals only rose: Laertes' Son,
And the vast Bulk of Ajax Telamon:
The King, who cherished each, with equal Love,
And from himself all Envy would remove,
Left both to be determined by the Laws;
And to the Grecian Chiefs transferred the Cause.
The End of the Twelfth Book.
To the Honorable Mrs. Margaret Pelha^
E. Kirkall sc^

OVID's METAMORPHOSES. BOOK XIII.
Translated by Mr. DRYDEN and Others.
The Speeches of AJAX and ULYSSES.
By Mr. DRYDEN.
THE Chiefs were set; the Soldiers crowned the Field:
To these the Master of the sevenfold Shield,
Upstarted fierce: And kindled with Disdain
Eager to speak, unable to contain
His boiling Rage, he rolled his Eyes around
The Shore, and Grecian Galleys hall'd a-ground.
Then stretching out his Hands, O Jove, he cried,
Must then our Cause before the Fleet be tried?
And dares Ulysses for the Prize contend,
In sight of what he durst not once defend?
But basely fled that memorable Day,
When I from Hector's Hands redeemed the flaming Prey.
So much it is safer at the noisie Bar
With Words to flourish, than engage in War.
By different Methods we maintain our Right,
Nor am I made to Talk, nor he to Fight.
In bloody Fields I labor to be great;
His Arms are a smooth Tongue, and soft Deceit:
Nor need I speak my Deeds, for those you see.
The Sun and Day are Witnesses for me.
Let him who fights unseen, relate his own,
And vouch the silent Stars, and conscious Moon.
Great is the Prize demanded, I confess,
But such an abject Rival makes it less;
That Gift, those Honors, he but hoped to gain,
Can leave no room for Ajax to be vain:
Losing he wins, because his Name will be
Ennobled by Defeat, who durst contend with me.
Were my known Valor questioned, yet my Blood
Without that Plea would make my Title good:
My Sire was Telamon, whose Arms, employed
With Hercules, these Trojan Walls destroyed;
And who before with Jason, sent from Greece,
In the first Ship brought home the Golden Fleece:
Great Telamon from Aeacus derives
His Birth (the Inquisitor of guilty Lives
In Shades below; where Sisyphus, whose Son
This Thief is thought, rouls up the restless heavy Stone.)
Just Aeacus, the King of Gods above
Begot: Thus Ajax is the third from Jove.
Nor should I seek Advantage from my Line,
Unless ( Achilles) it were mixed with thine:
As next of Kin Achilles' Arms I claim;
This Fellow would ingraft a Foreign Name
Upon our Stock, and the Sisyphian Seed
By Fraud and Theft asserts his Father's Breed:
Then must I lose these Arms, because I came
To fight uncalled, a voluntary Name,
Nor shunned the Cause, but offered you my Aid,
While he long lurking was to War betrayed:
Forced to the Field he came, but in the Rear;
And feigned Distraction to conceal his Fear:
Till one more cunning caught him in the Snare;
(Ill for himself) and dragged him into War.
Now let a Hero's Arms a Coward vest,
And he who shunned all Honors, gain the best:
And let me stand excluded from my Right,
Robbed of my Kinsman's Arms, who first appeared in Fight.
Better for us, at home had he remained,
Had it been true the Madness which he feigned,
Or so believed; the less had been our Shame,
The less his counseled Crime, which brands the Grecian Name;
Nor Philoctetes had been left enclosed
In a bare Isle, to Wants and Pains exposed,
Where to the Rocks, with solitary Groans,
His Sufferings and our Baseness he bemoans:
And wishes (so may Heaven his Wish fulfill)
The due Reward to him who caused his Ill.
Now he, with us to Troy's Destruction sworn,
Our Brother of the War, by whom are born
Alcides' Arrows, pent in narrow Bounds,
With Cold and Hunger pinched, and pained with Wounds,
To find him Food and Clothing, must employ
Against the Birds the Shafts due to the Fate of Troy.
Yet still he lives, and lives from Treason free,
Because he left Ulysses' Company:
Poor Palamede might wish, so void of Aid,
Rather to have been left, than so to Death betrayed:
The Coward bore the Man immortal Spite,
Who shamed him out of Madness into Fight:
Nor daring otherwise to vent his Hate,
Accused him first of Treason to the State;
And then for proof produced the golden Store,
Himself had hidden in his Tent before:
Thus of two Champions he deprived our Host,
By Exile one, and one by Treason lost.
Thus fights Ulysses, thus his Fame extends,
A formidable Man, but to his Friends:
Great, for what Greatness is in Words and Sound,
Even faithful Nestor less in both is found:
But that he might without a Rival reign,
He left this faithful Nestor on the Plain;
Forsook his Friend even at his utmost Need,
Who tired, and tardy with his wounded Steed,
Cried out for Aid, and called him by his Name;
But Cowardice has neither Ears nor Shame:
Thus fled the good old Man, bereft of Aid,
And, for as much as lay in him, betrayed:
That this is not a Fable forged by me,
Like one of his, an Ulyssean Lie,
I vouch even Diomede, who though his Friend,
Cannot that Act excuse, much less defend:
He called him back aloud, and taxed his Fear;
And sure enough he heard, but durst not hear.
The Gods with equal Eyes on Mortals look,
He justly was forsaken, who forsook:
Wanted that Succor he refused to lend,
Found every Fellow such another Friend:
No wonder, if he roared that all might hear;
His Elocution was increased by Fear:
I heard, I ran, I found him out of Breath,
Pale, trembling, and half dead with fear of Death.
Though he had judged himself by his own Laws,
And stood condemned, I helped the common Cause:
With my broad Buckler hid him from the Foe;
(Even the Shield trembled as he lay below;)
And from impending Fate the Coward freed:
Good Heaven forgive me for so bad a Deed!
If still he will persist, and urge the Strife,
First let him give me back his forfeit Life:
Let him return to that opprobrious Field;
Again creep under my protecting Shield:
Let him lie wounded, let the Foe be near,
And let his quivering Heart confess his Fear;
There put him in the very Jaws of Fate;
And let him plead his Cause in that Estate:
And yet when snatched from Death, when from below
My lifted Shield I loosed, and let him go;
Good Heavens, how light he rose, with what a bound
He sprung from Earth, forgetful of his Wound;
How fresh, how eager then his Feet to ply;
Who had not Strength to stand, had Speed to fly!
Hector came on, and brought the Gods along;
Fear seized alike the Feeble and the Strong:
Each Greek was an Ulysses; such a Dread
The Approach, and even the Sound of Hector bred:
Him, fleshed with Slaughter, and with Conquest crowned,
I met, and over-turn'd him to the Ground;
When after, matchless as he deemed in Might,
He challenged all our Host to single Fight;
All Eyes were fixed on me: The Lots were thrown;
But for your Champion I was wished alone:
Your Vows were heard; we fought, and neither yield;
Yet I returned unvanquish'd from the Field.
With Jove to friend the insulting Trojan came,
And menaced us with Force, our Fleet with Flame:
Was it the Strength of this Tongue-valiant Lord,
In that black Hour, that saved you from the Sword?
Or was my Breast exposed alone, to brave
A thousand Swords, a thousand Ships to save?
The hopes of your return! And can you yield,
For a saved Fleet, less than a single Shield?
Think it no Boast, O Grecians, if I deem
These Arms want Ajax, more than Ajax them;
Or, I with them an equal Honor share;
They honored to be worn, and I to wear.
Will he compare my Courage with his Slight?
As well he may compare the Day with Night.
Night is indeed the Province of his Reign:
Yet all his dark Exploits no more contain
Than a Spy taken, and a Sleeper slain;
A Priest made Prisoner, Pallas made a Prey:
But none of all these Actions done by Day:
Nor ought of these was done, and Diomede away.
If on such petty Merits you confer
So vast a Prize, let each his Portion share;
Make a just Dividend; and if not all,
The greater part to Diomede will fall.
But why for Ithacus such Arms as those,
Who naked and by Night invades his Foes?
The glittering Helm by Moonlight will proclaim
The latent Robber, and prevent his Game:
Nor could he hold his tottering Head upright
Beneath that Morion, or sustain the Weight;
Nor that right Arm could toss the beamy Lance;
Much less the left that ampler Shield advance;
Ponderous with precious Weight, and rough with Cost
Of the round World in rising Gold embossed.
That Orb would ill become his Hand to wield,
And look as for the Gold he stole the Shield;
Which, should your Error on the Wretch bestow,
It would not frighten, but allure the Foe:
Why asks he, what avails him not in Fight,
And would but cumber and retard his Flight,
In which his only Excellence is placed?
You give him Death, that intercept his Haste.
Add, that his own is yet a Maiden-Shield,
Nor the least Dint has suffered in the Field,
Guiltless of Fight: Mine battered, hewed, and bored,
Worn out of Service, must forsake his Lord.
What farther need of Words our Right to scan?
My Arguments are Deeds, let Action speak the Man.
Since from a Champion's Arms the Strife arose,
So cast the glorious Prize amid the Foes;
Then send us to redeem both Arms and Shield,
And let him wear who wins 'em in the Field.
He said: A Murmur from a Multitude,
Or somewhat like a stifled Shout ensued:
Till from his Seat arose Laertes' Son,
Looked down a while, and paused ere he begun;
Then, to the expecting Audience, raised his Look,
And not without prepared Attention spoke:
Soft was his Tone, and sober was his Face;
Action his Words, and Words his Action grace.
If Heaven, my Lords, had heard our common Prayer*
These Arms had caused no Quarrel for an Heir;
Still great Achilles had his own possessed,
And we with great Achilles had been blessed;
But since hard Fate, and Heaven's severe Decree,
Have ravished him away from you and me,
(At this he sighed, and wiped his Eyes, and drew,
Or seemed to draw, some Drops of kindly Dew)
Who better can succeed Achilles lost,
Than He who gave Achilles to your Host?
This only I request, that neither He
May gain, by being what he seems to be,
A stupid Thing; nor I may lose the Prize,
By having Sense, which Heaven to him denies:
Since, great or small, the Talent I enjoyed
Was ever in the common Cause employed:
Nor let my Wit, and wonted Eloquence,
Which often has been used in your Defense,
And in my own, this only time be brought
To bear against my self, and deemed a Fault.
Make not a Crime, where Nature made it none;
For every Man may freely use his own.
The Deeds of long descended Ancestors
Are but by grace of Imputation ours,
Theirs in Effect; but since he draws his Line
From Jove, and seems to plead a Right Divine;
From Jove, like him, I claim my Pedigree,
And am descended in the same Degree:
My Sire Laertes was Arcesius' Heir,
Arcesius was the Son of Jupiter:
No Parricide, no banished Man, is known
In all my Line: Let him excuse his own.
Hermes ennobles too my Mother's Side,
By both my Parents to the Gods allied;
But not because that on the Female Part
My Blood is better, dare I claim Desert,
Or that my Sire from Parricide is free;
But judge by Merit betwixt Him and Me:
The Prize be to the best; provided yet
That Ajax for a while his Kin forget,
And his great Sire, and greater Uncle's Name,
To fortify by them his feeble Claim:
Be Kindred and Relation laid aside,
And Honor's Cause by Laws of Honor tried:
For if he plead Proximity of Blood;
That empty Title is with Ease withstood.
Peleus, the Hero's Sire, more nigh than he,
And Pyrrhus, his undoubted Progeny,
Inherit first these Trophies of the Field;
To Scyros, or to Phthia, send the Shield:
And Teucer has an Uncle's Right; yet he
Waves his Pretensions, nor contends with me.
Then since the Cause on pure Desert is placed,
Whence shall I take my rise, what reckon last?
I not presume on every Act to dwell,
But take these few, in order as they fell.
Thetis, who knew the Fates, applied her Care
To keep Achilles in Disguise from War;
And till the threatening Influence were past,
A Woman's Habit on the Hero cast:
All Eyes were cozened by the borrowed Vest,
And Ajax (never wiser than the rest)
Found no Pelides there: At length I came
With proffered Wares to this pretended Dame;
She, not discovered by her Mien or Voice,
Betrayed her Manhood by her manly Choice;
And while on Female Toys her Fellows look,
Grasped in her Warlike Hand, a Javelin shook;
Whom, by this Act revealed, I thus bespoke:
O Goddess-born! resist not Heaven's Decree,
The Fall of Ilium is reserved for Thee;
Then seized him, and produced in open Light,
Sent blushing to the Field the fatal Knight.
Mine then are all his Actions of the War,
Great Telephus was conquered by my Spear,
And after cured: To me the Thebans owe
Lesbos, and Tenedos, their overthrow;
Syros and Cylla: Not on all to dwell,
By me Lyrnesus and strong Chrysa fell:
And since I sent the Man who Hector slew,
To me the noble Hector's Death is due:
Those Arms I put into his living Hand,
Those Arms, Pelides dead, I now demand.
When Greece was injured in the Spartan Prince,
And met at Aulis to avenge the Offense,
'Twas a dead Calm, or adverse Blasts, that reigned,
And in the Port the Wind-bound Fleet detained:
Bad Signs were seen, and Oracles severe
Were daily thundered in our Gen'ral's Ear;
That by his Daughter's Blood we must appease
Diana's kindled Wrath, and free the Seas.
Affection, Interest, Fame, his Heart assailed;
But soon the Father over the King prevailed:
Bold, on himself he took the pious Crime,
As angry with the Gods, as they with him.
No Subject could sustain their Sov'reign's Look,
Till this hard Enterprise I undertook:
I only durst the Imperial Power control,
And undermined the Parent in his Soul;
Forced him t'exert the King for common Good,
And pay our Ransom with his Daughter's Blood.
Never was Cause more difficult to plead,
Than where the Judge against himself decreed:
Yet this I won by dint of Argument;
The Wrongs his injured Brother underwent,
And his own Office, shamed him to consent.
'Twas harder yet to move the Mother's Mind,
And to this heavy Task was I designed:
Reasons against her Love I knew were vain;
I circumvented whom I could not gain:
Had Ajax been employed, our slackened Sails
Had still at Aulis waited happy Gales.
Arrived at Troy, your Choice was fixed on me,
A fearless Envoy, fit for a bold Embassy:
Secure, I entered through the hostile Court,
Glittering with Steel, and crowded with Resort:
There, in the midst of Arms, I plead our Cause,
Urge the foul Rape, and violated Laws;
Accuse the Foes, as Authors of the Strife,
Reproach the Ravisher, demand the Wife.
Priam, Antenor, and the wiser few,
I moved; but Paris and his lawless Crew
Scarce held their Hands, and lifted Swords; but stood
In Act to quench their impious Thirst of Blood:
This Menclaus knows; exposed to share
With me the rough Preludium of the War.
Endless it were to tell what I have done,
In Arms, or Council, since the Siege begun:
The first Encounter's past, the Foe repelled,
They skulk'd within the Town, we kept the Field.
War seemed asleep for nine long Years; at length
Both Sides resolved to push, we tried our Strength.
Now what did Ajax while our Arms took Breath,
Versed only in the gross mechanic Trade of Death?
If you require my Deeds, with ambush'd Arms
I trapp'd the Foe, or tired with false Alarms;
Secured the Ships, drew Lines along the Plain,
The Fainting cheered, chastis'd the Rebel-train,
Provided Forage, our spent Arms renewed;
Employed at home, or sent abroad, the common Cause pursued.
The King, deluded in a Dream by Jove,
Despaired to take the Town, and ordered to remove.
What Subject durst arraign the Power Supreme,
Producing Jove to justify his Dream?
Ajax might wish the Soldiers to retain
From shameful Flight, but Wishes were in vain:
As wanting of Effect had been his Words,
Such as of Course his thundering Tongue affords.
But did this Boaster threaten, did he pray,
Or by his own Example urge their Stay?
None, none of these, but ran himself away.
I saw him run, and was ashamed to see;
Who plied his Feet so fast to get aboard as He?
Then speeding through the Place, I made a stand,
And loudly cried, O base, degenerate Band,
To leave a Town already in your Hand!
After so long Expense of Blood, for Fame,
To bring home nothing but perpetual Shame!
These Words, or what I have forgotten since,
(For Grief inspired me then with Eloquence)
Reduced their Minds; they leave the crowded Port,
And to their late forsaken Camp resort:
Dismayed the Council met: This Man was there,
But mute, and not recovered of his Fear:
Thersites taxed the King, and loudly railed,
But his wide opening Mouth with Blows I sealed.
Then, rising, I excite their Souls to Fame,
And kindle sleeping Virtue into Flame.
From thence, whatever he performed in Fight
Is justly mine, who drew him back from Flight.
Which of the Grecian Chiefs consorts with Thee?
But Diomede desires my Company,
And still communicates his Praise with me.
As guided by a God, secure he goes,
Armed with my Fellowship, amid the Foes;
And sure no little Merit I may boast,
Whom such a Man selects from such an Host;
Unforced by Lots I went without affright,
To dare with him the Dangers of the Night:
On the same Errand sent, we met the Spy
Of Hector, double-tongu'd, and used to lie;
Him I dispatched, but not till undermined,
I drew him first to tell what treacherous Troy designed:
My Task performed, with Praise I had retired,
But not content with this, to greater Praise aspired.
Invaded Rhesus, and his Thracian Crew,
And him, and his, in their own Strength I slew:
Returned a Victor, all my Vows complete,
With the King's Chariot, in his Royal Seat:
Refuse me now his Arms, whose fiery Steeds
Were promised to the Spy for his Nocturnal Deeds:
And let dull Ajax bear away my Right,
When all his Days out-balance this one Night.
Nor fought I Darkling still: The Sun beheld
With slaughtered Lycians when I strewn the Field:
You saw, and counted as I passed along,
Alastor, Chromius, Ceranos the Strong,
Alcander, Prytanis, and Halius,
Noemon, Charopes, and Ennomus;
Coon, Chersidamas; and five beside,
Men of obscure Descent, but Courage tried:
All these this Hand laid breathless on the Ground;
Nor want I Proofs of many a manly Wound:
All honest, all before: Believe not me;
Words may deceive, but credit what you see.
At this he barred his Breast, and showed his Scars,
As of a furrowed Field, well plough'd with Wars;
Nor is this Part unexercis'd, said he;
That Gyant-bulk of his from Wounds is free:
Safe in his Shield he fears no Foe to try,
And better manages his Blood than I:
But this avails me not; our Boaster strove
Not with our Foes alone, but partial Jove,
To save the Fleet: This I confess is true,
(Nor will I take from any Man his due:)
But thus assuming all, he robs from you.
Some part of Honor to your share will fall,
He did the best indeed, but did not all.
Patroclus in Achilles' Arms, and thought
The Chief he seemed, with equal Ardour fought;
Preserved the Fleet, repelled the raging Fire,
And forced the fearful Trojans to retire.
But Ajax boasts, that he was only thought
A Match for Hector, who the Combat sought:
Sure he forgets the King, the Chiefs, and Me:
All were as eager for the Fight as He:
He but the ninth, and not by public Voice,
Or ours preferred, was only Fortune's Choice:
They fought; nor can our Hero boast the Event,
For Hector from the Field unwounded went.
Why am I forced to name that fatal Day,
That snatched the Prop and Pride of Greece away?
I saw Pelides sink, with pious Grief,
And ran in vain, alas! to his Relief;
For the brave Soul was fled: Full of my Friend
I rushed amid the War, his Relics to defend:
Nor ceased my Toil till I redeemed the Prey,
And, loaded with Achilles, marched away:
Those Arms, which on these Shoulders then I bore,
It Is just you to these Shoulders should restore.
You see I want not Nerves, who could sustain
The ponderous Ruins of so great a Man:
Or if in others equal Force you find,
None is endu'd with a more grateful Mind.
Did Thetis then, ambitious in her Care,
These Arms thus labored for her Son prepare;
That Ajax after him the heavenly Gift should wear!
For that dull Soul to stare, with stupid Eyes,
On the learned unintelligible Prize!
What are to him the Sculptures of the Shield,
Heaven's Planets, Earth, and Ocean's watery Field?
The Pleiads, Hyads; less, and greater Bear,
Undipp'd in Seas; Orion's angry Star;
Two differing Cities, engraved on either Hand;
Would he wear Arms he cannot understand?
Beside, what wise Objections he prepares
Against my late Accession to the Wars?
Does not the Fool perceive his Argument
Is with more Force against Achilles bent?
For if Dissembling be so great a Crime,
The Fault is common, and the same in him:
And if he taxes both of long delay,
My Guilt is less, who sooner came away.
His pious Mother, anxious for his Life,
Detained her Son; and me, my pious Wife.
To them the Blossoms of our Youth were due,
Our riper Manhood we reserved for you.
But grant me guilty, it is not much my Care,
When with so great a Man my Guilt I share:
My Wit to War the matchless Hero brought,
But by this Fool I never had been caught.
Nor need I wonder, that on me he threw
Such foul Aspersions, when he spares not you:
If Palamede unjustly fell by me,
Your Honor suffered in the unjust Decree:
I but accused, you doomed: And yet he died,
Convinced of Treason, and was fairly tried:
You heard not he was false; your Eyes beheld
The Traitor manifest; the Bribe revealed.
That Philoctetes is on Lemnos left,
Wounded, forlorn, of human Aid bereft,
Is not my Crime, or not my Crime alone;
Defend your Justice, for the Fact's your own:
It Is true, the Advice was mine; that staying there
He might his weary Limbs with Rest repair,
From a long Voyage free, and from a longer War.
He took the Counsel, and he lives at least;
The Event declares I counseled for the best:
Though Faith is all, in Ministers of State;
For who can promise to be fortunate?
Now since his Arrows are the Fate of Troy,
Do not my Wit, or weak Address, employ;
Send Ajax there, with his persuasive Sense,
To mollify the Man, and draw him thence:
But Xanthus shall run backward; Ida stand
A leafless Mountain; and the Grecian Band
Shall fight for Troy; if, when my Counsel fail,
The Wit of heavy Ajax can prevail.
Hard Philoctetes, exercise thy Spleen
Against thy Fellows, and the King of Men;
Curse my devoted Head, above the rest,
And wish in Arms to meet me Breast to Breast:
Yet I the dangerous Task will undertake,
And either die my self, or bring thee back.
Nor doubt the same Success, as when before
The Phrygian Prophet to these Tents I bore,
Surpised by Night, and forced him to declare
In what was placed the Fortune of the War,
Heaven's dark Decrees, and Answers to display,
And how to take the Town, and where the Secret lay:
Yet this I compassed, and from Troy conveyed
The fatal Image of their Guardian-Maid;
That Work was mine; for Pallas, though our Friend,
Yet while she was in Troy, did Troy defend.
Now what has Ajax done, or what designed?
A noisie Nothing, and an empty Wind.
If he be what he promises in Show,
Why was I sent, and why feared he to go?
Our boasting Champion thought the Task not light
To pass the Guards, commit himself to Night;
Not only through a hostile Town to pass,
But scale, with steep Ascent, the sacred Place;
With wandering Steps to search the Citadel,
And from the Priests their Patroness to steal:
Then through surrounding Foes to force my way,
And bear in Triumph home the heavenly Prey;
Which had I not, Ajax in vain had held,
Before that monst'rous Bulk, his sev'nfold Shield.
That Night to conquer Troy I might be said,
When Troy was liable to Conquest made.
Why point'st thou to my Partner of the War?
Tydides had indeed a worthy Share
In all my Toil, and Praise; but when thy Might
Our Ships protected, did thou singly fight?
All joined, and thou of many were but one;
I asked no Friend, nor had, but him alone:
Who, had he not been well assured, that Art
And Conduct were of War the better part,
And more availed than Strength, my valiant Friend
Had urged a better Right, than Ajax can pretend:
As good at least Eurypylus may claim,
And the more moderate Ajax of the Name:
The Cretan King, and his brave Charioteer,
And Menelaus bold with Sword and Spear:
All these had been my Rivals in the Shield,
And yet all these to my Pretensions yield.
Thy boisterous Hands are then of use, when I
With this directing Head those Hands apply.
Brawn without Brain is thine: My prudent Care
Foresees, provides, administers the War:
Thy Province is to Fight; but when shall be
The time to Fight, the King consults with me:
No Dram of Judgment with thy Force is joined;
Thy Body is of Profit, and my Mind.
By how much more the Ship her Safety owes
To him who steers, than him that only rows,
By how much more the Captain merits Praise
Than he who fights, and fighting but obeys;
By so much greater is my Worth than thine,
Who can but execute what I design.
What gain'st thou, brutal Man, if I confess
Thy Strength superior, when thy Wit is less?
Mind is the Man: I claim my whole Desert,
From the Mind's Vigor, and the immortal Part.
But you, O Grecian Chiefs, reward my Care,
Be grateful to your Watchman of the War:
For all my Labors in so long a space,
Sure I may plead a Title to your Grace:
Enter the Town; I then unbarr'd the Gates,
When I removed their tutelary Fates.
By all our common Hopes, if Hopes they be
Which I have now reduced to Certainty;
By falling Troy, by yonder tottering Towers,
And by their taken Gods, which now are ours;
Or if there yet a farther Task remains,
To be performed by Prudence or by Pains;
If yet some desperate Action rests behind,
That asks high Conduct, and a dauntless Mind;
If ought be wanting to the Trojan Doom,
Which none but I can manage and overcome,
Award, those Arms I ask, by your Decree:
Or give to this what you refuse to me.
He ceased: And ceasing with Respect he bowed,
And with his Hand at once the fatal Statue showed.
Heaven, Air and Ocean rung, with loud Applause,
And by the general Vote he gained his Cause.
Thus Conduct won the Prize, when Courage failed,
And Eloquence over brutal Force prevailed.
The Death of AJAX.
He who could often, and alone, withstand
The Foe, the Fire, and Jove's own partial Hand,
Now cannot his unmaster'd Grief sustain,
But yields to Rage, to Madness, and Disdain;
Then snatching out his Fauchion, Thou, said He,
Art mine; Ulysses lays no Claim to Thee.
O often tried, and ever trusty Sword,
Now do thy last kind Office to thy Lord:
It Is Ajax who requests thy Aid, to show
None but himself, himself could overthrow:
He said, and with so good a Will to die
Did to his Breast the fatal Point apply,
It found his Heart, a way till then unknown,
Where never Weapon entered, but his own.
No Hands could force it thence, so fixed it stood,
Till out it rushed, expelled by Streams of spouting Blood.
The fruitful Blood produced a Flower, which grew
On a green Stem; and of a Purple Hue:
Like his, whom unaware Apollo slew:
Inscribed in both, the Letters are the same,
But those express the Grief, and these the Name.
The Story of POLYXENA and HECUBA.
By Mr. TEMPLE STANYAN.
The Victor with full Sails for Lemnos stood,
(Once stained by Matrons with their Husbands Blood)
Thence Great Alcides' fatal Shafts to bear,
Assigned to Philoctetes' secret Care.
These with their Guardian to the Greeks conveyed,
Their ten Years Toil with wished Success repaid.
With Troy old Priam falls; his Queen survives;
Till all her Woes complete transformed she grieves
In borrowed Sounds, nor with an human Face,
Barking tremendous over the Plains of Thrace.
Still Ilium's Flames their pointed Columns raise,
And the red Hellespont reflects the Blaze.
Shed on Jove's Altar are the poor Remains
Of Blood, which trickl'd from old Priam's Veins.
Cassandra lifts her Hands to Heaven in vain,
Dragged by her sacred Hair; the trembling Train
Of Matrons to their burning Temples fly;
There to their Gods for kind Protection cry;
And to their Statues cling, till forced away,
The Victor Greeks bear off the invidious Prey.
From those high Towers Astyanax is thrown,
Whence he was wont with pleasure to look down;
When often his Mother with a fond Delight
Pointed to view his Father's Rage in fight,
To win Renown, and guard his Country's Right.
The Winds now call to Sea; brisk Northern Gales
Sing in the Shrowds, and court the spreading Sails.
Farewell, dear Troy, the captive Matrons cry;
Yes, We must leave Our long-lov'd native Sky.
Then prostrate on the Shore they kiss the Sand,
And quit the smoking Ruins of the Land.
Last Hecuba on board, sad Sight! appears;
Found weeping over her Childrens Sepulchers:
Dragged by Ulysses from her slaughtered Sons,
Whilst yet she graspt their Tombs, and kissed their mouldring Bones.
Yet Hector's Ashes from his Urn she bore,
And in her Bosom the sad Relic wore:
Then scattered on his Tomb her hoary Hairs;
A poor Oblation mingled with her Tears.
Opposed to Ilium lie the Thracian Plains,
Where Polymestor safe in Plenty reigns.
King Priam to his Care commits his Son
Young Polydore, the chance of War to shun.
A wise Precaution! had not Gold, consigned
For the Child's Use, debauched the Tyrant's Mind.
When sinking Troy to its last Period drew,
With impious Hands his Royal Charge he slew;
Then in the Sea the lifeless Coarse is thrown;
As with the Body he the Guilt could drown.
The Greeks now riding on the Thracian Shore,
Till kinder Gales invite, their Vessels moor.
Here the wide-op'ning Earth to sudden View
Disclosed Achilles, Great as when he drew
The vital Air, but fierce with proud Disdain,
As when he sought Briseis to regain;
When stern Debate, and rash injurious Strife
Unsheathed his Sword, to reach Atrides' Life.
And will ye go? He said. Is then the Name
Of the once Great Achilles lost to Fame?
Yet stay, ungrateful Greeks; nor let me sue
In vain for Honors to my Manes due.
For this just End, Polyxena I doom
With Victim-Rites to grace my slighted Tomb.
The Phantom spoke; the ready Greeks obeyed,
And to the Tomb led the devoted Maid,
Snatched from her Mother, who with pious Care
Cherished this last Relief of her Despair.
Superior to her Sex the fearless Maid
Approached the Altar, and around surveyed
The cruel Rites, and consecrated Knife,
Which Pyrrhus pointed at her guiltless Life.
Then as with stern Amaze intent he stood,
" Now strike, she said; now spill my Generous Blood;
" Deep in my Breast, or Throat, your Dagger sheath,
" Whilst thus I stand prepared to meet my Death.
" For Life on terms of Slavery I despise:
" Yet sure no God approves this Sacrifice.
" O! could I but conceal this dire Event
" From my sad Mother, I should dye content.
" Yet should she not with Tears my Death deplore,
" Since her own wretched Life demands them more.
" But let not the rude Touch of Man pollute
" A Virgin-Victim; it is a modest Suit.
" It best will please, whoever demands my Blood,
" That I untainted reach the Stygian Flood.
" Yet let one short, last, dying Prayer be heard;
" To Priam's Daughter pay this last Regard;
" It Is Priam's Daughter, not a Captive, sues;
" Do not the Rites of Sepulture refuse.
" To my afflicted Mother, I implore,
" Free without Ransom my dead Corpse restore:
" Nor barter me for Gain, when I am cold;
" But be her Tears the Price, if I am sold:
" Time was she could have ransomed me with Gold.
Thus as she prayed, one common Shower of Tears
Burst forth, and streamed from every Eye but hers.
Even the Priest wept, and with a rude Remorse
Plunged in her Heart the Steel's resistless Force.
Her slackened Limbs sunk gently to the Ground,
Dauntless her Looks, unaltered by the Wound.
And as she fell, she strove with decent Pride
To guard what suits a Virgin's Care to hide.
The Trojan Matrons the pale Corpse receive,
And the whole slaughtered Race of Priam grieve.
Sad they recount the long disastrous Tale;
Then with fresh Tears, Thee, Royal Maid, bewail;
Thy widowed Mother too, who flourished late
The Royal Pride of Asia's happier State:
A Captive Lot now to Ulysses born;
Whom yet the Victor would reject with Scorn,
Were she not Hector's Mother: Hector's Fame
Scarce can a Master for his Mother claim!
With strict Embrace the lifeless Coarse she viewed;
And her fresh Grief that flood of Tears renewed,
With which she lately mourned so many dead;
Tears for her Country, Sons, and Husband shed.
With the thick gushing Stream she bathed the Wound;
Kissed her pale Lips; then weltring on the Ground,
With wonted Rage her frantic Bosom tore;
Sweeping her Hair amidst the clotted Gore;
Whilst her sad Accents thus her Loss deplore.
" Behold a Mother's last dear Pledge of Woe!
" Yes, it is the last I have to suffer now.
" Thou, my Polyxena, my Ills must crown:
" Already in thy Fate I feel my own.
" It Is thus, least happily of my numerous Seed
" One should unslaughter'd fall, even Thou must bleed.
" And yet I hoped thy Sex had been thy Guard;
" But neither has thy tender Sex been spared.
"The same Achilles, by whose deadly Hate
" Thy Brothers fell, urged thy untimely Fate!
" The same Achilles, whose destructive Rage
" Laid waste my Realms, has robbed my Childless Age!
" When Paris' Shafts with Phoebus' certain Aid
" At length had pierced this dreaded Chief, I said,
" Secure of future Ills, He can no more:
" But see, he still pursues me as before.
" With Rage rekindled his dead Ashes burn;
" And his yet murdering Ghost my wretched House must mourn.
" This Tyrant's Lust of Slaughter I have fed
" With large Supplies from my too fruitful Bed.
" Troy's Towers lie waste; and the wide Ruin ends
" The Public Woe; but Me fresh Woe attends.
" Troy still survives to me; to none but me;
" And from its Ills I never must be free.
" I, who so late had Power, and Wealth, and Ease,
" Blessed with my Husband, and a large Increase,
" Must now in Poverty and Exile mourn;
" Even from the Tombs of my dead Offspring torn:
" Given to Penelope, who proud of Spoil,
" Allots me to the Loom's ungrateful Toil;
" Points to her Dames, and cries with scorning Mien,
" See Hector's Mother, and Great Priam's Queen!
" And Thou, my Child, sole Hope of all that is lost,
" Thou now art slain to sooth this Hostile Ghost.
" Yes, my Child falls an Offering to my Foe!
" Them what am I, who still survive this Woe?
" Say, cruel Gods! for what new Scenes of Death
" Must a poor aged Wretch prolong this hated Breath?
" Troy fallen, to whom could Priam happy seem?
" Yet was he so; and happy must I deem
"His Death; for O! my Child, he saw not thine,
" When he his Life did with his Troy resign.
" Yet sure due Obsequies thy Tomb might grace;
" And thou shall sleep amidst thy Kingly Race.
" Alas! my Child, such Fortune does not wait
" Our Suffering House in this abandoned State.
" A foreign Grave, and thy poor Mother's Tears
" Are all the Honors that attend thy Hearse.
" All now is lost! -- Yet no; One Comfort more
" Of Life remains, my much-loved Polydore,
" My youngest Hope: Here on this Coast he lives,
" Nursed by the Guardian-King he still survives.
" Then let me hasten to the cleansing Flood,
" And wash away these Stains of guiltless Blood.
Strait to the Shore her feeble Steps repair
With limping Pace, and torn dishevelled Hair
Silvered with Age. " Give me an Urn, she cried,
" To bear back Water from this swelling Tide:
When on the Banks her Son in ghastly Hue
Transfixed with Thracian Arrows strikes her View.
The Matrons shrieked; her big-swoln Grief surpast
The Power of Utterance; she stood aghast;
She had nor Speech, nor Tears to give Relief;
Excess of Woe suppressed the rising Grief.
Lifeless as Stone on Earth she fixed her Eyes;
And then looked up to Heaven with wild Surprise.
Now she contemplates over with sad Delight
Her Son's pale Visage; then her aching Sight
Dwells on his Wounds: She varys thus by turns,
Till with collected Rage at length she burns.
Wild as the Mother-Lion, when among
The Haunts of Prey she seeks her ravished young:
Swift flies the Ravisher; she marks his Trace,
And by the Print directs her anxious Chase.
So Hecuba with mingled Grief and Rage
Pursues the King, regardless of her Age.
She greets the Murderer with dissembled Joy
Of secret Treasure hoarded for her Boy.
The specious Tale the unwary King betrayed
Fired with the Hopes of Prey; " Give quick, he said
" With soft enticing Speech, the promised Store:
" Whatever you give, you give to Polydore.
" Your Son, by the immortal Gods I swear,
" Shall this with all your former Bounty share.
She stands attentive to his soothing Lies,
And darts avenging Horror from her Eyes.
Then full Resentment fires her boiling Blood:
She springs upon him 'midst the Captive Crowd:
(Her thirst of Vengeance want of Strength supplies;)
Fastens her forky Fingers in his Eyes;
Tears out the rooted Balls; her Rage pursues,
And in the hollow Orbs her Hand imbrews.
The Thracians fired at this inhuman Scene,
With Darts and Stones assail the frantic Queen.
She snarls and growls, nor in an human Tone;
Then bites impatient at the bounding Stone;
Extends her Jaws, as she her Voice would raise
To keen Invectives in her wonted Phrase;
But barks, and thence the yelping Brute betrays.
Still a sad Monument the Place remains,
And from this Monstrous Change its Name obtains:
Where she, in long Remembrance of her Ills,
With plaintive Howlings the wide Desert fills.
Greeks, Trojans, Friends and Foes, and Gods above
Her numerous Wrongs to just Compassion move.
Even Juno's self forgets her ancient Hate,
And owns, she had deserved a milder Fate.
The Funeral of MEMNON.
By Mr. CROXALL.
Yet bright Aurora, partial as she was
To Troy, and those that loved the Trojan Cause,
Nor Troy, nor Hecuba can now bemoan,
But weeps a sad Misfortune, more her own.
Her Offspring Memnon, by Achilles slain,
She saw extended on the Phrygian Plain:
She saw, and strait the Purple Beams, that grace
The rosy Morning, vanished from her Face;
A deadly Pale her wonted Bloom invades,
And veils the lowering Skies with mournful Shades.
But when his Limbs upon the Pile were laid,
The last kind Duty that by Friends is paid,
His Mother to the Skies directs her Flight,
Nor could sustain to view the doleful Sight:
But frantic, with her loose neglected Hair,
Hastens to Jove, and falls a Suppliant there.
O King of Heaven, O Father of the Skies,
The weeping Goddess passionately cries,
Though I the meanest of Immortals am,
And fewest Temples celebrate my Fame,
Yet still a Goddess, I presume to come
Within the Verge of your Ethereal Dome:
Yet still may plead some Merit, if my Light
With Purple Dawn controuls the Powers of Night;
If from a Female Hand that Virtue springs,
Which to the Gods and Men such Pleasure brings.
Yet I nor Honors seek, nor Rites Divine,
Nor for more Altars, or more Fanes repine;
Oh! that such Trifles were the only Cause,
From whence Aurora's Mind its Anguish draws!
For Memnon lost, my dearest only Child,
With weightier Grief my heavy Heart is filled;
My Warrior Son! that lived but half his Time,
Nipt in the Bud, and blasted in his Prime;
Who for his Uncle early took the Field,
And by Achilles' fatal Spear was killed.
To whom but Jove should I for Succor come?
For Jove alone could fix his cruel Doom.
O Sovereign of the Gods, accept my Prayer,
Grant my Request, and sooth a Mother's Care;
On the Deceased some solemn Boon bestow,
To expiate the Loss, and ease my Woe.
Jove with a Nod, complied with her Desire;
Around the Body flamed the Funeral Fire;
The Pile decreased that lately seemed so high,
And Sheets of Smoke rolled upward to the Sky:
As humid Vapors from a marshy Bog,
Rise by Degrees, condensing into Fog,
That intercept the Sun's enlivening Ray,
And with a Cloud infect the cheerful Day.
The sooty Ashes wafted by the Air,
Whirl round and thicken in a Body there;
Then take a Form, which their own Heat and Fire
With active Life and Energy inspire.
Its Lightness makes it seem to fly, and soon
It skims on real Wings that are its own;
A real Bird, it beats the breezy Wind,
Mixed with a thousand Sisters of the Kind,
That, from the same Formation newly sprung,
Up-born aloft on plumy Pinions hung.
Thrice round the Pile advanced the circling Throng,
Thrice, with their Wings, a whizzing Consort rung:
In the fourth Flight their Squadron they divide,
Ranked in two different Troops, on either Side:
Then two and two, inspired with martial Rage,
From either Troop in equal Pairs engage.
Each Combatant with Beak and Pounces pressed,
In wrathful Ire, his Adversary's Breast;
Each falls a Victim, to preserve the Fame
Of that great Hero whence their Being came.
From him their Courage and their Name they take,
And, as they lived, they dye for Memnon's sake.
Punctual to Time, with each revolving Year,
In fresh Array the Champion Birds appear;
Again, prepared with vengeful Minds, they come
To bleed in Honor of the Soldier's Tomb.
Therefore in others it appeared not strange,
To grieve for Hecuba's unhappy Change:
But poor Aurora had enough to do
With her own Loss, to mind another's Woe;
Who, still in Tears, her tender Nature shows,
Besprinkling all the World with pearly Dews.
The VOYAGE of AENEAS.
By Mr. CATCOTT.
Troy thus destroyed, 'twas still denied by Fate,
The Hopes of Troy should perish with the State.
His Sire, the Son of Cytherea bore,
And Houshold-Gods from burning Ilium's Shore.
The pious Prince (a double Duty paid)
Each sacred Burden through the Flames conveyed.
With young Ascanius, and this only Prize,
Of Heaps of Wealth, he from Antandros flies;
But struck with Horror, left the Thracian Shore,
Stained with the Blood of murdered Polydore.
The Delian Isle receives the banished Train,
Driven by kind Gales, and favored by the Main.
Here pious Anius, Priest, and Monarch reigned,
And either Charge, with equal Care sustained,
His Subjects ruled, to Phoebus Homage paid,
His God obeying, and by those obeyed.
The Priest displays his Hospitable Gate,
And shows the Riches of his Church, and State;
The sacred Shrubs, which eased Latona's Pain,
The Palm, and Olive, and the votive Fane.
Here grateful Flames with fuming Incense fed,
And mingled Wine, ambrosial Odours shed;
Of slaughtered Steers the crackling Entrails burned:
And then the Strangers to the Court returned.
On Beds of Tap'stry placed aloft, they dine
With Ceres' Gift, and flowing Bowls of Wine;
When thus Anchises spoke, amidst the Feast,
Say, mitred Monarch, Phoebus' chosen Priest,
Or (ever from Troy by cruel Fate expelled)
When first mine Eyes these sacred Walls beheld,
A Son, and twice two Daughters crowned thy Bliss?
Or errs my Memory, and I judge amiss?
The Royal Prophet shook his hoary Head,
With snowy Fillets bound, and sighing, said;
Thy Memory errs not, Prince; Thou saw me then,
The happy Father of so large a Train;
Behold me now, (such Turns of Chance befall
The Race of Man!) almost bereft of all.
For (ah!) what Comfort can my Son bestow,
What Help afford to mitigate my Woe!
While far from hence, in Andros' Isle he reigns,
(From him so named) and there my Place sustains.
Him Delius Praescience gave; the twice-born God
A Boon more wondrous on the Maids bestowed.
Whatever they touched, he gave them to transmute,
(A Gift past Credit, and above their Suit,)
To Ceres, Bacchus, and Minerva's Fruit.
How great their Value, and how rich their Use,
Whose only Touch such Treasures could produce!
The dire Destroyer of the Trojan Reign,
Fierce Agamemnon, such a Prize to gain,
(A Proof we also were designed by Fate
To feel the Tempest, that o'erturn'd your State)
With Force superior, and a Ruffian Crew,
From these weak Arms, the helpless Virgins drew;
And sternly bad them use the Grant Divine,
To keep the Fleet in Corn, and Oil, and Wine.
Each, as they could, escaped: Two strove to gain
Euboea's Isle, and Two their Brother's Reign.
The Soldier follows, and demands the Dames;
If held by Force, immediate War proclaims.
Fear conquered Nature in their Brother's Mind,
And gave them up to Punishment assigned.
Forgive the Deed; nor Hector's Arm was there,
Nor thine, Aeneas, to maintain the War;
Whose only Force upheld your Ilium's Towers,
For ten long Years against the Grecian Powers.
Prepared to bind their Captive Arms in Bands,
To Heaven they reared their yet unfettered Hands,
Help, Bacchus, Author of the Gift, they prayed;
The Gift's great Author gave immediate Aid;
If such Destruction of their human Frame
By Ways so wondrous, may deserve the Name;
Nor could I hear, nor can I now relate
Exact, the manner of their altered State;
But this in general of my Loss I knew,
Transformed to Doves, on milky Plumes they flew,
Such as on Ida's Mount thy Consort's Chariot drew.
With such Discourse, they entertained the Feast;
Then rose from Table, and withdrew to Rest.
The following Morn, e're Sol was seen to shine,
The inquiring Trojans sought the sacred Shrine;
The Mystic Power commands them to explore
Their ancient Mother, and a Kindred Shore.
Attending to the Sea, the generous Prince
Dismissed his Guests with rich Munificence,
In old Anchises' Hand a Scepter placed,
A Vest and Quiver young Ascanius graced,
His Sire, a Cup; which from the Aonian Coast,
Ismenian Therses sent his Royal Host.
Alcon of Mile made what Therses sent,
And carved thereon this ample Argument.
A Town with sev'n distinguished Gates was shown,
Which spoke its Name, and made the City known;
Before it, Piles, and Tombs, and rising Flames,
The Rites of Death, and Quires of mourning Dames,
Who barred their Breasts, and gave their Hair to flow
The Signs of Grief, and Marks of public Woe.
Their Fountains dried, the weeping Naiads mourned,
The Trees stood bare, with searing Cankers burned,
No Herbage clothed the Ground, a ragged Flock
Of Goats half-famish'd, licked the naked Rock,
Of manly Courage, and with Mind serene,
Orion's Daughters in the Town were seen;
One heaved her Chest to meet the lifted Knife,
One plunged the Poyniard through the Seat of Life,
Their Country's Victims; mourns the rescued State,
The Bodies burns, and celebrates their Fate.
To save the Failure of the Illustrious Line,
From the pale Ashes rose, of Form Divine
Two generous Youths; these, Fame Coronae calls,
Who join the Pomp, and mourn their Mother's Falls.
These burnished Figures formed of antique Mold,
Shone on the Brass, with rising Sculpture bold;
A Wreath of gilt Acanthus round the Brim was rolled.
Nor less Expense the Trojan Gifts expressed;
A fuming Censer for the Royal Priest,
A Chalice, and a Crown of Princely Cost,
With ruddy Gold, and sparkling Gems embossed.
Now hoisting Sail, to Crete the Trojans stood,
Themselves remembering sprung from Teucer's Blood;
But Heaven forbids, and pestilential Jove
From noxious Skies, the wandering Navy drove.
Her hundred Cities left, from Crete they bore,
And sought the destined Land, Ausonia's Shore;
But tossed by Storms at either Strophas lay,
'Till scared by Harpies from the faithless Bay.
Then passing onward with a prosperous Wind,
Left sly Ulysses' spacious Realms behind;
Ambracia's State, in former Ages known
The Strife of Gods, the Judge transformed to Stone
They saw; for Actian Phoebus since renowned,
Who Caesar's Arms with Naval Conquest crowned;
Next passed Dodona, wont of old to boast
Her vocal Forest; and Chaonia's Coast,
Where King Molossus' Sons on Wings aspired,
And saw secure the harmless Fuel fired.
Now to Phaeacia's happy Isle they came,
For fertile Orchards known to early Fame;
Epirus past, they next beheld with Joy
A second Ilium, and fictitious Troy;
Here Trojan Helenus the Scepter swayed,
Who showed their Fate, and Mystic Truths displayed;
By him confirmed, Sicilia's Isle they reached,
Whose Sides to Sea three Promontories stretched;
Pachynos to the stormy South is placed,
On Lilybaeum blows the gentle West,
Peloro's Cliffs the Northern Bear survey,
Who rolls above, and dreads to touch the Sea.
By this they steer, and favored by the Tide,
Secure by Night in Zancle's Harbor ride.
Here cruel Scylla guards the rocky Shore,
And there the Waves of loud Charybdis roar:
This sucks, and vomits Ships, and Bodies drowned;
And ravenous Dogs the Womb of That surround,
In Face a Virgin; and (if ought be true
By Bards recorded) once a Virgin too.
A Train of Youths in vain desired her Bed;
By Sea-Nymphs loved, to Nymphs of Seas she fled;
The Maid to these, with Female Pride, displayed
Their baffled Courtship, and their Love betrayed.
When Galatea thus bespoke the Fair,
(But first she sighed) while Scylla combed her Hair;
You, lovely Maid, a generous Race pursues,
Whom safe you may (as now you do) refuse;
To me, though powerful in a numerous Train
Of Sisters, sprung from Gods who rule the Main,
My native Seas could scarce a Refuge prove,
To shun the Fury of the Cyclops' Love.
Tears choked her Utt'rance here; the pitying Maid
With Marble Fingers wiped them off, and said;
My dearest Goddess, let thy Scylla know,
(For I am faithful) whence these Sorrows flow.
The Maid's Entreaties over the Nymph prevail,
Who thus to Scylla tells the mournful Tale.
The Story of ACIS, POLYPHEMUS, and GALATEA.
By Mr. DRYDEN.
Acis, the lovely Youth, whose loss I mourn,
From Faunus and the Nymph Symethis born,
Was both his Parents Pleasure; but, to me
Was all that Love could make a Lover be.
The Gods our Minds in mutual Bands did join;
I was his only Joy, and he was mine.
Now sixteen Summers the sweet Youth had seen;
And doubtful Down began to shade his Chin:
When Polyphemus first disturbed our Joy;
And loved me fiercely, as I loved the Boy.
Ask not which Passion in my Soul was high'r,
My last Aversion, or my first Desire:
Nor this the greater was, nor that the less;
Both were alike, for both were in Excess.
Thee, Venus, thee, both Heaven and Earth obey;
Immense thy Power, and boundless is thy Sway.
The Cyclops, who defied the Aetherial Throne,
And thought no Thunder louder than his own,
The Terror of the Woods, and wilder far
Than Wolves in Plains, or Bears in Forests are,
The inhuman Host, who made his bloody Feasts
On mangled Members of his butchered Guests,
Yet felt the force of Love, and fierce Desire,
And burnt for me, with unrelenting Fire.
Forgot his Caverns, and his woolly Care,
Assumed the Softness of a Lover's Air;
And combed, with Teeth of Rakes, his rugged Hair.
Now with a crooked Scythe his Beard he sleeks;
And mowes the stubborn Stubble of his Cheeks:
Now in the Crystal Stream he looks, to try
His Simagres, and rowls his glaring Eye.
His Cruelty and Thirst of Blood are lost;
And Ships securely sail along the Coast.
The Prophet Telemus (arrived by chance
Where Aetna's Summets to the Seas advance,
Who marked the Tracts of every Bird that flew,
And sure Presages from their flying drew.)
Foretold the Cyclops, that Ulysses' Hand
In his broad Eye should thrust a flaming Brand.
The Giant, with a scornful Grin replied,
Vain Augur, thou have falsely Prophesied;
Already Love his flaming Brand has tossed;
Looking on two fair Eyes, my Sight I lost.
Thus, warned in vain, with stalking Pace he strode,
And stamped the Margin of the briny Flood
With heavy Steps; and weary, sought again
The cool Retirement of his gloomy Den.
A Promontory, sharp'ning by degrees,
Ends in a Wedge, and over-looks the Seas:
On either Side, below, the Water flows;
This airy Walk the Giant Lover chose.
Here, on the midst he sat; his Flocks, unled,
Their Shepherd followed, and securely fed.
A Pine so burly, and of Length so vast,
That sailing Ships required it for a Mast,
He wielded for a Staff, his Steps to guide:
But laid it by, his Whistle while he tried.
A hundred Reeds, of a prodigious Growth,
Scarce made a Pipe, proportioned to his Mouth:
Which, when he gave it Wind, the Rocks around,
And watery Plains, the dreadful Hiss resound.
I heard the Ruffian-Shepherd rudely blow,
Where, in a hollow Cave, I sat below;
On Acis' Bosom I my Head reclined:
And still preserve the Poem in my Mind.
Oh lovely Galatea, whiter far
Than falling Snows, and rising Lilies are;
More flowery than the Meads, as Crystal bright,
Erect as Alders, and of equal height:
More wanton than a Kid, more sleek thy Skin
Than Orient Shells, that on the Shores are seen.
Than Apples fairer, when the Boughs they lade,
Pleasing as Winter Suns, or Summer Shade:
More grateful to the Sight, than goodly Plains;
And softer to the Touch, than Down of Swans;
Or Curds new turned: and sweeter to the Taste
Than swelling Grapes, that to the Vintage haste:
More clear than Ice, or running Streams, that stray
Through Garden Plots, but ah! more swift than they.
Yet, Galatea, harder to be broke
Than Bullocks, unreclaim'd, to bear the Yoke,
And far more stubborn than the knotted Oak:
Like sliding Streams, impossible to hold;
Like them fallacious, like their Fountains cold.
More warping than the Willow to decline
My warm Embrace, more brittle than the Vine;
Immovable and fixed in thy Disdain;
Rough as these Rocks, and of a harder Grain.
More violent than is the rising Flood;
And the praised Peacock is not half so proud.
Fierce as the Fire, and sharp as Thistles are,
And more outrageous than a Mother-Bear:
Deaf as the Billows to the Vows I make;
And more revengeful than a trodden Snake.
In Swiftness fleeter than the flying Hind,
Or driven Tempests, or the driving Wind.
All other Faults, with Patience I can bear;
But Swiftness is the Vice I only fear.
Yet if you knew me well, you would not shun
My Love, but to my wished Embraces run:
Would languish in your turn, and court my Stay;
And much repent of your unwise Delay.
My Palace, in the living Rock, is made
By Nature's Hand; a spacious pleasing Shade:
Which neither Heat can pierce, nor Cold invade.
My Garden filled with Fruits you may behold,
And Grapes in Clusters, imitating Gold;
Some blushing Bunches of a Purple Hue:
And these and those, are all reserved for you.
Red Strawberries, in Shades, expecting stand,
Proud to be gathered by so white a Hand.
Autumnal Cornels, latter Fruit provide;
And Plumbs to tempt you, turn their glossy Side:
Not those of common kinds; but such alone
As in Phaeacian Orchards might have grown:
Nor Chestnuts shall be wanting to your Food,
Nor Garden-Fruits, nor Wildings of the Wood;
The laden Boughs for you alone shall bear;
And yours shall be the Product of the Year.
The Flocks you see, are all my own; beside
The rest that Woods, and winding Valleys hide;
And those that folded in the Caves abide.
Ask not the Numbers of my growing Store;
Who knows how many, knows he has no more.
Nor will I praise my Cattle; trust not me,
But judge your self, and pass your own Decree:
Behold their swelling Dugs; the sweepy Weight
Of Ewes that sink beneath the Milky Freight;
In the warm Folds, their tender Lambkins lie;
Apart from Kids, that call with human Cry.
New Milk in Nut-brown Bowls, is duly served
For daily Drink; the rest for Cheese reserved.
Nor are these Household Dainties all my Store:
The Fields and Forests will afford us more;
The Deer, the Hare, the Goat, the Salvage Boar.
All sorts of Ven'son; and of Birds the best;
A pair of Turtles taken from the Nest.
I walked the Mountains, and two Cubs I found,
(Whose Dam had left 'em on the naked Ground,)
So like, that no Distinction could be seen:
So pretty, they were Presents for a Queen;
And so they shall; I took 'em both away;
And keep, to be Companions of your Play.
Oh raise, fair Nymph, your Beauteous Face above
The Waves; nor scorn my Presents, and my Love.
Come, Galatea, come, and view my Face;
I late beheld it, in the watery Glass;
And found it lovelier than I feared it was.
Survey my towering Stature, and my Size:
Not Jove, the Jove you dream that rules the Skies,
Bears such a Bulk, or is so largely spread:
My Locks (the plenteous Harvest of my Head)
Hang over my manly Face; and dangling down,
As with a shady Grove, my Shoulders crown.
Nor think, because my Limbs and Body bear
A thick-set Underwood of bristling Hair,
My Shape deformed; what fouler Sight can be,
Than the bald Branches of a leafless Tree?
Foul is the Steed, without a flowing Mane:
And Birds, without their Feathers and their Train.
Wool decks the Sheep; and Man receives a Grace
From bushy Limbs, and from a bearded Face.
My Forehead with a single Eye is filled,
Round as a Ball, and ample as a Shield.
The glorious Lamp of Heaven, the radiant Sun,
Is Nature's Eye; and she is content with one.
Add, that my Father sways your Seas, and I,
Like you, am of the watery Family.
I make you his, in making you my own;
You I adore; and kneel to you alone:
Jove with his Fabled Thunder, I despise,
And only fear the Lightning of your Eyes.
Frown not, fair Nymph; yet I could bear to be
Disdained, if others were disdained with me.
But to repulse the Cyclops, and prefer
The Love of Acis, (Heavens!) I cannot bear.
But let the Stripling please himself; nay more,
Please you, though that is the thing I most abhor;
The Boy shall find, if ever we cope in Fight,
These Giant Limbs endu'd with Giant Might.
His living Bowels, from his Belly torn,
And scattered Limbs, shall on the Flood be born:
Thy Flood, ungrateful Nymph; and Fate shall find
That way, for thee and Acis to be joined.
For oh! I burn with Love, and thy Disdain
Augments at once my Passion, and my Pain.
Translated Aetna flames within my Heart,
And thou, Inhuman, wilt not ease my Smart.
Lamenting thus in vain, he rose, and strode
With furious Paces to the neighboring Wood:
Restless his Feet, distracted was his Walk;
Mad were his Motions, and confused his Talk.
Mad as the vanquished Bull, when forced to yield
His lovely Mistress, and forsake the Field.
Thus far unseen I saw: when fatal Chance
His Looks directing, with a sudden Glance,
Acis and I were to his Sight betrayed;
Where naught suspecting we securely played.
From his wide Mouth a bellowing Cry he cast,
I see, I see; but this shall be your last:
A Roar so loud made Aetna to rebound:
And all the Cyclops labored in the Sound.
Affrighted with his monstrous Voice, I fled,
And in the Neighboring Ocean plunged my Head.
Poor Acis turned his Back, and Help, he cried;
Help, Galatea, help, my Parent Gods,
And take me dying to your deep Abodes.
The Cyclops followed; but he sent before
A Rib, which from the living Rock he tore:
Though but an Angle reached him of the Stone,
The mighty Fragment was enough alone,
To crush all Acis; 'twas too late to save,
But what the Fates allowed to give, I gave:
That Acis to his Lineage should return;
And roll, among the River Gods, his Urn.
Straight issued from the Stone a Stream of Blood;
Which lost the Purple, mingling with the Flood.
Then, like a troubled Torrent, it appeared:
The Torrent too, in little space, was cleared.
The Stone was cleft, and through the yawning Chink
New Reeds arose, on the new River's Brink.
The Rock, from out its hollow Womb, disclosed
A Sound like Water in its Course opposed.
When, (wondrous to behold,) full in the Flood,
Up starts a Youth, and Navel high he stood.
Horns from his Temples rise; and either Horn
Thick Wreaths, of Reeds, (his Native Growth) adorn.
Were not his Stature taller than before,
His Bulk augmented, and his Beauty more,
His Color blue; for Acis he might pass:
And Acis changed into a Stream he was.
But mine no more; he rowls along the Plains
With rapid Motion, and his Name retains.
The Story of GLAUCUS and SCYLLA.
By Mr. ROW.
Here ceased the Nymph; the fair Assembly broke,
The Seagreen Nereids to the Waves betook:
While Scylla fearful of the wide-spread Main,
Swift to the safer Shore returns again.
There over the sandy Margin, unarray'd,
With printless Footsteps flies the bounding Maid;
Or in some winding Creek's secure Retreat
She baths her weary Limbs, and shuns the Noonday's Heat.
Her Glaucus saw, as over the Deep He rode,
New to the Seas, and late received a God.
He saw, and languish'd for the Virgin's Love;
With many an artful Blandishment he strove,
Her Flight to hinder, and her Fears remove.
The more he sues, the more she wings her Flight,
And nimbly gains a neighboring Mountain's Height.
Steep shelving to the Margin of the Flood,
A neighboring Mountain bare, and woodless stood;
Here, by the Place secured, her Steps she stayed,
And, trembling still, her Lover's Form surveyed.
His Shape, his Hue, her troubled Sense appall,
And dropping Locks that over his Shoulders fall;
She sees his Face Divine, and Manly Brow,
End in a Fish's wreathy Tail below:
She sees, and doubts within her anxious Mind,
Whether he comes of God, or Monster Kind.
This Glaucus soon perceived; And, Oh! forbear
(His Hand supporting on a Rock lay near)
Forbear, he cried, fond Maid, this needless Fear.
Nor Fish am I, nor Monster of the Main,
But equal, with the watery Gods I reign;
Nor Proteus, nor Palaemon me excel,
Nor he whose Breath inspires the sounding Shell.
My Birth, it is true, I owe to mortal Race,
And I my self but late a Mortal was:
Even then in Seas, and Seas alone, I joy'd;
The Seas my Hours, and all my Cares employed.
In Meshes now the twinkling Prey I drew;
Now skilfully the slender Line I threw,
And silent sat the moving Float to view.
Not far from Shore, there lies a verdant Mead,
With Herbage half and half with Water spread:
There, nor the horned Heifers browsing stray,
Nor shaggy Kids, nor wanton Lambkins play;
There, nor the sounding Bees their Nectar cull,
Nor Rural Swains their genial Chaplets pull,
Nor Flocks, nor Herds, nor Mowers haunt the Place,
To crop the Flowers, or cut the bushy Grass:
Thither, sure first of living Race came I,
And sat by chance, my dropping Nets to dry.
My scaly Prize, in Order all displayed,
By Number on the Greensword there I laid,
My Captives, whom or in my Nets I took,
Or hung unwary on my wily Hook.
Strange to behold! yet what avails a Lie?
I saw 'em bite the Grass, as I sat by;
Then sudden darting over the verdant Plain,
They spread their Finns as in their native Main:
I paused, with Wonder struck, while all my Prey
Left their new Master, and regained the Sea.
Amazed, within my secret Self I sought,
What God, what Herb the Miracle had wrought:
But sure no Herbs have Power like this, I cried;
And strait I plucked some neighboring Herbs, and tried.
Scarce had I bit and proved the wondrous Taste,
When strong Convulsions shook my troubled Breast;
I felt my Heart grow fond of something strange,
And my whole Nature laboring with a Change.
Restless I grew, and every Place forsook,
And still upon the Seas I bent my Look.
Farewell for ever! Farewell Land! I said;
And plunged amidst the Waves my sinking Head.
The gentle Powers, who that low Empire keep,
Received me as a Brother of the Deep;
To Tethys, and to Ocean old, they pray
To purge my mortal Earthy Parts away.
The watery Parents to their Suit agreed,
And thrice nine times a sacred Charm they read.
Then with Lustrations purify my Limbs,
And bid me bathe beneath a hundred Streams:
A hundred Streams from various Fountains run,
And on my Head at once come rushing down.
Thus far each Passage, I remember well,
And faithfully thus far the Tale I tell;
But then Oblivion dark, on all my Senses fell.
Again at length my Thought reviving came,
When I no longer found my self the same;
Then first this Seagreen Beard I felt to grow,
And these large Honors on my spreading Brow;
My long descending Locks the Billows sweep,
And my broad Shoulders cleave the yielding Deep;
My Fishy Tail, my Arms of Azure Hue,
And every Part divinely changed, I view.
But what avail these useless Honors now?
What Joys can Immortality bestow?
What, though our Nereids all my Form approve?
What boots it, while fair Scylla scorns my Love?
Thus far the God; and more he would have said;
When from his Presence flew the ruthless Maid.
Stung with Repulse, in such disdainful sort,
He seeks Titanian Circe's horrid Court.
The End of the Thirteenth Book.
To the Rt. Honble. Countess of Burlington

OVID's METAMORPHOSES. BOOK XIV.
Translated by Sir SAMUEL GARTH, M. D.
The Transformation of SCYLLA.
NOW Glaucus, with a Lover's Haste, bounds over
The swelling Waves, and seeks the Latian Shore.
Messena, Rhegium, and the barren Coast
Of flaming Aetna, to his Sight are lost:
At length he gains the Tyrrhene Seas, and views
The Hills where baneful Philters Circe brews;
Monsters, in various Forms, around her press;
As thus the God salutes the Sorceress.
O Circe, be indulgent to my Grief,
And give a Lovesick Deity Relief.
Too well the mighty Power of Plants I know;
To those my Figure, and new Fate I owe.
Against Messena, on the Ausonian Coast,
I Scylla viewed, and from that Hour was lost.
In tenderest Sounds I su'd; but still the Fair
Was deaf to Vows, and pityless to Prayer.
If Numbers can avail: exert their Power;
Or Energy of Plants, if Plants have more.
I ask no Cure; let but the Virgin pine
With dying Pangs, or Agonies like mine.
No longer Circe could her Flame disguise,
But, to the suppliant God Marine, replies:
When Maids are coy, have manlier Aims in view;
Leave those that Fly, but those that Like, pursue.
If Love can be by kind Compliance won;
See, at your Feet, the Daughter of the Sun.
Sooner, said Glaucus, shall the Ash remove
From Mountains, and the swelling Surges love;
Or humble Sea-weed to the Hills repair;
Ever I think any but my Scylla fair.
Strait Circe reddens with a guilty Shame,
And vows Revenge for her rejected Flame.
Fierce Liking often a Spite as fierce creates;
For Love refused, without Aversion, hates.
To hurt her hapless Rival she proceeds;
And, by the Fall of Scylla, Glaucus bleeds.
Some fascinating Bev'rage now she brews;
Composed of deadly Drugs, and baneful Juice.
At Rhegium she arrives; the Ocean braves,
And treads with unwet Feet the boiling Waves.
Upon the Beach a winding Bay there lies,
Sheltered from Seas, and shaded from the Skies:
This Station Scylla chose; a soft Retreat
From chilling Winds, and raging Cancer's Heat.
The vengeful Sorc'ress visits this Recess;
Her Charm infuses, and infects the Place.
Soon as the Nymph wades in; Her nether Parts
Turn into Dogs; then at her self she starts.
A ghastly Horror in her Eyes appears;
But yet she knows not who it is she fears;
In vain she offers from her self to run;
And drags about her what she strives to shun.
Oppressed with Grief the pitying God appears;
And swells the rising Surges with his Tears;
From the detested Sorceress he flies,
Her Art reviles, and her Address denies;
Whilst hapless Scylla, changed to Rocks, decrees
Destruction to those Barques that beat the Seas.
The Voyage of AENEAS continued.
Here bulg'd the Pride of famed Ulysses' Fleet,
But good Aeneas 'scap'd the Fate he met.
As to the Latian Shore the Trojan stood,
And cut with well-timd Oars the foaming Flood:
He weathered fell Charybdis: But e're long
The Skies were darkened, and the Tempest strong.
Then to the Libyan Coast he stretches over;
And makes at length the Carthaginian Shore.
Here Dido, with an hospitable Care,
Into her Heart receives the Wanderer.
From her kind Arms the ungrateful Hero flies;
The injured Queen looks on with dying Eyes,
Then to her Folly falls a Sacrifice.
Aeneas now sets Sail, and plying gains
Fair Eryx, where his Friend Acestes reigns:
First to his Sire does funeral Rites decree,
Then gives the Signal next, and stands to Sea;
Out-runs the Islands where Volcano's roar;
Gets clear of Sirens, and their faithless Shore:
But looses Palynurus in the Way;
Then makes Inarime and Prochyta.
The Transformation of CERCOPIANS into Apes.
The Galleys now by Pythecusa pass;
The Name is from the Natives of the Place.
The Father of the Gods detesting Lies;
Often, with Abhorrence, heard their Perjuries.
The abandoned Race, transformed to Beasts, began
To mimick the Impertinence of Man.
Flat-nos'd, and furrowed; with Grimace they grin;
And look, to what they were, too near akin:
Merry in Make, and busy to no End;
This Moment they divert, the next offend:
So much this Species of their past retains;
Though lost the Language, yet the Noise remains.
AENEAS descends to Hell.
Now, on his Right, he leaves Parthenope;
His Left, Misenus jutting in the Sea:
Arrives at Cume, and with Awe surveyed
The Grotto of the venerable Maid:
Begs Leave through black Avernus to retire;
And view the much-loved Manes of his Sire.
Strait the divining Virgin raised her Eyes;
And, foaming with a holy Rage, replies:
O thou, whose Worth thy wondrous Works proclaim;
The Flames, thy Piety; the World, thy Fame:
Though great be thy Request, yet shall thou see
The Elysian Fields, the infernal Monarchy;
Thy Parent's Shade: This Arm thy Steps shall guide;
To suppliant Virtue nothing is denied.
She spoke, and pointing to the Golden Bough,
Which in the Avernian Grove refulgent grew,
Seize That, She bids; He listens to the Maid;
Then views the mournful Mansions of the Dead:
The Shade of Great Anchises, and the Place
By Fates determined to the Trojan Race.
As back to upper Light the Hero came,
He thus salutes the Visionary Dame. --
O, whether some propitious Deity,
Or loved by those bright Rulers of the Sky!
With grateful Incense I shall style you One,
And deem no Godhead greater than your own.
'Twas you restored me from the Realms of Night,
And gave me to behold the Fields of Light:
To feel the Breezes of Congenial Air;
And Nature's blessed Benevolence to share.
The Story of the SIBYLL.
I am no Deity, replied the Dame,
But Mortal, and religious Rites disclaim.
Yet had avoided Death's tyrannick Sway,
Had I consented to the God of Day.
With Promises he sought my Love, and said,
Have all you wish, my fair Cumaean Maid.
I paused; then pointing to a Heap of Sand,
For every Grain, to live a Year, demand.
But ah! unmindful of the Effect of Time,
Forgot to covenant for Youth, and Prime.
The smiling Bloom, I boasted once, is gone,
And feeble Age with lagging Limbs creeps on.
Sev'n Cent'ries have I lived; Three more fulfill
The Period of the Years to finish still.
Who Will think that Phoebus, dressed in Youth Divine,
Had once believed his Luster less than mine?
This withered Frame (so Fates have willed) shall waste
To nothing, but Prophetic Words, at last.
The Sibyll mounting now from nether Skies,
And the famed Ilian Prince, at Cumae rise.
He sailed, and near the Place to Anchor came,
Since called Cajeta from his Nurse's Name.
Here did the luckless Macareus, a Friend
To wise Ulysses, his long Labors end.
Here, wandering Achaemenides he meets,
And, sudden, thus his late Associate greets.
Whence came you here, O Friend, and whither bound?
All gave you lost on far Cyclopean Ground;
A Greek's at last aboard a Trojan found.
The Adventures of ACHAEMENIDES.
Thus Achaemenides -- With Thanks I name
Aeneas, and his Piety proclaim.
I 'scap'd the Cyclops through the Hero's Aid,
Else in his Maw my mangled Limbs had laid.
When first your Navy under Sail he found,
" He raved, till Aetna labored with the Sound.
Raging, he stalked along the Mountain's Side,
And vented Clouds of Breath at every Stride.
" His Staff a Mountain Ash; and in the Clouds
" Often, as he walks, his grisly Front he shrowds.
Eyeless he grop'd about with vengeful Haste,
And justled Promontories, as he passed.
Then heaved a Rock's high Summit to the Main,
And bellowed, like some bursting Hurricane.
Oh! could I seize Ulysses in his Flight,
How unlamented were my Loss of Sight!
These Jaws should Piecemeal tear each panting Vein,
Grind every crackling Bone, and pound his Brain.
As thus he raved, my Joints with Horror shook;
The Tide of Blood my chilling Heart forsook.
I saw him once disgorge huge Morsels, raw,
Of Wretches undigested in his Maw.
From the pale breathless Trunks whole Limbs he tore,
His Beard all clotted with overflowing Gore.
My anxious Hours I passed in Caves; my Food
Was Forest Fruits, and Wildings of the Wood.
At length a Sail I wafted, and aboard
My Fortune found an hospitable Lord.
Now, in Return, your own Adventures tell,
And what, since first you put to Sea, befell.
The Adventures of MACAREUS.
Then Macareus -- There reigned a Prince of Fame
Over Tuscan Seas, and Aeolus his Name.
A Largess to Ulysses he consigned,
And in a Steer's tough Hide enclosed a Wind.
Nine Days before the swelling Gale we ran;
The tenth, to make the meeting Land, began:
When now, the merry Mariners, to find
Imagined Wealth within, the Bag unbind.
Forthwith out-rush'd a Gust, which backwards bore
Our Galleys to the Laestrigonian Shore,
Whose Crown, Antiphates the Tyrant wore.
Some few commissioned were with Speed to treat;
We to his Court repair, his Guards we meet.
Two, friendly Flight preserved; the Third was doomed
To be by those cursed Cannibals consumed.
Inhumanly our hapless Friends they treat;
Our Men they murder, and destroy our Fleet.
In time the wise Ulysses bore away,
And dropped his Anchor in yon faithless Bay.
The Thoughts of Perils past we still retain,
And fear to land, till Lots appoint the Men.
Polites true, Elpenor given to Wine,
Eurylochus, my self, the Lots assign.
Designed for Dangers, and resolved to Dare,
To Circe's fatal Palace we repair,
The Enchantments of CIRCE.
Before the spacious Front, a Herd we find
Of Beasts, the fiercest of the savage Kind.
Our trembling Steps with Blandishments they meet,
And fawn, unlike their Species, at our Feet.
Within, upon a sumptuous Throne of State
On golden Columns raised th'Enchantress sat.
Rich was her Robe, and amiable her Mein,
Her Aspect awful, and she looked a Queen.
Her Maids not mind the Loom, nor household Care,
" Nor wage in Needle Work a Scythian War.
But cull in Canisters disastrous Flowers,
" And Plants from haunted Heaths, and fairy Bowers,
" With brazen Sickles reaped at Planetary Hours.
Each Dose the Goddess weighs with watchful Eye;
So nice her Art in impious Pharmacy!
Entering she greets us with a gracious Look,
And Airs, that future Amity bespoke.
Her ready Nymphs serve up a rich Repast;
The Bowl she dashes first, then gives to taste.
Quick, to our own undoing, we comply;
Her Power we prove, and show the Sorcery.
Soon, in a Length of Face, our Head extends;
Our Chine stiff Bristles bears, and forward bends:
A Breadth of Brawn new burnishes our Neck;
Anon we grunt, as we begin to speak.
Alone Eurylochus refused to taste,
Nor to a Beast obscene the Man debased.
Hither Ulysses hastes, (so Fates command)
And bears the powerful Moly in his Hand;
Unsheaths his Scymitar, assaults the Dame,
Preserves his Species, and remains the same.
The Nuptial Rite this Outrage strait attends;
The Dower desired is his transfigur'd Friends.
The Incantation backward she repeats,
Inverts her Rod, and what she did, defeats.
And now our Skin grows smooth, our Shape upright;
Our Arms stretch up, our cloven Feet unite.
With Tears our weeping General we embrace;
Hang on his Neck, and melt upon his Face.
Twelve Silver Moons in Circe's Court we stay,
Whilst there they waste the unwilling Hours away.
'Twas here I spied a Youth in Parian Stone;
His Head a Pecker bore; the Cause unknown
To Passengers. A Nymph of Circe's Train
The Mystery thus attempted to explain.
The Story of PICUS and CANENS.
Picus, who once the Ausonian Scepter held,
Could rein the Steed, and fit him for the Field.
So like he was to what you see, that still
We doubt if real, or the Sculptor's Skill.
The Graces in the finished Piece, you find,
Are but the Copy of his fairer Mind.
Four Lustres scarce the Royal Youth could name,
Till every Lovesick Nymph confessed a Flame.
Often for his Love the Mountain Dryads su'd,
And every Silver Sister of the Flood:
Those of Numicus, Albula, and those
Where Almo creeps, and hasty Nar overflows:
Where sedgy Anio glides through smiling Meads,
Where shady Farfar rustles in the Reeds:
And those that love the Lakes, and Homage owe
To the chaste Goddess of the Silver Bow.
In vain each Nymph her brightest Charms put on,
His Heart no Sovereign would obey but one.
She whom Venilia, on Mount Palatine,
To Janus bore, the fairest of her Line.
Nor did her Face alone her Charms confess,
Her Voice was ravishing, and pleased no less.
When-e'er she sung, so melting were her Strains,
The Flocks unfed seemed listening on the Plains;
The Rivers would stand still, the Cedars bend;
And Birds neglect their Pinions, to attend;
The Savage Kind in Forest-Wilds grow tame;
And Canens, from her heavenly Voice, her Name.
Hymen had now in some ill-fated Hour
Their Hands united, as their Hearts before.
" Whilst their soft Moments in Delights they waste,
" And each new Day was dearer than the past;
Ticus would sometimes over the Forests rove,
And mingle Sports with Intervals of Love.
It chanced, as once the foaming Boar he chased,
His Jewels sparkling on his Tyrian Vest,
Lascivious Circe well the Youth surveyed,
As simpling on the flowery Hills she strayed.
Her wishing Eyes their silent Message tell,
And from her Lap the verdant Mischief fell.
As she attempts at Words, his Courser springs
Over Hills, and Lawns, and even a Wish outwings.
Thou shall not 'scape me so, pronounced the Dame,
If Plants have Power, and Spells be not a Name.
She said -- and forthwith formed a Boar of Air,
That sought the Covert with dissembled Fear.
Swift to the Thicket Picus wings his Way
On Foot, to chase the visionary Prey.
Now she invokes the Daughters of the Night,
Does noxious Juices smear, and Charms recite;
Such as can veil the Moon's more feeble Fire,
Or shade the Golden Luster of her Sire.
In filthy Fogs she hides the cheerful Noon;
The Guard at Distance, and the Youth alone,
By those fair Eyes, she cries, and every Grace
That finish all the Wonders of your Face,
O! I conjure thee, hear a Queen complain,
Nor let the Sun's soft Lineage sue in vain.
Who-e'er thou art, replied the King, forbear,
None can my Passion with my Canens share.
" She first my every tender Wish possessed,
" And found the soft Approaches to my Breast.
" In Nuptials blessed, each loose Desire we shun,
" Nor Time can end, what Innocence begun.
" Think not, she cried, to saunter out a Life
" Of Form, with that domestic Drudge, a Wife;
My just Revenge, dull Fool, e're long shall show
What Ills we Women, if refused, can do:
Think me a Woman, and a Lover too.
" From dear successful Spite we hope for Ease,
" Nor fail to Punish, where we fail to Please.
Now twice to East she turns, as often to West;
Thrice waves her Wand, as often a Charm expressed,
On the lost Youth her Magic Power she tries;
A loft he springs, and wonders how he flies.
On painted Plumes the Woods he seeks, and still
The Monarch Oak he pierces with his Bill.
Thus changed, no more over Latian Lands he reigns;
Of Picus nothing but the Name remains.
The Winds from drisling Damps now purge the Air,
The Mist subsides, the settling Skies are fair:
The Court their Sovereign seek with Arms in Hand,
They threaten Circe, and their Lord demand.
Quick she invokes the Spirits of the Air,
" And Twilight Elves that on dun Wings repair
" To Charnels, and the unhallowed Sepulcher.
Now, strange to tell, the Plants sweat Drops of Blood
The Trees are tossed from Forests where they stood;
Blue Serpents over the tainted Herbage slide,
Pale glaring Specter on the Ether ride;
Dogs howl, Earth yawns, rent Rocks forsake their Beds,
And from their Quarries heave their stubborn Heads.
The sad Spectators, stiffen'd with their Fears
She sees, and sudden every Limb she smears;
Then each of savage Beasts the Figure bears.
The Sun did now to Western Waves retire,
In Tides to temper his bright World of Fire.
Canens laments her Royal Husband's Stay;
" Ill suits fond Love with Absence, or Delay.
" Where she commands, her ready People run;
" She wills, retracts; bids, and forbids anon.
Restless in Mind, and dying with Despair,
Her Breast she beats, and tears her flowing Hair.
Six Days, and Nights she wanders on, as Chance
Directs, without or Sleep, or Sustenance.
Tiber at last beholds the weeping Fair;
Her feeble Limbs no more the Mourner bear;
Stretched on his Banks, she to the Flood complains,
And faintly tunes her Voice to dying Strains.
The sickening Swan thus hangs her Silver Wings,
And, as she droops, her Elegy she sings.
Ever long sad Canens wastes to Air; whilst Fame
The Place still honors with her hapless Name.
Here did the tender Tale of Picus cease,
Above Belief, the Wonder, I confess.
Again we sail, but more Disasters meet,
Foretold by Circe, to our suffering Fleet.
My self, unable further Woes to bear,
Declined the Voyage, and am refug'd Here.
AENEAS arrives in ITALY.
Thus Macareus -- Now with a pious Aim
Had good Aeneas raised a funeral Flame,
In Honor of his hoary Nurse's Name.
Her Epitaph he fixed; and setting Sail,
Cajeta left, and caught at every Gale.
He steered at Distance from the faithless Shore
Where the false Goddess reigns with fatal Power;
And sought those grateful Groves, that shade the Plain,
Where Tyber rouls majestic to the Main,
And fattens, as he runs, the fair Campain.
His Kindred Gods the Hero's Wishes crown
With fair Lavinia, and Latinus' Throne:
But not without a War the Prize he won.
Drawn up in bright Array the Battle stands:
Turnus with Arms his promised Wife demands.
Hetrurians, Latians equal Fortune share;
And doubtful long appears the Face of War.
Both Powers from neighboring Princes seek Supplies,
And Embassies appoint for new Allies.
Aeneas, for Relief, Evander moves;
His Quarrel he asserts, his Cause approves.
The bold Rutulians, with an equal Speed,
Sage Venulus dispatch to Diomede.
The King, late Griefs revolving in his Mind,
These Reasons for Neutrality assigned. --
Shall I, of one poor Dotal Town possessed,
My People thin, my wretched Country waste;
An exiled Prince, and on a shaking Throne;
Or risque my Patron's Subjects, or my own?
You Will grieve the Harshness of our Hap to hear;
Nor can I tell the Tale without a Tear.
The Adventures of DIOMEDES.
After famed Ilium was by Argives won,
And Flames had finished, what the Sword begun;
Pallas, incensed, pursued us to the Main,
In Vengeance of her violated Fane.
Alone Oileus forced the Trojan Maid,
Yet all were punished for the brutal Deed.
A Storm begins, the raging Waves run high,
The Clouds look heavy, and benight the Sky;
Red Sheets of Lightning over the Seas are spread,
Our Tackling yields, and Wrecks at last succeed.
It Is tedious our disast'rous State to tell;
Even Priam would have pitied, what befell.
Yet Pallas saved me from the swallowing Main;
At home new Wrongs to meet, as Fates ordain.
Chased from my Country, I once more repeat
All Sufferings Seas could give, or War complete.
For Venus, mindful of her Wound, decreed
Still new Calamities should past succeed.
Agmon, impatient through successive Ills,
With Fury, Love's bright Goddess thus reviles --
These Plagues in spite to Diomede are sent;
" The Crime is his, but ours the Punishment.
" Let each, my Friends, her puny Spleen despise,
" And Dare that haughty Harlot of the Skies.
The rest of Agmon's Insolence complain,
And of Irreverence the Wretch arraign.
About to answer; his blaspheming Throat
Contracts, and shrieks in some disdainful Note.
To his new Skin a Fleece of Feather clings,
Hides his late Arms, and lengthens into Wings.
The lower Features of his Face extend,
Warp into Horn, and in a Beak descend.
Some more experience Agmon's Destiny,
And wheeling in the Air, like Swans they fly.
These thin Remains to Daunus' Realms I bring,
And here I reign, a poor precarious King.
The Transformation of APPULUS.
Thus Diomedes. Venulus withdraws;
Unsped the Service of the common Cause.
Puteoli he passes, and surveyed
A Cave long honored for its awful Shade.
Here trembling Reeds exclude the piercing Ray;
" Here Streams in gentle Falls through Windings stray,
" And with a passing Breath cool Zephyrs play.
The Goatherd God frequents the silent Place,
As once the Wood-Nymphs of the Sylvan Race,
Till Appulus with a dishonest Air,
And gross Behavior, banished thence the Fair.
The bold Buffoon, when-e'er they tread the Green,
Their Motion mimicks, but with Gests obscene.
Loose Language often he utters; but e're long
A Bark in filmy Network binds his Tongue.
Thus changed, a base wild Olive he remains;
" The Shrub the Coarseness of the Clown retains.
The TROJAN Ships transformed to Sea-Nymphs.
Mean while the Latians all their Power prepare,
Against Fortune, and the Foe to push the War.
With Phrygian Blood the floating Fields they stain;
But, short of Succors, still contend in vain.
Turnus remarks the Trojan Fleet ill manned,
Unguarded, and at Anchor near the Strand;
He thought; and strait a lighted Brand he bore,
And Fire invades, what 'scap'd the Waves before.
The Billows from the kindling Prow retire;
Pitch, Rosin, Searwood on red Wings aspire,
And Vulcan on the Seas exerts his Attribute of Fire.
This, when the Mother of the Gods beheld,
Her tow'ry Crown she shook, and stood revealed;
Her brindl'd Lions rein'd, unveiled her Head,
And hovering over her favored Fleet, she said:
Cease Turnus, and the heavenly Powers respect,
Nor dare to violate, what I protect.
These Galleys, once fair Trees, on Ida stood,
And gave their Shade to each descending God.
Nor shall consume; irrevocable Fate
Allots their Being no determined Date.
Strait Peals of Thunder Heaven's high Arches rend,
The Hailstones leap, the Showers in Spouts descend.
The Winds with widen'd Throats the Signal give;
The Cables break, the smoking Vessels drive.
Now, wondrous, as they beat the foaming Flood,
The Timber softens into Flesh, and Blood;
The Yards, and Oars new Arms, and Legs design;
A Trunk the Hull; the slender Keel, a Spine;
The Prow a female Face; and by Degrees
The Galleys rise green Daughters of the Seas.
" Sometimes on coral Beds they sit in State,
Or wanton on the Waves they feared of late.
The Barks, that beat the Seas are still their Care,
Themselves remembering what of late they were;
To save a Trojan Sail in Throngs they press;
But smile to see Alcinous in Distress.
Unable were those Wonders to deter
The Latians from their unsuccessful War.
Both Sides for doubtful Victory contend;
And on their Courage, and their Gods depend.
Nor bright Lavinia, nor Latinus' Crown,
Warm their great Soul to War, like fair Renown.
Venus at last beholds her Godlike Son
Triumphant, and the Field of Battle won;
Brave Turnus slain, strong Ardea but a Name,
" And buried in fierce Deluges of Flame.
" Her Towers, that boasted once a Sovereign Sway,
" The Fate of fancied Grandeur, now betray.
A famished Heron from the Ashes springs,
And beats the Ruin with disast'rous Wings.
Calamities of Towns distressed she feigns,
And often, with woeful Shrieks, of War complains.
The Deification of AENEAS.
Now had Aeneas, as ordained by Fate,
Survived the Period of Saturnia's Hate;
And by a sure irrevocable Doom,
Fixed the immortal Majesty of Rome.
Fit for the Station of his Kindred Stars,
His Mother Goddess thus her Suit prefers.
Almighty Arbiter, whose powerful Nod
Shakes distant Earth, and bows our own Abode;
To thy great Progeny indulgent be,
And rank the Goddess-born a Deity.
Already has he viewed, with mortal Eyes,
Thy Brother's Kingdoms of the nether Skies.
Forthwith a Conclave of the Godhead meets,
Where Juno in the shining Senate sits.
Remorse for past Revenge the Goddess feels;
Then thundering Jove the Almighty Mandate seals;
Allots the Prince of his Celestial Line,
An Apotheosis, and Rights Divine.
The crystal Mansions echo with Applause,
And, with her Graces, Love's bright Queen withdraws;
Shoots in a Blaze of Light along the Skies,
And, born by Turtles, to Laurentum flies.
Alights, where through the Reeds Numicius strays,
And to the Seas his watery Tribute pays.
The God she supplicates to wash away
The Parts more gross, and subject to Decay,
And cleanse the Goddess-born from Seminal Allay.
The horned Flood with glad Attention stands,
Then bids his Streams obey their Sire's Commands.
His better Parts by Lustral Waves refined,
More pure, and nearer to Aetherial Mind;
With Gums of fragrant Scent the Goddess strews,
And on his Features breathes ambrosial Dews.
Thus deify'd, new Honors Rome decrees,
Shrines, Festivals; and styles him Indiges.
The Line of the LATIAN Kings.
Ascanius now the Latian Scepter sways;
The Alban Nation, Sylvius, next obeys.
Then young Latinus: Next an Alba came,
The Grace, and Guardian of the Alban Name.
Then Epitus; then gentle Capys reigned;
Then Capetis the regal Power sustained.
Next he, who perished on the Tuscan Flood,
And honored with his Name the River God.
Now haughty Remulus begun his Reign,
Who fell by Thunder he aspired to feign.
Meek Acrota succeeded to the Crown;
From Peace endeavoring, more than Arms, Renown,
To Aventinus well resigned his Throne.
The Mount, on which he ruled, preserves his Name,
And Procas wore the Regal Diadem.
The Story of VERTUMNUS, and POMONA.
A Hama-Dryad flourished in these Days,
Her Name Pomona, from her Woodland Race.
In Garden Culture none could so excel,
Or form the pliant Souls of Plants so well;
Or to the Fruit more generous Flavours lend,
Or teach the Trees with nobler Loads to bend.
The Nymph frequented not the flattering Stream,
" Nor Meads, the Subject of a Virgin's Dream;
But to such Joys her Nurs'ry did prefer,
Alone to tend her vegetable Care.
A Pruning-hook she carried in her Hand,
And taught the Straglers to obey Command;
" Lest the licentious, and unthrifty Bough,
" The too indulgent Parent should undo.
" She shows, how Stocks invite to their Embrace
" A Graft, and naturalize a foreign Race
" To mend the Salvage Teint; and in its Stead
" Adopt new Nature, and a nobler Breed.
Now hourly she observes her growing Care,
" And guards their Nonage from the bleaker Air:
Then opes her streaming Sluices, to supply
With flowing Draughts her thirsty Family.
Long had she labored to continue free
From Chains of Love, and Nuptial Tyranny;
And in her Orchard's small Extent immured,
Her vowed Virginity she still secured.
Often would loose Pan, and all the lustful Train
Of Satyrs, tempt her Innocence in vain.
Silenus, that old Dotard, owned a Flame;
And He, that frights the Thieves with Stratagem
Of Sword, and Something else too gross to name.
To the Rt. Honble the Lady Juliana Boil.
M. Pool Sc^


Vertumnus too pursued the Maid no less;
But, with his Rivals, shared a like Success.
To gain Access a thousand Ways he tries;
Often, in the Hind, the Lover would disguise.
The heedless Lout comes shambling on, and seems
Just sweating from the Labor of his Teams.
Then, from the Harvest, often the mimick Swain
Seems bending with a Load of bearded Grain.
Sometimes a Dresser of the Vine he feigns,
And lawless Tendrils to their Bounds restrains.
Sometimes his Sword a Soldier shows; his Rod
An Angler; still so various is the God.
Now, in a Forhead-Cloth, some Crone he seems,
A Staff supplying the Defect of Limbs;
Admittance thus he gains; admires the Store
Of fairest Fruit; the fair Possessor more;
Then greets her with a Kiss: The unpracticed Dame
Admired a Grandame kissed with such a Flame.
Now, seated by her, he beholds a Vine
Around an Elm in amorous Foldings twine.
If that fair Elm, he cried, alone should stand,
No Grapes would glow with Gold, and tempt the Hand;
Or if that Vine without her Elm should grow,
'Twould creep a poor neglected Shrub below.
Be then, fair Nymph, by these Examples led;
Nor shun, for fancied Fears, the Nuptial Bed.
Not she for whom the Lapithites took Arms,
Nor Sparta's Queen could boast such heavenly Charms.
And if you would on Woman's Faith rely,
None can your Choice direct so well, as I.
Though old, so much Pomona I adore,
Scarce does the bright Vertumnus love her more.
It Is your fair self alone his Breast inspires
With softest Wishes, and unsoyl'd Desires.
Then fly all vulgar Followers, and prove
The God of Seasons only worth your Love.
On my Assurance well you may repose;
Vertumnus scarce Vertumnus better knows.
True to his Choice, all looser Flames he flies;
" Nor for new Faces fashionably dies.
The Charms of Youth, and every smiling Grace
Bloom in his Features, and the God confess.
Besides, he puts on every Shape at Ease;
But those the most, that best Pomona please.
Still to oblige her is her Lover's Aim;
Their Likings, and Aversions are the same.
Nor the fair Fruit your burdened Branches bear;
Nor all the youthful Product of the Year,
Could bribe his Choice; your self alone can prove
A fit Reward for so refined a Love.
Relent, fair Nymph, and with a kind Regret,
Think it is Vertumnus weeping at your Feet.
A Tale attend, through Cyprus known, to prove
How Venus once revenged neglected Love.
The Story of IPHIS and ANAXARETE.
Iphis, of vulgar Birth, by Chance had viewed
Fair Anaxarete of Teucer's Blood.
Not long had he beheld the Royal Dame,
E're the bright Sparkle kindled into Flame.
Often did he struggle with a just Despair,
Unfix'd to ask, unable to forbear.
" But Love, who flatters still his own Disease,
" Hopes all things will succeed, he knows will please.
Wherever the fair one haunts, he hovers there;
And seeks her Confident with Sighs, and Prayer.
Or Letters he conveys, that seldom prove
" Successless Messengers in Suits of Love.
Now shivering at her Gates the Wretch appears,
And Myrtle Garlands on the Columns rears,
Wet with a Deluge of unbidden Tears.
The Nymph more hard than Rocks, more deaf than Seas,
Derides his Prayers; insults his Agonies;
Arraigns of Insolence the aspiring Swain;
And takes a cruel Pleasure in his Pain.
Resolved at last to finish his Despair,
He thus upbraids the inexorable Fair. --
O Anaxarete, at last forget
" The License of a Passion indiscreet.
Now Triumph, since a welcome Sacrifice
Your Slave prepares, to offer to your Eyes.
My Life, without Reluctance, I resign;
That Present best can please a Pride, like Thine.
But, O! forbear to blast a Flame so bright,
Doomed never to expire, but with the Light.
And you, great Powers, do Justice to my Name;
The Hours, you take from Life, restore to Fame.
Then over the Posts, once hung with Wreaths, he throws
The ready Cord, and fits the fatal Noose;
For Death prepares; and bounding from above,
At once the Wretch concludes his Life and Love.
E're long the People gather, and the Dead
Is to his mourning Mother's Arms, conveyed.
First, like some ghastly Statue, she appears;
Then baths the breathless Coarse in Seas of Tears,
And gives it to the Pile; now as the Throng
Proceed in sad Solemnity along,
To view the passing Pomp, the cruel Fair
Hastes, and beholds her breathless Lover there.
Struck with the sight, inanimate she seems;
Set are her Eyes, and motionless her Limbs:
Her Features without Fire, her Color gone,
And, like her Heart, she hardens into Stone.
In Salamis the Statue still is seen
In the famed Temple of the Cyprian Queen.
Warned by this Tale, no longer then disdain,
O Nymph beloved, to ease a Lover's Pain.
So may the Frosts in Spring your Blossoms spare,
And Winds their rude Autumnal Rage forbear.
The Story often Vertumnus urged in vain,
But then assumed his heavenly Form again.
Such Looks, and Luster the bright Youth adorn,
As when with Rays glad Phoebus paints the Morn.
The Sight so warms the fair admiring Maid,
Like Snow she melts: So soon can Youth persuade.
Consent, on eager Wings, succeeds Desire;
And both the Lovers glow with mutual Fire.
The LATIAN Line continued.
Now Procas yielding to the Fates, his Son
Mild Numitor succeeded to the Crown.
But false Amulius, with a lawless Power,
At length deposed his Brother Numitor.
Then Ilia's valiant Issue, with the Sword,
Her Parent reinthron'd, the rightful Lord.
Next Romulus to People Rome contrives;
The joyous time of Pales' Feast arrives;
He gives the Word to seize the Sabine Wives.
The Sires enraged take Arms, by Tatius led,
Bold to revenge their violated Bed.
A Fort there was, not yet unknown to Fame,
Called the Tarpeian, its Commander's Name.
This by the false Tarpeia was betrayed,
But Death well recompensed the treacherous Maid.
The Foe on this new-bought Success relies,
And, silent, march; the City to surprise.
Saturnia's Arts with Sabine Arms combine;
But Venus countermines the vain Design;
Entreats the Nymphs that over the Springs preside.
Which near the Fane of hoary Janus glide,
To send their Succors; every Urn they drain,
To stop the Sabines Progress, but in vain.
The Naiads now more Stratagems essay;
And kindling Sulphur to each Source convey.
The Floods ferment, hot Exhalations rise,
Till from the scalding Ford the Army flies.
Soon Romulus appears in shining Arms,
And to the War the Roman Legions warms.
The Battle rages, and the Field is spread
With nothing, but the Dying and the Dead.
Both Sides consent to treat without Delay,
And their two Chiefs at once the Scepter sway.
But Tatius by Lavinian Fury slain;
Great Romulus continued long to reign.
The Assumption of ROMULUS.
Now Warrior Mars his burnished Helm puts on,
And thus addresses Heaven's Imperial Throne.
Since the inferior World is now become
" One Vassal Globe, and Colony to Rome,
This Grace, O Jove, for Romulus I claim,
Admit him to the Skies, from whence he came.
Long have thou promised an Aetherial State
To Mars's Lineage; and thy Word is Fate.
The Sire, that rules the Thunder, with a Nod
" Declared the Fiat, and dismissed the God.
Soon as the Power Armipotent surveyed
The flashing Skies, the Signal he obeyed;
And leaning on his Lance, he mounts his Car,
His fiery Coursers lashing through the Air.
Mount Palatine he gains, and finds his Son
Good Laws enacting on a peaceful Throne;
" The Scales of heavenly Justice holding high,
" With steady Hand, and a discerning Eye.
Then vaults upon his Carr, and to the Spheres,
Swift as a flying Shaft, Rome's Founder bears.
The Parts, more pure, in rising are refined,
The gross, and perishable lag behind.
His Shrine in purple Vestments stands in view;
He looks a God, and is Quirinus now.
The Assumption of HERSILIA.
E're long the Goddess of the nuptial Bed,
With Pity moved, sends Iris in her Stead
To sad Hersilia -- Thus the Metcor Maid: --
Chaste Relict! in bright Truth to Heaven allied,
The Sabines Glory, and the Sex's Pride;
Honored on Earth, and worthy of the Love
Of such a Spouse, as now resides above.
Some Respite to thy killing Griefs afford;
And if thou would once more behold thy Lord,
Retire to yon steep Mount, with Groves o'er-spread,
Which with an awful Gloom his Temple shade.
With Fear the modest Matron lifts her Eyes,
And to the bright Embassadress replies: --
O Goddess, yet to mortal Eyes unknown,
But sure thy various Charms confess thee one:
O quick to Romulus thy Votress bear,
" With Looks of Love he will smile away my Care;
In what-e'er Orb he shines, my Heaven is there;
Then hastes with Iris to the holy Grove,
And up the Mount Quirinal as they move,
A lambent Flame glides downward through the Air,
And brightens with a Blaze Hersilia's Hair.
Together on the bounding Ray they rise,
And shoot a Gleam of Light along the Skies.
With opening Arms Quirinus met his Bride,
Now Ora named, and pressed her to his Side.
N. B. Where this Mark " appears, the Lines of this Book are paraphrased.

The End of the Fourteenth Book.
To Her Grace the Duchess of St. Albans
E. Kirkall Sculp

OVID's METAMORPHOSES. BOOK XV.
Translated by Mr. DRYDEN, and Others.
The PYTHAGOREAN PHILOSOPHY.
By Mr. DRYDEN.
A KING is sought to guide the growing State,
One able to support the Public Weight,
And fill the Throne where Romulus had sat.
Renown, which often bespeaks the Public Voice,
Had recommended Numa to their Choice:
A peaceful, pious Prince; who not content
To know the Sabine Rites, his Study bent
To cultivate his Mind; to learn the Laws
Of Nature, and explore their hidden Cause.
Urged by this Care, his Country he forsook,
And to Crotona thence his Journey took.
Arrived, he first inquired the Founder's Name
Of this new Colony; and whence he came.
Then thus a Senior of the Place replies,
(Well read, and curious of Antiquities)
It Is said, Alcides hither took his way
From Spain, and drove along his conquered Prey;
Then, leaving in the Fields his grazing Cows,
He sought himself some hospitable House:
Good Croton entertained his Godlike Guest;
While he repaired his weary Limbs with Rest.
The Hero, thence departing, blessed the Place;
And here, he said, in Time's revolving Race,
A rising Town shall take his Name from thee.
Revolving Time fulfilled the Prophecy:
For Myscelos, the justest Man on Earth,
Alemon's Son, at Argos had his Birth:
Him Hercules, armed with his Club of Oak,
O'ershadow'd in a Dream, and thus bespoke;
Go, leave thy Native Soil, and make Abode
Where Aesaris rowls down his rapid Flood:
He said; and Sleep forsook him, and the God.
Trembling he waked, and rose with anxious Heart;
His Country Laws forbad him to depart:
What should he do? 'Twas Death to go away,
And the God menaced if he dared to stay.
All Day he doubted, and when Night came on,
Sleep, and the same forewarning Dream, begun:
Once more the God stood threatening over his Head;
With added Curses if he disobeyed.
Twice warned, he studied Flight; but would convey,
At once, his Person and his Wealth away:
Thus while he lingered, his Design was heard;
A speedy Process formed, and Death declared.
Witness there needed none of his Offense;
Against himself the Wretch was Evidence:
Condemned, and destitute of human Aid,
To him, for whom he suffered, thus he prayed.
O Power, who have deserved in Heaven a Throne,
Not given, but by thy Labors made thy own,
Pity thy Suppliant, and protect his Cause,
Whom thou have made obnoxious to the Laws*
A Custom was of old, and still remains;
Which Life or Death by Suffrages ordains:
White Stones and Black within an Urn are cast;
The first absolve, but Fate is in the last.
The Judges to the common Urn bequeath
Their Votes, and drop the Sable Signs of Death;
The Box receives all Black, but, poured from thence,
The Stones came candid forth; the Hue of Innocence.
Thus Alemonides his Safety won,
Preserved from Death by Alcumena's Son:
Then to his Kinsman-God his Vows he pays,
And cuts with prosperous Gales the Ionian Seas:
He leaves Tarentum, favored by the Wind,
And Thurine Bays, and Temises, behind;
Soft Sybaris, and all the Capes that stand
Along the Shore, he makes in sight of Land;
Still doubling, and still coasting, till he found
The Mouth of Aesaris, and promised Ground;
Then saw where, on the Margin of the Flood,
The Tomb that held the Bones of Croton stood:
Here, by the Gods Command, he built and walled
The Place predicted; and Crotona called.
Thus Fame, from time to time, delivers down
The sure Tradition of the Italian Town.
Here dwelt the Man divine, whom Samos bore,
But now Self-banish'd from his Native Shore,
Because he hated Tyrants, nor could bear
The Chains which none but servile Souls will wear:
He, though from Heaven remote, to Heaven could move*
With Strength of Mind, and tread the Abyss above;
And penetrate, with his interior Light,
Those upper Depths, which Nature hid from Sight:
And what he had observed, and learnt from thence*
Loved in familiar Language to dispense,
The Crowd with silent Admiration stand,
And heard him, as they heard their God's Command;
While he discoursed of Heaven's mysterious Laws,
The World's Original, and Nature's Cause;
And what was God; and why the fleecy Snows
In Silence fell, and rattling Winds arose;
What shook the steadfast Earth, and whence begun
The Dance of Planets round the radiant Sun;
If Thunder was the Voice of angry Jove,
Or Clouds, with Nitre pregnant, burst above:
Of these, and Things beyond the common Reach,
He spoke, and charmed his Audience with his Speech.
He first the Taste of Flesh from Tables drove,
And argued well, if Arguments could move.
O Mortals, from your Fellows Blood abstain,
Nor taint your Bodies with a Food profane:
While Corn and Pulse by Nature are bestowed,
And planted Orchards bend their willing Load;
While labored Gardens wholesome Herbs produce,
And teeming Vines afford their generous Juice;
Nor tardier Fruits of cruder Kind are lost,
But tamed with Fire, or mellow'd by the Frost;
While Kine to Pails distended Udders bring,
And Bees their Honey redolent of Spring;
While Earth not only can your Needs supply,
But, lavish of her Store, provides for Luxury;
A guiltless Feast administers with Ease,
And without Blood is prodigal to please.
Wild Beasts their Maws with their slain Brethren fill;
And yet not all, for some refuse to kill;
Sheep, Goats, and Oxen, and the nobler Steed,
On Browz, and Corn, and flowery Meadows, feed.
Bears, Tigers, Wolves, the Lyon's angry Brood,
Whom Heaven endu'd with Principles of Blood,
He wisely sundred from the rest, to yell
In Forests, and in lonely Caves to dwell;
Where stronger Beasts oppress the Weak by Might,
And all in Prey and purple Feasts delight.
O impious Use! to Nature's Laws opposed,
Where Bowels are in other Bowels closed:
Where, fatten'd by their Fellow's Fat, they thrive;
Maintained by Murder, and by Death they live.
It Is then for naught that Mother Earth provides
The Stores of all she shows, and all she hides,
If Men with fleshy Morsels must be fed,
And chaw with bloody Teeth the breathing Bread:
What else is this, but to devour our Guests,
And barb'rously renew Cyclopean Feasts!
We, by destroying Life, our Life sustain;
And gorge the ungodly Maw with Meats obscene.
Not so the Golden Age, who fed on Fruit,
Nor durst with bloody Meals their Mouths pollute.
Then Birds in airy Space might safely move,
And timorous Hares on Heaths securely rove:
Nor needed Fish the guileful Hooks to fear,
For all was peaceful; and that Peace sincere.
Whoever was the Wretch (and cursed be he)
That envied first our Food's Simplicity,
The Essay of bloody Feasts on Brutes began,
And after forged the Sword to murder Man.
Had he the sharpened Steel alone employed
On Beasts of Prey, that other Beasts destroyed,
Or Man invaded with their Fangs and Paws,
This had been justified by Nature's Laws,
And Self-defence: But who did Feasts begin
Of Flesh, he stretched Necessity to Sin.
To kill Man-killers, Man has lawful Power,
But not the extended License, to devour.
Ill Habits gather by unseen Degrees,
As Brooks make Rivers, Rivers run to Seas.
The Sow, with her broad Snout, for rooting up
Th'intrusted Seed, was judged to spoil the Crop,
And intercept the sweating Farmer's Hope:
The covet'ous Churl, of unforgiving Kind,
The Offender to the bloody Priest resigned:
Her Hunger was no Plea: For that she died.
The Goat came next in order, to be tried:
The Goat had cropped the Tendrills of the Vine:
In vengeance Laity and Clergy join,
Where one had lost his Profit, one his Wine.
Here was, at least, some Shadow of Offense:
The Sheep was sacrificed on no Pretense,
But meek and unresisting Innocence.
A patient, useful Creature, born to bear
The warm and woolly Fleece, that clothed her Murderer;
And daily to give down the Milk she bred,
A Tribute for the Grass on which she fed.
Living, both Food and Raiment she supplies,
And is of least Advantage when she dies.
How did the toiling Ox his Death deserve,
A downright simple Drudge, and born to serve?
O Tyrant! with what Justice can thou hope
The Promise of the Year, a plenteous Crop;
When thou destroy'st thy laboring Steer, who tilled,
And plough'd with Pains, thy else ungrateful Field?
From his yet reeking Neck to draw the Yoke,
That Neck with which the surly Clods he broke;
And to the Hatchet yield thy Husbandman,
Who finished Autumn, and the Spring began!
Nor this alone! but Heaven it self to bribe,
We to the Gods our impious Acts ascribe:
First recompense with Death their Creatures Toil;
Then call the Blessed above to share the Spoil:
The fairest Victim must the Powers appease,
(So fatal it is sometimes too much to please!)
A purple Fillet his broad Brows adorns,
With flowery Garlands crowned, and gilded Horns:
He hears the murderous Prayer the Priest prefers,
But understands not, it is his Doom he hears:
Beholds the Meal betwixt his Temples cast,
(The Fruit and Product of his Labors past;)
And in the Water views perhaps the Knife
Uplifted, to deprive him of his Life;
Then broken up alive, his Entrails sees
Torn out, for Priests t'inspect the Gods Decrees.
From whence, O mortal Men, this Gust of Blood
Have you derived, and interdicted Food?
Be taught by me this dire Delight to shun,
Warned by my Precepts, by my Practice won:
And when you eat the well-deserving Beast,
Think, on the Lab'rer of your Field you feast!
Now since the God inspires me to proceed*
Be that, whatever inspiring Power, obeyed.
For I will sing of mighty Mysteries,
Of Truths concealed before, from human Eyes,
Dark Oracles unveil, and open all the Skies.
Pleased as I am to walk along the Sphere
Of shining Stars, and travel with the Year,
To leave the heavy Earth, and scale the Height
Of Atlas, who supports the heavenly Weight;
To look from upper Light, and thence survey
Mistaken Mortals wandering from the Way,
And wanting Wisdom, fearful for the State
Of future Things, and trembling at their Fate!
Those I would teach; and by right Reason bring
To think of Death, as but an idle Thing.
Why thus affrighted at an empty Name,
A Dream of Darkness, and fictitious Flame?
Vain Themes of Wit, which but in Poems pass,
And Fables of a World, that never was!
What feels the Body when the Soul expires,
By Time corrupted, or consumed by Fires?
Nor dies the Spirit, but new Life repeats
In other Forms, and only changes Seats.
Even I, who these mysterious Truths declare,
Was once Euphorbus in the Trojan War;
My Name and Lineage I remember well,
And how in Fight by Sparta's King I fell.
In Argive Juno's Fane I late beheld
My Buckler hung on high, and owned my former Shield.
Then, Death, so called, is but old Matter dressed
In some new Figure, and a varied Vest:
Thus all Things are but altered, nothing dies;
And here and there the unbody'd Spirit flies,
By Time, or Force, or Sickness dispossessed,
And lodges, where it lights, in Man or Beast;
Or hunts without, till ready Limbs it find,
And actuates those according to their Kind;
From Tenement to Tenement is tossed,
The Soul is still the same, the Figure only lost:
And, as the softened Wax new Seals receives,
This Face assumes, and that Impression leaves;
Now called by one, now by another Name;
The Form is only changed, the Wax is still the same:
So Death, so called, can but the Form deface;
The Immortal Soul flies out in empty Space,
To seek her Fortune in some other Place.
Then let not Piety be put to flight,
To please the Taste of Glutton Appetite;
But suffer inmate Souls secure to dwell,
Lest from their Seats your Parents you expel;
With rabid Hunger feed upon your Kind,
Or from a Beast dislodge a Brother's Mind.
And since, like Typhis parting from the Shore,
In ample Seas I sail, and Depths untried before,
This let me further add, That Nature knows
No steadfast Station, but, or Ebbs, or Flows:
Ever in Motion; she destroys her old,
And casts new Figures in another Mold.
Even Times are in perpetual Flux, and run,
Like Rivers from their Fountain, rolling on.
For Time, no more than Streams, is at a Stay;
The flying Hour is ever on her Way:
And as the Fountain still supplies her Store,
The Wave behind impels the Wave before;
Thus in successive Course the Minutes run,
And urge their Predecessor Minutes on,
Still moving, ever new: For former Things
Are set aside, like abdicated Kings:
And every moment alters what is done,
And innovates some Act, till then unknown.
Darkness we see emerges into Light,
And shining Suns descend to Sable Night;
Even Heaven it self receives another Dye,
When wearied Animals in Slumbers lie
Of Midnight Ease: Another, when the Gray
Of Morn preludes the Splendour of the Day.
The Disk of Phoebus, when he climbs on high,
Appears at first but as a bloodshot Eye;
And when his Chariot downward drives to Bed,
His Ball is with the same Suffusion red;
But mounted high in his Meridian Race
All bright he shines, and with a better Face:
For there, pure Particles of Ether flow,
Far from The Infection of the World below.
Nor equal Light the unequal Moon adorns,
Or in her wexing, or her waning Horns.
For every Day she wanes, her Face is less;
But gathering into Globe, she fattens at Increase.
Perceiv'st thou not the Process of the Year,
How the four Seasons in four Forms appear,
Resembling human Life in every Shape they wear?
Spring first, like Infancy, shoots out her Head,
With milky Juice requiring to be fed:
Helpless, though fresh, and wanting to be led.
The green Stem grows in Stature and in Size,
But only feeds with Hope the Farmer's Eyes;
Then laughs the childish Year with Flowrets crowned,
And lavishly perfumes the Fields around,
But no substantial Nourishment receives;
Infirm the Stalks, unsolid are the Leaves.
Proceeding onward whence the Year began,
The Summer grows adult, and ripens into Man.
This Season, as in Men, is most repleat
With kindly Moisture, and prolifick Heat.
Autumn succeeds, a sober tepid Age,
Not froze with Fear, nor boiling into Rage;
More than mature, and tending to Decay,
When our brown Locks repine to mix with odious Gray.
Last, Winter creeps along with tardy Pace,
Sour is his Front, and furrowed is his Face;
His Scalp if not dishonored quite of Hair,
The ragged Fleece is thin; and thin is worse than bare.
Even our own Bodies daily Change receive,
Some Part of what was theirs before, they leave;
Nor are Today what Yesterday they were;
Nor the whole Same Tomorrow will appear.
Time was, when we were sowed, and just began,
From some few fruitful Drops, the Promise of a Man:
Then Nature's Hand (fermented as it was)
Molded to Shape the soft, coagulated Mass;
And when the little Man was fully formed,
The breathless Embrio with a Spirit warmed;
But when the Mother's Throws begin to come,
The Creature, pent within the narrow Room,
Breaks his blind Prison, pushing to repair
His stiffled Breath, and draw the living Air;
Cast on the Margin of the World he lies,
A helpless Babe, but by Instinct he cries.
He next essays to walk, but downward pressed
On four Feet imitates his Brother Beast:
By slow Degrees he gathers from the Ground
His Legs, and to the rolling Chair is bound;
Then walks alone; a Horseman now become,
He rides a Stick, and travels round the Room:
In time he vaunts among his youthful Peers,
Strong-bon'd, and strung with Nerves, in Pride of Years,
He runs with Mettle his first merry Stage,
Maintains the next, abated of his Rage,
But manages his Strength, and spares his Age.
Heavy the third, and stiff, he sinks apace,
And though it is down-hill all, but creeps along the Race.
Now sapless on the Verge of Death he stands,
Contemplating his former Feet, and Hands;
And, Milo-like, his slackened Sinews sees,
And withered Arms, once fit to cope with Hercules,
Unable now to shake, much less to tear, the Trees.
So Helen wept, when her too faithful Glass
Reflected on her Eyes the Ruins of her Face:
Wondering what Charms her Ravishers could spy,
To force her twice, or even but once to enjoy!
Thy Teeth, devouring Time, thine, envious Age,
On Things below still exercise your Rage:
With venomed Grinders you corrupt your Meat,
And then, at lingering Meals, the Morsels eat.
Nor those, which Elements we call, abide,
Nor to this Figure, nor to that, are tied:
For this eternal World is said of Old,
But four prolifick Principles to hold,
Four different Bodies; two to Heaven ascend,
And other two down to the Center tend:
Fire first with Wings expanded mounts on high,
Pure, void of Weight, and dwells in upper Sky;
Then Air, because unclog'd in empty Space,
Flies after Fire, and claims the second Place:
But weighty Water, as her Nature guides,
Lies on the lap of Earth; and Mother Earth subsides.
All Things are mixed of these, which all contain,
And into these are all resolved again:
Earth rarifies to Dew, expanded more,
The subtle Dew in Air begins to soar;
Spreads as she flies, and weary of her Name
Extenuates still, and changes into Flame;
Thus having by degrees Perfection won,
Restless they soon untwist the Web they spun,
And Fire begins to lose her radiant Hue,
Mixed with gross Air, and Air descends to Dew;
And Dew condensing, does her Form forego,
And sinks, a heavy lump of Earth, below.
Thus are their Figures never at a stand,
But changed by Nature's innovating Hand;
All Things are altered, nothing is destroyed,
The shifted Scene for some new Show employed.
Then, to be born, is to begin to be
Some other Thing we were not formerly:
And what we call to Die, is not t'appear,
Or be the Thing that formerly we were.
Those very Elements which we partake,
Alive, when Dead some other Bodies make:
Translated grow, have Sense, or can Discourse;
But Death on deathless Substance has no Force.
That Forms are changed I grant; that nothing can
Continue in the Figure it began:
The golden Age, to Silver was debased:
To Copper that; our Metal came at last.
The Face of Places, and their Forms, decay;
And that is solid Earth, that once was Sea:
Seas in their Turn retreating from the Shore,
Make solid Land, what Ocean was before;
And far from Strands are Shells of Fishes found,
And rusty Anchors fixed on Mountain-Ground:
And what were Fields before, now washed and worn
By falling Floods from high, to Valleys turn,
And crumbling still descend to level Lands;
And Lakes, and trembling Bogs, are barren Sands:
And the parched Desert floats in Streams unknown;
Wondering to drink of Waters not her own.
Here Nature living Fountains opes; and there
Seals up the Wombs where living Fountains were;
Or Earthquakes stop their ancient Course, and bring
Diverted Streams to feed a distant Spring.
So Lycus, swallowed up, is seen no more,
But far from thence knocks out another Door.
Thus Erasinus dives; and blind in Earth
Runs on, and gropes his way to second Birth,
Starts up in Argos Meads, and shakes his Locks
Around the Fields, and fattens all the Flocks.
So Mysus by another way is led,
And, grown a River, now disdains his Head:
Forgets his humble Birth, his Name forsakes,
And the proud Title of Caicus takes.
Large Amenane, impure with yellow Sands,
Runs rapid often, and as often stands,
And here he threats the drunken Fields to drown;
And there his Dugs deny to give their Liquor down.
Anigros once did wholesome Draughts afford,
But now his deadly Waters are abhorred:
Since, hurt by Hercules, as Fame resounds,
The Centaurs in his Current washed their Wounds.
The Streams of Hypanis are sweet no more,
But brackish lose the Taste they had before.
Antissa, Pharos, Tire, in Seas were pent,
Once Isles, but now increase the Continent;
While the Leucadian Coast, main Land before,
By rushing Seas is severed from the Shore.
So Zancle to the Italian Earth was tied,
And Men once walked where Ships at Anchor ride.
Till Neptune overlooked the narrow Way,
And in Disdain poured in the conquering Sea.
Two Cities that adorned the Achaian Ground,
Buris and Helice, no more are found,
But, whelmed beneath a Lake, are sunk and drowned;
And Boatsmen through the Crystal Water show,
To wondering Passengers, the Walls below.
Near Traezen stands a Hill, exposed in Air
To Winter-winds, of leafy Shadows bare:
This once was level Ground: But (strange to tell)
The included Vapors, that in Caverns dwell,
Laboring with Cholick Pangs, and close confined,
In vain sought Issue for the rumbling Wind:
Yet still they heaved for Vent, and heaving still
Enlarged the Concave, and shot up the Hill;
As Breath extends a Bladder, or the Skins
Of Goats are blown t'inclose the hoarded Wines:
The Mountain yet retains a Mountain's Face,
And gathered Rubbish heals the hollow Space.
Of many Wonders, which I heard or knew,
Retrenching most, I will relate but few:
What, are not Springs with Qualities opposed,
Endu'd at Seasons, and at Seasons lost?
Thrice in a Day thine, Ammon, change their Form,
Cold at high Noon, at Morn and Evening warm:
Thine, Athaman, will kindle Wood, if thrown
On the pil'd Earth, and in the waning Moon*
The Thracians have a Stream, if any try
The Taste, his hardened Bowels petrify;
Whatever it touches it converts to Stones,
And makes a Marble Pavement where it runs.
Crathis, and Sybaris her Sister Flood,
That slide through our Calabrian Neighbor Wood,
With Gold and Amber dye the shining Hair,
And thither Youth resort; (for who would not be Fair?)
But stranger Virtues yet in Streams we find,
Some change not only Bodies, but the Mind:
Who has not heard of Salmacis obscene,
Whose Waters into Women soften Men?
Or Ethiopian Lakes, which turn the Brain
To Madness, or in heavy Sleep constrain?
Clytorian Streams the Love of Wine expel,
(Such is the Virtue of the abstemious Well,)
Whether the colder Nymph that rules the Flood
Extinguishes, and balks the drunken God;
Or that Melampus (so have some assured)
When the mad Proetides with Charms he cured;
And powerful Herbs, both Charms and Simples cast
Into the sober Spring, where still their Virtues last.
Unlike Effects Lyncestis will produce;
Who drinks his Waters, though with moderate Use,
Reels as with Wine, and sees with double Sight:
His Heels too heavy, and his Head too light.
Ladon, once Pheneos, an Arcadian Stream,
(Ambiguous in the Effects, as in the Name)
By Day is wholesome Bev'rage; but is thought
By Night infected, and a deadly Draught.
Thus running Rivers, and the standing Lake,
Now of these Virtues, now of those partake:
Time was (and all Things Time and Fate obey)
When fast Ortygia floated on the Sea;
Such were Cyanean Isles, when Typhis steered
Betwixt their Streights, and their Collision feared;
They swam where now they sit; and firmly joined
Secure of rooting up, resist the Wind.
Nor Aetna vomiting sulphurous Fire
Will ever belsh; for Sulphur will expire,
(The Veins exhausted of the liquid Store:)
Time was she cast no Flames; in time will cast no more.
For whether Earth's an Animal, and Air
Imbibes; her Lungs with Coolness to repair,
And what she sucks remits; she still requires
Inlets for Air, and Outlets for her Fires;
When tortured with convulsive Fits she shakes,
That Motion choaks the Vent, till other Vent she makes:
Or when the Winds in hollow Caves are closed
And subtle Spirits find that Way opposed,
They toss up Flints in Air; the Flints that hide
The Seeds of Fire, thus tossed in Air, collide,
Kindling the Sulphur, till the Fuel spent
The Cave is cooled, and the fierce Winds relent.
Or whether Sulphur, catching Fire, feeds on
Its unctuous Parts, till all the Matter gone
The Flames no more ascend; for Earth supplies
The Fat that feeds them; and when Earth denies
That Food, by length of Time consumed, the Fire
Famished for want of Fuel must expire.
A Race of Men there are, as Fame has told,
Who shivering suffer Hyperborean Cold,
Till nine times bathing in Minerva's Lake,
Soft Feathers, to defend their naked Sides, they take.
It Is said, the Scythian Wives (believe who will)
Transform themselves to Birds by Magic Skill;
Smeared over with an Oil of wondrous Might,
That adds new Pinions to their airy Flight.
But this by sure Experiment we know,
That living Creatures from Corruption grow:
Hide in a hollow Pit a slaughtered Steer,
Bees from his putrid Bowels will appear;
Who like their Parents haunt the Fields, and bring
Their Hony-Harvest home, and hope another Spring.
The Warlike-Steed is multiplied, we find,
To Wasps and Hornets of the Warrior Kind.
Cut from a Crab his crooked Claws, and hide
The rest in Earth, a Scorpion thence will glide,
And shoot his Sting, his Tail in Circles tossed
Refers the Limbs his backward Father lost:
And Worms, that stretch on Leaves their filmy Loom,
Crawl from their Bags, and Butterflies become.
Even Slime begets the Frog's loquacious Race:
Short of their Feet at first, in little space
With Arms and Legs endu'd, long Leaps they take
Raised on their hinder Part, and swim the Lake,
And Waves repel: For Nature gives their Kind,
To that Intent, a Length of Legs behind.
The Cubs of Bears a living Lump appear,
When whelp'd, and no determined Figure wear.
Their Mother licks 'em into Shape, and gives
As much of Form, as she her self receives.
The Grubs from their sexangular Abode
Crawl out unfinished, like the Maggot's Brood:
Trunks without Limbs; till time at leisure brings
The Thighs they wanted, and their tardy Wings.
The Bird who draws the Carr of Juno, vain
Of her crowned Head, and of her Starry Train;
And he that bears the Artillery of Jove,
The strong-pounc'd Eagle, and the billing Dove;
And all the feathered Kind, who could suppose
(But that from Sight the surest Sense he knows)
They from the included Yolk not ambient White arose.
There are who think the Marrow of a Man,
Which in the Spine, while he was living, ran;
When dead, the Pith corrupted will become
A Snake, and hiss within the hollow Tomb.
All these receive their Birth from other Things;
But from himself the Phoenix only springs:
Self-born, begotten by the Parent Flame
In which he burned, Another and the Same;
Who not by Corn or Herbs his Life sustains,
But the sweet Essence of Amomum drains:
And watches the rich Gums Arabia bears,
While yet in tender Dew they drop their Tears.
He, (his five Centuries of Life fulfilled)
His Nest on Oaken Boughs begins to build,
Or trembling Tops of Palm, and first he draws
The Plan with his broad Bill, and crooked Claws,
Nature's Artificers; on this the Pile
Is formed, and rises round, then with the Spoil
Of Casia, Cynamon, and Stems of Nard,
(For Softness strewn beneath) his Funeral Bed is reared:
Funeral and Bridal both; and all around
The Borders with corruptless Myrrh are crowned,
On this incumbent; 'till aetherial Flame
First catches, then consumes the costly Frame:
Consumes him too, as on the Pile he lies;
He lived on Odours, and in Odours dies.
An Infant- Phoenix from the former springs,
His Father's Heir, and from his tender Wings
Shakes off his Parent Dust, his Method he pursues,
And the same Lease of Life on the same Terms renews.
When grown to Manhood he begins his Reign,
And with stiff Pinions can his Flight sustain,
He lightens of its Load, the Tree that bore
His Father's Royal Sepulcher before,
And his own Cradle: This (with pious Care
Placed on his Back) he cuts the buxome Air,
Seeks the Sun's City, and his sacred Church,
And decently lays down his Burden in the Porch.
A Wonder more amazing would we find?
The Hyaena shows it, of a double Kind,
Varying the Sexes in alternate Years,
In one begets, and in another bears.
The thin Camelion fed with Air, receives
The Color of the Thing to which he cleaves.
India when conquered, on the conquering God
For planted Vines the sharp-ey'd Lynx bestowed,
Whose Urine, shed before it touches Earth,
Congeals in Air, and gives to Gems their Birth.
So Coral soft, and white in Ocean's Bed,
Comes hardened up in Air, and glows with Red.
All changing Species should my Song recite;
Before I ceased, would change the Day to Night.
Nations and Empires flourish, and decay,
By turns command, and in their turns obey;
Time softens hardy People, Time again
Hardens to War a soft, unwarlike Train.
Thus Troy for ten long Years her Foes withstood,
And daily bleeding bore The Expense of Blood:
Now for thick Streets it shows an empty Space,
Or only filled with Tombs of her own perished Race,
Her self becomes the Sepulcher of what she was.
Mycene, Sparta, Thebes of mighty Fame,
Are vanished out of Substance into Name.
And Dardan Rome that just begins to rise,
On Tiber's Banks, in time shall mate the Skies:
Widening her Bounds, and working on her way;
Even now she meditates Imperial Sway:
Yet this is Change, but she by changing thrives,
Like Moons newborn, and in her Cradle strives
To fill her Infant-Horns; an Hour shall come
When the round World shall be contained in Rome.
For thus old Saws foretell, and Helenus
Anchises' drooping Son enlivened thus;
When Ilium now was in a sinking State;
And he was doubtful of his future Fate:
O Goddess-born, with thy hard Fortune strive,
Troy never can be lost, and thou alive.
Thy Passage thou shall free through Fire and Sword,
And Troy in Foreign Lands shall be restored.
In happier Fields a rising Town I see,
Greater than what ever was, or is, or ever shall be:
And Heaven yet owes the World a Race derived from Thee.
Sages and Chiefs, of other Lineage born,
The City shall extend, extended shall adorn:
But from Iulus he must draw his Breath,
By whom thy Rome shall rule the conquered Earth:
Whom Heaven will lend Mankind on Earth to reign,
And late require the precious Pledge again.
This Helenus to great Aeneas told,
Which I retain, ever since in other Mould
My Soul was clothed; and now rejoice to view
My Country Walls rebuilt, and Troy revived anew,
Raised by the Fall: Decreed by Loss to Gain;
Enslaved but to be free, and conquered but to reign.
It Is time my hard-mouthed Coursers to control,
Apt to run Riot, and transgress the Goal:
And therefore I conclude, Whatever lies,
In Earth, or flits in Air, or fills the Skies,
All suffer Change; and we, that are of Soul
And Body mixed, are Members of the whole.
Then when our Sires, or Grandsires, shall forsake
The Forms of Men, and brutal Figures take,
Thus housed, securely let their Spirits rest,
Nor violate thy Father in the Beast.
Thy Friend, thy Brother, any of thy Kin,
If none of these, yet there is a Man within:
O spare to make a Thyestaean Meal,
T'inclose his Body, and his Soul expel.
Ill Customs by degrees to Habits rise,
Ill Habits soon become exalted Vice:
What more Advance can Mortals make in Sin
So near Perfection, who with Blood begin?
Deaf to the Calf that lies beneath the Knife,
Looks up, and from her Butcher begs her Life:
Deaf to the harmless Kid, that e're he dies
All Methods to procure thy Mercy tries,
And imitates in vain thy Childrens Cries.
Where will he stop, who feeds with Household Bread,
Then eats the Poultry which before he fed?
Let plough thy Steers; that when they lose their Breath,
To Nature, not to thee, they may impute their Death.
Let Goats for Food their loaded Udders lend,
And Sheep from Winter-cold thy Sides defend;
But neither Sprindges, Nets, nor Snares employ,
And be no more Ingenious to destroy.
Free as in Air, let Birds on Earth remain,
Nor let insidious Glue their Wings constrain;
Nor opening Hounds the trembling Stag affright,
Nor purple Feathers intercept his Flight:
Nor Hooks concealed in Baits for Fish prepare,
Nor Lines to heave 'em twinkling up in Air.
Take not away the Life you cannot give:
For all Things have an equal Right to live.
Kill noxious Creatures, where it is Sin to save;
This only just Prerogative we have:
But nourish Life with vegetable Food,
And shun the sacrilegious Taste of Blood.
These Precepts by the Samian Sage were taught,
Which Godlike Numa to the Sabines brought,
And thence transferred to Rome, by Gift his own:
A willing People, and an offered Throne.
O happy Monarch, sent by Heaven to bless
A Salvage Nation with soft Arts of Peace,
To teach Religion, Rapine to restrain,
Give Laws to Lust, and Sacrifice ordain:
Himself a Saint, a Goddess was his Bride,
And all the Muses over his Acts preside.
The Story of HIPPOLYTUS.
By Mr. CATCOTT.
Advanced in Years he died; one common Date
His Reign concluded, and his Mortal State.
Their Tears Plebeians, and Patricians shed,
And pious Matrons wept their Monarch dead.
His mournful Wife, her Sorrows to bewail,
Withdrew from Rome, and sought the Arician Vale.
Hid in thick Woods, she made incessant Moans,
Disturbing Cynthia's sacred Rites with Groans.
How often the Nymphs, who ruled the Wood and Lake,
Reproved her Tears, and Words of Comfort spoke!
How often (in vain) the Son of Theseus said,
Thy stormy Sorrows be with Patience laid;
Nor are thy Fortunes to be wept alone,
Weigh others Woes, and learn to bear thine own.
Be mine an Instance to assuage thy Grief:
Would mine were none! -- yet mine may bring Relief*
You Have heard, perhaps, in Conversation told,
What once befell Hippolytus of old;
To Death by Theseus' easy Faith betrayed,
And caught in Snares his wicked Step-dame laid.
The wondrous Tale your Credit scarce may claim,
Yet (strange to say) in me behold the same,
Whom lustful Phaedra often had pressed in vain,
With impious Joys, my Father's Bed to stain;
'Till seized with Fear, or by Revenge inspired,
She charged on me the Crimes her self desired.
Expelled by Theseus, from his Home I fled
With Heaps of Curses on my guiltless Head.
Forlorn, I sought Pitthean Troezen's Land,
And drove my Chariot over Corinthus' Strand;
When from the Surface of the level Main
A Billow rising, heaved above the Plain;
Rolling, and gathering, 'till so high it swelled,
A Mountain's Height the enormous Mass excelled;
Then bellowing, burst; when from the Summit cleav'd,
A horned Bull his ample Chest upheav'd.
His Mouth, and Nostrils, Storms of briny Rain,
Expiring, blew. Dread Horror seized my Train.
I stood unmoved. My Father's cruel Doom
Claimed all my Soul, nor Fear could find a Room.
Amazed, awhile my trembling Coursers stood
With prick'd-up Ears, contemplating the Flood;
Then starting sudden, from the dreadful View,
At once, like Lightning, from the Seas they flew,
And over the craggy Rocks the rattling Chariot drew.
In vain to stop the hot-mouth'd Steeds I tried,
And bending backward, all my Strength applied;
The frothy Foam in driving Flakes distains
The Bits, and Bridles, and bedews the Reins.
But though, as yet untamed they run, at length
Their heady Rage had tired beneath my Strength,
When in the Spokes, a Stump intangling, tore
The shattered Wheel, and from its Axle bore.
The Shock impetuous tossed me from the Seat,
Caught in the Reins beneath my Horse's Feet.
My reeking Guts dragged out alive, around
The jagged Stump, my trembling Nerves were wound,
Then stretched the well-knit Limbs, in Pieces haled,
Part stuck behind, and part the Chariot trail'd;
'Till, midst my cracking Joints; and breaking Bones,
I breathed away my wearied Soul in Groans.
No Part distinguished from the Rest was found,
But all my Parts an universal Wound.
Now say, self-tortur'd Nymph, can you compare
Our Griefs as equal, or in Justice dare?
I saw besides the darksome Realms of Woe,
And bathed my Wounds in smoking Streams below.
There I had staid, nor second Life enjoyed,
But Paean's Son his wondrous Art employed.
To Light restored, by medicinal Skill,
In Spite of Fate, and rigid Pluto's Will,
Th'invidious Object to preserve from View,
A misty Cloud around me Cynthia threw;
And lest my Sight should stir my Foes to Rage,
She stamped my Visage with the Marks of Age.
My former Hue was changed, and for it shown
A Set of Features, and a Face unknown.
Awhile the Goddess stood in doubt, or Crete,
Or Delos' Isle, to choose for my Retreat.
Delos, and Crete refused, this Wood she chose,
Bad me my former luckless Name depose,
Which kept alive the Memory of my Woes;
Then said, Immortal Life be thine; and thou,
Hippolytus once called, be Virbius now.
Here then a God, but of th'inferior Race,
I serve my Goddess, and attend her Chase.
EGERIA transformed to a Fountain.
But others Woes were useless to appease
Egeria's Grief, or set her Mind at ease.
Beneath the Hill, all comfortless she laid,
The dropping Tears her Eyes incessant shed,
'Till pitying Phoebe eased her pious Woe,
Thawed to a Spring, whose Streams for ever flow.
The Nymphs, and Virbius, like Amazement filled,
As seized the Swains, who Tyrrhene Furrows tilled;
When heaving up, a Clod was seen to roll,
Untouched, self-mov'd, and big with human Soul.
The spreading Mass its former Shape deposed,
Began to shoot, and Arms and Legs disclosed,
'Till formed a perfect Man, the living Mold
Opened its new Mouth, and future Truths foretold;
And Tages named by Natives of the Place,
Taught Arts prophetic to the Tuscan Race.
Or such as once by Romulus was shown,
Who saw his Lance with sprouting Leaves o'er-grown,
When fixed in Earth the Point began to shoot,
And growing downward turned a fibrous Root;
While spread aloft the branching Arms displayed,
Over wondering Crowds, an unexpected Shade.
The Story of CIPPUS.
By Sir SAMUEL GARTH, M. D.
Or as when Cippus in the Current viewed
The shooting Horns that on his Forehead stood,
His Temples first he feels, and with Surprise
His Touch confirms the Assurance of his Eyes.
Strait to the Skies his horned Front he rears,
And to the Gods directs these pious Prayers.
If this Portent be prosperous, O decree
To Rome The Event; if otherwise, to me.
An Altar then of Turf he hastes to raise,
Rich Gums in fragrant Exhalations blaze;
The panting Entrails crackle as they fry,
And boding Fumes pronounce a Mystery.
Soon as the Augur saw the Holy Fire,
And Victims with presaging Signs expire,
To Cippus then he turns his Eyes with speed,
And views the horny Honors of his Head;
Then cried, Hail Conqueror! thy Call obey,
Those Omens I behold presage thy Sway.
Rome waits thy Nod, unwilling to be Free,
And owns thy Sovereign Power as Fate's Decree.
He said -- and Cippus, starting at The Event,
Spoke in these Words his pious Discontent.
Far hence, ye Gods, this Execration send;
And the great Race of Romulus defend.
Better that I in Exile live abhorred,
Then ever the Capitol should style me Lord.
This spoke, he hides with Leaves his Omen'd Head.
Then prays, the Senate next convenes, and said,
If Augurs can foresee, a Wretch is come,
Designed by Destiny the Bane of Rome.
Two Horns (most strange to tell) his Temples crown;
If ever he pass the Walls, and gain the Town,
Your Laws are forfeit, that ill-fated Hour;
And Liberty must yield to lawless Power.
Your Gates he might have entered; but this Arm
Seized the Usurper, and withheld the Harm.
Haste, find the Monster out, and let him be
Condemned to all the Senate can decree;
Or tied in Chains, or into Exile thrown;
Or by the Tyrant's Death prevent your own.
The Crowd such Murmurs utter as they stand,
As swelling Surges breaking on the Strand:
Or as when gathering Gales sweep over the Grove,
And their tall Heads the bending Cedars move.
Each with Confusion gazed, and then began
To feel his Fellow's Brows, and find the Man.
Cippus then shakes his Garland off, and cries
The Wretch you want I offer to your Eyes.
The Anxious Throng looked down, and sad in Thought,
All wished they had not found the Sign they sought:
In haste with Laurel Wreaths his Head they bind;
Such Honor to such Virtue was assigned.
Then thus the Senate. -- Hear, O Cippus, hear;
So Godlike is thy Tutelary Care,
That since in Rome thy self forbids thy Stay,
For thy Abode those Acres we convey
The Plough-share can surround, the Labor of a Day.
In Deathless Records thou shall stand enrolled,
And Rome's rich Posts shall shine with Horns of Gold.
The Occasion of AESCULAPIUS being brought to ROME.
By Mr. WELSTED.
Melodious Maids of Pindus, who inspire
The flowing Strains, and tune the vocal Lyre;
Tradition's Secrets are unlocked to you,
Old Tales revive, and Ages past renew;
You, who can hidden Causes best expound,
Say, whence the Isle, which Tiber flows around,
Its Altars with a heavenly Stranger graced,
And in our Shrines the God of Physic placed.
A wasting Plague infected Latium's Skies;
Pale bloodless Looks were seen with ghastly Eyes;
The dire Disease's Marks each Visage wore,
And the pure Blood was changed to putrid Gore:
In vain were human Remedies applied;
In vain the Power of healing Herbs was tried:
Wearied with Death, they seek Celestial Aid,
And visit Phoebus in his Delphic Shade;
In the World's Center sacred Delphos stands,
And gives its Oracles to distant Lands:
Here they implore the God, with fervent Vows,
His salutary Power to interpose,
And end a great afflicted City's Woes.
The holy Temple sudden Tremors proved;
The Laurel-grove and all its Quivers moved;
In hollow Sounds the Priestess, thus, began,
And through each Bosom thrilling Horrors ran.
' The Assistance, Roman, which you here implore,
' Seek from another, and a nearer Shore;
' Relief must be implored, and Succor won,
' Not from Apollo, but Apollo's Son;
' My Son, to Latium born, shall bring Redress:
' Go, with good Omens, and expect Success.
When these clear Oracles the Senate knew;
The sacred Tripod's Counsels they pursue,
Depute a Pious and a chosen Band,
Who sail to Epidaurus' neighboring Land:
Before the Grecian Elders when they stood,
They pray 'em to bestow the healing God:
' Ordained was he to save Ausonia's State;
' So promised Delphos, and unerring Fate.
Opinions various their Debates enlarge:
Some plead to yield to Rome the sacred Charge;
Others, tenacious of their Country's Wealth,
Refuse to grant the Power, who guards its Health.
While dubious they remained, the wasting Light
Withdrew before the growing Shades of Night;
Thick Darkness now obscured the dusky Skies:
Now, Roman, closed in Sleep were mortal Eyes,
When Health's auspicious God appears to Thee,
And thy glad Dreams his Form celestial see:
In his left Hand, a rural Staff preferred,
His Right is seen to stroke his decent Beard.
' Dismiss, said he, with Mildness all divine,
' Dismiss your Fears; I come, and leave my Shrine;
' This Serpent view, that with ambitious Play
' My Staff encircles, mark him every way;
' His Form, though larger, nobler, I Will assume,
' And changed, as Gods should be bring Aid to Rome.
Here fled the Vision, and the Vision's flight
Was followed by the cheerful Dawn of Light.
Now was the Morn with blushing Streaks o'er-spread,
And all the starry Fires of Heaven were fled;
The Chiefs perplexed, and filled with doubtful Care,
To their Protector's sumptuous Roofs repair,
By genuin Signs implore him to express,
What Seats he deigns to choose, what Land to bless:
Scarce their ascending Prayers had reached the Sky;
Lo, the Serpentine God, erected high!
Forerunning Hissings his Approach confessed;
Bright shone his Golden Scales, and waved his lofty Crest;
The trembling Altar his Appearance spoke;
The Marble Floor, and glittering Cieling shook;
The Doors were rocked; the Statue seemed to nod;
And all the Fabric owned the present God:
His radiant Chest he taught aloft to rise,
And round the Temple cast his flaming Eyes:
Struck was the astonished Crowd; the holy Priest,
His Temples with white Bands of Ribbon dressed,
With reverent Awe the Power divine confessed:
The God, the God, he cries! all Tongues be still!
Each conscious Breast devoutest Ardour fill!
O Beauteous! O Divine! assist our Cares,
And be propitious to thy Votaries Prayers!
All with consenting Hearts, and pious Fear,
The Words repeat, the Deity revere:
The Romans in their holy Worship joined,
With silent Awe, and Purity of Mind:
Gracious to them, his Crest is seen to nod,
And, as an Earnest of his Care, the God,
Thrice hissing, vibrates thrice his forked Tongue;
And now the smooth Descent he glides along:
Still on the ancient Seats he bends his Eyes,
In which his Statue breaths, his Altars rise;
His long-lov'd Shrine with kind Concern he leaves,
And to forsake the accustomed Mansion grieves:
At length, his sweeping Bulk in State is born
Through the thronged Streets, which scattered Flowers adorn;
Through many a Fold he winds his mazy Course,
And gains the Port and Moles, which break the Ocean's force.
'Twas here he made a Stand, and having viewed
The pious Train, who his last Steps pursued,
Seemed to dismiss their Zeal with gracious Eyes,
While Gleams of Pleasure in his Aspect rise.
And now the Latian Vessel he ascends;
Beneath the weighty God the Vessel bends:
The Latins on the Strand great Jove appease,
Their Cables loose, and plough the yielding Seas:
The high-rear'd Serpent from the Stern displays
His gorgeous Form, and the blue Deep surveys;
The Ship is wafted on with gentle Gales,
And over the calm Ionian smoothly sails;
On the sixth Morn the Italian Coast they gain,
And touch Laciniae, graced with Juno's Fane;
Now fair Calabria to the Sight is lost,
And all the Cities on her fruitful Coast;
They pass at length the rough Sicilian Shore,
The Brutian Soil, rich with metallic Ore,
The famous Isles, where Aeolus was King,
And Paestus blooming with eternal Spring:
Minerva's Cape they leave, and Capreae's Isle,
Campania, on whose Hills the Vineyards smile,
The City, which Alcides' Spoils adorn,
Naples, for soft Delight and Pleasure born,
Fair Stabiae, with Cumean Sybil's Seats,
And Baia's tepid Baths, and green Retreats:
Linternum next they reach, where balmy Gums
Distill from mastic Trees, and spread Perfumes:
Caieta, from the Nurse so named, for whom
With pious Care Aeneas raised a Tomb,
Vulturne, whose Whirlpools suck the numerous Sands,
And Trachas, and Minturnae's marshy Lands,
And Formiae's Coast is left, and Circe's Plain,
Which yet remembers her enchanting Reign;
To Antium, last, his Course the Pilot guides;
Here, while the anchored Vessel safely rides,
(For now the ruffled Deep portends a Storm)
The spiry God unfolds his spheric Form,
Through large Indentings draws his lubric Train,
And seeks the Refuge of Appollo's Fane;
The Fane is situate on the yellow Shore:
When the Sea smiled, and the Winds raged no more,
He leaves his Father's hospitable Lands,
And furrows, with his rattling Scales, the Sands
Along the Coast; at length the Ship regains,
And sails to Tibur and Lavinum's Plains.
Here mingling Crowds to meet their Patron came,
Even the chaste Guardians of the Vestal Flame,
From every Part tumultuous they repair,
And joyful Acclamations rend the Air:
Along the flowery Banks, on either Side,
Where the tall Ship floats on the swelling Tide,
Disposed in decent Order Altars rise;
And crackling Incense, as it mounts the Skies,
The Air with Sweets refreshes; while the Knife,
Warm with the Victim's Blood, let us out the streaming Life.
The World's great Mistress, Rome, receives him now;
On the Mast's Top reclined he waves his Brow,
And from that Height surveys the great Abodes,
And Mansions worthy of residing Gods.
The Land, a narrow Neck, it self extends,
Round which his Course the Stream divided bends;
The Stream's two Arms, on either side, are seen,
Stretched out in equal length; the Land between.
The Isle, so called, from hence derives its Name:
'Twas here the salutary Serpent came;
Nor sooner has he left the Latian Pine,
But he assumes again his Form divine,
And now no more the drooping City mourns,
Joy is again is restored, and Health returns.
The Deification of JULIUS CAESAR.
But Aesculapius was a foreign Power:
In his own City Caesar we adore:
Him Arms and Arts alike renowned beheld,
In Peace conspicuous, dreadful in the Field;
His rapid Conquests, and swift-finish'd Wars,
The Hero justly fixed among the Stars;
Yet is his Progeny his greatest Fame:
The Son immortal makes the Father's Name.
The Sea-girt Britons, by his Courage tamed,
For their high rocky Cliffs, and Fierceness famed;
His dreadful Navies, which victorious rode
Over Nile's affrighted Waves and seven-sourced Flood;
Numidia, and the spacious Realms regained,
Where Cyniphis or flows, or Juba reigned;
The Powers of titled Mithridates broke,
And Pontus added to the Roman Yoke;
Triumphal Shows decreed, for Conquests won,
For Conquests, which the Triumphs still out-shone;
These are great Deeds; yet less, than to have given
The World a Lord, in whom, propitious Heaven,
When you decreed the Sovereign Rule to place,
You blessed with lavish Bounty human Race.
Now lest so great a Prince might seem to rise
Of mortal Stem, his Sire must reach the Skies;
The beauteous Goddess, that Aeneas bore;
Foresaw it, and foreseeing did deplore;
For well she knew, her Hero's Fate was nigh,
Devoted by conspiring Arms to die.
Trembling and pale, to every God, she cried,
Behold, what deep and subtle Arts are tried,
To end the last, the only Branch that springs
From my Iulus, and the Dardan Kings!
How bent they are! how desperate to destroy
All that is left me of unhappy Troy!
Am I alone by Fate ordained to know
Uninterrupted Care, and endless Woe?
Now from Tydides' Spear I feel the Wound:
Now Ilium's Towers the hostile Flames surround:
Troy laid in Dust, my exiled Son I mourn,
Through angry Seas, and raging Billows born;
Over the wide Deep his wandering Course he bends;
Now to the sullen Shades of Styx descends,
With Turnus driven at last fierce Wars to wage,
Or rather with unpitying Juno's Rage.
But why record I now my ancient Woes?
Sense of past Ills in present Fears I lose;
On me their Points the impious Daggers throw;
Forbid it, Gods, repel the direful Blow:
If by cursed Weapons Numa's Priest expires,
No longer shall ye burn, ye vestal Fires.
While such Complainings Cypria's Grief disclose;
In each celestial Breast Compassion rose:
Not Gods can alter Fate's resistless Will;
Yet they foretold by Signs the approaching Ill.
Dreadful were heard, among the Clouds, Alarms
Of ecchoing Trumpets, and of clashing Arms;
The Sun's pale Image gave so faint a Light,
That the sad Earth was almost veiled in Night;
The Aether's Face with fiery Meteors glowed;
With Storms of Hail were mingled Drops of Blood;
A dusky Hue the Morning Star overspread,
And the Moon's Orb was stained with Spots of Red;
In every place portentous Shricks were heard,
The fatal Warnings of the infernal Bird;
In every Place the Marble melts to Tears;
While in the Groves, revered through length of Years,
Boding and awful Sounds the Ear invade;
And solemn Music warbles through the Shade;
No Victim can atone the impious Age,
No Sacrifice the wrathful Gods assuage;
Dire Wars and civil Fury threat the State;
And every Omen points out Caesar's Fate:
Around each hallowed Shrine, and sacred Dome,
Night-howling Dogs disturb the peaceful Gloom;
Their silent Seats the wandering Shades forsake,
And fearful Tremblings the rocked City shake.
Yet could not, by these Prodigies, be broke
The plotted Charm, or staid the fatal Stroke;
Their Swords the Assassins in the Temple draw;
Their murdering Hands nor Gods nor Temples awe;
This sacred Place their bloody Weapons stain,
And Virtue falls before the Altar slain.
'Twas now fair Cypria, with her Woes oppressed,
In raging Anguish smote her heavenly Breast;
Wild with distracting Fears, the Goddess tried
Her Hero in the etherial Cloud to hide,
The Cloud, which youthful Paris did conceal,
When Menelaus urged the threatening Steel;
The Cloud, which once deceived Tydides' Sight,
And saved Aeneas in the unequal Fight.
When Jove -- In vain, fair Daughter, you assay
To o'er-rule Destiny's unconquered Sway:
Your Doubts to banish, enter Fate's Abode;
A Privilege to heavenly Powers allowed;
There shall you see the Records engraved, in length,
On Ir'n and solid Brass, with mighty Strength;
Which Heaven's and Earth's Concussion shall endure;
Maugre all Shocks, eternal and secure:
There, on perennial Adamant designed,
The various Fortunes of your Race you will find:
Well I have marked 'em, and will now relate
To thee the settled Laws of future Fate.
He, Goddess, for whose Death the Fates you blame,
Has finished his determined Course with Fame:
To thee it is given, at length, that he shall shine
Among the Gods, and grace the worshipped Shrine:
His Son to all his Greatness shall be Heir,
And worthily succeed to Empire's Care:
Our self will lead his Wars, resolved to aid
The brave Avenger of his Father's Shade:
To him its Freedom Mutina shall owe,
And Decius his auspicious Conduct know:
His dreadful Powers shall shake Pharsalia's Plain,
And drench in Gore Philippi's Fields again:
A mighty Leader, in Sicilia's Flood,
Great Pompey's warlike Son, shall be subdued:
Aegypt's soft Queen, adorned with fatal Charms,
Shall mourn her Soldier's unsuccessful Arms;
Too late shall find, her swelling Hopes were vain,
And know, that Rome over Memphis still must reign:
What name I Afric or Nile's hidden Head?
Far as both Oceans roll, his Power shall spread:
All the known Earth to him shall Homage pay,
And the Seas own his universal Sway:
When cruel War no more disturbs Mankind;
To civil Studies shall he bend his Mind,
With equal Justice guardian Laws ordain,
And by his great Example Vice restrain:
Where will his Bounty or his Goodness end?
To Times unborn his generous Views extend;
The Virtues of his Heir our Praise engage,
And promise Blessings to the coming Age:
Late shall he in his Kindred Orbs be placed,
With Pylian Years and crowded Honors graced.
Mean time, your Hero's fleeting Spirit bear,
Fresh from his Wounds, and change it to a Star:
So shall great Julius Rites divine assume,
And from the Skies eternal smile on Rome.
This spoke; the Goddess to the Senate flew;
Where, her fair Form concealed from mortal View,
Her Caesar's heavenly Part she made her Care,
Nor left the recent Soul to waste to Air;
But bore it upwards to its native Skies:
Glowing with newborn Fires she saw it rise;
Forth springing from her Bosom up it flew,
And kindling, as it soared, a Comet grew;
Above the Lunar Sphere it took its Flight,
And shot behind it a long Trail of Light.
The Reign of AUGUSTUS, in which OVID flourished.
Thus raised, his glorious Offspring Julius viewed,
Beneficently Great, and scattering Good,
Deeds, that his own surpassed, with Joy beheld,
And his large Heart dilates to be excelled.
What though this Prince refuses to receive
The Preference, which his juster Subjects give;
Fame uncontrolled, that no Restraint obeys,
The Homage, shunned by modest Virtue, pays,
And proves disloyal only in his Praise.
Though great his Sire, him greater we proclaim:
So Atreus yields to Agamemnon's Fame;
Achilles so superior Honors won,
And Peleus must submit to Peleus' Son;
Examples yet more Noble to disclose,
So Saturn was eclipsed, when Jove to Empire (...)
Jove rules the Heaven's; the Earth Augustus sways;
Each claims a Monarch's and a Father's Praise.
Celestials, who for Rome your Cares employ;
Ye Gods, who guarded the Remains of Troy;
Ye native Gods, here born and fixed by Fate;
Quirinus, Founder of the Roman State;
O Parent Mars, from whom Quirinus sprung;
Chaste Vesta, Caesar's household Gods among,
Most sacred held; domestic Phoebus, thou,
To whom with Vesta chaste alike we bow;
Great Guardian of the high Tarpeian Rock;
And all ye Powers, whom Poets may invoke;
O grant, that Day may claim our Sorrows late,
When loved Augustus shall submit to Fate,
Visit those Seats, where Gods and Heroes dwell,
And leave, in Tears, the World he ruled so well!
The POET concludes.
The Work is finished, which nor dreads the Rage
Of Tempests, Fire, or War, or wasting Age:
Come, soon or late, Death's undetermined Day,
This mortal Being only can decay;
My nobler Part, my Fame, shall reach the Skies,
And to late Times with blooming Honors rise:
Whatever the unbounded Roman Power obeys,
All Climes and Nations shall record my Praise:
If it is allowed to Poets to divine,
One half of round Eternity is mine.
FINIS.

