THE SIEGE OF BERWICK, A TRAGEDY, BY MR. JERNINGHAM: AS PERFORMED AT THE
Theater Royal, Covent Garden.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. ROBSON, NEW BOND STREET.

M.DCC.XCIV.

[Price 1 s. 6 d.]

TO MRS. POPE.
MADAM,
THIS Tragedy is so much indebted to You, that it naturally shelters itself
under Your name, even when it is presented to the Reader. -- Accustomed as the
Public is to your superior talents, the judges of acting felt themselves
impressed upon this occasion with a display of new and unacquainted
excellencies.

While I am paying this just homage to you, I beg to express my sense of
obligation to the Gentlemen who performed in this Play.

I am, With the Sentiments of the highest Esteem, Your obedient humble Servant,
EDWARD JERNINGHAM.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IN the Reign of EDWARD the Third, Sir Alexander Seaton refused to surrender
the town of BERWICK, even at the Peril of losing his two Sons; who being taken
prisoners in a sally, were threatened with immediate death, unless the town was
delivered up.

See Abercromby's Martial Achievements, vol. ii. p. 29. PROLOGUE.
WRITTEN BY THE AUTHOR; And Spoken by MR. HARLEY.
WHILE fears and hopes alternate thoughts suggest,
And now disturb, now soothe the Author's breast;
While expectation breathes an awful pause,
Ere yet the ready hand the curtain draws,
Ere yet the action glows -- I come a spy,
To cast around a reconnoit'ring eye.
Yet then, as I this fearful Pit explore,
Where Authors sometimes fall to rise no more,
Here when the Adventurer dares you to the field,
If his fond efforts some small merit yield,
I Have seen your generous arm forbear the blow,
And raise to life and fame the grateful foe.
For you, the boisterous inmates of the sky!
Bold is the man who dares your power defy;
With you confusion her loud compact forms,
You ride the clouds, and are yourselves the storms.
Yet have I seen you mitigate your rage,
And spare the Adventurer struggling on the Stage;
If in some scenes (the rest though feebly done)
Unerring Nature owned her genuine Son,
Your glowing soul has grasped the Author's cause,
And hurled around the thunder of applause.
For you, ye glittering Amazonian train,
Whose power is dreaded on the critic plain!
Though marshaled to the war by taste severe,
Yet meek indulgence follows in the rear:
And often on beauty's cheek I Have loved to trace,
Soft stealing down, the holy tear of grace.
Raised by the thoughts these soothing hopes create,
I Will bid the Bard come forth, and meet his fate,
The tyrant Terror from his breast erase,
Rush on the scene, and combat for your praise.

CHARACTERS.
SIR ALEXANDER SEATON, Mr. POPE. ARCHIBALD his Sons, Mr. MIDDLETON. VALENTINE
his Sons, Mr. HOLMAN. ANSELM, a Monk, Mr. HARLEY. DONALDSON, an Officer, Mr.
MACREADY. ETHELBERTA, Wife of Sir ALEXANDER, Mrs. POPE. JULIANA, Mrs. FAWCETT.
HERALD, etc.
THE SIEGE OF BERWICK.
ACT THE FIRST.
Sir ALEXANDER, ARCHIBALD, VALENTINE. SIR ALEXANDER. IT is not action only that
adorns
The soldier's character, it is patience,
Calm and enduring in the rugged hour
Of want, that forms the nobler part of duty:
You, my loved sons, and all your fellow sufferers,
Have well that rigorous iron task performed.
But now a smoother train of hours advances;
The truce, which at tomorrow's dawn takes place,
Will enable me from out the northern gate
To dismiss the women, the aged and the infirm,
Then disencumber'd of its useless numbers
This foe-encircled town shall raise its head;
The hand of scarceness shall no more dispense
Her meagre morsel to the exhausted soldier,
But cheering competency shall provide
The meal.

ARCHIBALD. It Is well! yet then inform me, Sir,
How you will employ the invaluable hours
That still precede the truce?

SIR ALEXANDER. Our gallant men
Have been severely tried, and worn with toil.

ARCHIBALD. Their toil-enfeebled bodies still enclose
The mounting spirit of unwearied vigor.

VALENTINE. Prompt as the hawk to dart upon his prey.

ARCHIBALD. The foe since yesterday appears to have lost
Half of his wonted intrepidity.

VALENTINE. That shower of arrows we poured down at eve
Has somewhat quenched their ardor!

SIR ALEXANDER. Be it so;
But tell me what is now your present purpose:
Methinks that swelling to some bold design
Your bosom labors. -- Speak, my Valentine.

VALENTINE. Command my elder brother, Sir, to speak.

SIR ALEXANDER. Unfold then, Archibald, this mysterious something,
This painful secret that disturbs you both.

ARCHIBALD. Last night, as we reclined upon our couch,
Still talking over (as is our wonted manner)
The various hazard of the busy day,
We wished, we fondly wished, that ere the truce
Should intervene, some daring enterprise
Might be attempted under our direction:
Thus we conversed in sacred confidence
Till as our weak'ning voices died away
We wearied into rest -- 'twas then an image --

VALENTINE. Mark, Sir, what now my brother will unfold.

ARCHIBALD. 'Twas then an image rushed upon my sight,
It showed as one of the angelic train,
A circling glory glittered over his head,
A smile benignant beautified his lip,
And thus he spoke -- 'Sons of the valiant Seaton,
Arise and hasten to the southern gate,
Thence dart upon the foe.' -- The vision ceased
And vanished into air! while a rude noise
Like the fierce struggle of contending spears
Suddenly waked us! Starting from my couch,
And ere I could communicate my dream,
Valentine with impatient voice disclosed
The mutual vision.

VALENTINE. 'Twas as he relates;
By honor's winnow'd purity I swear
The nightly visitation also came
To me.

SIR ALEXANDER. I hazard no impeachment of
Your truth; yet then, endearing children, tell me
How can a prudent tender parent send
His valiant sons to danger's precipice
At the fantastic impulse of a dream?

ARCHIBALD. In the old time we read that dreams have often
Been the prophetic leaders to success.

VALENTINE. Oh do not, Sir, with caution's chill restraint
O'ershade the splendid purpose of our soul.

ARCHIBALD. Let the bright vision be forgot, if that
Offend you, and attend to reason's voice:
Does not the weary foe anticipate
The approaching truce, and guard neglectingly
The southern gate?

SIR ALEXANDER. It Is a masked neglect,
It is the couchant lion prompt to seize
The unwary prey -- ah! trust not to his stern
Repose.

VALENTINE. If danger still must check the current
Of enterprise, tell, tell me, Father, wherefore
You reared us in the hardy school of war?

ARCHIBALD. The road to martial glory well thou know
Is not gay-sprinkled over with flowers, but broken
Helmets, shivered spears, and blood-stained arrows
Choke up the aspiring path of fame's ascent.

VALENTINE. To be restrained when proud occasion calls,
'Twere better thou had led me to some cloister,
Where holy peace resides, o'er-canopied
By ancient roofs, that ever shade her from
The madd'ning sunbeams of ambition's sky.

SIR ALEXANDER. Forbear to torture thus a parent's feelings.

ARCHIBALD. Indulgent Father, rest assured we both
Pay homage to the thought that now disturbs you;
But with the experienced Melvil we have just
Conferred.

SIR ALEXANDER. And he undoubtedly contemned
Your gaudy dream, that meteor of the brain.

VALENTINE. 'Twas not the meteor of a heated brain,
It was a sun^beam of revealing Heaven,
It was the sympathetic glow of two
According minds.

SIR ALEXANDER. Of this enough -- What said
The experienced Melvil?

ARCHIBALD. After due attention
To our proposal, he first stamped it with
The seal of his applause, and then added
Arguments that embodied as it were
Our enterprise, and brightened it with the
Calm coloring of reason.

SIR ALEXANDER. I will myself
Confer with Melvil; and if he has words
To smooth the rugged doubts that vex my mind,
Think not, my valiant sons, I shall withhold
You from the object of your bold request

ARCHIBALD. To keep unsullied the bright martial name
Of Seaton, is indeed my proudest wish.

VALENTINE. And if thy Valentine might add his mite
To the rich treasury of his Father's fame,
He would be happy.

SIR ALEXANDER. Wait till I return.
Exit.
ARCHIBALD. Excellent man! his ardour to promote
Our cause, and his solicitude about
Our safety, combat and distract his will.

VALENTINE. More active, warm, and forcible affection
Was never embosom'd in a father's soul;
And therefore much I fear that Melvil cannot
Subdue his scruples.

ARCHIBALD. Often have I observed
That Melvil's clear illumined manly judgment
Possesses something like magnetic power,
Which still attracts opinion to his side.

VALENTINE. May that attractive power be at this moment
Endued with double influence, that my Father
Withholding his restraint, I might unbounded
Spring against the foe! -- This common praise
That Is claimed by every soldier, ill supplies
My starved and craving appetite of fame.

ARCHIBALD. Endearing Valentine, think not that I
Reprove these flashes of an ardent mind;
But should your mounting wishes meet control,
Wound not a Father's tender caution with
Reproach.

VALENTINE. Sooner than wound his feeling mind
With sullen, splenetic, unduteous carriage,
I would, like the Spartan boy (who silently
Endured the gnawing fox) conceal my sorrow,
Though, like the savage animal, it should
Prey upon my vitals.

ARCHIBALD. Consider also
This warlike age will gratify your wishes
With many a future enterprise! The morn
Of life is now but breaking on thy youth.

VALENTINE. Talk not to me of early youth: behold
Edward's brave son, whose age but equals mine --
Oh were I equal with him in renown!
Behold that boy on Cressy's wondering field
Reaping an immortal harvest, while I
Enveloped in obscurity --

ARCHIBALD. Desist,
I hear some step approaching. Enter DONALDSON.

VALENTINE. It Is my Father;
Ah, no! it is Donaldson. Say, have thou seen
The Governor?

DONALDSON. I saw him as I passed by
In close conference engaged with Melvil.

VALENTINE. Know thou the subject of their conference?

DONALDSON. There breathes an ignorant rumor of a sally,
Propos seems by Archibald and you.

ARCHIBALD. It is as you have darkly heard, and here
Impatiently we wait the Governor's
Return.

VALENTINE. See, here he comes.
Enter Sir ALEXANDER. Hail to my Father!

ARCHIBALD. Sir, you appear disturbed.

SIR ALEXANDER. Ah! tell me, Archibald,
Is It with a look of cheerfulness a parent
Resigns his duteous children to the hazard
Of a fearful enterprise?

ARCHIBALD. Yet then reflect,
Melvil the military sage approves
The enterprise.

SIR ALEXANDER. But Melvil has no children,
His smooth sail of honor meets no adverse
Gales to check its progress. -- It Is not thus with me:
Say how shall I endure the keen reproofs
Of Ethelberta, when she is informed
That I have sent, without the imperious call
Of stern necessity, her darling children
To the path of danger?

VALENTINE. Speak not of danger,
It Is the soldier's charter, his best privilege.

SIR ALEXANDER. Something withholds my full consent.
And calls my judgment to severe account!
Forgive this trembling caution in a parent.

VALENTINE. Had England's warlike king suppressed his son's
Ascending soul, on her proud list of victories
We should not have found the name of Cressy!

ARCHIBALD. 'Twas on the summit of a neighboring hill
The father stood, and saw his youthful son
Oppose the pride of France; and when the Earls
Of Warwick and of Oxford sent a herald,
To claim immediate succor from the king --

VALENTINE. Did not the king reply, Go tell the lords
Who sent you, that while my boy 's alive
They will require my aid in vain: the glory
Of this great day shall be his own?

SIR ALEXANDER. Enough!
Your arguments prevail, and you have won me
To your request. -- Go, join the skilful Melvil,
The Nestor of the war, and strictly mark
His words and well-weigh'd counsel -- first receive
The anxious Father's blessing. (Embraces his sons.)
May that Power
Who often has shielded me in many a combat,
Oh! may that guardian, kind, benignant Angel
Now hover over my children!
(Leads them to the door, and returns.) Donaldson,
This is an awful moment for a Father!

DONALDSON. Think not so deeply, Sir, nor feed your mind
With busy torturing vain surmises; think
How often you have encountered perils imminent,
And still returned with glory.

SIR ALEXANDER. Unavailing
Remembrance! reared as I have almost been
In storms of battle, say what paternal
Bosom will not feel a warm renewed affection
For two such sons staged to the front of danger?

DONALDSON. But should not Ethelberta be informed?

SIR ALEXANDER. Ah! there you probe my bosom's tender part:
No, Donaldson, the mother must not know
The gathering storm that is brooding over her sons;
Her quickening apprehension would outrun
The deed, and picture to itself images
That would distract her. -- It Is my duty, my
Religion, still to shield her mind from all
That may assail it.

DONALDSON. Many a time have
I listened to the splendid narrative
Of Ethelberta's virtues.

SIR ALEXANDER. From the happy hour
I first called her mine, unto this moment,
She has with unremitting fortitude
Attended me through many a rugged day.

DONALDSON. I think that England triumphs in her birth.

SIR ALEXANDER. At those famed tournaments that Edward held
At Windsor, did I first behold that matchless
Woman, though attractive, yet not dazzling:
As looks the softer green amidst the radiant
Colors of the vernal bow, so Ethelberta
Seemed 'mid the circling flush of British beauties.
-- This gorgeous castle, and its proud delights,
The daughter of Earl Nevil willingly
Resigned, to share with me the perils of
The late crusade: This faithful Wife, this soothing
Companion of my way, still smoothed the harrow'd
Walk of war -- Even as the wall-flower rears its form,
And smiles and flourishes 'midst tombs and ruins,
So Ethelberta's warm affection grew
'Mid sickness, want, fatigue, distress, and danger.
Enter ANSELM. Hail, holy father! what do thou report?

ANSELM. With hasty step I come, Sir, to acquaint you
That the bold enterprise is well prepared:
Along the subterraneous windings did
The gallant troops advance, 'till they approached
The chapel of St. Andrew, near the gate
That issues to the field: here paused the band --
And then in sacred silence lowly bending
Dedicated themselves unto their country.

SIR ALEXANDER. What followed?

ANSELM. Then with solemn voice I uttered
Warm from my throbbing heart, the benediction
That is appointed in the hour of danger.

SIR ALEXANDER. Yet tell me what directions then were given?

ANSELM. It was agreed that your two sons, attended
By a chosen few, should rush upon the foe,
While Melvil with a greater number should,
Taking a wide circling path, fall on the rear.
Brave Melvil first began the silent march:
Then did your sons lead forth their gallant men
Through the deep awful gloom -- the signal for
The onset is to be the convent bell
That tolls at midnight.

SIR ALEXANDER. Wherefore did I yield me
To their wild request? Oh say, is 't yet too late?
The leave they wrested from me I may still
Recall.

ANSELM. The die is cast, and you must wait
The event: yet elevate your mind to hope;
For me I augur well of this bold enterprise.

SIR ALEXANDER. But as a Father should I not have been
More cautious, more reserved?

ANSELM. The sacred poet
Says, Children are as arrows in the hand
Of a giant, to perform his purpose.

SIR ALEXANDER. Your words, good Anselm, animate my hopes,
And lift me to my wonted confidence
In Heaven. -- Did thou not say, the convent bell
At midnight was the appointed signal for
The onset?

ANSELM. Even so!

SIR ALEXANDER. See Ethelberta comes;
Farewell -- it is meet that now ye both retire.
Exeunt.
Enter ETHELBERTA. ETHELBERTA. I hope I Am no intruder; if I am,
My warm solicitude for you must plead
Indulgence.

SIR ALEXANDER Ever most welcome!

ETHELBERTA. Methinks
You look all harassed, pale and overcome;
It Is not surprising -- but I Am told the foe
Anticipates the truce, by retreating
To some distance. -- Wherefore do you not
Retire to rest? It Is late, it is almost midnight.

SIR ALEXANDER. Midnight, did thou say?

ETHELBERTA. Sir, you seem alarmed?

SIR ALEXANDER. What recent subject is there to alarm me?

ETHELBERTA. Forgive my busy fond anxiety,
That catches as it were at airy symptoms. --
Where are my sons? tell me when I may see them?

SIR ALEXANDER. I hope tomorrow.

ETHELBERTA. Wherefore do thou only
Hope? Does not the truce take place tomorrow?
What should then prevent? --
(The bell tolls.) Oh! what transports you?
'Twas but the wonted midnight bell, that calls
The holy fathers to their prayers; relieve,
Relieve me from this painful ignorance,
And let thine Ethelberta share the pang
That rends thy heart.

SIR ALEXANDER. Dear Wife, forbear to question me --

ETHELBERTA. Will you not retire to rest, for sure you
Need it much?

SIR ALEXANDER. Perchance I may. -- Directions
Of highest import I have first to give!

ETHELBERTA. Farewell -- do not tarry long. -- Care and sorrow
Mingle on thy brow. -- Farewell! -- my warmest
Blessing to my sons! --
Exit.
SIR ALEXANDER. That blessing was pronounced
By her whose sons perchance are now no more --
Enter DONALDSON. Well Donaldson, what have thou to relate?

DONALDSON. By some perfidious means the foe, appris'd
Of the intended sally, were prepared to meet
The troops that Melvil led. -- O'erpower'd by numbers,
He and most of his brave train lie slaughtered
On the plain -- As for your sons --

SIR ALEXANDER. Ah! what of them?

DONALDSON. In warmest combat they are now engaged!

SIR ALEXANDER. I Will fly to their assistance --
(Draws his sabre.)
DONALDSON. Let me first --

SIR ALEXANDER. Cease your vain talking, I must speed away
To save my sons, or perish in their cause.
Exeunt.
End of the FIRST ACT.
ACT THE SECOND.
Enter ETHELBERTA and JULIANA. ETHELBERTA. SAY, what can be the cause of their
deserting me?
I have not since the truce began beheld
The Governor, nor have I yet embraced
My children! they whose dutiful affection
I have until this present hour experienced!
Whence comes it they defraud me of their cheering
Presence?

JULIANA. It Is business of some great moment
Perchance delays them.

ETHELBERTA. Feed me not with vain
Pretexts; their presence only can assuage
My starved and ravenous longing! wild conception
Peoples the void of absence with many
Ghastly and terrific forms.

JULIANA. Shall I withdraw
In order to investigate the cause?

ETHELBERTA. No, Juliana, you must not desert me,
I am too wretched and unfit for solitude!
Why do you send your view to yonder portal.
(Juliana retires a few steps, and then returns.)
JULIANA. Now cast away your fears; behold, behold!
The Governor approaches.

Enter SIR ALEXANDER. ETHELBERTA. Your presence
Is as the sun unto the darkened landscape:
Wherefore have thou lingered thus? Oh, tell me
Where are my children?

SIR ALEXANDER. They are well.

ETHELBERTA. Yet why
Do they delay to bless a mother's sight?

SIR ALEXANDER. It Is proper now I should reveal.

ETHELBERTA. Reveal!
You Have then some fearful secret to unfold.

SIR ALEXANDER. Dear Ethelberta, be not thus alarmed!
Already have I said our boys are well.
Last night a sally was proposed. Archibald
And Valentine entreated much to lead
The onset.

ETHELBERTA. And you yielded to their entreaty?

SIR ALEXANDER. The subtle foe by some dark perfidy
Had early notice of the deep-laid scheme,
And were too well prepared.

ETHELBERTA. My blood runs cold.

SIR ALEXANDER. Ah, rather let it glow at my recital:
Your sons have gained the warrior's best reward,
Unsullied fame. Three times did their small force
Drive back their triple-number'd foes; at length,
By their increasing powers subdued (with nine
Of their brave men remaining) they submitted
To be captives.

ETHELBERTA. Say, who first suggested
This rash enterprise?

SIR ALEXANDER. Melvil applauded
What my sons proposed; and to the energy
With which he uttered his approving thought
Did I reluctantly give my assent.

ETHELBERTA. Cursed be old Melvil for his rash approval!

SIR ALEXANDER. Spare your resentment, and revere the dead;
Fallen is his valiant arm, to rise no more.

ETHELBERTA. Then peace be to his soul! Let me retain
A grateful sense to Heaven that my loved children
Are not, as Melvil, numbered with the slain;
The loss of those dear boys would be to me
As if the spring were blotted from the year.
Come, Juliana, let us to our customed
Visitation of the sick and wounded.
Exit Ethelberta and Juliana.
Enter ANSELM. ANSELM. A herald from the foe is just arrived,
And waits your orders for admission.

SIR ALEXANDER. Let him be admitted.

Enter HERALD. THE HERALD. Sir, this letter,
Of high import, I Am ordered to deliver
Into your hands only.

SIR ALEXANDER. Retire awhile:
In some few moments come for my reply.
(Reads to himself.)
ANSELM. Methinks you look disturbed! Say, what can be
The drift of this important note?

SIR ALEXANDER. Attend! (reads aloud.)
"Complaints have reached me from my court, as if
"I lingered in subjecting your proud town:
"To these complaints strong menaces are added!
"I therefore summon you to surrender,
"Or else your sons shall rue your stubbornness:
"I will erect two pillars near the tower
"From whence your crowding arrows gall us most;
"To these two pillars shall your sons be chained;
"Exposed to the whole tempest of the war."

ANSELM. The blackest fiend in hell conceived that thought,
And breathed it on his mind.

SIR ALEXANDER. I know him well;
It suits the native disposition of the man.

Enter ETHELBERTA. ETHELBERTA. Ah! wonder not I hastily return:
I Am told a Herald from the camp is come --
What tidings of my sons?

SIR ALEXANDER. Peruse this note.
(She reads.)
ETHELBERTA. Say, what do thou intend to do?

SIR ALEXANDER. My duty.

ETHELBERTA. Is 't then a duty to destroy your children?
To rend affection from your inmost breast;
Uproot the thoughts of pity as they grow;
Embowel nature of her hallowed feelings?
And to a mother dare you this avow?

SIR ALEXANDER. I dare avow what honor bids me do.

ETHELBERTA. The untamed Arab, who exists on plunder,
Lets fall his booty to assist his child!
But you, whom polished manners should adorn,
Whose pure religion wears a softer feature,
Do you reject the impulse of compassion,
For the stern morals of imagined honor?

Enter HERALD. HERALD. Sir, the time urges, what is your reply?

SIR ALEXANDER. Go, tell your savage, and blood-thirsty General,
The sacred oath I uttered to my country
And to my royal master, when I was
Exalted to the station I now hold,
Contains my answer. -- Sir, you may return.

ETHELBERTA. Stay one short moment, hear a mother plead:
Though dead to pity, riches may perchance
Allure his mind! I Have jewels of high value --
( Sir Alexander makes a signal to the Herald, who retires.) He goes, he heeds
not what I say; my sons
Are then condemned without resource. Enjoy,
( turning to Sir Alexander.) Enjoy this philosophic victory,
This conquest, this cold triumph over all feeling --
Domestic pity, conjugal affiance,
Fatherly endearment, are by you profaned!

SIR ALEXANDER. What does this mean? dare you assert I do
Not love my children?

ETHELBERTA. Say, where are the proofs?
Is yielding up your sons without a conflict,
Without resorting to the prompt expedient
Affection would have flown to? Is resigning
Your sons, without the interposing a short
Delay, without a pause, without inventing
Some pious artifice; are these the proofs
Of your paternal kindness? Evidence
Like this would not be admitted in the court
Of Nature.

SIR ALEXANDER. Cease this idle declamation!
Respect, respect the great, the solemn trial,
To which my pure allegiance now is called!
I see the desolating hour approach,
Like the dark storm that thickens as it sails!
It is the woman's privilege to weep
And utter her complaints: to man belongs
The majesty of grief! yet not the less
Does the fond parent warm this bosom:
Even while proud honor and relentless duty
Seem to command the function of my soul,
I Have that within that tells me I Am a father.

ETHELBERTA. Thus the pale cheek of hungry fame is flushed
And rudded over with the false glow of duty.

ANSELM. Make not the bitter cup he is doomed to drink
Still more bitter by the infusions of reproach.

ETHELBERTA. May not the brokenhearted mother speak;
May not her madd'ning sorrow still attempt
To snatch her children from destruction?

Enter an OFFICER. OFFICER. I come to pour glad tidings on your ear!
Your sons --

ETHELBERTA. What of my sons?

OFFICER. They are returned:
Relenting, as it is thought, of his intention,
The General has restored them to your wishes.

ETHELBERTA. Ah! tell me where you saw them?

OFFICER. Entering at
The southern gate, amidst the applauding multitude!
They bade me hasten to your presence with
The news of their return.

ETHELBERTA. Wherefore do they
Linger thus?

OFFICER. Methinks I hear their footsteps --

Enter ARCHIBALD and VALENTINE. ETHELBERTA. What glorious vision meets my
raptured eyes!
(Runs to embrace them.) This sudden joy, this unimagin'd heaven,
Transports me beyond all power of utterance. --

SIR ALEXANDER. Your presence, my loved children, smooths
The rugged conflict in my breast. -- Whence comes
This change of counsel in the tyrant's mind?

ETHELBERTA. Ah! rather tell me where, where is the joy
That ought to harmonise with ours? Archibald.
Your down-cast look portends some dread intelligence:
And you, my Valentine, where is thy wonted
Gaiety?

ARCHIBALD. I have of high importance
Something to communicate to my Father.

ETHELBERTA. May not I be present at the interview?

ARCHIBALD. What I Am going to unfold will distress you.

ETHELBERTA. No, no! your mutual safety is sufficient
To bear me up against this new calamity!
But wherefore do you weep?

ARCHIBALD. These tears I shed
Spring from affection, not from fear. -- I Will die
Worthy of such parents.

VALENTINE. So will I!

ETHELBERTA. Wherefore,
Wherefore do ye talk of death?

ARCHIBALD. With a mockery
Of pity does the General send us back:
One of us must return to be the victim
Of his cruelty.

ETHELBERTA. Oh! never.

ARCHIBALD. We Are bound
By honor's tie, the soldier's strongest chain;
One must return: and unappall'd we wait
( turning to Sir Alexander.) For your decision.

SIR ALEXANDER. Ah! what Father can
Decide of two affectionate and duteous
Children, which shall be led to slaughter? Say,
Was I to raise in awful thought the balance
Of my affection, and could judgment see
One side prevail, still sacred nature's hand
Would join and equalize the trembling scales.

VALENTINE ( to ETHELBERTA.) Be comforted.

ETHELBERTA. Oh! my dear Valentine.
(Falls on his neck.)
ANSELM. I think all this is a mere stratagem
To lengthen out the truce. -- Allow me, Sir,
To hasten to the General's tent; there will
I urge with glowing words my suit,
There paint the infamy that must involve him,
If, thus profaning the hallowed feelings
Of Parents --

VALENTINE. Holy father! 'twou'd become
Thee better to assuage, support with comfort's
Lenient voice, this drooping mother, than to
Interfere with what regards my brother's
Honor and my own.

ETHELBERTA. I Will write to the General
In words of soothing power, in terms of energy,
Such as the mother's throbbing heart conceives.

VALENTINE. No letter must be written, for 'twou'd seem
Our dictating, and would show like cowardice.

SIR ALEXANDER. There spoke my valiant son.

ARCHIBALD. Our mutual dignity
Forbids, abhors all interposition.

ETHELBERTA. Then I have lost my children.

VALENTINF. That follows not;
He who is first in years, in skill, experience,
He must be spared, the general cause demands him.

ARCHIBALD. What says the hasty Valentine?

VALENTINE. Command
Your rising indignation, I Will explain. --
Allow us, Father, for some few moments,
To confer alone, that free from all restraint
I may to Archibald disclose my mind,
And utter arguments that may subdue
His reason to my ardent wish, and thus
Prevent the extinction of our family.

ARCHIBALD. Perish to the root the name of Seaton,
And let oblivion's night o'ershade the proud
Exploits of our long ancestry, ere I
Consent to that which must degrade and shrink
Me in my own esteem!

VALENTINE. I mean not that.

SIR ALEXANDER. Come, Ethelberta, let us for a while
Retire, and leave them to confer alone.

ETHELBERTA. Well the high theme of your discourse I know,
It is a contest for the palm of death:
But in this glorious conflict still remember
What is due to your afflicted Mother.
If any plan, expedient, or device,
Allied to honor, should suggest itself;
If any beam should pierce this awful gloom,
Admit its sacred influence on your mind,
And save me from despair.
( Exit with ANSELM, JULIANA, and SIR ALEXANDER.)
VALENTINE. Fear is no inmate of thy glowing breast;
Yet then reflect that other thoughts than those
That courage breathes must sometimes regulate
A soldier's conduct. Say, have thou not heard
That mercy, resignation, are the nobler
Duties of a soldier?

ARCHIBALD. Where is now that
Mercy claimed? where called for? mercy on whom?

VALENTINE. Mercy on your Parents, and on your country.

ARCHIBALD. This puerile declamation moves me not.

VALENTINE. I speak the language of a mind sincere,
To one who is my friend as well as brother,
For whom my partial fondness never was doubted.

ARCHIBALD. He loves me not who does not love my fame!
Was I to yield to your ill-timed suggestion,
Would not each finger mark me as I pass,
As one who skulks behind the privilege
Of eldership to save himself from death?
I feel dishonor as I feel a wound --
The fatal spot to which we both aspire,
Is glory's prize, is honor's awful station,
And I now claim it as my sacred birthright.

VALENTINE. I contend no longer.

ARCHIBALD. Let me hasten,
Fly to my Father to proclaim the news,
That Valentine at length consents to live.

VALENTINE. Allow me one short moment, and be calm:
Say, will thou, with an avarice of fame,
Demand exclusively the meed of glory?
Will thou pursue the path that leads to death,
And leave thy faithful Valentine behind?

ARCHIBALD. Cease, generous brother, or thou 'lt break my heart --

VALENTINE. When first I quitted childhood's lowly vale,
Eager with you I climbed youth's arduous height,
Whence greater scenes expanded on-my view;
Still our pursuits, consenting to one plan,
Our lives like wedded streams united rolled;
And will you now disturb the sacred tide,
And bid the kindred waves disparting run?

ARCHIBALD. It Is as you say, in us was ever found
The sympathetic union of the mind,
The harmony of affection and design.

VALENTINE. And would it not be sacrilege to tear
Our souls asunder? -- Mark my firm resolve,
I will attend thee to the fatal spot,
And share an equal destiny with thee.

ARCHIBALD. I yield, I bow to thy sublimer mind.

VALENTINE. Let Us haste away, lest Ethelberta should
Return, and with her tears unman our purpose.

ARCHIBALD. Agreed -- We'll hasten to our mutual doom,
Co-equals at the hallowed shrine of danger.

VALENTINE. Will not the spirits of our valiant ancestry
Lean from their golden thrones on high, well pleased
While thus
(Encircling his brother.) we march undaunted to our fate.
One heart --

ARCHIBALD. One cause --

VALENTINE. One ruin, and one fame!
Exeunt.
End of the SECOND ACT.
ACT THE THIRD.
Enter ETHELBERTA and JULIANA. ETHELBERTA. FLED to the camp! Both fled!
Impossible!

JULIANA. Pure honor breathing on their bosom --

ETHELBERTA. Fled,
Without one parting word!

JULIANA. The great trial
They are called to claims their whole attention.

ETHELBERTA. Has then the phantom glory steeled my children
Into savages? -- Not one endearing
Word to soothe their fond afflicted Mother?

JULIANA. The rigorous duty of their situation --

ETHELBERTA. What duty is more pressing or more sacred
Than that a Mother claims? It rises out
Of Nature's bosom, summoned by the voice
Of Heaven!

JULIANA. Their better judgment held them from
Your presence; well, full well they knew the sight
Of two sons hastening to untimely death
Would rend your heart.

ETHELBERTA. It must be so, it was,
It was their love that urged them to avoid me!
The cloud of dark surmise that here was gathering
Begins to melt in air! and my full heart
Expands to all its wonted warm affection.

JULIANA. To this affection join a confidence
That all may yet be well.

ETHELBERTA. I dare not cast
A meeting glance upon the approaching hour. --
Could I but raise my sinking mind to the
Faint hope, that the arrows happily might not
Reach my children! -- That the tyrant may
Relent of his fell purpose! Vain endeavor! --
Each way I look I meet despair. -- Yet now --
A thought possesses me -- Indulge my weakness --
Ah! pity the disease that flies to such
A remedy -- I Have heard a skilful sorceress
Does in this town reside, whose magic power
Unfolds the future to her trembling visitant --

JULIANA. It is as you report, and many a hapless
Virgin, many a distressful mother,
Have consulted her.

ETHELBERTA. It Is said she rivals
The weird sisterhood of ancient days,
While over her mind pale prophecy hangs fluttering,
The dread vaunt-courier of futurity --
Perchance this deeply-skill'd magician may
Transport my ignorant fears beyond the event.

JULIANA. Yet say, was she by her exploring art
To raise your ignorant fears to horrid certainties --

ETHELBERTA. Better to know the worse, than thus to live
In apprehension, unrelenting agony! --
Can thou inform me where the sorceress dwells?

JULIANA. Her lonely cell is seen not far from hence,
Amidst the ruins of an ancient cloister,
Upon the burial ground! There on a seat
Of ebony, overspread with human skulls,
She exercises her tremendous function.

ETHELBERTA. Whence does the hag derive her daring mission?
Is 't from on high, or from the caves of hell?
Does she not lift her impious hand to rend
The sanctuary-veil that hangs 'tween men and angels?
And on the breast of heaven she sends a glance
Profane!

JULIANA. This deep reflection will avert
Your anxious mind from its new-form'd purpose.

ETHELBERTA. Let me be wretched, let me not be impious:
Never will I tread the path that leads to
Her unhallowed cell. -- Another thought occurs,
Which meets my heart's consent -- Come, come what may,
I Will go in person to the hostile camp,
There, rushing on the rude barbarian,
I will demand my children.

JULIANA. Vain, vain project!

ETHELBERTA. He Will hear my plaintive voice, he will see these eyes
In tears.

JULIANA. The unfeeling wretch will mock those tears.

ETHELBERTA. Affection will endue my speech with eloquence;
The monster self will soften at warm nature
Pleading for her darling sons.

JULIANA. Consider
What dangers you will encounter, to what insults
You there may be exposed: it is likely you
May be detained a captive, and immured
Within the precincts of a lonesome dungeon.

ETHELBERTA. Talk not to me of dangers, I despise them.
Say, have thou not beheld the bold sea-eagle,
When her dear young one from the rock has fallen,
Descend undaunted to the roaring main,
Dash with her throbbing breast the waves asunder,
To snatch the nestling from the ravenous shark!
And would thou have me pause and hesitate
To act the mother's part? Let us retire,
And seek for Anselm to attend
And guide my footsteps to the tyrant's tent.
Exeunt.
Enter Sir ALEXANDER and ANSELM. SIR ALEXANDER. Yes, Anselm, I confess I glory
in
These children -- their abrupt departure wakes
At once my wonder and delight! Say, has
It not a relish of the antique manners,
Some proud resemblance of the Roman mind?

ANSELM. This mutual dedication of themselves
To certain death will ornament our annals.

SIR ALEXANDER. As torrents feed the river, so my sons
Swell the strong current of my country's fame.

ANSELM. You also share your part in this sublime
Transaction.

SIR ALEXANDER. The renown is their's, and mine
Is the distress. -- My scene in this deep drama
Is to bid my archers shoot their arrows
Where my defenseless sons will be exposed
To their full rage. -- Alas! I fear, good father,
I have not virtue equal to the task.

ANSELM. Virtue is ever found superior to
The rugged task; and, like the water-plant,
Ascends still higher than the swelling flood.

SIR ALEXANDER. Was ever father so severely tried?

ANSELM. Image to yourself that you are acting
In sight of angels and immortal spirits,
And through the scenery that darkens round
Look up, as to the sun that breaks the cloud,
Look up unto the approving smile of Heaven!

SIR ALEXANDER. I sometimes think the tyrant will relent.

ANSELM. He 's not of English birth.

SIR ALEXANDER. Of that you may be certain:
Humanity adorns the English soldier;
It is the wholesome gale that ventilates
Their heart, from the low subaltern up to
The royal youth who now in Gallia leads
His valiant band --

ANSELM. From Norway is he not,
This wretch who outrages a parent's feelings?

SIR ALEXANDER. Even so. -- A pirate on the northern seas,
His skill and matchless courage lifted him
To fame: and being by distress of weather
Driven on the English coast, the warlike Edward,
Dazzled by his enterprizing spirit,
Gave him to command the troops that now invest us.

ANSELM. But tell me, has your sons' abrupt departure
Yet reached the ear of hapless Ethelberta?

SIR ALEXANDER. I know not that. -- I must not now approach
Her presence; her unbounded sorrow would
Ill suit the frame of mind that I must now
Acquire! -- Go, holy father, and dispense
The balm of comfort to her bleeding soul --
I must confer with Donaldson.
Exit ANSELM.
Enter DONALDSON. DONALDSON. Your commands have been attended to, and
Now the town is disencumber'd of its
Numbers -- The wide northern gate recoiling,
Poured forth a lengthening train. -- The aged warriors
Passed on in mournful silence. -- This dismission,
Which marked their inutility, appeared
To humble and degrade them.

SIR ALEXANDER. It Is a cruel
But necessary order on my part --
Yet then these aged and once active men
May happily in a few short days return,
And then resume their wonted occupations,
Habits and customs, which they now forego --
But never shall I meet with comfort more --
My sons! my sons!

DONALDSON. Next in long order moved
A female band, while many a pensive wife
Threw back a frequent glance of fond regard.

SIR ALEXANDER. It Is well. -- Your diligence demands my thanks,
The truce will in two hours expire. -- I must
Prepare me for the sad, the solemn task
Imperious duty has imposed upon me. --
It Is time the men ascend the embattled walls,
In act to hurl the arrowy war below.

DONALDSON. I left the men assembling in the square.

SIR ALEXANDER. Oh! would that, with the safety of this town,
Which to my latest moment I Will defend,
I might include the safety of my children.
Exit.
SCENE, the Enemy's Camp. Enter ETHELBERTA and ANSELM. SENTINEL to ETHELBERTA.
Arrest your daring footsteps!

ETHELBERTA. Your uplifted
Weapon frights not her, to whose misfortunes
Death were welcome. -- I am Ethelberta.
(The Sentinel returns the sabre into the scabbard.) Happily in some far distant
hamlet sits
Your mother brooding over your absence, all
In tears: Oh! think of her, and lead me to
My sons.

SENTINEL. Beneath you tent the captive youths
Abide.

ETHELBERTA. Inform your General, that the wretched
Ethelberta humbly begs an audience.
Exit Sentinel. ( As ETHELBERTA and ANSELM approach the tent ARCHIBALD and
VALENTINE rush out.)
ETHELBERTA. Marvel not at my appearance, my bleeding
Bosom demanded this sad interview.

ARCHIBALD. We Are ever bound to you for this new proof
Of your affection.

VALENTINE. Have you seen the General?

ETHELBERTA. I Have asked a conference -- I wait the answer.

VALENTINE. Be sure you let him know that we did not
Urge or prompt you to demand an audience.

ETHELBERTA. Is it then criminal in me to own
A Mother's feelings?

ARCHIBALD. It is beneath the dignity
Of Ethelberta to confer with him.

ETHELBERTA. Say, what dignity belongs to a wretch
Like me?

VALENTINE. His ear is steeled against compassion,
Nor do we wish to live.

ETHELBERTA. Why, Valentine,
This contempt of life? would you not live to
Save me from distraction? -- Is the cruelty
That breathes within the General's tent
Contagious? are my children grown insensible
To their afflicted mother?

VALENTINE (Embracing her knees.) Think not so
Unjustly of us.

ETHELBERTA. Oh! I think you both
Love me, or I should wish to be the dust
Beneath your feet.

Enter an OFFICER. OFFICER. The General now in council
Waits your attendance.
Exeunt ETHELBERTA, ANSELM, and OFFICER.
VALENTINE. Sooner would the sea-cliff
Stoop to the sinking mariner, than will
The tyrant bend to her imploring voice;
I mean his mercy will not reach us both.
What if Ethelberta should return, and
Bring with her commands for your releasement?

ARCHIBALD. I would reject the despicable mercy.
Has not our mutual vow to Heaven ascended?
Yes, brother, both must be released, or both
Consigned to death!

Enter OFFICER. OFFICER. The General bids me lead
You to the fatal spot, with orders that
You should immediately be fastened to
The summit of the pillars.

ARCHIBALD and VALENTINE. We obey.
Exeunt.
SCENE. -- The place where pillars are erected; men with ropes, etc. FIRST MAN.
I relish not this barbarous employment;
It pains me to behold these ligaments,
With which we soon must bind the valiant youths.

SECOND MAN. It Is said the Mother now is with the General,
Imploring for her sons.

FIRST MAN. I fear in vain!
Behold, they now approach.
Enter ARCHIBALD, VALENTINE, OFFICER and SOLDIERS. With great reluctance
Do I perform this office.

ARCHIBALD. My good friend,
Discharge your duty: leave the rest to Heaven!

ETHELBERTA, behind the scenes. Lead, lead me to those dear unfortunate sons.

Enter ETHELBERTA and ANSELM. ETHELBERTA. Inhuman wretches! check your dreadful
office,
This sight appalls me.

ARCHIBALD. Still, oh still be comforted!
We suffer more for your sake than our own.

ETHELBERTA. Was it for this I reared you with such care?
Was it for this I watched your waking virtues,
And kindled at the dawn of your celestial mind?

VALENTINE. We were born to die.

ETHELBERTA. Had gradual illness
Stolen on you as ye faded in my arms,
Or had ye fallen in battle, then I should,
Like many, many more unfortunate mothers,
Have mournfully submitted; but this outrage,
This indignity --

VALENTINE. Affects me not, I am
Proud to fall in such a cause.

ETHELBERTA, to ANSELM. Did I not
Fall at the tyrant's feet; did I not bathe
Them with my tears? Like the unheeding rock
He stood unmoved. The stranger Pity knew not
The dark avenue to his heart.

ANSELM. The king of terrors,
Death, comes like a friendly angel
In a noble cause.

ARCHIBALD. It Is as the holy
Father says. The cause for which we die brightens
The darkened hour: it is the cause that dignifies
Those ignominious instruments; that turns
These fatal pillars into pyramids
Proclaiming our eternal fame.

ETHELBERTA. Who would
Not glory in such children? Yes, ye are
My boast, my honor, my delight. I first led
Your infant footsteps to the path of virtue:
Indulge the fond idea, happily this
Sublime enthusiasm flows from me.

VALENTINE. Speak ever thus, and be the Heroine
Of this conflicting hour.

ARCHIBALD. Methought! as thus
You spoke, a current of new ardour gushed
Upon my throbbing heart.

ETHELBERTA. Be not deceived,
The momentary gleam of triumph's past;
To glory's touch succeeds tormenting fear,
And Nature gives me up to grief again.

Enter OFFICER. OFFICER. The General bids me urge you to retire.

ETHELBERTA. Does he prohibit this short interview?
This last dear horror of a sad farewell?
( Leans overpowered upon ANSELM.)
OFFICER. The General also says, that one of these
Youths may return, and that the choice remains
With you.

ETHELBERTA. (suddenly raising up her head.) Ah! were I to absolve the life
Of one, say by that act should I not condemn
The other to the fate that threatens him?

OFFICER. Reflect, that by these means you will prevent
The entire extinction of your name.

ETHELBERTA. Your reasoning
Touches not a mother's breast. -- While I behold
My sons as now they stand before me, and
Recall their virtues, their invariable
Affection toward their mother, and the concord
Of their congenial minds, the interweaving
Harmony of coloring, that composes
The texture of their mutual life, my heart
Blends, and unites the two, and my fond eyes
Behold but one dear son!
(ARCHIBALD and VALENTINE throw themselves at her feet, while ETHELBERTA hangs
over them.)
ARCHIBALD (rising.) Kind, pitying father,
We entrust her to your care: Oh comfort her!

ANSELM. Mark this hallowed symbol of our dread belief:
(Holding up the cross that hangs at his side.) By this I swear I will
administer
To her relief, and wait upon her sorrow,
And shed upon the fest'ring wound of grief
That Gilead balm, Religion only can
Supply: from thence alone can comfort flow.

ETHELBERTA. Who talks of comfort? Say, will not these pillars
Rise to my mind in every place, to frighten
Comfort from me? In such a state, comfort
Would be impiety, leave, leave me with
Despair. Oh! would to Heaven that in this conflict
Of life and sorrow, sorrow might prevail,
That I might fall death-smitten on this spot,
And in one grave be buried with my sons!

OFFICER. The time expires, the truce will shortly end,
The war will be renewed, and from you town
The arrows then will fly.

ETHELBERTA. To pierce my children --
Torturing madness harbors in the thought.

OFFICER. That devious pathway leads not to the town.

ETHELBERTA. Forgive, I was a moment scarce myself,
And still a dimness hangs across my sight.
Where are my sons?
(they go up to her.) Forbear, forbear to weep,
I see my presence but enfeebles them:
It Is cruelty to linger, then resolved
I tear myself away. Oh! God of mercy,
Spread over my children thy protecting shield!
Exit with ANSELM.
End of the THIRD ACT.
ACT THE FOURTH.
SCENE. -- The Archers mounted on the walls, expecting the word of command.
Enter SIR ALEXANDER, JULIANA, DONALDSON. SIR ALEXANDER, to DONALDSON. TO your
command do I entrust those archers;
I Will through the subterraneous passage with
A chosen number issue on the plain!
My bosom burns to meet the tyrant, and
Provoke him to a single combat. How
Is he distinguished?

DONALDSON. A bright scarlet mantle
Floats around his armor.

SIR ALEXANDER. The impulse of an
Injured Father will add vigor to this arm,
But Ethelberta is not yet returned.

DONALDSON. Her visit to the camp surprises me.

SIR ALEXANDER. It moves not my surprise, for when the affections
Of her soul are roused, no fear, no danger --

JULIANA. She comes -- mark how her tortured mind speaks through
The expressive eye.

Enter ETHELBERTA and ANSELM. ETHELBERTA. I Have spoke in vain.

SIR ALEXANDER. I do
Not yet believe he will proceed to such
Extreme barbarity.

ETHELBERTA. I saw the pillars,
I saw the men with chains and instruments
Prepared. Ere now your sons are bound to the
Lofty pillars with their bosoms bare, to catch
The arrows which these men are now in act
To shoot, and only wait your terrible
Command.

SIR ALEXANDER. Ah! leave me then to my dread duty,
Retire, Retire! -- The truce is just expiring,
The trembling sands have almost
Run their hour.

ETHELBERTA, kneeling. See at your feet the Mother of your children,
Who through the unvaried course of long attachment
Has shown she is not unworthy of your choice.
Oh! how I gloried in that day, when first
You called me yours! and do I live to curse
That day?

SIR ALEXANDER. Rise, Ethelberta, cease entreating --
Awake each virtue that surrounds your heart!
Elevate your mind, and dare to meet the
Approaching trial; think that now you stand
As in a solemn temple, and forbear
With vain complaining accents to disturb
The awful service that is now beginning.

ETHELBERTA. These proud exalted sentiments suit well
The breast that is fed with glory's turgid vapor:
My simple heart feels nothing but affection.

SIR ALEXANDER. Would have me be a traitor do my country?

ETHELBERTA. Dare thou assume the sacred name of Father,
And can thou unappall'd behold that scene?

SIR ALEXANDER. The voice that dares dissuade me from my duty
Is to my careless ear an empty sound.
Mark me, Ethelberta! I Will not disgrace
The school of war in which I have been trained:
My parting soul shall fly unsullied
Into the bosom of my ancestry,
And at my death my honor be conveyed
Immaculate, into the ashes of
My grave!

DONALDSON (taking up the hourglass.) The last remaining sands are hastening
fast
Away.

SIR ALEXANDER. Now bid the archers draw their
Bows.

ETHELBERTA. One moment yet delay, one moment.

SIR ALEXANDER. Ring out the alarm-bell.
(ETHELBERTA faints, and is carried out by JULIANA and ANSELM.) The besiegers
scale the walls, and are repulsed, and pursued; the scene then changes to the
place where the pillars are erected, where Sir ALEXANDER meets the General.
SIR ALEXANDER. Well met! my childrens' blood cries out revenge!
New youthful vigor gushes on my breast,
And vengeance, like the exterminating angel,
Rides on this sword.
(They fight, the General falls) Enter ETHELBERTA. Your sons are now avenged:
See, Ethelberta, where the monster lies!

ETHELBERTA. It Is nobly done, now you are indeed a Father:
But gaudy exultation ill becomes us,
The dreaded pillars we have not surveyed,
I Will hasten to the spot, and dare the event.
(they go to the pillars.) No children meet these fond enquiring eyes.

SIR ALEXANDER. It seems as he relented of his purpose.

ETHELBERTA. My heart presageful scorns the flattering hope:
Mark how the pillars are overspread with arrows,
And some that strew the ground are stained with blood.
(Takes up one, and advances toward the stage.) This dread informer tells a
horrid tale.
(Shouts at a distance.) Whence that tumultuous noise?

SIR ALEXANDER. Happily my valiant
Men are now returning from their victory.

ETHELBERTA. What Is victory to me without my sons?
( Nearer shouts; then the troops enter, with ARCHIBALD and VALENTINE.)
Transporting sight! I Am well repaid for all
The heart-pangs of this agonizing day.

SIR ALEXANDER. How did ye escape the flight of arrows
That winged from yonder losty battlements?

ARCHIBALD. Chained to the pillars, to our doom resigned,
We saw the angry weapons fly around.

VALENTINE. Yet then, beneath the spreading canopy
Of danger, still did we remain untouched.

ETHELBERTA. Some hovering angel, with benignant hand,
Averted from your breast the crowding darts.
Yet tell me all! Oh! say, by what blessed means
Am I become the happiest of mothers?

VALENTINE. As the enemy retreated from the walls,
Orders were issued (should we be alive)
To drag us back again in chains as captives;
But our bold troops, with hasty step advancing,
By the resistless effort of Donaldson
We are restored to safety and to you.

ETHELBERTA to DONALDSON. Take, take a mother's thanks: this gallant deed
Of thine, brave youth, yes, it is here engraved
Deep in the last recesses of my heart.

SIR ALEXANDER. Thanks to my sons, my matchless sons, who on
This memorable day have poured fresh luster
On our name and on our country. Dear boys,
Oblivion's gulf shall never entomb your story,
While history, to time's remotest bound,
Her stream majestic shall through ages roll:
Like kindred flowers that on one stem arise,
You on her margin shall for ever glow.
Exeunt.
End of the FOURTH and LAST ACT.
The EPILOGUE.
WRITTEN BY THE AUTHOR, AND SPOKEN BY MRS. POPE.
AS now I come unarmed, without a dart,
I fear I cannot presume to touch your heart;
But your indulgence, here so often sound,
Has on my heart, at least, impressed a wound;
A sacred wound! which I am proud to feel,
Which, if I know myself, will never heal.
Methinks I hear you say, Dear Mrs. POPE,
Amidst what mouldering Annals did you grope,
And dig, from out the mine of tragic ore,
A tale unfashion'd from the days of yore --
Where two wild Boys take such prodigious pains,
And are determined to be hung in chains?
Goes your complaint to this? -- that we display
A tale unsuited to the modern day?
Does this famed Island then produce no more
The bright achievements of the days of yore?
Avert the thought! -- still ancient Glory towers,
And warm heroic Virtue still is ours!
Even here, as I the martial theme pursue,
Full many a mother rises to my view,
Whose ardent Sons domestic comforts fly,
To seek the advancing Foe with kindling eye,
And, braving the full force of hostile power,
Add to their Country's wreath another flower.
No station, titles, here exemption claim;
All feel alike tbe sympathetic ^l^me:
Even SHE whose life adds splendor to a Throne,
Whom every British heart delights to own --
Even SHE beholds her brave undaunted SON,
In early youth the path of danger run!
Happy the realm, in this convulsive Age,
Whose tragic scenes are only on the Stage!
Calamity extends her withered hand,
And drags her harrow over a neighboring Land;
While you, reclined beneath a softer sway,
Bask and enjoy a bright unclouded day.
Depressed by civic storms, deformed with woes,
Stung by the pangs of agonizing throes,
A Nation falls. -- It Is yours to still the storm,
To raise with generous arm her bleeding form,
To soothe her shame, administer relief,
To close the gushing artery of grief,
To cast a veil over each disgraceful seam,
And once more lift her to her own esteem.
This Godlike act, which is reserved for you,
With glowing zeal and confidence pursue:
This act from future times shall homage claim,
Extend your worth, and consecrate your fame!


