A TRIP TO SCARBOROUGH A COMEDY.

[Price One Shilling and Sixpence.]

A TRIP TO SCARBOROUGH. A COMEDY. AS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL IN DRURY
LANE.

ALTERED FROM Vanbrugh's Relapse; or, Virtue in Danger.

By RICHARD BRINSLEY SHERIDAN, Esquire.

LONDON. Printed for G. WILKIE, No. 71, St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCCLXXXI.

PROLOGUE.
Written by DAVID GARRICK, Esquire.
Spoken by Mr. KING. WHAT various transformations we remark,
From East Whitechapel to the West Hyde-park!
Men, women, children, houses, signs, and fashions,
State, stage, trade, taste, the humors and the passions;
The Exchange, 'Change alley, wheresoe'er your ranging,
Court, city, country, all are changed, or changing;
The streets sometime ago, were paved with stones,
Which, aided by a hackney coach, half broke your bones.
The purest lovers then indulged no bliss;
They run great hazard if they stole a kiss --
One chaste salute -- the Damsel cried, O fie!
As they approached, slap went the coach awry,
-- Poor Sylvia got a bump, and Damon a black eye.
But now weak nerves in hackney coaches roam,
And the crammed glutton snores unjolted home:
Of former times that polished thing a Beau,
Is metamorphos'd now, from top to toe;
Then the full flaxen wig, spread over the shoulders,
Concealed the shallow head from the beholders!
But now the whole's reversed -- each fop appears,
Cropp'd, and trimmed up -- exposing head and ears;
The buckle then it is modest limits knew --
Now, like the ocean, dreadful to the view,
Has broke it is bounds, and swallows up the shoe;
The wearer's foot, like his once fine estate,
Is almost lost, the encumbrance is so great.
Ladies may smile -- are they not in the plot?
The bounds of nature have not they forgot?
Were they designed to be, when put together,
Made up, like shuttlecocks, of cork and feather?
Their pale faced grand-mama's appeared with grace,
When dawning blushes rose upon the face;
No blushes now their once loved station seek,
The foe is in possession of the cheek!
No head of old, too high in feathered state,
Hindered the fair to pass the lowest gate;
A church to enter now, they must be bent,
If even they should try the experiment.
As change thus circulates throughout the nation,
Some plays may justly call for alteration;
At least to draw some slender covering over
That graceless wit, And Van wants Grace, who never wanted Wit. POPE.
which was too bare before:
Those writers well and wisely use their pens,
Who turn our Wantons into Magdalens;
And howsoever wicked wits revile 'em,
We hope to find in you, their Stage Asylum.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Lord FOPPINGTON, Mr. Dodd. YOUNG FASHION, Mr. Palmer. LOVELESS, Mr. Smith.
Colonel TOWNLEY, Mr. Brereton Sir TUNBELLY CLUMSEY, Mr. Moody. PROBE, Mr.
Parsons LORY, Mr. Baddeley. LA VAROLE Mr. Burton. SHOEMAKER, Mr. Carpenter.
TAILOR, Mr. Baker. HOSIER, Mr. Norris. JEWELLER, Mr. La Mash. SERVANTS, etc.
BERINTHIA, Miss Farren. AMANDA, Mrs. Robinson. Mrs. COUPLER, Mrs. Booth.
NURSE, Mrs. Bradshaw. Miss HOYDEN, Mrs. Abington.
A TRIP TO SCARBOROUGH, A COMEDY.
ACT I.
SCENE I. the Hall of an Inn.
Enter YOUNG FASHION and LORY -- Postillion following with a Portmanteau. Y.
FASHION. LORY, pay the post-boy, and take the portmanteau.


LORY. Faith, sir, we had better let the post-boy take the portmanteau and pay
himself.


Y. FASHION. Why sure there is something lest in it.


LORY. Not a rag, upon my honor, sir -- we eat the last of your wardrobe at
Newmalton -- and if we had had twenty miles farther to go, our next meal must
have been off the cloak-bag.


Y. FASHION. Why 'sdeath it appears full.


LORY. Yes, sir -- I made bold to stuff it with hay, to save appearances, and
look like baggage.


Y. FASHION. What the devil shall I do! -- harkee, boy, what is the chaise?


BOY. Thirteen shillings, please your honor.


Y. FASHION. Can you give me change for a guinea?


BOY. O yes, sir.


LORY. Soh, what will he do now? -- Lord, sir, you had better let the boy be
paid below.


Y. FASHION. Why, as you say, Lory, I believe it will be as well.


LORY. Yes, yes; tell them to discharge you below, honest friend.


BOY. Please your honor, there are the turnpikes too.


Y. FASHION. Aye, aye; the turnpikes by all means.


BOY. And I hope your honor will order me something for myself.


Y. FASHION. To be sure, bid them give you a crown.


LORY. Yes, yes -- my master does not care what you charge them -- so get along
you --


BOY. Your honor promised to send the hostler --


LORY. P'shaw! damn the hostler -- would you impose upon the gentleman's
generosity? -- ( Pushes him out) -- A rascal, to be so cursed ready with his
change!


Y. FASHION. Why faith, Lory, he had near posed me.


LORY. Well, sir, we are arrived at Scarborough, not worth a guinea! -- I hope
you will own yourself a happy man -- You have outlived all your cares.


Y. FASHION. How so, sir?


LORY. Why you have nothing left to take care of.


Y. FASHION. Yes, sirrah, I have myself and you to take care of still.


LORY. Sir, if you could prevail with somebody else to do that for you, I
fancy we might both fare the better for it -- But now, sir, for my Lord
Foppington, your elder brother.


Y. FASHION. Damn my eldest brother!


LORY. With all my heart; but get him to redeem your annuity however. -- Look
you, sir, you must wheedle him, or you must starve.


Y. FASHION. Look you, sir, I will neither wheedle him nor starve.


LORY. Why what will you do then?


Y. FASHION. Cut his throat, or get some one to do it for me.


LORY. Gad-so, sir, I Am glad to find I was not so we I acquainted with the
strength of your conscience as with the weakness of your purse.


Y. FASHION. Why, art thou so impenetrable a blockhead as to believe he will help
me with a farthing?


LORY. Not if you treat him de baut en bas as you used to do.


Y. FASHION. Why how would have me treat him?


LORY. Like a trout -- tickle him.


Y. FASHION. I cannot flatter.


LORY. Can you starve?


Y. FASHION. Yes.


LORY. I cannot -- Good-bye to ye, sir.


Y. FASHION. Stay -- thou wilt distract me. But who comes here -- my old friend,
Colonel Townly?

Enter Colonel TOWNLY. My dear Colonel, I am rejoiced to meet you here.


TOWNLY. Dear Tom, this is an unexpected pleasure -- what, are you come to
Scarbro' to be present at your brother's wedding?


LORY. Ah, sir, if it had been his funeral, we should have come with pleasure.


TOWNLY. What, honest Lory, are you with your master still?


LORY. Yes, sir, I have been starving with him ever since I saw your honor
last.


Y. FASHION. Why, Lory is an attached rogue; there is no getting rid of him.


LORY. True, sir, as my master says, there is no seducing me from his service,
'till he is able to pay me my wages. ( Aside.


Y. FASHION. Go, go, sir -- and take care of the baggage.


LORY. Yes, sir -- the baggage! -- O Lord! -- I suppose, sir, I must charge the
landlord to be very particular where he stows this.


Y. FASHION. Get along, you rascal. [ Exit Lory, with the Portmanteau.

But, Colonel, are you acquainted with my proposed sister-in-law?


TOWNLY. Only by character -- her father, Sir Tunbelly Clumsey, lives within a
quarter of a mile of this place, in a lonely old house, which nobody comes
near. She never goes abroad, nor sees company at home; to prevent all
misfortunes, she has her breeding within doors; the parson of the parish
teaches her to play upon the dulcimer; the clerk to sing, her nurse to dress,
and her father to dance: -- in short, nobody has free admission there but our
old acquaintance, Mother Coupler, who has procured your brother this match, and
is, I believe, a distant relation of Sir Tunbelly's.


Y. FASHION. But is her fortune so considerable?


TOWNLY. Three thousand a year, and a good sum of money independent of her
father beside.


Y. FASHION. 'Sdeath! that my old acquaintance, dame Coupler, could not have
thought of me as well as my brother for such a prize.


TOWNLY. Egad I wouldn't swear that you are too late -- his Lordship, I know,
hasn't yet seen the lady, and, I believe, has quarrelled with his patroness.


Y. FASHION. My dear Colonel, what an idea have you started?


TOWNLY. Pursue it if you can, and I promise you you shall have my assistance;
for besides my natural contempt for his Lordship, I have at present the enmity
of a rival toward him.


Y. FASHION. What, has he been addressing your old flame, the sprightly widow
Berinthia?


TOWNLY. Faith, Tom, I am at present most whimsically circumstanced -- I came
here near a month ago to meet the lady you mention; but she failing in her
promise, I, partly from pique, and partly from idleness, have been diverting my
chagrin by offering up chaste incense to the beauties of Amanda, our friend
Loveless's wife.


Y. FASHION. I have never seen her, but have heard her spoken of as a youthful
wonder of beauty and prudence.


TOWNLY. She is so indeed; and Loveless being too careless and insensible of
the treasure he possesses -- my lodging in the same house has given me a
thousand opportunities of making my assiduities acceptable; so that in less
than a fortnight, I began to bear my disappointment from the widow, with the
most Christian resignation.


Y. FASHION. And Berinthia has never appeared?


TOWNLY. O there is the perplexity; for just as I began not to care whether I
ever saw her again or not, last night she arrived.


Y. FASHION. And instantly reassumed her empire.


TOWNLY. No faith -- we met -- but the lady not condescending to giev me any
serious reasons for having fooled me for a month, I left her in a huff.


Y. FASHION. Well, well, I Will answer for it, she will soon resume her power,
especially as friendship will prevent your pursuing the other too far -- but my
coxcomb of a brother is an admirer of Amanda's too, is he?


TOWNLY. Yes; and I believe is most heartily despised by her -- but come with
me, and you shall see her and your old friend Loveless.


Y. FASHION. I must pay my respects to his Lordship -- perhaps you can direct
me to his lodgings.


TOWNLY. Come with me, I shall pass by it.


Y. FASHION. I wish you could pay the visit for me; or could tell me what I
should say to him.


TOWNLY. Say nothing to him -- apply yourself to his bag, his sword, his
feather, his snuff box; and when you are well with them, desire him to lend you
a thousand pounds, and I Will engage you prosper.


Y. FASHION. 'Sdeath and furies! why was that coxcomb thrust into the world
before me? O Fortune! Fortune! thou art a jilt, by Gad. [Exit


SCENE II, a Dressing Room.
Lord FOPPINGTON, in his Night Gown, and LA VAROLE. LD. FOPPINGTON. Well, it is
an unspeakable pleasure to be a man of quality -- strike me dumb! -- even the
boors of this Northern spa have learned the respect due to a title -- La Varole!


LA VAROLE. Mi Lor --


LD. FOPPINGTON. You have not yet been at Muddy-Moat-Hall to announce my arrival,
have you?


LA VAROLE. Not yet, mi Lor.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Then you need not go till Saturday, [ Exit La Va. as I am in
no particular haste to view my intended Sposa -- I shall sacrifice a day or two
more to the pursuit of my friend Loveless's wife -- Amanda is a charming
creature -- strike me ugly; and if I have any discernment in the world, she
thinks no less of my Lord Foppington.


Enter LA VAROLE. LA VAROLE. Mi Lor, de shoemaker, de tailor, de hosier, de
sempstress, de peru, be all ready, if your lordship please to dress.


LD. FOPPINGTON. It Is well, admit them.


LA VAROLE. Hey, Messieurs, entrez.


Enter TAILOR, etc. etc. LD. FOPPINGTON. So, gentlemen, I hope you have all
taken pains to show yourselves masters in your professions.


TAILOR. I think I may presume to say, Sir --


LA VAROLE. My Lor, you clown you!


TAILOR. My Lord, I ask your Lordship's pardon, my Lord. I hope, my Lord, your
Lordship will please to own, I have brought your Lordship as accomplished a
suit of clothes as ever Peer of England wore, my Lord -- will your Lordship
please to try 'em now?


LD. FOPPINGTON. Ay; but let my people dispose the glasses so, that I may see
myself before and behind; for I love to see myself all round.

( Whilst he puts on his clothes, enter YOUNG FASHION and LORY.)
Y. FASHION. Hey-day! What the devil have we here? -- Sure my gentleman's grown
a favorite at court, he has got so many people at his levee.


LORY. Sir, these people come in order to make him a favorite at court -- they
are to establish him with the ladies.


Y. FASHION. Good Heaven! to what an ebb of taste are women fallen, that it
should be in the power of a laced coat to recommend a gallant to them!


LORY. Sir, Tailors and Hair-dressers are now become the bawds of the nation --
it is they that debauch all the women.


Y. FASHION. Thou say true; for there is that fop now has not, by nature,
wherewithal to move a cook maid: and by the time these fellows have done with
him, egad he shall melt down a Countess -- but now for my reception.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Death and eternal tortures! Sir -- I say the coat is too wide
here by a foot.


TAILOR. My Lord, if it had been tighter, 'twould neither have hooked nor
buttoned.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Rat the hooks and buttons, Sir, can any thing be worse than
this? -- As Gad shall jedge me! it hangs on my shoulders like a chairman's
surtout.


TAILOR. It Is not for me to dispute your Lordship's fancy.


LORY. There, Sir, observe what respect does.


Y. FASHION. Respect! -- D -- m him for a coxcomb -- but let us accost him. --
Brother, I Am your humble servant.


LD. FOPPINGTON. O Lard, Tam, I did not expect you in England -- Brother, I Am
glad to see you -- but what has brought you to Scarbro' Tam? -- Look you, Sir,
( to the Tailor) I shall never be reconciled to this nauseous wrapping gown;
therefore, pray get me another suit with all possible expedition; for this is
my eternal aversion -- Well, but Tam, you don't tell me what has driven you to
Scarbro'? -- Mrs. Callicoe, are not you of my mind?


SEMPSTRESS. Directly, my Lord. -- I hope your Lordship is pleased with your
ruffles?


LD. FOPPINGTON. In love with them, stab my vitals! -- Bring my bill, you shall
be paid tomorrow.


SEMPSTRESS. I humbly thank your Lordship. [ Exit Semp.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Hark thee, shoemaker, these shoes a'nt ugly, but they don't
sit me.


SHOEMAKER. My Lord, I think they fit you very well.


LD. FOPPINGTON. They hurt me just below the instep.


SHOEMAKER. ( feeling his foot) No, my Lord, they don't hurt you there.


LD. FOPPINGTON. I tell thee they pinch me execrably.


SHOEMAKER. Why then, my Lord, if those shoes pinch you I Will be d -- n'd.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Why will thou undertake to persuade me I cannot feel!


SHOEMAKER. Your Lordship may please to feel what you think fit, but that shoe
does not hurt you -- I think I understand my trade.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Now by all that is good and powerful, thou art an
incomprehensible coxcomb -- but thou make good shoes, and so I Will bear with
thee.


SHOEMAKER. My Lord, I have worked for half the people of quality in this town
these twenty years, and it is very hard I shoudn't know when a shoe hurts, and
when it don't.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Well, prithee be gone about thy business. Exit Shoe.

Mr. Mendlegs, a word with you. The calves of these stockings are thickened a
little too much; thy make my legs look like a porter's.


MENDLEGS. My Lord, methinks they look mighty well.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Aye, but you are not so good a judge of those things as I am
-- I have studied them all my life -- therefore pray let the next be the
thickness of a crown piece less.


MENDLEGS. Indeed, my Lord, they are the same kind I had the honor to furnish
your Lordship with in town.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Very possibly, Mr. Mendlegs; but that was in the beginning of
the winter; and you should always remember, Mr. Hosier, that if you make a
Nobleman's spring legs as robust as his autumnal calves, you commit a manstrous
impropriety, and make no allowance for the fatigues of the winter.


JEW. I hope, my Lord, those buckles have had the unspeakable satisfaction of
being honored with your Lordship's approbation?


LD. FOPPINGTON. Why they are of a pretty fancy; but don't you think them
rather of the smallest?


JEW. My Lord, they could not well be larger to keep on your Lordship's shoe.


LD. FOPPINGTON. My good Sir, you forget that these matters are not as they
used to be: formerly, indeed, the buckle was a sort of machine, intended to
keep on the shoe; but the case is now quite reversed, and the shoe is of no
earthly use, but to keep on the buckle. -- Now give me my watches, and the
business of the morning will be pretty well over.


Y. FASHION. Well, Lory, what do think on it? -- a very friendly reception
from a brother after three years absence!


LORY. Why, Sir, it is your own fault -- here you have stood ever since you came
in, and have not commended any one thing that belongs to him.


Y. FASHION. Nor ever shall, while they belong to a coxcomb. -- Now your people
of business are gone, brother, I hope I may obtain a quarter of an hour's
audience of you?


LD. FOPPINGTON. Faith, Tam, I must beg you will excuse me at this time, for I
have an engagement which I would not break for the salvation of mankind. Hey!
-- there! -- is my carriage at the door? -- You Will excuse me, brother. [Going.


Y. FASHION. Shall you be back to dinner?


LD. FOPPINGTON. As Gad shall jedge me, I cannot tell, for it is passible I may
dine with some friends at Donner's.


Y. FASHION. Shall I meet you there? for I must needs talk with you.


LD. FOPPINGTON. That I Am afraid may not be quite so praper; -- for those I
commonly eat with are a people of nice conversation; and you know, Tam, your
education has been a little at large -- but there are other ordinaries in town
-- very good beef ordinaries -- I suppose, Tam, you can eat beef? -- However,
dear Tam, I Am glad to see thee in England, stap my vitals! [Exit.


Y. FASHION. Hell and furies! Is this to be borne?


LORY. Faith, Sir, I could almost have given him a knock of the pate myself.


Y. FASHION. It Is enough; I will now show you the excess of my passion, by
being very calm. -- Come, Lory, lay your loggerhead to mine, and, in cold
blood, let us contrive his destruction.


LORY. Here comes a head, Sir, would contrive it better than us both, if she
would but join in the confederacy.


Y. FASHION. By this light, Madam Coupler; she seems dissatisfied at something:
let us observe her.


Enter COUPLER. COUPLER. Soh! I am likely to be well rewarded for my services,
truly; my suspicions, I find, were but too just -- What! refuse to advance me a
paltry sum, when I am upon the point of making him master of a Galloon! But let
him look to the consequences, an ungrateful, narrow-minded coxcomb.


Y. FASHION. So he is, upon my soul, old lady: it must be my brother you speak
of.


COUPLER. Hah! -- stripling, how came you here? What, have spent all, hey? And
art thou come to dun his Lordship for assistance?


Y. FASHION. No; -- I want somebody's assistance to cut his Lordship's throat,
without the risque of being hanged for him.


COUPLER. Egad, sirrah, I could help thee to do him almost as good a turn
without the danger of being burnt in the hand for it.


Y. FASHION. How -- how, old Mischief?


COUPLER. Why you must know I have done you the kindness to make up a match for
your brother.


Y. FASHION. I Am very much beholden to you, truly.


COUPLER. You may before the wedding day yet: the lady is a great heiress, the
match is concluded, the writings are drawn, and his lordship is come hither to
put the finishing hand to the business.


Y. FASHION. I understand as much.


COUPLER. Now you must know, stripling, your brother's a knave.


Y. FASHION. Good.


COUPLER: He has given me a bond of a thousand pounds for helping him to his
fortune, and has promised me as much more in ready money upon the day of the
marriage; which, I understand by a friend, he never designs to pay me; and his
just now refusing to pay me a part, is a proof of it. If, therefore, you will
be a generous young rogue and secure me five thousand pounds, I Will help you to
the lady.


Y. FASHION. And how the devil will thou do that?


COUPLER. Without the devil's aid, I warrant thee. Thy brother's face not one
of the family ever saw; the whole business has been managed by me, and all the
letters go through my hands. Sir Tunbelly Clumsey, my relation, (for that is the
old gentleman's name) is apprized of his lordship's being down here, and
expects him tomorrow to receive his daughter's hand; but the Peer, I find,
means to bait here a few days longer, to recover the fatigue of his journey, I
suppose. Now you shall go to Muddymoat-hall in this place. I Will give you a
letter of introduction; and if you don't marry the girl before sunset, you
deserve to be hanged before morning.


Y. FASHION. Agreed, agreed; and for thy reward --


COUPLER. Well, well; -- though I warrant thou have not a farthing of money in
thy pocket now -- no -- one may see it in thy face.


Y. FASHION. Not a souse, by Jupiter.


COUPLER. Must I advance then? -- well, be at my lodgings next door this
evening, and I Will see what may be done -- We'll sign and seal, and when I have
given thee some farther instructions, thou shall hoist sail and be gone. [ Exit
Coup.


Y. FASHION. So, Lory; Providence thou see at last takes care of merit: we
are in a fair way to be great people.


LORY. Aye, sir, if the devil don't step between the cup and the lip, as he
uses to do.


Y. FASHION. Why, faith, he has played me many a damned trick to spoil my
fortune; and, egad, I Am almost afraid he is at work about it again now; but if I
should tell thee how, thou would wonder at me.


LORY. Indeed, sir, I should not.


Y. FASHION. How do know?


LORY. Because, sir, I have wondered at you so often, I can wonder at you no
more.


Y. FASHION. No! what would thou say if a qualm of conscience should spoil my
design?


LORY. I would eat my words, and wonder more than ever!


Y. FASHION. Why faith, Lory, though I am a young Rakehell, and have played many
a rogueish trick, this is so full-grown a cheat, I find I must take pains to
come up to it -- I have scruples.


LORY. They are strong symptoms of death. If you find they increase, sir, pray
make your will.


Y. FASHION. No, my conscience shall not starve me neither, but thus far I Will
listen to it. Before I execute this project, I Will try my brother to the bottom.
If he has yet so much humanity about him as to assist me (though with a moderate
aid) I Will drop my project at his feet, and show him how I can do for him much
more than what I Would ask he would do for me. This one conclusive trial of him I
resolve to make. --

Succeed or fail, still victory's my lot,
If I subdue his heart, it is well -- if not
I will subdue my conscience to my plot.
Exeunt.
END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter LOVELESS and AMANDA LOVELESS. HOW do you like these lodgings, my dear?
For my part, I am so well pleased with them, I shall hardly remove whilst we
stay here, if you are satisfied.


AMANDA. I am satisfied with every thing that pleases you, else I had not come
to Scarbro' at all.


LOVELESS. O! a little of the noise and folly of this place will sweeten the
pleasures of our retreat; we shall find the charms of our retirement doubled
when we return to it.


AMANDA. That pleasing prospect will be my chiefest entertainment, whilst, much
against my will, I engage in those empty pleasures which it is so much the
fashion to be fond of.


LOVELESS. I own most of them are, indeed, but empty; yet there are delights,
of which a private life is destitute, which may divert an honest man, and be a
harmless entertainment to a virtuous woman: good music is one; and truly,
(with some small allowance) the plays, I think, may be esteemed another.


AMANDA. Plays, I must confess, have some small charms, and would have more,
would they restrain that loose encouragement to vice, which shocks, if not the
virtue of some women, at least the modesty of all.


LOVELESS. But, 'till that reformation can be wholly made, 'twould surely be a
pity to exclude the productions of some of our best writers for want of a
little wholesome pruning; which might be effected by any one who possessed
modesty enough to believe that we should preserve all we can of our deceased
authors, at least 'till they are outdone by the living ones.


AMANDA. What do you think of that you saw last night?


LOVELESS. To say truth, I did not mind it much; my attention was for some time
taken off to admire the workmanship of Nature, in the face of a young lady who
sat some distance from me, she was so exquisitely handsome!


AMANDA. So exquisitely handsome!


LOVELESS. Why do you repeat my words, my dear?


AMANDA. Because you seemed to speak them with such pleasure, I thought I might
oblige you with their echo.


LOVELESS. Then you are alarmed, Amanda?


AMANDA. It is my duty to be so when you are in danger.


LOVELESS. You are too quick in apprehending for me. I viewed her with a world
of admiration, but not one glance of love.


AMANDA. Take heed of trusting to such nice distinctions. But were your eyes
the only things that were inquisitive? Had I been in your place, my tongue, I
fancy, had been curious too. I should have asked her, where she lived (yet
still without design) who was she pray?


LOVELESS. Indeed, I cannot tell.


AMANDA. You will not tell.


LOVELESS. By all that is sacred then, I did not ask.


AMANDA. Nor do you know what company was with her?


LOVELESS. I do not; but why are you so earnest?


AMANDA. I thought I had cause.


LOVELESS. But you thought wrong, Amanda; for turn the case, and let it be your
story; should you come home and tell me you had seen a handsome man, should I
grow jealous because you had eyes?


AMANDA. But should I tell you he was exquisitely so, and that I had gazed on
him with admiration, should you not think 'twere possible I might go one step
further, and enquire his name?


LOVELESS. ( Aside.) She has reason on her side, I have talked too much; but I
must turn off another way. ( To her.) Will you then make no difference, Amanda,
between the language of our sex and yours? There is a modesty restrains your
tongues, which makes you speak by halves when you commend, but roving flattery
gives a loose to ours, which makes us still speak double what we think. You
should not, therefore, in so strict a sense, take what I said to her advantage.


AMANDA. Those flights of flattery, sir, are to our faces only; when women are
once out of hearing, you are as modest in your commendations as we are; but I
shall not put you to the trouble of farther excuses; -- if you please, this
business shall rest here, only give me leave to wish, both for your peace and
mine, that you may never meet this miracle of beauty more.


LOVELESS. I am content.


Enter SERVANT. SERVANT. Madam, there is a lady at the door in a chair, desires
to know whether your Ladyship sees company? her name is Berinthia.


AMANDA. O dear! -- it is a relation I have not seen these five years, pray her
to walk in. ( Exit Serve.) Here Is another beauty for you; she was, when I saw
her last, reckoned extremely handsome.


LOVELESS. Don't be jealous now, for I shall gaze upon her too.


Enter BERINTHIA. LOVELESS. ( Aside.) Ha! -- by Heavens the very woman!


BERINTHIA. ( Saluting Amanda.) Dear Amanda, I did not expect to meet with you
in Scarbro'.


AMANDA. Sweet cousin, I Am overjoyed to see you. ( To Lov.) Mr. Loveless,
here is a relation and a friend of mine, I desire you will be better acquainted
with.


LOVELESS. ( Saluting Berinthia.) If my wife never desires a harder thing,
Madam, her request will be easily granted.


Enter SERVANT. SERVANT. Sir, my Lord Foppington presents his humble service to
you, and desires to know how you do. He Is at the next door, and if it be not
inconvenient to you, he will come and wait upon you.


LOVELESS. Give my compliments to his Lordship, and I shall be glad to see him.
( Exit Serve.) If you are not acquainted with his Lordship, Madam, you will be
entertained with his character.


AMANDA. Now it moves my pity more than my mirth, to see a man whom Nature has
made no sool, be so very industrious to pass for an ass.


LOVELESS. No, there you are wrong, Amanda; you should never bestow your pity
upon those who take pains for your contempt; pity those whom Nature abuses,
never those who abuse Nature.


Enter LORD FOPPINGTON. LD. FOPPINGTON. Dear Loveless, I am your most humble
servant.


LOVELESS. My Lord, I Am yours.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Madam, your Ladyship's very humble slave.


LOVELESS. My Lord, this lady is a relation of my wife's.


LD. FOPPINGTON. ( Saluting her.) The beautifullest race of people upon earth,
rat me. Dear Loveless, I am overjoyed that you think of continuing here. I am,
stap my vitals. ( To. Amanda.) For Gad's sake, Madam, how has your ladyship
been able to subsist thus long, under the fatigue of a country life?


AMANDA. My life has been very far from that, my Lord, it has been a very quiet
one.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Why that is the fatigue I speak of, Madam; for it is impossible
to be quiet, without thinking; now thinking is to me the greatest fatigue in
the world.


AMANDA. Does not your lordship love reading then?


LD. FOPPINGTON. Oh, passionately, Madam, but I never think of what I read.


BERINTHIA. Why, can your lordship read without thinking?


LD. FOPPINGTON. O Lard, can your ladyship pray without devotion, Madam?


AMANDA. Well, I must own, I think books the best entertainment in the world.


LD. FOPPINGTON. I am so much of your ladyship's mind, Madam, that I have a
private gallery in town, where I walk sometimes, which is furnished with
nothing but books and looking glasses. Madam, I have gilded them, and ranged
them so prettily, before Gad, it is the most entertaining thing in the world,
to walk and look at them.


AMANDA. Nay, I love a neat library too, but it is, I think, the inside of a
book should recommend it most to us.


LD. FOPPINGTON. That, I must confess, I am not altogether so fand of, far to
my mind, the inside of a book is to entertain one's self with the forced
product of another man's brain. Now I think a man of quality and breeding may
be much more diverted with the natural sprauts of his own; but to say the
truth, Madam, let a man love reading never so well, when once he comes to know
the tawn, he finds so many better ways of passing away the four-and-twenty
hours, that it were ten thousand pities he should consume his time in that. Far
example, Madam, now my life, my life, Madam, is a perpetual stream of pleasure,
that glides through with such a variety of entertainments, I believe the wisest
of our ancestors never had the least conception of any of 'em. I rise, Madam,
when in town, about twelve o'clock. I don't rise sooner, because it is the
worst thing in the world for the complexion; not that I pretend to be a beau,
but a man must endeavor to look decent, lest he makes so odious a figure in
the side-bax, the ladies should be compelled to turn their eyes upon the play;
so, at twelve o'clock I say I rise. Naw, if I find it a good day, I resalve to
take the exercise of riding, so drink my chocolate, and draw on my boots by
two. On my return, I dress; and after dinner, lounge, perhaps to the Opera.


BERINTHIA. Your lordship, I suppose, is fond of music?


LD. FOPPINGTON. O, passionately, on Tuesdays and Saturdays, provided there is
good company, and one is not expected to undergo the fatigue of listening.


AMANDA. Does your lordship think that the case at the Opera?


LD. FOPPINGTON. Most certainly, Madam; there is my Lady Tattle, my Lady Prate,
my Lady Titter, my Lady Sneer, my Lady Giggle, and my Lady Grin, -- these have
boxes in the front, and while any favorite air is singing, are the prettiest
company in the waurld, stap my vitals! May Not we hope for the honor to see you
added to our society, Madam?


AMANDA. Alas, my Lord, I am the worst company in the world at a concert, I Am
so apt to attend to the music.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Why, Madam, that is very pardonable in the country, or at
church; but a monstrous inattention in a polite assembly. But I am afraid I
tire the company?


LOVELESS. Not at all; pray go on.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Why then, ladies, there only remains to add, that I generally
conclude the evening at one or other of the Clubs, not that I ever play deep;
indeed I have been for some time tied up from losing above five thousand pawnds
at a sitting.


LOVELESS. But is'nt your Lordship sometimes obliged to attend the weighty
affairs of the nation?


LD. FOPPINGTON. Sir, as to weighty affairs, I leave them to weighty heads; I
never intend mine shall be a burden to my body.


BERINTHIA. Nay, my Lord, but you are a pillar of the state.


LD. FOPPINGTON. An ornamental pillar, Madam; for sooner than undergo any part
of the burden, rat me, but the whole building should fall to the ground.


AMANDA. But, my Lord, a fine gentleman spends a great deal of his time in his
intrigues; you have given us no account of them yet.


LD. FOPPINGTON. ( Aside.) Soh! She would enquire into my amors, that is
jealousy; poor soul! I see she is in love with me. ( To her.) Why, Madam, I
should have mentioned my intrigues, but I am really afraid I begin to be
troublesome with the length of my visit.


AMANDA. Your lordship is too entertaining to grow troublesome any where.


LD. FOPPINGTON. ( Aside.) That now was as much as if she had said pray make
love to me. I Will let her see I Am quick of apprehension. ( To her). O Lard,
Madam, I had like to have forgot a secret I must needs tell your ladyship. ( To
Lov.) Ned, you must not be so jealous now as to listen.


LOVELESS. Not I, my Lord, I am too fashionable a husband to pry into the
secrets of my wife.


LD. FOPPINGTON. ( To Aman. squeezing her hand) I am in love with you to
desperation, strike me speechless!


AMANDA. ( Giving him a box of the ear.) Then thus I return your passion, -- an
impudent fool!


LD. FOPPINGTON. Gad's curse, Madam, I Am a Peer of the Realm.


LOVELESS. Hey, what the Devil do you affront my wife, Sir? Nay then -- ( Draws
and fight.


AMANDA. Ah! What has my folly done? -- Help! murder! help! Part them, for
Heaven's sake.


LD. FOPPINGTON. ( Falling back, and leaning on his sword.) Ah! quite through
the body, stap my vitals!


Enter SERVANTS. LOVELESS. ( Running to him.) I hope I have not killed the fool,
however -- bear him up -- where is your wound?


LD. FOPPINGTON. Just through the guts.


LOVELESS. Call a surgeon, there -- unbutton him quickly.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Ay, pray make haste.


LOVELESS. This mischief you may thank yourself for.


LD. FOPPINGTON. I may so, love's the Devil, indeed, Ned.


Enter PROBE and SERVANT. SERVANT. Here Is Mr. Probe, sir, was just going by the
door.


LD. FOPPINGTON. He Is the welcomest man alive.


PROBE. Stand by, stand by, stand by; pray, Gentlemen, stand by; Lord have
mercy upon us! did you never see a man run through the body before? Pray stand
by.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Ah! Mr. Probe, I Am a dead man.


PROBE. A dead man, and I by! I should laugh to see that, egad.


LOVELESS. Prithee, don't stand prating, but look upon his wound.


PROBE. Why, what if I will not look upon his wound this hour, sir?


LOVELESS. Why then he will bleed to death, sir.


PROBE. Why then I Will fetch him to life again, sir.


LOVELESS. 'Slife! he is run through the guts, I tell thee.


PROBE. I wish he was run through the heart, and I should get the more credit by
his cure. -- Now I hope you are satisfied? -- Come, now let me come at him --
now let me come at him -- ( viewing his wound) Oons! what a gash is here! --
Why, sir, a man may drive a coach and six horses into your body!


LD. FOPPINGTON. Oh!


PROBE. Why, what the devil have you run the gentleman through with a scythe? --
( aside) A little scratch between the skin and the ribs, that is all.


LOVELESS. Let me see his wound.


PROBE. Then you shall dress it, Sir -- for if any body looks upon it I will not.


LOVELESS. Why thou art the veriest coxcomb I ever saw.


PROBE. Sir, I am not master of my trade for nothing.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Surgeon!


PROBE. Sir?


LD. FOPPINGTON. Are there any hopes?


PROBE. Hopes! I cannot tell -- What are you willing to give for a cure?


LD. FOPPINGTON. Five hundred paunds with pleasure.


PROBE. Why then perhaps there may be hopes; but we must avoid a further delay
-- here -- help the gentleman into a chair, and carry him to my house presently
-- that is the properest place -- ( aside) to bubble him out of his money. --
Come, a chair -- a chair quickly -- there, in with him. -- ( they put him into
a chair)


LD. FOPPINGTON. Dear Loveless, adieu: if I die, I forgive thee; and if I live,
I hope thou will do as much by me. -- I am sorry you and I should quarrel, but
I hope here is an end on it; for if you are satisfied, I am.


LOVELESS. I shall hardly think it worth my prosecuting any farther, so you may
be at rest, sir.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Thou art a generous fellow, strike me dumb! -- ( aside) but
thou have an impertinent wife, stap my vitals!


PROBE. So -- carry him off -- carry him off -- we shall have him prate himself
into a fever by and by -- carry him off* [ Exit. with Ld. Foppington and Probe.


AMANDA. Now on my knees, my dear, let me ask your pardon for my indiscretion
-- my own I never shall obtain.


LOVELESS. Oh, there is no harm done -- you served him well.


AMANDA. He did indeed deserve it; but I tremble to think how dear my
indiscreet resentment might have cost you.


LOVELESS. O, no matter -- never trouble yourself about that.


Enter COLONEL TOWNLY. TOWNLY. So, so, I Am glad to find you all alive -- I met
a wounded Peer carrying off -- for Heavens sake what was the matter?


LOVELESS. O, a trifle -- he would have made love to my wife before my face, so
she obliged him with a box of the ear, and I run him through the body, that was
all.


TOWNLY. Bagatelle on all sides -- but pray, Madam, how long has this noble
Lord been an humble servant of yours?


AMANDA. This is the first I have heard on it -- so I suppose it is his quality
more than his love has brought him into this adventure. He thinks his title an
authentic passport to every woman's heart, below the degree of a Peeress.


TOWNLY. He Is coxcomb enough to think any thing; but I would not have you
brought into trouble for him. -- I hope there is no danger of his life?


LOVELESS. None at all -- he is fallen into the hands of a roguish surgeon, who,
I perceive, designs to frighten a little money out of him -- but I saw his
wound -- it is nothing -- he may go to the ball tonight if he pleases.


TOWNLY. I am glad you have corrected him without farther mischief, or you
might have deprived me of the pleasure of executing a plot against his
Lordship, which I have been contriving with an old acquaintance of yours.


LOVELESS. Explain --


TOWNLY. His brother, Tom Fashion, is come down here, and we have it in
contemplation to save him the trouble of his intended wedding; but we want your
assistance. Tom would have called, but he is preparing for his enterprise, so I
promised to bring you to him -- so, sir, if these ladies can spare you --


LOVELESS. I Will go with you with all my heart -- ( aside) -- though I could wish,
methinks, to stay and gaze a little longer on that creature -- Good Gods! how
engaging she is -- but what have I to do with beauty? -- I have already had my
portion, and must not covet more. -- ( To Townly) Come, sir, when you please.


TOWNLY. Ladies, your servant.


AMANDA. Mr. Loveless, pray one word with you before you go.


LOVELESS. ( to Townly.) I Will overtake you, Colonel. ( Exit Townly). What would
my dear?


AMANDA. Only a woman's foolish question, how do you like my cousin here?


LOVELESS. Jealous already, Amanda?


AMANDA. Not at all -- I ask you for another reason.


LOVELESS. ( Aside.) Whatever her reason be, I must not tell her true. ( to
her). Why, I confess she is handsome -- but you must not think I slight your
kinswoman, if I own to you, of all the women who may claim that character, she
is the last would triumph in my heart.


AMANDA. I Am satisfied.


LOVELESS. Now tell me why you asked?


AMANDA. At night I will -- Adieu. --


LOVELESS. ( Kissing her. I Am yours -- ( Exit.


AMANDA. ( Aside.) I Am glad to find he does not like her, for I have a great
mind to persuade her to come and live with me.


BERINTHIA. ( Aside.) Soh! I find my Colonel continues in his airs; there must
be something more at the bottom of this than the provocation he pretends from
me.


AMANDA. For Heavens sake, Berinthia, tell me what way I shall take to persuade
you to come and live with me?


BERINTHIA. Why one way in the world there is -- and but one.


AMANDA. And pray what is that?


BERINTHIA: It is to assure me -- I shall be very welcome.


AMANDA. If that be all, you shall even sleep here tonight.


BERINTHIA. Tonight!


AMANDA. Yes, tonight.


BERINTHIA. Why the people where I lodge will think me mad.


AMANDA. Let 'em think what they please.


BERINTHIA. Say you so, Amanda? -- Why then they shall think what they please
-- for I Am a young widow, and I care not what any body thinks. -- Ah, Amanda,
it is a delicious thing to be a young widow.


AMANDA. You Will hardly make me think so.


BERINTHIA. Puh! because you are in love with your husband -- but that is not
every woman's case.


AMANDA. I hope 'twas yours at least.


BERINTHIA. Mine, say you? -- Now I have a great mind to tell you a lie, but I
shall do it so aukwardly, you would find me out.


AMANDA. Then even speak the truth.


BERINTHIA. Shall I? -- then, after all, I did love him, Amanda, as a Nun does
penance.


AMANDA. How did you live together?


BERINTHIA. Like man and wife -- asunder -- he loved the country -- I the town.
-- He hawks and hounds -- I coaches and equipage. -- He eating and drinking --
I carding and playing. -- He the sound of a horn -- I the squeek of a fiddle.
-- We were dull company at table -- worse a-bed: whenever we met we gave one
another the spleen, and never agreed but once, which was about lying alone.


AMANDA. But tell me one thing truly and sincerely -- notwithstanding all these
jars, did not his death at last extremely trouble you?


BERINTHIA. O yes. -- I was forced to wear an odious Widows' band a
twelvemonth for it.


AMANDA. Women, I find, have different inclinations: -- prithee, Berinthia,
instruct me a little farther -- for I Am so great a novice, I Am almost ashamed
on it. -- Not Heaven knows that what you call intrigues have any charms for me
-- the practical part of all unlawful love is --


BERINTHIA. O it is abominable -- but for the speculative, that we must all
confess is entertaining enough.


AMANDA. Pray, be so just then to me, to believe, it is with a world of
innocence I would enquire whether you think those, we call Women of Reputation,
do really escape all other men, as they do those shadows of beaus?


BERINTHIA. O no, Amanda -- there are a sort of men make dreadful work amongst
'em -- men that may be called the Beaus Antipathy -- for they agree in nothing
but walking upon two legs. These have brains -- the beau has none. -- These are
in love with their mistress -- the beau with himself. -- They take care of
their reputation -- he is industrious to destroy it -- They are decent -- he is a
fop. They are men -- he is an ass.


AMANDA. If this be their character, I fancy we had here even now a pattern of
'em both.


BERINTHIA. His Lordship and Colonel Townly?


AMANDA. The same.


BERINTHIA. As for the Lord, he is eminently so; and for the other, I can assure
you there is not a man in town who has a better interest with the women, that
are worth having an interest with.


AMANDA. He answers then the opinion I had ever of him -- Heavens! what a
difference there is between a man like him, and that vain nauseous fop, Lord
Foppington -- ( taking her hand) I must acquaint you with a secret, cousin --
it is not that fool alone has talked to me of love. -- Townly has been tampering
too.


BERINTHIA. ( Aside) So, so! -- here the mystery comes out! -- Colonel Townly!
-- impossible, my dear!


AMANDA. It Is true, indeed! -- though he has done it in vain; nor do I think that
all the merit of mankind combined, could shake the tender love I bear my
husband; yet I will own to you, Berinthia, I did not start at his addresses, as
when they came from one whom I contemned.


BERINTHIA. ( Aside.) O this is better and better -- well said innocence! --
and you really think, my dear, that nothing could abate your constancy and
attachment to your husband?


AMANDA. Nothing, I am convinced.


BERINTHIA. What if you found he loved another woman better?


AMANDA. Well!


BERINTHIA. Well! -- why were I that thing they call a slighted wife; somebody
should run the risk of being that thing they call -- a husband.


AMANDA. O fie, Berinthia, no revenge should ever be taken against a husband --
but to wrong his bed is a vengeance, which of all vengeance --


BERINTHIA. Is the sweetest! -- ha! ha! ha I -- don't I talk madly?


AMANDA. Madly indeed!


BERINTHIA. Yet I Am very innocent.


AMANDA. That I dare swear you are. -- I know how to make allowances for your
humor -- but you resolve then never to marry again?


BERINTHIA. O no! -- I resolve I will.


AMANDA. How so?


BERINTHIA. That I never may.


AMANDA. You banter me.


BERINTHIA. Indeed I don't -- but I consider I Am a woman, and form my
resolutions accordingly.


AMANDA. Well, my opinion is, form what resolution you will, matrimony will be
the end on it.


BERINTHIA. I doubt it -- but A Heavens! -- I have business at home, and am
half an hour too late.


AMANDA. As you are to return with me, I Will just give some orders, and walk
with you.


BERINTHIA. Well, make haste, and we'll finish this subject as we go. [ Exit
Amanda.

Ah! poor Amanda, you have led a country life! Well, this discovery is lucky!
-- base Townly! -- at once false to me, and treacherous to his friend! and my
innocent, demure, cousin, too! -- I have it in my power to be revenged on her,
however. Her husband, if I have any skill in countenance, would be as happy in
my smiles, as Townly can hope to be in here is. -- I Will make the experiment, come
what will on it. -- The woman who can forgive the being robbed of a favored
lover, must be either an idiot or a wanton.


END OF ACT THE SECOND.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter LORD FOPPINGTON and LA VAROLE. LD. FOPPINGTON. HEY, fellow -- let my
vis-a-vis come to the door.


LA VAROLE. Will your lordship venture so soon to expose yourself to the
weather?


LD. FOPPINGTON. Sir, I will venture as soon as I can to expose myself to the
ladies.


LA VAROLE. I wish your lordship would please to keep house a little longer;
I Am afraid your honor does not well consider your wound.


LD. FOPPINGTON. My wound! -- I would not be in eclipse another day, though I had
as many wounds in my body as I have had in my heart. So mind, Varole, let these
cards be left as directed. For this evening I shall wait on my father-in-law,
Sir Tunbelly, and I mean to commence my devoirs to the lady, by giving an
entertainment at her father's expense; and hark thee, tell Mr. Loveless I
request he and his company will honor me with their presence, or I shall think
we are not friends.


LA VAROLE. I will be sure. [Exit.


Enter YOUNG FASHION. Y. FASHION. Brother, your servant, how do you find
yourself to day?


LD. FOPPINGTON. So well, that I have ardered my coach to the door; -- so
there is no danger of death this baut, Tam.


Y. FASHION. I Am very glad of it.


LD. FOPPINGTON, ( Aside.) That I believe's a lie. -- Prithee, Tam, tell me one
thing -- did not your heart cut a caper up to your mauth, when you heard I was
ran through the bady?


Y. FASHION. Why do you think it should?


LD. FOPPINGTON. Because I remember mine did so when I heard my uncle was shot
through the head.


Y. FASHION. It then did very ill.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Prithee, why so?


Y. FASHION. Because he used you very well.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Well! -- Naw, strike me dumb, he starved me -- he has let me
want a thausand women, for want of a thausand pound.


Y. FASHION. Then he hindered you from making a great many ill bargains -- for
I think no woman worth money that will take money.


LD. FOPPINGTON. If I was a younger brother, I should think so too.


Y. FASHION. Then you are seldom much in love?


LD. FOPPINGTON. Never, stap my vitals.


Y. FASHION. Why then did you make all this bustle about Amanda?


LD. FOPPINGTON. Because she was a woman of an insolent virtue -- and I thought
myself piqu'd in honor to debauch her.


Y. FASHION. ( Aside.) Very well. Here Is a rare fellow for you, to ^ave the
spending of five thousand pounds a year. But now for my business with him. --
Brother, though I know to talk of business (especially of money) is a theme not
quite so entertaining to you as that of the ladies, my necessities are such, I
hope you will have patience to hear me.


LD. FOPPINGTON. The greatness of your necessities, Tam, is the worst argument
in the world for your being patiently heard. I do believe you are going to make
a very good speech, but strike me dumb, it has the worst beginning of any
speech I have heard this twelvemonth.


Y. FASHION. I Am sorry you think so.


LD. FOPPINGTON. I do believe thou art -- but come, let us know the affair
quickly.


Y. FASHION. Why then, my case in a word is this. -- The necessary expenses of
my travels have so much exceeded the wretched income of my annuity, that I have
been forced to mortgage it for five hundred pounds, which is spent. So unless
you are so kind as to assist me in redeeming it, I know no remedy but to take a
purse.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Why, faith, Tam, to give you my sense of the thing, I do think
taking a purse the best remedy in the world -- for if you succeed you are
relieved that way, if you are taken -- you are relieved the other.


Y. FASHION. I Am glad to see you are in so pleasant a humor; I hope I shall
find the effects on it.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Why, do you then really think it a reasonable thing that I
should give you five hundred pawnds?


Y. FASHION. I do not ask it as a due, brother, I am willing to receive it as a
favor.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Then thou art willing to receive it any how, strike me
speechless. -- But these are d -- n'd times to give money in; taxes are so
great, repairs so exorbitant, tenants such rogues, and bouquets so dear, that
the Devil take me, I am reduced to to that extremity in my cash, I have been
forced to retrench in that one article of sweet pawder, till I have brought it
dawn to five guineas a maunth -- now judge, Tam, whether I can spare you five
hundred pawnds?


Y. FASHION. If you cannot I must starve, that is all. ( Aside.) Damn him.


LD. FOPPINGTON. All I can say is, you should have been a better husband.


Y. FASHION. Ouns! -- If you cannot live upon ten thousand a year, how do you
think I should do it upon two hundred?


LD. FOPPINGTON. Don't be in a passion, Tam, for passion is the most unbecoming
thing in the world -- to the face. Look you, I don't love to say any thing to
you to make you melancholy, but upon this occasion I must take leave to put you
in mind, that a running-horse does require more attendance than a coach-horse.
-- Nature has made some difference 'twixt you and me.


Y. FASHION. Yes. -- She has made you older. ( Aside.) Plague take her.


LD. FOPPINGTON. That is not all, Tam.


Y. FASHION. Why, what is there else?


LD. FOPPINGTON. ( Looking first upon himself and then upon his brother.) Ask
the ladies.


Y. FASHION. Why, thou Essence-bottle, thou Musk Cat, -- do thou then think
thou have any advantage over me but what fortune has given thee?


LD. FOPPINGTON. I do, stap my vitals.


Y. FASHION. Now, by all that is great and powerful thou art the Prince of
Coxcombs.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Sir, I am proud at being at the head of so prevailing a party.


Y. FASHION. Will nothing then provoke thee? -- Draw, Coward.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Look you, Tam, you know I have always taken you for a mighty
dull fellow, and here is one of the foolishest plats broke out, that I have
seen a lang time. Your poverty makes life so burthen-some to you, you would
provoke me to a quarrel, in hopes either to slip through my lungs into my
estate, or to get yourself run through the guts, to put an end to your pain, but
I will disappoint you in both your designs; far with the temper of a
Philasapher, and the discretion of a statesman -- I shall leave the room with
my sword in the scabbard. [Exit.


Y. FASHION. So! farewell brother; and now conscience I defy thee. -- Lory!


Enter LORY. LORY. Sir?


Y. FASHION. Here Is rare news, Lory, his Lordship has given me a pill has
purged off all my scruples.


LORY. Then my heart's at ease again. For I have been in a lamentable fright,
sir, ever since your conscience had the impudence to intrude into your company.


Y. FASHION. Be at peace; it will come there no more, my brother has given it a
wring by the nose, and I have kicked it down stairs. So run away to the inn,
get the chaise ready quickly, and bring it to dame Coupler's without a moment's
delay.


LORY. Then, sir, you are going striaght about the fortune?


Y. FASHION. I am. -- Away -- fly, Lory.


LORY. The happiest day I ever saw. I Am upon the wing already.

[Exeunt severally.
SCENE, A GARDEN.
Enter LOVELESS and SERVANT. LOVELESS. Is my wife within?


SERVANT. No, sir, she has been gone out this half hour.


LOVELESS. Well, leave me. ( Exit Servant.) How strangely does my mind run on
this widow -- never was my heart so suddenly seized on before -- that my wife
should pick out her, of all womankind, to be her playfellow. -- But what fate
does, let fate answer for -- I sought it not -- soh! -- by heavens! -- here she
comes.


Enter BERINTHIA. BERINTHIA. What makes you look so thoughtful, Sir? I hope you
are not ill.


LOVELESS. I was debating, madam, whether I was so or not, and that was it
which made me look so thoughtful.


BERINTHIA. Is it then so hard a matter to decide? -- I thought all people were
acquainted with their own bodies, though few people know their own minds.


LOVELESS. What if the distemper I suspect be in the mind?


BERINTHIA. Why then I Will undertake to prescribe you a cure.


LOVELESS. Alas! you undertake you know not what.


BERINTHIA. So far at least then you allow me to be a Physician.


LOVELESS. Nay, I Will allow you to be so yet farther, for I have reason to
believe, should I put myself into your hands, you would increase my distemper.


BERINTHIA. How?


LOVELESS. Oh, you might betray my complaints to my wife.


BERINTHIA. And so lose all my practice.


LOVELESS. Will you then keep my secret?


BERINTHIA. I will.


LOVELESS. I Am satisfied. Now hear my symptoms, and give me your advice. The
first were these when I saw you at the play; a random glance you threw, at
first alarmed me. I could not turn my eyes from whence the danger came -- I
gazed upon you till my heart began to pant -- nay, even now on your approaching
me, my illness is so increased, that if you do not help me I shall, whilst you
look on, consume to Ashes. ( Taking her hand.


BERINTHIA. ( Breaking from him.) O Lord let me go, it is the plague, and we
shall be infected.


LOVELESS. Then we'll die together, my charming angel.


BERINTHIA. O Gad! the devil's in you. Lord, let me go -- here is somebody
coming.


Enter SERVANT. SERVANT. Sir, my lady's come home, and desires to speak with
you.


LOVELESS. Tell her I Am coming. ( Exit Servant). -- ( To Berinthia) But before
I go, one glass of nectar to drink her health.


BERINTHIA. Stand off, or I shall hate you, by heavens.


LOVELESS. ( Kissing her.) In matters of love, a woman's oath is no more to be
minded than a man's. ( Exit Lov.


BERINTHIA. Um!


Enter TOWNLY. TOWNLY. Soh! what is here -- Berinthia and Loveless -- and in
such close conversation! -- I cannot now wonder at her indifference in excusing
herself to me! -- O rare woman, -- well then, let Loveless look to his wife,
'twill be but the retort courteous on both sides. -- ( To Berinthia.) Your
servant, Madam, I need not ask you how you do, you have got so good a color.


BERINTHIA. No better than I used to have, I suppose.


TOWNLY. A little more blood in your cheeks.


BERINTHIA. I have been walking!


TOWNLY. Is that all? Pray was it Mr. Loveless went from here just now?


BERINTHIA. O yes -- he has been walking with me.


TOWNLY. He has!


BERINTHIA. Upon my word I think he is a very agreeable man! -- and there is
certainly something particularly insinuating in his address!


TOWNLY. So! so! she has n't even the modesty to dissemble! Pray, madam, may I,
without impertinence, trouble you with a few serious questions?


BERINTHIA. As many as you please; but pray let them be as little serious as
possible.


TOWNLY. Is it not near two years since I have presumed to address you?


BERINTHIA. I don't know exactly -- but it has been a tedious long time.


TOWNLY. Have I not, during that period, had every reason to believe that my
assiduities were far from being unacceptable?


BERINTHIA. Why, to do you justice, you have been extremely troublesome -- and
I confess I have been more civil to you than you deserved.


TOWNLY. Did I not come to this place at your express desire? and for no
purpose but the honor of meeting you? -- and after wasting a month in
disappointment, have you condescended to explain, or in the slightest way
apologize, for your conduct?


BERINTHIA. O heavens! apologize for my conduct! -- apologize to you! -- O you
barbarian! -- But pray now, my good serious Colonel, have you any thing more to
add?


TOWNLY. Nothing, madam, but that after such behavior I am less surprised at
what I saw just now; it is not very wonderful that the woman who can trifle
with the delicate addresses of an honorable lover, should be found coquetting
with the husband of her friend.


BERINTHIA. Very true -- no more wonderful than it was for this honorable
lover to divert himself in the absence of this coquet, with endeavoring to
seduce his friend's wife! O Colonel, Colonel, don't talk of honor or your
friend, for heavens sake.


TOWNLY. God's Death! how came she to suspect this. -- Really madam, I don't
understand you.


BERINTHIA. Nay -- nay -- you saw I did not pretend to misunderstand you. --
But here comes the Lady -- perhaps you would be glad to be left with her for an
explanation.


TOWNLY. O madam, this recrimination is a poor resource, and to convince you
how much you are mistaken, I beg leave to decline the happiness you propose me.
-- Madam, your servant.


Enter AMANDA. (TOWNLY whispers AMANDA, and exit.) BERINTHIA. He carries it off
well however -- upon my word -- very well! -- how tenderly they part! -- So,
cousin -- I hope you have not been chiding your admirer for being with me -- I
assure you we have been talking of you.


AMANDA. Fie, Berinthia! -- my admirer -- will you never learn to talk in
earnest of any thing?


BERINTHIA. Why this shall be in earnest, if you please; for my part I only
tell you matter of fact.


AMANDA. I Am sure there is so much jest and earnest in what you say to me on
this subject, I scarce know how to take it. -- I have just parted with Mr.
Loveless -- perhaps it is my fancy, but I think there is an alteration in his
manner, which alarms me.


BERINTHIA. And so you are jealous? is that all?


AMANDA. That all! -- is jealousy then nothing?


BERINTHIA. It should be nothing, if I were in your case.


AMANDA. Why what would you do?


BERINTHIA. I Would cure myself.


AMANDA. How?


BERINTHIA. Care as little for my husband as he did for me. Look you, Amanda,
you may build castles in the air, and fume, and fret, and grow thin, and lean,
and pale, and ugly, if you please, but I tell you, no man worth having is true
to his wife, or ever was, or ever will be so.


AMANDA. Do you then really think he is false to me? for I did not suspect him.


BERINTHIA. Think so! -- I am sure of it.


AMANDA. You are sure on it?


BERINTHIA. Positively -- he fell in love at the play.


AMANDA. Right -- the very same -- but who could have told you this?


BERINTHIA. Um -- O -- Townly! -- I suppose your husband has made him his
confidant.


AMANDA. O base Loveless! -- and what did Townly say on it?


BERINTHIA. So, so -- why should she ask that? -- ( aside) -- say! -- why he
abused Loveless extremely, and said all the tender things of you in the world.


AMANDA. Did he? -- Oh! my heart! -- I Am very ill -- I must go to the chamber
-- dear Berinthia, don't leave me a moment. ( Exit.


BERINTHIA. No -- don't fear. -- So -- there is certainly some affection on her
side at least, toward Townly. If it prove so, and her agreeable husband
perseveres -- Heaven send me resolution! -- well -- how this business will end
I know not -- but I seem to be in as fair a way to lose my gallant Colonel, as
a boy is to be a rogue, when he is put clerk to an attorney. [Exit.


SCENE, a Country House.
Enter Young FASHION and LORY. Y. FASHION. So -- here is our inheritance, Lory,
if we can but get into possession -- but methinks the seat of our family looks
like Noah's ark, as if the chief part on it were designed for the fowls of the
air, and the beasts of the field.


LORY. Pray, sir, don't let your head run upon the orders of building here --
get but the heiress, let the devil take the house.


Y. FASHION. Get but the house! let the devil take the heiress, I say -- but
come, we have no time to squander, knock at the door -- [Lory knocks two or
three times.

What the devil have they got no ears in this house? -- knock harder.


LORY. I'gad, sir, this will prove some enchanted castle -- we shall have the
giant come out by and by with his club, and beat our brains out. ( knocks again.


Y. FASHION. Hush -- they come -- ( from within) who is there?


LORY. Open the door and see -- is that your country breeding? --


SERVANT. ( within) Ay, but two words to that bargain -- Tummas, is the
blunderbuss prim'd?


Y. FASHION. Ouns! give 'em good words Lory -- or we shall be shot here a
fortune catching.


LORY. Egad sir, I think you're in the right on it -- ho! -- Mr. what do you
callum -- will you please to let us in? or are we to be left to grow like
willows by your moat side? (Servant appears at the window with a blunderbuss)


SERVANT. Weel naw, what is ya're business?


Y. FASHION. Nothing, sir, but to wait upon Sir Tunbelly, with your leave.


SERVANT. To weat upon Sir Tunbelly? -- why you will find that is just as Sir
Tunbelly pleases.


Y. FASHION. But will you do me the favor, sir, to know whether Sir Tunbelly
pleases or not?


SERVANT. Why look you do you see, with good words much may be done. -- Ralph, go
thy waes, and ask Sir Tunbelly if he pleases to be waited upon -- and do
hear? call to nurse that she may lock up Miss Hoyden before the geats open.


Y. FASHION. Do You hear that Lory?


Enter SIR TUNBELLY, with Servants, armed with guns, clubs, pitchforks, etc.
LORY. O ( Running behind his master) O Lord, O Lord, Lord, we are both dead men.


Y. FASHION. Take heed fool, thy fear will ruin us.


IORY. My fear, sir, 'sdeath, sir, I fear nothing -- ( aside) would I were well
up to the chin in a horse pond.


SIR TUNBELLY. Who is it here has any business with me?


Y. FASHION. Sir, it is I, if your name be Sir Tunbelly Clumsey?


SIR TUNBELLY. Sir, my name is Sir Tunbelly Clumsy, whether you have any
business with me or not -- so you see I am not ashamed of my name, nor my face
either.


Y. FASHION. Sir, you have no cause that I know of.


SIR TUNBELLY. Sir, if you have no cause either, I desire to know who you are;
for 'till I know your name, I shall not ask you to come into my house: and when I
do know your name, it is six to four I don't ask you then.


Y. FASHION. ( Giving him a Letter) Sir, I hope you will find this letter an
authentic passport.


SIR TUNBELLY. Cod's my life, from Mrs. Coupler. -- I ask your Lordship's
pardon ten thousand times -- ( to his Servant) -- Here, run in a doors quickly;
get a Scotch coal fire in the great parlour -- set all the Turkey work chairs
in their places; get the brass candlesticks out, and be sure stick the socket
full of laurel, run -- ( turning to Young Fashion) My Lord, I ask your
Lordship's pardon -- ( to Servant) and do you hear, run away to nurse, bid her
let Miss Hoyden loose again. [Exit Servant.

( To Young Fashion) I hope your honor will excuse the disorder of my family
-- we are not used to receive men of your Lordship's great quality every day --
pray where are your coaches and servants, my Lord?


Y. FASHION. Sir, that I might give you and your daughter a proof how impatient
I am to be nearer akin to you, I left my equipage to follow me, and came away
post with only one servant.


SIR TUNBELLY. Your Lordship does me too much honor -- It was exposing your
person to too much fatigue and danger, I protest it was -- but my daughter
shall endeavor to make you what amends she can -- and though I say it, that
should not say it, Hoyden has charms.


Y. FASHION. Sir, I am not a stranger to them, though I am to her: common fame
has done her justice.


SIR TUNBELLY. My Lord, I am common Fame's very grateful humble servant. -- My
Lord, my girl's young -- Hoyden is young, my Lord; but this I must say for her,
what she wants in art, she has by nature -- what she wants in experience, she
has in breeding -- and what is wanting in her age, is made good in her
constitution -- so pray, my Lord, walk in; pray, my Lord, walk in.


Y. FASHION. Sir, I wait upon you. [Ex. through the gate.


MISS HOYDEN sola. MISS. Sure, nobody was ever used as I am. I know well enough
what other girls do, for all they think to make a fool of me. It Is well I have
a husband ^ coming, or I'cod I Would marry the baker, I would so. -- Nobody can
knock at the gate, but presently I must be locked up -- and here is the young
greyhound can run loose about the house all the day long, so she can. -- It Is
very well --

(NURSE, without opening the door.)
NURSE. Miss Hoyden, Miss, Miss, Miss, Miss Hoyden!

( Enter NURSE.)
MISS. Well, what do you make such a noise for, ha? -- what do you din a body's
ears for? -- cannot one be at quiet for you?


NURSE. What do I din your ears for? -- here is one come will din your ears for
you.


MISS. What care I who is come? -- I care not a fig who comes, nor who goes, as
long as I must be locked up like the ale cellar.


NURSE. That, Miss, is for fear you should be drank before you are ripe.


MISS. O don't you trouble your head about that, I Am as ripe as you, though not
so mellow.


NURSE. Very well -- now I have a good mind to lock you up again, and not let
you see my Lord tonight.


MISS. My Lord! why is my husband come?


NURSE. Yes, marry is he, and a goodly person too.


MISS. ( Hugging Nurse) O my dear nurse, forgive me this once, and I Will never
misuse you again; no, if I do, you shall give me three thumps on the back, and
a great pinch by the cheek.


NURSE. Ah! the poor thing, see how it melts, its as full of good nature as an
egg's full of meat.


MISS. But my dear Nurse, don't lie now, is he come by your troth?


NURSE. Yes, by my truly is he.


MISS. O Lord! I Will go and put on my laced tucker, though I Am locked up a month
for it. [Exit running.


END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Enter MISS HOYDEN and NURSE. NURSE. WELL, Miss, how do you like your husband
that is to be?


MISS. O Lord, Nurse, I Am so overjoyed, I can scarce contain myself.


NURSE. O but you must have a care of being too fond, for men nowadays, hate
a woman that loves 'em.


MISS. Love him! Why do you think I love him, Nurse? I'cod, I would not ca^e if
he was hanged, so I were but once married to him. -- No, that which pleases me,
is to think what work I Will make when I get to London; for when I am a wife and
a Lady both, I'cod I Will flaunt it with the best of 'em. Aye, and I shall have
money enough to do so too, Nurse.


NURSE. Ah! there is no knowing that Miss, for though these Lords have a power
of wealth, indeed, yet, as I have heard say, they give it all to their sluts
and their trulls, who joggle it about in their coaches, with a murrain to 'em,
whilst poor Madam sits sighing and wishing, and has not a spare half crown to
buy her a Practice of Piety.


MISS. O, but for that, don't deceive yourself, Nurse, for this I must say of
my Lord, he is as free as an open house at Christmas. For this very morning he
told me, I should have six hundred a year to buy pins. Now, Nurse, if he gives
me six hundred a year to buy pins, what do you think he will give me to buy fine
petticoats?


NURSE. Ah, my dearest, he deceives thee foully, and he is no better than a rogue
for his pains. These Londoners have got a gibberage with 'em, would confound a
gipsey. That which they call pinmoney, is to buy their wives every thing in the
versal world, down to their very shoe-knots. -- Nay, I have heard folks say,
that some ladies, if they will have gallants, as they call 'em, are forced to
find them out of their pin-money too. But, look, look, if his Honor be not
coming to you. -- Now, if I were sure you would behave yourself handsomely, and
not disgrace me that have brought you up, I Would leave you alone together.


MISS. That Is my best Nurse, do as you would be done by -- trust us together this
once, and if I don't show my breeding, may I never be married but die an old
maid.


NURSE. Well, this once I Will venture you. -- But if you disparage me --


MISS. Never fear. [ Exit Nurse.


Enter Y. FASHION. Y. FASHION. Your servant, Madam, I Am glad to find you alone,
for I have something of importance to speak to you about.


MISS. Sir, (my Lord, I meant) you may speak to me about what you please, I
shall give you a civil answer.


Y. FASHION. You give me so obliging a one, it encourages me to tell you in a
few words, what I think both for your interest and mine. Your father, I suppose
you know, has resolved to make me happy in being your husband, and I hope I may
depend on your consent to perform what he desires.


MISS. Sir, I never disobey my father in any thing but eating green
gooseberries.


Y. FASHION. So good a daughter must needs be an admirable wife. -- I am
therefore impatient till you are mine, and hope you will so far consider the
violence of my love, that you will not have the cruelty to defer my happiness so
long as your father designs it.


MISS. Pray, my Lord, how long is that?


Y. FASHION. Madam -- a thousand years -- a whole week.


MISS. A week! -- Why I shall be an old woman by that time.


Y. FASHION. And I an old man.


MISS. Why I thought it was to be tomorrow morning, as soon as I was up. I Am
sure nurse told me so.


Y. FASHION. And it shall be tomorrow morning, if you will consent?


MISS. If I Will consent! Why I thought I was to obey you as my husband?


Y. FASHION. That Is when we are married. Till then I Am to obey you.


MISS. Why then if we are to take it by turns, it is the same thing. I Will obey
you now, and when we are married you shall obey me.


Y. FASHION. With all my heart. But I doubt we must get Nurse on our side, or
we shall hardly prevail with the Chaplain.


MISS. No more we shall not indeed, for he loves her better than he loves his
pulpit, and would always be a-preaching to her by his good will.


Y. FASHION. Why then, my dear, if you will call her hither, we'll try to
persuade her presently.


MISS. O Lord, I can tell you a way how to persuade her to any thing.


Y. FASHION. How Is that?


MISS. Why tell her she is a handsome, comely woman, and give her half-a-crown.


Y. FASHION. Nay, if that will do, she shall have half a score of them.


MISS. O Gemini, for half that she would marry you herself. -- I Will run and call
her. [Exit.


Y. FASHION. Soh, matters go swimmingly. This is a rare girl In Faith. I shall
have a fine time on it with her at London. But no matter -- she brings me an
estate will afford me a separate maintenance.


Enter LORY. Y. FASHION. So, Lory, what is the matter?


LORY. Here, Sir; an intercepted packet from the enemy -- your brother's
postillion brought it -- I knew the livery; pretended to be a servant of Sir
Tunbelly's, and so got possession of the letter.


Y. FASHION. ( Looking at it) Ouns! -- He tells Sir Tunbelly here, that he will
be with him this evening, with a large party to supper, -- 'egad! I must marry
the girl directly.


LORY. O Zounds, Sir, directly to be sure! Here she comes. [ Exit Lory.


Y. FASHION. And the old Jesabel with her. She has a thorough procuring
countenance, however.


Enter MISS HOYDEN and NURSE. Y. FASHION. How do you do, Mrs. Nurse? -- I
desired your young lady would give me leave to see you, that I might thank you
for your extraordinary care and conduct in her education; pray accept of this
small acknowledgement for it at present, and depend upon my farther kindness
when I shall be that happy thing her husband.


NURSE. ( Aside.) Gold by Maakins! -- Your Honor's goodness is too great.
Alas! all I can boast of is, I gave her pure good milk, and so your Honor
would have said, an you had seen how-the poor thing thrived -- and how it would
look up in my face -- and crow and laugh it would!


MISS. ( To Nurse, taking her angrily aside.) Pray one word with you. Prithee,
Nurse, don't stand ripping up old stories, to make one ashamed before one's
love; do you think such a fine, proper gentleman as he is, cares for a
fiddle-come tale of a child? If you have a mind to make him have a good opinion
of a woman, don't tell him what one did then, tell him what one can do now. (
To him.) I hope your Honor will excuse my mis-manners, to whisper before you,
it was only to give some orders about the family.


Y. FASHION. O every thing, Madam, is to give way to business; besides, good
housewisery is a very commendable quality in a young lady.


MISS. Pary, Sir, are young ladies good housewives at London town? Do they darn
their own linen.


Y. FASHION. O no; -- they study how to spend money, not to save.


MISS. I'cod, I don't know but that may be better sport, ha, Nurse!


Y. FASHION. Well, you shall have your choice when you come there.


MISS. Shall I? -- then by my troth I Will get there as fast as I can. ( To
Nurse.) His Honor desires you will be so kind, as to let us be married tomorrow.


NURSE. Tomorrow, my dear Madam?


Y. FASHION. Aye faith, Nurse, you may well be surprised at Miss's wanting to
put it off so long -- tomorrow! no, no, -- it is now, this very hour, I would
have the ceremony performed.


MISS. I'cod with all my heart.


NURSE. O mercy, worse and worse.


Y. FASHION. Yes, sweet Nurse, now, and privately. For all things being signed
and sealed, why should Sir Tunbelly make us stay a week for a wedding dinner?


NURSE. But if you should be married now, what will you do when Sir Tunbelly
calls for you to be wedded?


MISS. Why then we will be married again.


NURSE. What twice, my child!


MISS. I'cod, I don't care how often I Am married, not I.


NURSE. Well -- I Am such a tender hearted fool, I find I can refuse you
nothing. So you shall even follow your own inventions.


MISS. Shall I? -- ( Aside.) O Lord I could leap over the Moon.


Y. FASHION. Dear Nurse, this goodness of yours shall not go unrewarded. But now
you must employ your power with the Chaplain, that he may do his friendly
office too, and then we shall be all happy. Do you think you can prevail with
him?


NURSE. Prevail with him! -- Or he shall never prevail with me, I can tell him
that.


Y. FASHION. I Am glad to hear it; however, to strengthen your interest with
him, you may let him know, I have several fat livings in my gift, and that the
first that salls shall be in your disposal.


NURSE. Nay then, I Will make him marry more folks than one, I Will promise him.


MISS. Faith do, Nurse, make him marry you too, I Am sure he will do it for a fat
living.


Y. FASHION. Well, Nurse, while you go and settle matters with him, your lady
and I will go and take a walk in the garden. [Exit Nurse.


Y. FASHION. ( Giving her his hand.) Come, Madam, dare you venture yourself
alone with me?


MISS. O dear, yes, Sir, I don't think you will do any thing to me I need be
afraid on. [Exeunt.


SCENE II.
Enter AMANDA, her WOMAN following. MAID. If you please, Madam, only to say
whether you will have me buy them or not?


AMANDA. Yes -- no -- go -- Teazer! -- I care not what you do -- prithee leave
me. [ Exit Maid.


Enter BERINTHIA. BERINTHIA. What, in the name of Jove's the matter with you?


AMANDA. The matter, Berinthia? I Am almost mad; I Am plagued to death.


BERINTHIA. Who is it that plagues you?


AMANDA. Who do you think should plague a wife, but her husband?


BERINTHIA. O ho! is it come to that? -- we shall have you wish yourself a
widow, by and bye.


AMANDA. Would I were any thing but what I am! -- a base, ungrateful man, to
use me thus!


BERINTHIA. What, has he given you fresh reason to suspect his wandering?


AMANDA. Every hour gives me reason.


BERINTHIA. And yet, Amanda, you perhaps at this moment cause in another's
breast the same tormenting doubts and jealousies which you feel so sensibly
yourself.


AMANDA. Heaven knows I would not!


BERINTHIA. Why, you cannot tell but there may be some one as tenderly attached
to Townly, whom you boast of as your conquest, as you can be to your husband.


AMANDA. I Am sure I never encouraged his pretensions.


BERINTHIA. Pshaw! Pshaw! -- No sensible man ever perseveres to love, without
encouragement. Why have you not treated him as you have Lord Foppington?


AMANDA. Because he has not presumed so far. But let us drop the subject. Men,
not women, are riddles. Mr. Loveless now follows some flirt for variety, whom
I Am sure he does not like so well as he does me.


BERINTHIA. That Is more than you know, Madam.


AMANDA. Why, do you know the ugly thing?


BERINTHIA. I think I can guess at the person -- but she is no such ugly thing
neither.


AMANDA. Is she very handsome?


BERINNHIA. Truly I think so.


AMANDA. Whatever she be, I Am sure he does not like her well enough to bestow
any thing more than a little outward gallantry upon her.


BERINTHIA. ( Aside.) Outward gallantry. -- I cannot bear this. -- Come, come,
don't you be too secure, Amanda; while you suffer Townly to imagine that you do
not detest him for his designs on you, you have no right to complain that your
husband is engaged elsewhere. But here comes the person we were speaking of.


Enter TOWNLY. TOWNLY. Ladies, as I come uninvited, I beg, if I intrude you
will use the same freedom in turning me out again.


AMANDA. I believe, sir, it is near the time Mr. Loveless said he would be at
home. He talked of accepting of Lord Foppington's invitation to sup at Sir
Tunbelly Clumsey's.


TOWNLY. His Lordship has done me the honor to invite me also. If you will let me
escort you, I Will let you into a mystery as me go, in which you must play a part
when we arrive.


AMANDA. But we have two hours yet to spare -- the carriages are not ordered
'till eight -- and it is not a five minutes drive. So, Cousin, let us keep the
Colonel to play piquet with us, till Mr. Loveless comes home.


BERINTHIA. As you please, Madam, but you know I have a letter to write.


TOWNLY. Madam, you know you may command me, though I Am a very wretched gamester.


AMANDA. O, you play well enough to lose your money, and that is all the ladies
require -- and so without any more ceremony, let us go into the next room and
call for cards and candles.

[Exeunt.
SCENE III. BERINTHIA's Dressing Room.
Enter LOVELESS. LOVELESS. So -- thus far all is well -- I have got into her
dressing room, and it being dusk, I think nobody has perceived me steal into
the house. I heard Berinthia tell my wife she had some particular letters to
write this evening, before we went to Sir Tunbelly's, and here are the
implements for correspondence -- how shall I muster up assurance to show myself
when she comes? -- I think she has given me encouragement -- and to do my
impudence justice, I have made the most of it. -- I hear a door open and some
one coming; if it should be my wife, what the Devil should I say? -- I believe
she mistrusts me, and by my life I don't deserve her tenderness; however I am
determined to reform, though not yet. Hah! -- Berinthia -- so I Will step in here
till I see what sort of humor she is in. [Goes into the Closet.


Enter BERINTHIA. BERINTHIA. Was ever so provoking a situation! -- To think I
should sit and hear him compliment Amanda to my face! -- I have lost all
patience with them both. I would not for something have Loveless know what
temper of mind they have piqued me into, yet I cannot bear to leave them
together. No -- I Will put my papers away, and return, to disappoint them. ( Goes
to the closet.) O Lord! a ghost! a ghost! a ghost!


Enter LOVELESS. LOVELESS. Peace, my Angel -- it is no ghost -- but one worth a
hundred spirits.


BERINTHIA. How, sir, have you had the insolence to presume to -- run in again
-- here is somebody coming.


Enter MAID. MAID. O Lord, Ma'am, what is the matter?


BERINTHIA. O Heavens I Am almost frightened out of my wits! -- I thought verily
I had seen a ghost, and 'twas nothing but a black hood pined against the wall.
-- You may go again, I am the fearfulest fool! [ Exit Maid.


Re-enter LOVELESS. LOVELESS. Is the coast clear?


BERINTHIA. The coast clear! -- Upon my word I wonder at your assurance!


LOVELESS. Why then you wonder before I have given you a proof of it. But
where is my wife?


BERINTHIA. At cards.


LOVELESS. With whom?


BERINTHIA. With Townly.


LOVELESS. Then we are safe enough.


BERINTHIA. You are so! -- Some husbands would be of another mind were he at
cards with their wives.


LOVELESS. And they would be in the right on it too -- but I dare trust mine.


BERINTHIA. Indeed! -- And she, I doubt not, has the same confidence in you.
Yet do you think she would be content to come and find you here?


LOVELESS. 'Egad, as you say, that is true -- then for fear she should come,
had not we better go into the next room out of her way?


BERINTHIA. What -- in the dark?


LOVELESS. Aye -- or with a light, which you please.


BERINTHIA. You are certainly very impudent.


LOVELESS. Nay then -- let me conduct you, my Angel.


BERINTHIA. Hold, hold, you are mistaken in your Angel, I assure you.


LOVELESS. I hope not, for by this hand I swear.


BERINTHIA. Come, come, let go my hand, or I shall hate you, I Will cry out as I
live.


LOVELESS. Impossible! -- you cannot be so cruel.


BERINTHIA. Ha! -- here is some one coming -- be gone instantly.


LOVELESS. Will you promise to return if I remain here?


BERINTHIA. Never trust myself in a room with you again while I live.


LOVELESS. But I have something particular to communicate to you.


BERINTHIA. Well, well, before we go to Sir Tunbelly's I Will walk upon the lawn.
If you are fond of a Moonlight evening, you will find me there.


LOVELESS. E'faith, they are coming here now. -- I take you at your word. [ Exit
Loveless into the Closet.


BERINTHIA. It Is Amanda, as I live. -- I hope she has not hheard s voice. Though
I mean she should have er share of jealousy in turn.


Enter AMANDA. AMANDA. Berinthia, why did you leave me?


BERINTHIA. I thought I only spoiled your party.


AMANDA. Since you have been gone, Townly has attempted to renew his
importunities. -- I must break with him -- for I cannot venture to acquaint Mr.
Loveless with his conduct.


BERINTHIA. O no -- Mr. Loveless mustnt know of it by any means.


AMANDA. O not for the world. -- I wish, Berinthia, you would undertake to
speak to Townly on the subject.


BERINTHIA. Upon my word it would be a very pleasant subject for me to talk to
him on. -- But come -- let us go back, -- and you may depend on it I Will not
leave you together again, if I can help it.

[Exeunt.
Enter LOVELESS. LOVELESS. Soh -- so! -- a pretty piece of business I have
overheard -- Townly makes love to my wife -- and I Am not to know it for the
world -- I must enquire into this -- and, by Heaven, if I find that Amanda has
in the smallest degree -- Yet what have I been at here? -- O god's death! that is no
rule.

That wife alone, unsullied credit wins,
Whose virtues can atone her husband's sins;
Thus while the man has other nymphs in view,
It suits the woman to be doubly true.
[Exit.
END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE I. A Garden -- Moonlight.
Enter LOVELESS. LOVELESS. NOW, does she mean to make a fool of me, or not? --
I shall not wait much longer, for my wife will soon be enquiring for me to set out
on our supping party. -- Suspense is at all times the devil -- but of all modes
of suspense, the watching for a loitering mistress is the worst -- but let me
accuse her no longer -- she approaches with one smile to o'erpay the anxiety of
a year.

( Enter BERINTHIA)
BERINTHIA. O Berinthia, what a world of kindness are you in my debt! -- had
you staid five minutes longer --


BERINTHIA. You would have been gone, I suppose.


LOVELESS. ( Aside) Egad she is right enough.


BERINTHIA. And I assure you 'twas ten to one that I came at all. In short, I
begin to think you are too dangerous a Being to trifle with; and as I shall
probably only make a fool of you at last, I believe we had better let matters
rest as they are.


LOVELESS, You cannot mean it sure?


BERINTHIA. No! -- why do you think you are really so irresistible, and master
of so much address, as to deprive a woman of her senses in a few days
acquaintance?


LOVELESS. O, no, Madam; it is only by your preserving your senses that I can
hope to be admitted into your favor -- your taste, judgment, and discernment,
are what I build my hopes on.


BERINTHIA. Very modest upon my word -- and it certainly follows, that the
greatest proof I can give of my possessing those qualities, would be my
admiring Mr. Loveless!


LOVELESS. O that were so cold a proof --


BERINTHIA. What shall I do more? -- esteem you?


LOVELESS. O, no -- worse and worse. -- Can you behold a man, whose every
faculty your attractions have engrossed -- whose whole soul, as by enchantment,
you have seized on -- can you see him tremble at your feet, and talk of so poor
a return as your esteem!


BERINTHIA. What more would you have me give to a married man?


LOVELESS. How doubly cruel to remind me of misfortunes!


BERINTHIA. A misfortune to be married to so charming a woman as Amanda!


LOVELESS. I grant all her merit, but -- 'sdeath, now see what you have done by
talking of her -- she is here by all that is unlucky.


BERINTHIA. O Ged, we had both better get out of the way, for I should feel as
awkward to meet her as you.


LOVELESS. Aye -- but if I mistake not, I see Townly coming this way also -- I
must see a little into this matter. ( steps aside)


BERINTHIA. O, if that is your intention -- I am no woman if suffer myself to be
outdone in curiosity. ( goes on the other side.


Enter AMANDA. AMANDA. Mr. Loveless come home and walking on the awn! -- I will
not suffer him to walk so late, though perhaps it is to show his neglect of me --
Mr. Loveless -- ha! -- Townly again! -- how I am persecuted!


Enter TOWNLY. TOWNLY. Madam, you seem disturbed!


AMANDA. Sir, I have reason.


TOWNLY. Whatever be the cause, I would to Heaven it were in my power to bear
the pain, or to remove the malady.


AMANDA. Your interference can only add to my distress.


TOWNLY. Ah! Madam, if it be the sting of unrequited love you suffer from, seek
for your remedy in revenge -- weigh well the strength and beauty of your
charms, and rouse up that spirit a woman ought to bear -- disdain the false
embraces of a husband -- see at your feet a real lover -- his zeal may give him
title to your pity, although his merit cannot claim your love!


LOVELESS. ( Aside.) So, so, very fine, e'faith!


AMANDA. Why do you presume to talk to me thus? -- is this your friendship to
Mr. Loveless? -- I perceive you will compel me at last to acquaint him with
your treachery.


TOWNLY. He could not upbraid me if you were -- he deserves it from me -- for
he has not been more false to you, than faithless to me.


AMANDA. To you!


TOWNLY. Yes, Madam; the lady for whom he now deserts those charms which he was
never worthy of, was mine by right; and I imagined too, by inclination -- Yes,
Madam, Berinthia, who now --


AMANDA. Berinthia! -- impossible! --


TOWNLY. It Is true, or may I never merit your attention. -- She is the
deceitful sorceress who now holds your husband's heart in bondage.


AMANDA. I will not believe it.


TOWNLY. By the faith of a true lover, I speak from conviction. -- This very
day I saw them together, and overheard --


AMANDA. Peace, Sir, I will not even listen to such slander -- this is a poor
device to work on my resentment, to listen to your insidious addresses. No,
Sir; though Mr. Loveless may be capable of error, I am convinced I cannot be
deceived so grossly in him, as to believe what you now report; and for
Berinthia, you should have fixed on some more probable person for my rival,
than she who is my relation, and my friend: for while I am myself free from
guilt, I will never believe that love can beget injury, or confidence create
ingratitude.


TOWNLY. If I do not prove this to you --


AMANDA. You never shall have an opportunity -- from the artful manner in which
you first showed yourself to me, I might have been led, as far as virtue
permitted, to have thought you less criminal than unhappy -- but this last
unmanly artifice merits at once my resentment and contempt. [Exit.


TOWNLY. Sure there is divinity about her; and she has dispensed some portion of
honor's light to me: yet can I bear to lose Berinthia without revenge or
compensation? -- Perhaps she is not so culpable as I thought her. I was
mistaken when I began to think lightly of Amanda's virtue, and may be in my
censure of my Berinthia. -- Surely I love her still; for I feel I should be
happy to find myself in the wrong. [Exit.


Enter LOVELESS and BERINTHIA. BERINTHIA. Your servant, Mr. Loveless.


LOVELESS. Your servant, Madam.


BERINTHIA. Pray, what do you think of this?


LOVELESS. Truly, I don't know what to say.


BERINTHIA. Don't you think we steal forth two contemptible creatures?


LOVELESS. Why tolerable -- so I must confess.


BERINTHIA. And do you conceive it possible for you ever to give Amanda the
least uneasiness again?


LOVELESS. No, I think we never should, indeed.


BERINTHIA. We! -- why, monster, you don't pretend that I ever entertained a
thought.


LOVELESS. Why then, sincerely, and honestly, Berinthia, there is something in
my wife's conduct which strikes me so forcibly, that if it were not for shame,
and the fear of hurting you in her opinion, I swear I would follow her, confess
my error, and trust to her generosity for forgiveness.


BERINTHIA. Nay, prithee don't let your respect for me prevent you; for as my
object in trifling with you was nothing more than to pique Townly; and as I
perceive he has been actuated by a similar motive, you may depend on it I shall
make no mystery of the matter to him.


LOVELESS. By no means inform him -- for though I may choose to pass by his
conduct without resentment, how will he presume to look me in the face again!


BERINTHIA. How will you presume to look him in the face again?


LOVELESS. He -- who has dared to attempt the honor of my wife!


BERINTHIA. You -- who have dared to attempt the honor of his mistress! --
Come, come, be ruled by me who affect more levity than I have, and don't think
of anger in this cause. A Readiness to resent injuries, is a virtue only in
those who are slow to injure.


LOVELESS. Then I will be ruled by you -- and when you shall think proper to
undeceive Townly, may your good qualities make as sincere a convert of him, as
Amanda's have of me. When truth's extended from us, then we own the robe of
virtue is a secret habit.

Could women but our secret counsels scan --
Could they but reach the deep reserve of man --
To keep our love -- they would rate their virtue high --
They live together, and together die!
[Exit.
SCENE, Sir TUNBELLY'S HOUSE.
Enter MISS HOYDEN, NURSE, and Y. FASHION. Y. FASHION. This quick dispatch of
the chaplain's I take so kindly, it shall give him claim to my favor as long
as I live, I assure you.


MISS. And to mine too, I promise you.


NURSE. I most humbly thank your honors; and may your children swarm about you,
like bees about a honeycomb.


MISS. I'cod with all my heart -- the more the merrier, I say -- ha Nurse?


Enter LORY, taking Y. FASHION hastily aside. LORY. One word with you, for
Heavens sake.


Y. FASHION. What the Devil's the matter?


LORY. Sir, your fortune's ruined, if you are not married -- yonder is your
brother, arrived with two coaches and six horses, twenty footmen, and a coat
worth fourscore pounds -- so judge what will become of your Lady's heart.


Y. FASHION. Is he in the house yet?


LORY. No -- they are capitulating with him at the gate -- Sir Tunbelly luckily
takes him for an impostor, and I have told him that we had heard of this plot
before.


Y. FASHION. That Is right: ( to Miss) my dear, here is a troublesome business my
man tells me of, but don't be frightened, we shall be too hard for the rogue.
-- Here Is an impudent fellow at the gate (not knowing I was come hither
incognito) has taken my name upon him, in hopes to run away with you.


MISS. O the brazen-faced varlet, it is well we are married, or may be we might
never have been so.


Y. FASHION. ( Aside) Egad like enough. -- Prithee, Nurse, run to Sir Tunbelly,
and stop him from going to the gate before I speak with him.


NURSE. An't please your honor, my Lady and I had best lock ourselves up till
the danger be over.


Y. FASHION. Do so, if you please.


MISS. Not so fast -- I will not be locked up any more, now I Am married.


Y. FASHION. Yes, pray, my dear do, till we have seized this rascal.


MISS. Nay, if you will pray me, I Will do any thing. [ Exit Miss and Nurse.


Y. FASHION. ( To Lory.) Hark you, sirrah, things are better than you imagine.
The wedding's over.


LORY. ( Aside.) The Devil it is, Sir!


Y. FASHION. Not a word -- all is safe -- but Sir Tunbelly don't know it, nor
must not, yet. So I am resolved to brazen the business out, and have the
pleasure of turning the impostor upon his Lordship, which I believe may easily
be done.


Enter SIR TUNBELLY, and SERVANTS, armed. with clubs, pitch-forks, etc. Y.
FASHION. Did you ever hear, Sir, of so impudent an undertaking?


SIR TUNBELLY. Never, by the Mass -- but we'll tickle him, I Will warrant you.


Y. FASHION. They tell me, Sir, he has a great many people with him, disguised
like servants.


SIR TUNBELLY. Ay, ay, rogues enough -- but we have mastered them. -- We only
fired a few shot over their heads, and the regiment scower'd in an instant. --
Here, Tommas, bring in your prisoner.


Y. FASHION. If you please, Sir Tunbelly, it will be best for me not to
confront the fellow yet, till you have heard how far his impudence will carry
him.


SIR TUNBELLY. 'Egad, your Lordship is an ingenious person. Your Lordship then
will please to step aside.


LORY. ( Aside.) Before Heaven I applaud my master's modesty. ( Exe. Young
Fashion and Lory.


Enter SERVANTS, with LORD FOPPINGTON, disarmed. SIR TUNBELLY. Come -- bring
him along, bring him along.


LD. FOPPINGTON. What the pax do you mean, gentlemen, is it fair time that you
are all drunk before supper?


SIR TUNBELLY. Drunk, sirrah! -- here is an impudent rogue for you. Drunk, or
sober, bully, I Am a Justice of the Peace, and know how to deal with strollers.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Strollers!


SIR TUNBELLY. Aye, strollers. -- Come, give an account of yourself. -- What Is
your name? Where do you live? Do you pay scot and lot? Come, are you a
freeholder or a copyholder?


LD. FOPPINGTON. And why do thou ask me so many impertinent questions?


SIR TUNBELLY. Because I Will make you answer 'em before I have done with you,
you rascal, you.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Before Gad, all the answers I can make to 'em, is, that you
are a very extraordinary old fellow, stap my vitals!


SIR TUNBELLY. Nay, if thou are for joking with Deputy Lieutenants, we know how
to deal with you -- Here, draw a warrant for him immediately.


LD. FOPPINGTON. A warrant! -- What the Devil is it thou would be at, old
gentleman?


SIR TUNBELLY. I would be at you, siriah, (if my hands were not tied as a
Magistrate) and with these two double fists beat your teeth down your throat
you dog you.


LD. FOPPINGTON. And why would thou spoil my face at that rate?


SIR TUNBELLY. For your design to rob me of my daughter, villain.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Rab thee of your daughter! Now do I begin to believe I am in
bed and asleep, and that all this is but a dream. Prithee, old father, will thou give me leave to ask thee one question?


SIR TUNBELLY. I cannot tell whether I will or not, till I know what it is.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Why then it is, whether thou did not write to my Lord
Foppington to come down and marry thy daughter?


SIR TUNBELLY. Yes, marry did I, and my Lord Foppington is come down, and shall
marry my daughter before she is a day older.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Now give me thy hand, old dad, I thought we should understand
one another at last.


SIR TUNBELLY. This fellow's mad -- here, bind him hand and foot. [They bind
him.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Nay, prithee Knight, leave fooling, thy jest begins to grow
dull.


SIR TUNBELLY. Bind him, I say -- he is mad -- bread and water, a dark room, and
a whip, may bring him to his senses again.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Prithee, Sir Tunbelly, why should you take such an aversion to
the freedom of my address, as to suffer the rascals thus to skewer down my arms
like a rabbit? 'Egad, if I don't waken quickly, by all that I can see, this is
like to prove one of the most impertinent dreams that ever I dreamt in my life.
( Aside.


Enter MISS HOYDEN and NURSE. MISS. ( Going up to him.) Is this he that would
have run away with me? Fough! how he stinks of sweets! -- Pray, father, let him
be dragged through the horse-pond.


LD. FOPPINGTON, ( Aside.) This must be my wife, by her natural inclination to
her husband.


MISS. Pray, father, what do you intend to do with him -- hang him?


SIR TUNBELLY. That, at least, child.


NURSE. Aye, and it is even too good for him too.


LD. FOPPINGTON. ( Aside.) Madame la Governante, I presume; hitherto this
appears to me to be one of the most extraordinary families that ever man of
quality matched into.


SIR TUNBELLY. What Is become of my Lord, daughter?


MISS. He Is just coming, Sir.


LD. FOPPINGTON. ( Aside.) My Lord! -- What does he mean by that, now?


Enter YOUNG FASHION and LORY. LD. FOPPINGTON. Stap my vitals, Tam, now the
dream's out.


Y. FASHION. Is this the fellow, Sir, that designed to trick me of your
daughter?


SIR TUNBELLY. This is he, my Lord; how do you like him? is not he a pretty
fellow to get a fortune?


Y. FASHION. I find by his dress, he thought your daughter might be taken with
a beau.


MISS. O gemini! Is this a beau? Let me see him again. Ha! I find a beau is no
such ugly thing, neither.


Y. FASHION. 'Egad, she will be in love with him presently. -- I Will even have him
sent away to gaol. ( To Lord Fop.) Sir, though your undertaking shows you a
person of no extraordinary modesty, I suppose you have not confidence enough to
expect much favor from me.


LD. FOPPINOTON. Strike me dumb, Tam, thou art a very impudent fellow.


NURSE. Look; if the varlot has not the frontery to call his Lordship, plain
Thomas.


SIR TUNBELLY. Come, is the warrant writ?


CHAPLAIN. Yes, Sir.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Hold, one moment. -- Pray gentlemen -- my Lord Foppington,
shall I beg one word with your Lordship?


NURSE. O, ho, it is my Lord, with him now; see how afflictions will humble
folks.


MISS. Pray, my Lord, don't let him whisper too close, lest he bite your ear
off.


LD. FOPPINGTON. I am not altogether so hungry as your Ladyship is pleased to
imagine. ( To Y. Fashion.) Look you, Tam, I am sensible I have not been so kind
to you as I ought, but I hope you will forgive what is past, and except of the
five thousand pounds I offer. Thou may live in extreme splendour with it,
stap my vitals!


Y. FASHION. It Is a much easier matter to prevent a disease, than to cure it. A
quarter of that sum would have secured your mistress, twice as much will not
redeem her. [Leaving him.


SIR TUNBELLY. Well, what says he?


Y. FASHION. Only the rascal offered me a bribe to let him go.


SIR TUNBELLY. Aye, he shall go, with a halter to him -- lead on, Constable.


Enter SERVANT. SERVANT. Sir, here is Muster Loveless, and Muster Colonel
Townly, and some ladies, to wait on you.


LORY. ( Aside.) So, Sir, What will you do now?


Y. FASHION. Be quiet -- they are in the plot. ( To Sir Tunbelly.) Only a few
friends, Sir Tunbelly, whom I wished to introduce to you.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Thou art the most impudent fellow, Tam, that ever Nature yet
brought into the world. Sir Tunbelly, strike me speechless, but these are my
friends and my guests, and they will soon inform thee, whether I am the true
Lord Foppington or not.


Enter LOVELESS, TOWNLY, AMANDA, and BERINTHIA. Y. FASHION. So, gentlemen, this
is friendly; I rejoice to see you.


TOWNLY. My Lord, we are fortunate to be the witnesses of your Lordship's
happiness.


LOVELESS. But your Lordship will do us the honor to introduce us to Sir
Tunbelly Clumsey?


AMANDA. And us to your Lady.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Ged take me, but they are all in a story.


SIR TUNBELLY. Gentlemen, you do me great honor; my Lord Foppington's friends
will ever be welcome to me and mine.


Y. FASHION. My love, let me introduce you to these ladies.


MISS. By goles, they look so fine and so stiff, I am almost ashamed to come
nigh 'em.


AMANDA. A most engaging lady, indeed!


MISS. Thank ye, Ma'am!


BERINTHIA. And I doubt not will soon distinguish herself in the Beau Monde.


MISS. Where is that?


Y. FASHION. You Will soon learn, my dear.


LOVELESS. But, Lord Foppington --


LD. FOPPINGTON. Sir!


LOVELESS. Sir! I was not addressing myself to you, Sir; pray who is this
gentleman? He seems rather in a singular predicament.


SIR TUNBELLY. Ha, ha, ha! -- So, these are your friends and your guests, ha,
my adventurer?


LD. FOPPINGTON. I am struck dumb with their impudence, and cannot positively
say whether I shall ever speak again or not.


SIR TUNBELLY. Why, Sir, this modest gentleman wanted to pass himself upon me
for Lord Foppington, and carry off my daughter.


LOVELESS. A likely plot to succeed, truly, ha, ha!


LD. FOPPINGTON. As Gad shall judge me, Loveless, I did not expect this from
thee; come, prithee confess the joke; tell Sir Tunbelly that I am the real Lord
Foppington, who yesterday made love to thy wife; was honored by her with a
slap on the face, and afterward pink'd through the body by thee.


SIR TUNBELLY. A likely story, truly, that a Peer would behave thus!


LOVELESS. A curious fellow indeed! that would scandalize the character he
wants to assume; but what will you do with him, Sir Tunbelly?


SIR TUNBELLY. Commit him certainly, unless the bride and bridegroom choose to
pardon him.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Bride and bridegroom! For Gad's sake, Sir Tunbelly, it is
tarture to me to hear you call 'em so.


MISS. Why, you ugly thing, what would you have him call us? dog and cat!


LD. FOPPINGTON. By no means, Miss; for that sounds ten times more like man and
wife, than the other.


SIR TUNBELLY. A precious rogue this, to come a wooing!


Enter SERVANT. SERVANT. There are some more gentlefolks below, to wait upon
Lord Foppington.


TOWNLY. God's Death, Tom, what will you do now?


LD. FOPPINGTON. Now, Sir Tunbelly, here are witnesses, who I believe are not
corrupted.


SIR TUNBELLY. Peace, fellow! -- Would your Lordship choose to have your guests
shown here, or shall they wait till we come to 'em?


Y. FASHION. I believe, Sir Tunbelly, we had better not have these visitors
here yet; 'egad, all must out! [Aside.


LOVELESS. Confess, confess, we'll stand by you.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Nay, Sir Tunbelly, I insist on your calling evidence on both
sides, and if I do not prove that fellow an impostor --


Y. FASHION. Brother, I will save you the trouble, by now confessing, that I am
not what I have passed myself for; -- Sir Tunbelly, I am a gentleman, and I
flatter myself a man of character; but it is with great pride I assure, I am not
Lord Foppington.


SIR TUNBELLY. Oun's! -- what is this! -- an impostor! -- a cheat! -- fire and
faggots, Sir! -- if you are not Lord Foppington, who the Devil are you?


Y. FASHION. Sir, the best of my condition is, I am your son in-law, and the
worst of it is, I am brother to that noble Peer.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Impudent to the last!


SIR TUNBELLY. My son-in-law! Not yet, I hope?


Y. FASHION. Pardon me, Sir, thanks to the goodness of your Chaplain, and the
kind offices of this old gentle woman.


LORY. It Is true, indeed, Sir; I gave your daughter away, and Mrs. Nurse, here,
was clerk.


SIR TUNBELLY. Knock that rascal down! -- But speak, Jezabel, how is this?


NURSE. Alas, your honor, forgive me! -- I have been overreach'd in this
business as well as you; your Worship knows, if the wedding dinner had been
ready, you would have given her away with your own hands.


SIR TUNBELLY. But how durst you do this without acquainting me!


NURSE. Alas, if your Worship had seen how the poor thing begged and prayed,
and clung and twined about me like ivy round an old wall, you would say I who
had nursed it and reared it, must have had a heart of stone to refuse it.


SIR TUNBELLY. Ouns! I shall go mad! Unloose my Lord there, you scoundrels!


LD. FOPPINGTON. Why, when these gentlemen are at leisure, I should be glad to
congratulate you on your son-in-law, with a little more freedom of address.


MISS. 'Egad, though -- I don't see which is to be my husband, after all.


LOVELESS. Come, come, Sir Tunbelly, a man of your understanding must perceive,
that an affair of this kind is not to be mended by anger and reproaches.


TOWNLY. Take my word for it, Sir Tunbelly, you are only tricked into a
son-in-law you may be proud of; my friend, Tom Fashion, is as honest a fellow
as ever breathed.


LOVELESS. That he is, depend on it, and will hunt or drink with you most
affectionately; be generous, old boy, and forgive them.


SIR TUNBELLY. Never -- the hussy: -- when I had set my heart on getting her a
title!


LD. FOPPINGTON. Now, Sir Tunbelly, that I am untruss'd, give me leave to thank
thee for the very extraordinary reception I have met with in thy damned,
execrable mansion, and at the same time to assure you, that of all the bumpkins
and blockheads I have had the misfortune to meet with, thou art the most
obstinate and egregious, strike me ugly!


SIR TUNBELLY. What Is this! -- Ouns! I believe you are both rogues alike!


LD. FOPPINGTON. No, Sir Tunbelly, thou will find to thy unspeakable
mortification, that I am the real Lord Foppington, who was to have disgraced
myself by an alliance with a clod; and that thou have matched thy girl to a
beggarly younger brother of mine, whose title deeds might be contained in thy
tobacco-box.


SIR TUNBELLY. Puppy, puppy! -- I might prevent their being beggars if I chose
it; -- for I could give 'em as good a rent-roll as your Lordship.


TOWNLY. Well said, Sir Tunbelly.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Aye, old fellow, but you will not do it; for that would be
acting like a Christian, and thou art a thorough barbarian, stap my vitals.


SIR TUNBELLY. Udzookers! Now six such words more, and I Will forgive them
directly.


LOVELESS. 'Slife, Sir Tunbelly, you should do it, and bless yourself; ladies
what say you?


AMANDA. Good Sir Tunbelly, you must consent.


BERINTHIA. Come, you have been young yourself, Sir Tunbelly.


SIR TUNBELLY. Well, then, if I must, I must; -- but turn that sneering Lord
out, however; and let me be revenged on somebody; but first, look whether I am
a barbarian, or not; there, children, I join your hands, and when I Am in a
better humor, I Will give you my blessing.


LOVELESS. Nobly done, Sir Tunbelly; and we shall see you dance at a grandson's
wedding, yet.


MISS. By goles though, I don't understand this; what, an't I to be a lady after
all? only plain Mrs. -- What Is my husband's name, Nurse?


NURSE. 'Squire Fashion.


MISS. 'Squire, is he? -- Well, that is better than nothing.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Now will I put on a Philosophic air, and show these people,
that it is not possible to put a man of my quality out of countenance. Dear,
Tam, since things are thus fallen out, prithee give me leave to wish thee joy;
I do it de bon coeur, strike me dumb! You have married into a family of great
politeness and uncommon elegance of manners; and your bride appears to be a
lady beautiful in person, modest in her deportment, refined in her sentiments,
and of nice morality, split my windpipe!


MISS. By goles, husband, break his bones, if he calls me names.


Y. FASHION. Your Lordship may keep up your spirits with your grimace, if you
please, I shall support mine by Sir Tunbelly's favor, with this lady, and
three thousand pounds a year.


LD. FOPPINGTON. Well, adieu, Tam; ladies, I kiss your hands; Sir Tunbelly, I
shall now quit thy den, but while I retain my arms, I shall remember thou art a
savage, stap my vitals! [Exit.


SIR TUNBELLY. By the mass, it is well he is gone, for I should have been provoked
by and by, to have dun'un a mischief; -- Well, if this is a Lord, I think Hoyden
has luck of her side, in troth!


TOWNLY. She has, indeed, Sir Tunbelly, but I hear the fiddles; his Lordship, I
know, had provided 'em.


LOVELESS. O, a dance, and a bottle, Sir Tunbelly, by all means.


SIR TUNBELLY. I had forgot the company below; well, what -- we must be merry
then, ha? -- and dance and drink, ha? -- Well, before George, you shall not say I
do things by halves; son-in-law there looks like a hearty rogue, so we'll have
a night of it; and which of these gay ladies will be the old man's partner, ha?
-- Ecod, I don't know how I came to be in so good a humor.


BERINTHIA. Well, Sir Tunbelly, my friend and I both will endeavor to keep you
so; you have done a generous action, and are entitled to our attention; and if
you should be at a loss to divert your new guests, we will assist you to relate
to them the plot of your daughter's marriage, and his Lordship's deserved
mortification, a subject which, perhaps, may afford no bad evening's
entertainment.


SIR TUNBELLY. 'Ecod, with all my heart; though I am a main bungler at a long
story.


BERINTHIA. Never fear, we will assist you, if the tale is judged worth being
repeated; but of this you may be assured, that while the intention is evidently
to please, British auditors will ever be indulgent to the errors of the
performance.


FINIS.

