THE FOUNTAIN OF HEALTH: OR, A View of Nature.

WHEREIN, The Causes of DISTEMPERS, are Philosophically Explained: With the
true Rules for Practice, in several critical Symptoms, in both Acute and
Chronical Diseases.

By HENRY BURDON.

Malo enim invideri, quam ingloria morte corripi, vel rebus clarissimis
obducere tenebras. LONDON, Printed for the AUTHOR. 1734. To be had at his House
in Henrietta Street, Covent Garden.

THE PREFACE.
SINCE I present this Book to the World in general, without dedicating it to
any Person to protect me, it may be necessary to say something in my own
Defense.

What I write is from Remarks on Nature, and Practical Observations, with an
Intention to improve the Method of curing Diseases; for the Art of healing is
in a declining Way, the Practice of Physic, is become a Perfect Ceremony; that
strong Beam, which ought to support it, is divided into different Branches:
Here is one Man shall be a Physician, another a Surgeon, one an Apothecary,
another a Chemist, etc. Thus (in this present Age) each Man sticks to his
particular Branch, and thinks it Scandal to meddle or interfere, with any more
than one Part only; but in former Ages, a Man was not deemed worthy to be
called a Physician, unless he was Master of every one of these following Arts.

(First.) Physiology, or a Knowledge of Human Nature.

(Secondly.) Anatomy, or a Knowledge of the Parts of Human Bodies.

(Thirdly.) Pharmacy and Chemistry, or the Method of making all manner of
Medicines.

Indeed, the First and Principal Point is, judging and distinguishing the
Diseases, and Causes of Diseases; but it is impossible for a Physician to be
perfect in this Point, until he is perfect in Anatomy and Surgery: For I call
Surgery the Practical Part of Anatomy; there being more Experience gained from
Accidental Practice and Observations upon living Bodies, than from Lectures and
Courses of Anatomy over dead Bodies.

Likewise it is as necessary for a Physician, to know the different Qualities
of Medicines, that he may be able to relieve the different Disorders which
Human Bodies are afflicted with: Therefore, every Practitioner ought to know
the preparing of all Kind of Medicines, for both Internal and External Uses;
because the Maker of Medicines, or Things of any Kind, is most able to know the
Power of such Things as he himself has made.

Paracelsus called Physic a Short Art, meaning, that when it is Short and Easy
it is most Perfect: For where the Practice is long and tedious, the Patient
suffers; and when Writings are long and tedious, the Reader's Mind is no Ways
improved thereby: but Books are too commonly esteemed according to the Fame of
the Author, and when any Thing new is published, the first Enquiry is, who is
the Author? Instead of, what has he wrote?

Although I say something in Opposition to the present Rules in Physic, I do
not rise up against the Physicians in general; for I know some Excellent Men in
Practice, whose Methods I always observed to improve my own Thoughts, so far I
am indebted; therefore I will say nothing that shall offend the Wise and
Worthy; but against Ignorance and Envy there can be no Defense, since People
will always have different Tastes; some Persons like a Surgeon for being
diligent in dressing a Green Wound, twice a Day, when certainly, the oftener a
Green Wound is opened, the longer it must be before it heals, because the Air
makes a Wound more tender, and hinders the Fibers from uniting. Others like a
Physician, under whose Care they are always sick.

And some People like to read Books, which confound their Understanding; I
might name a certain Author, in great Esteem, who at his Beginning, takes up
five Pages in explaining the Word Disease; now I will explain the meaning of
the Word, Disease, in a few Lines.

Suppose I find a Person uneasy, I may then say he has a Dis-ease, because he
is not at Ease; and so may we say of Temper, and Dis-temper. Thus I would make
the Path of Practice, Plain and Easy, therefore, I will begin first with the
Nerves and Senses, by way of Introduction.

THE INTRODUCTION.
I HAVE observed that several Authors who have wrote upon the Animal Spirits,
without explaining themselves, have been ridiculed and condemned, for picking
out an Abstruse Term, to build an Argument upon; and as my Thoughts may lead me
to make use of that Term, I will tell the Reader what I mean thereby; in Hopes
it may in some Measure defend me from Calumny, or at least vindicate other
Authors: For certainly every Man has an Idea of what he writes; indeed he may
not measure it out to the Understanding of every Reader.

Therefore, when I say the Animal Spirits, I mean the Principal Seat of
Knowledge, where the Prime Sense gives immediate Judgment between Pain and
Pleasure; and these following Gates, lead thereto, as, Seeing, Hearing,
Tasting, Smelling, and Feeling.

Yet the Mind, or Animal Spirits, can conceive either Fear, Grief, or Joy,
without drawing it in by any of those Organs; but when one Person infects
another, with either Fear, Joy, or Pain, it must then be carried to the Prime
Seat of Knowledge, by some one of the five Senses: And when any Hurt or
Surprise, Infection of Fear, or Malignity of any Kind, reaches the Animal
Spirits, or the Prime Seat of Sense, from thence is shown an Antipathy in all
the Nerves, by a rigorous shivering and shaking of every Muscle, throughout the
whole Body; and it is then (as in Holy Writ) that the Keepers of the House
shall tremble, Fears being in the Way.

Now I must own, the Liquidum Nervorum, (or rather the Nerves themselves) may
properly be called the Animal Spirits.

But nearer to the Fountain Head,
More Crystal flows the Silver Stream.
For certainly the Nerves are governed by the Mind, and Force or Quickness of
Thought, as is plainly demonstrated, when we catch a flying Ball, or when we
defend our Heads from a Blow, our Arm is then moved by the Nerves guiding the
Muscles, yet the Nerves are directed by the Mind; for although the Performances
and Economy of the Nerves, are noble, they are not designed (by Nature) to
contract, or extend a Muscle, without Order from the Mind, or Prime Seat of
Sense.

Moreover when it happens (contrary to Nature) that any of the Nerves contract
a Muscle, without Commission from the Mind, that Muscle so moved, is then
cramped, or in Convulsion.

Therefore as the Mind commands the Nerves, the Mind or Thought, must be the
Animal Spirit; likewise the Mind must be the Throne of the Soul.

Thus in pursuit of Nature, as one hard Cause we overtake, still harder stand
before us; so from Cause to Cause, our Thoughts are led, even to that mighty
Power, the Sun, by whose Beams we live, move, and generate.

Without that Warmth, and lively Light,
So mortal Cold this Globe would be,
That Nature must in Darkness fix,
And every Thing that is living dye.
For the Sun is Nature's Lord, the first Power from God, and the only Cause of
the Course and Changes of Things on this Earth.

The Moon has no Influence over Human Bodies, nor over any Thing on this Globe:
Indeed, the Tide keeps Time with the Moon; but it is because the Moon and the
Earth both, have the same Circular Motion to the Sun.

I would demonstrate how the Tide, is caused, by the Atmosphere pressing
against the Sea, as the Earth moves; and how the Wind, and Combustions of
Weather, are caused by a Fermentation in the Atmosphere; but it would be
tedious here, and keep me from what I propose, which is chiefly to treat on
Distempers, and Human Nature.

Of Malignant Fevers.
FEVERS commonly called Malignant, being in their Nature most subtle and
severe, which prey upon the Animal Spirits, some Time before the Blood is
infected.

This Kind of Fever does not proceed from contagious Particles in the Air; nor
is it infectious any otherwise, than by our being afraid of it, and thus it
gets Possession into the Prime Fancy or Animal Spirits, by conceiving a Fear of
Death within ourselves, upon any slight Illness, or sudden Surprise of Danger;
and the most dangerous Symptom is, when the Thoughts have drawn in an
Apprehension and Dread of Death, upon the Spirits; for without this Dread, it
is not a real Malignant Fever.

The Sick is seized at first, with a Shivering and Coldness, a weary Pain and
Weakness, throughout the whole Body, proceeding from that Disorder upon the
Nerves and Spinal Marrow, which render the Sinews and Muscles incapable of
doing their Offices; likewise a continual reaching to vomit, and a Watchfulness
upon the Spirits, which hinders him from sleeping, although he is attended with
a great Drowsiness, these are the Symptoms of a Malignant Fever, at the first
Approach, before the Blood is inflamed. The Patient should then by all means
submit himself to his Bed, and not strive against Nature; for she will not be
conquered.

Now a Physician being called, he prescribes according to his Judgment, for
Physicians differ in their Methods of Practice, as they do in their Opinions,
and full as much as Human Bodies differ in their Constitutions; some will
boldly give purging Medicines, others give Sudorisicks, and some Blister more
and more, even to the last Gasp.

I do not pretend to be a Pilot; I only wish the Wanderer may know, which Path
will mislead him; as for Blistering, I cannot see why it should do any Hurt,
yet I may reasonably make an Objection, since Practice has convinced me, that
Blisters afford no Relief in real Malignant Fevers. Purging is an Ignorant
Proceeding, and dangerous; for all sudden Evacuations, or immoderate
Discharges, add to the Rigor and Anxiety of the Mind, therefore must tend to
destroy Life, rather than save. Sudorificks are very proper, if we use such as
may bring on gentle Sweats; for if the Sweats come on excessively, Nature will
be reduced so low, as to be past defending herself, so Critical are these
Malignant Fevers; and likewise if we find a Difficulty in bringing the Patient
to sweat, we must forbear heating Medicines, otherwise we shall put the Blood
into a violent Ebullition, and hurry the Patient out of the World, when
perhaps, if he had been supplied with a proper Regimen, yielding to Nature, he
might have recovered, by the Help of gentle Cardiack, and Diluting Medicines.
The Lapis Contrayerva, and Testaceous Powders repeated often, and given in a
Julep of Black-Cherry Water, Syrup of Saffron and Compound Piony Water, will
help to correct the Acidity in the Stomach and cherish the Animal Spirits; for
if we can find out how, and where Nature is oppressed, we then must use Means
to set her Free, that she may (on her own Accord) bring on such Sweats, as are
not only necessary and wonderful, but highly preferable to all that can be
forced by Art.

The only Sudorifick Medicine that I ever found effectual in Malignant and
Pestilential Fevers, is the Elixir of Vipers, as I have set down in the Chapter
of Inflammatory Fevers; in it, there is a subtle Virtue, which never fails to
bring on the Moderate and Necessary Sweats, and as if it were a Specific,
temperates the Animal Spirits, without augmenting the Heat in the Blood: But it
is impossible to set a Rule to practice by, in either Acute or Chronical
Diseases; nor even how to order a proper Regimen, or a fit Liquor for the
Patient in a Malignant Fever; perhaps the Physician may order Chicken Broth,
which certainly is very proper, if the Patient can drink as much as his Fever
requires; but after he has drank one Sort of Liquor five of six Times, he bears
so great an Antipathy to it, that his Stomach will not take the same Liquor any
longer, yet he is confined to it for several Days; this Way of restraining the
Patient to one Sort of Liquor, is barbarous, if rightly considered; for we
should endeavor to find out which Sort of Liquor he likes, and divert him with
Variety of Liquors; first one Sort, and then another. By this Means, he will
drink as much as is Necessary: Proper Liquors in Fevers are Broths, Sage-Tea,
Sack-Whey, Pectoral Drinks, White Drink, etc.

Moreover, if the Patient should have a Longing, or Desire for a Draught of
Small Beer, we should by all means let him have it, with a Piece of Bread put
into it burning hot: This sometimes is of singular Service, by affording a
Satisfaction to the Mind; for every Thing that is grateful to a Person in a
Fever, gives a Courage and better enables him to endure his Affliction.

It may be of some Weight, to set down the Qualifications of a Good Nurse, one
who is cheerful, obedient, and watchful; not one that reads, sighs, and
whispers in the Room, as if she was talking to a Spirit: but this I mention by
the bye, because the Patient never sleeps in a Malignant Fever, being so very
watchful he only slumbers, and when he hears any Whispering, he is affrighted,
and commonly starts up to listen; so it infects his Thoughts with fresh Dreads,
and thus it hurts him, because the Malignity of this Fever is Rigor and Fears
upon the Mind or Animal Spirits; therefore I advise the Nurse to speak out
briskly, or be quite silent, likewise to move briskly, or sit quite still.

But, as I was saying before, how unseasonably Proper Remedies may be applied,
as in this Fever, Bleeding may be of great Service, when the Blood comes to too
High a Fermentation, but if on the contrary we should bleed at the first
Approach of the Disease, we shall thereby conceal the Fever upon the Spirits,
and depress Nature, insomuch that the Patient dies in a Languid Manner.

Nor do I digress by bringing in comparatively, how improper it would be, to
give the Jesuit's Bark in the Cold shivering Fit of an Intermittent Fever. I
might note several other Proofs, while I am treating of Malignant Fevers, since
the Word Malign alludes to all that is unfavourable, severe, and dangerous; yet
I will explain the Nature of Pestilential, and Inflammatory Fevers, the Small
Pox, and other Distempers, singularly and faithfully, as far as I have
observed, by looking from one Cause into another.

Of Pestilential Fevers.
PEstilential Fevers are in no wise more dangerous, than the Fever described in
the foregoing Chapter, although the Name may sound more terrible. Indeed
Pestilential Fevers are very fatal in one Respect, by running through whole
Families and Towns, for several Miles, as if the Air was loaded with Contagious
Particles.

I believe, the wisest Men that ever wrote were always lost by looking into the
Causes and Nature of Infection; and as several Authors have attempted it, I
will venture to give my Opinion, in Hopes it may, in some Measure, conduct
those Men into right Notions, that are capable of judging mine to be wrong.

Then in my way of Thinking, Infection most commonly is drawn into Human
Bodies, by the Power of Sympathy and Antipathy, working upon the Nerves or the
Mind: As for Example; when one Person complains to another, that he feels an
unwholesome Rawness in the Air; the other whom he complains to, will be apt to
draw the same Notion into his own Mind; likewise when one in Company gapes or
yawns for Sleep, others in the same Company, who bear the least Sympathy to
Drowsiness, will be soon seized with the like gaping or yawning; besides, it is
worth observing, how a Dampness in a Room just washed, or Damp Linen hanging in
a Room, will infect those who bear an Antipathy thereto, yet it very seldom
hurts those who are in no wise afraid of such like Dampnesses; and also, as the
Sweet Notes, and Swells in Music, only elevates such Souls as feel its Charms,
so any Particulr Impureness in the Air, can only infect such Bodies as are fit
to receive that Kind of Impureness; and thus it comes to pass, that the Small
Pox cannot infect those who have had the Small Pox before, because their Bodies
are not capable of receiving that kind of Infection; and most certainly every
one's Body is not at all Times in a Disposition for admitting in a Pestilential
Contagion; and as Nature has ordered that such Fevers as begin with great
Violence, by the same Rule, shall the sooner come to a Crisis.

A Pestilential Fever is attended with various Symptoms from the Beginning,
through the whole Course; but commonly at its first coming, it seizes with
great violence the Head, Stomach, and Lungs; the Blood soon takes the Flame in
this Fever, and the Heat being then in the greatest Degree, Nature begins to
strive to force out the Enemy, either by Carbuncles, Biles, Eruptions in the
Skin, or Excessive Sweats, and sometimes a violent Looseness, which is the
worst of all the foregoing Symptoms, and I can scarce believe that Nature
brings on a Looseness of her own Accord; I rather think it is caused by forcing
the Sick to take some Medicines, or persuading him to eat some Victuals his
weak Stomach cannot bear. The Patient finds Relief from all the other Symptoms,
for as the Blood receives the Fever, the Animal Spirits are in some Measure
relieved; therefore the Physician must always endeavor to promote the
foregoing Symptoms: Since it is certain, unless some of 'em concur, the Patient
must die in a few Hours, by the Animal Spirits being overset with the Violence
of the Fever.

There commonly is a continual Kecking in drawing in the Breath, which is a
strong Proof that raw and unwholesome Air, has made an Impression upon the
Lungs. By this Disorder, in drawing in the Breath, the Stomach becomes very
weak and unfit to receive many Medicines; therefore as Alexipharmacks are most
proper, we must be very careful not to give such as are too loading.

Pestilential Fevers require a great quantity of diluting Liquors, for which
reason we must endeavor, as much as possible, to relieve the Disorder in the
Stomach and Lungs, that he may be able to drink as much as is necessary.

Blisters are of great Service in Pestilential Fevers, for relieving both the
Head and Lungs; and to correct the Stomach, let the Patient take the following
Draught every four Hours. -- Take Salt of Wormwood, a Scruple; Juice of Lemons,
half an Ounce; mixed together in a large Cup, and stir it till it has done
fermenting; then put to it an Ounce of Barley Cinnamon Water. As this Draught
must be repeated, it will be convenient to mix up six times the Quantity at
once, and divide it.

If the Fever, or the Heat in the Blood, should be very violent, it will be
necessary to keep the Body open by Glysters, or gentle Lenitives, such as
Manna, or a Decoction made of Tamerinds and Senna, of each two Drams, and Salt
of Wormwood, ten Grains, boiled in two Ounces of Water; as soon as it boils,
take if from the Fire, and strain it off, before it is quite cold. This is an
excellent Cathartick, yet, if misapplied, it is liable to do Mischief.

I have been told of Bleeding to the Quantity of an hundred Ounces at once, but
they must know very little of Anatomy that believe it; yet I confess, in my
Opinion, when we bleed in Pestilential Fevers we ought to take a large
Quantity, in order to assuage the Heat, or Violence of the Fever: for by taking
the common Quantity, which is about ten Ounces, we only depress the natural
Course of the Distemper, and prolong the Grievances the Patient lies under.

The Testaceous Powders are hurtful in this Fever, by reason that the Stomach
abounds with Phlegm, and Oily Medicines are improper for no other reason, than
the Stomach being weak, and cannot bear 'em.

Thus the Symptoms of every Disease, must always indicate what Remedies, and
when they ought to be applied; only let this be a standing Rule, what Medicines
soever are fit to be given in Pestilential Fevers, ought to be made up in
little Quantities, and repeated often.

I should be glad to find out better Rules, but so critical and various are the
Symptoms in Fevers, that he may be deemed an exceeding good Practitioner that
does no hurt in them.

Of Inflammatory Fevers.
FEVERS under this Denomination, affect the Body by a Flux of inflamed Blood,
falling on particular Parts, caused frequently by drinking cold Liquors, or
some sudden Coldness in the Air, at a time when the Body is overheated; so this
Inflammatory Fever comes in either a Pleurisy, a Quinzy, or a St. Anthony's
Fire.

These Fevers are not without Danger, although the Animal Spirits be not
infested with Dread and Malignity, yet Nature may be overset by the violent
Heat in the Blood.

In these kind of Fevers it is necessary to keep the Body open, by cooling
Glysters, and diluting Purgatives; for Relief is given by all moderate
Evacuations, bleeding in particular: Sweating is of great service, only
Sudorificks are so very apt to inflame the Blood; but our Method of Practice is
so common in those Cases, that I need not mention bleeding, blistering, and
other Applications. My Design is only to set down such things as have not been
explained hitherto, and such things as may be useful hereafter, for which
reason I will set down a Fomentation for the Part affected in a St. Anthony's
Fire, which I have experienced, and know to be valuable.

Take a Pint of Limewater, make it boiling hot, put to it a Pint of rectified
Spirit of Wine, it will be of a right Heat, and must be applied thus; wrap a
Linen Cloth (not Woollen) round, or upon the Inflammation, so that the Cloth
may be four or five in thickness, then pour this Mixture through the Cloth:
upon the inflamed Part; this repeated three times a Day, without taking off the
Cloth, is much preferable to camphorated Spirit of Wine, Poultices, or any kind
of Hot Fomentation; yet we must use inward Means, at the same Time, to cool the
Body, and temper the Fermentation in the Blood.

But it happens sometimes, that these Fevers are attended with all the ill
Symptoms of a Malignant Fever, which is very fatal to the Patient, and renders
the Cure more difficult to the Physician; for although the Blood being sizy,
indicates both bleeding, blistering, and other Evacautions, yet the Rigor upon
the Animal Spirits, contradicts that way of Proceeding, because both bleeding
and blistering depress Nature, and irritate the Animal Spirits, and is apt to
bring on greater Rigor and Dread. Therefore in a Malignant Pleurisy, I will
recommend an Infusion of Stone-Horse Dung, made thus: Take six Globules of the
Horse Dung, and pour upon it a Quart of the Pectoral Decoction, boiling Hot;
let it stand to infuse in an Earthen Vessel, close covered, about an Hour, then
strain it off: This Infusion both temperates and comforts the Animal Spirits,
and commonly keeps the Patient in a gentle Sweat; for gentle Sweats tend to a
Recovery, but by excessive Sweats, Nature is overset, and the Physician often
deceived by the Patient dying at a time, when he thought him past all Danger.
The foregoing Infusion is to be drank frequently, very Hot, about a Quarter of
a Pint at a time.

Let the Patient take about thirty Drops of the Elixir of Vipers, in a Cup of
the aforesaid Infusion, twice a Day; it is proper to keep his Body open by
Glysters, but not to purge upon any Account, until all the Symptoms of
Malignity are vanished.

If the Patient's Stomach will bear to take a Bolus, make him up two Scruples
of Edenborough Treacle, and six Grains of Salt of Amber; this must be given
every six Hours, with a Draught of the aforesaid Infusion, or any other
diluting Liquor quor after it, for we must not confine him to the Infusion of
Horse Dung, though it is wonderful in this Case; we must divert him with a
Change, when he is tired of any one sort of Liquor.

As I have mentioned the Elixir of Vipers, I will set it down before I go any
farther, that I may not be accused of Quackery, or designing this Book an
Advertisement for my own Interest.

Take the Skins of Vipers, dried and powdered, Millepedes dried, Contrayerva
Roots in Powder, of each an Ounce, mix these Ingredients into a Past in a Glass
Mortar, with two Ounces of Spirit of Salt, tie the Mortar close over with a
Bladder, let it stand for five or six Days, then put it into a Florence Flask,
with four Ounces of Spirit of Nitre Dulcis, let it stand to digest in the Sun,
or a gentle Sand Heat, ten or twelve Days, then press it out, and filter it, it
must be kept in a Bottle with a Glass Stopper, for it will corrode, and eat a
common Cork. This Medicine opens all Obstructions in the Body, and wonderfully
revives, and cherishes the Mind, or Animal Spirits; also causes Perspiration,
and quickens Vital Motion.

Yet every Professor of Physic, knows not when, and how to apply a good
Medicine, no more than every Man in Jack Boots, is fit to mount the managed
Horse.

Of Intermittent Fevers.
THESE Fevers vary both according to the Difference in Constitutions, and
Degrees of Malignity, therefore liable to be a Quotidian, a Tertian, or a
Quartan: The most favorable sort is, when it comes every Day; the next in
Degree, is when it intermits one Day; and the worst sort of all, is when the
Patient is well two Days together, and the third Day has his Fever.

There is yet another Sort, which is commonly called a double Tertian: In this
the Patient is ill two Days together, and well the third; this is thought the
worst Species of all Intermittents; but whosoever examins strictly, will find
it only a Quartan Ague, wherein Nature is by some Means obstructed, so that she
cannot expel the Malignity by Sweats the first Day; so the Fever remains two
Days together. I have observed the Patient to sweat the first Day, but not a
Discharge sufficient for a Quartan Ague, which is not a jot inferior to either
a Malignant, or a Pestilential Fever, for the Time it holds him in the
shivering Fit; besides I have observed the Sweats have not smelt sour and
fetid, until the second Day; therefore it ought to be called an irregular, or a
depressed Quartan.

It may be thought miraculous, that Intermittent Fevers should go off, and
return so regularly at stated Periods, when one might reasonably have supposed
the Patient to have been quite freed from the Distemper by the Sweats, at the
Termination of the last Fit.

Now I am of opinion, that the Body draws in the infectious Particles, from the
sourness of the Sweats, back again; as soon as Nature has thrust out such
Sweats; so as I judge it in this Fever, the Body is capable of admitting in
such Infection, as Nature at that time discharges through the Pores; so it
returns again in as many Hours as it requires to reach the Animal Spirits, to
cause a fresh Disturbance; and then the Nerves again show the Rigor and
Antipathy, by shaking every Fiber and Muscle in the Body.

But let this be how it will, Intermittent Fevers are so familiar to us, that
the Cure is become very easy; the only Difficulty is, when the Bark purges,
which is commonly prevented by Opiates; yet the Stomach is managed much better
with Preparations of Sulphur; for Opiates by thickening the Blood, and causing
a slowness of the Internal Motion, bring on very often the Rheumatism, a
Dropsy, or some other Evil much harder to be cured, than the Intermittent Fever.

Of the Smallpox.
WHenever the Smallpox breaks out in any Part, it commonly takes a run through
the whole Place, whether Town or City, and frequently several Villages near
each other, for twelve Miles round.

The Confluent Sort is not a Degree milder than a Pestilential Fever, and is
full as contagious among chose who have not had the Smallpox before; neither
is the Infection limited to the Smallpox only; for frequently when the Fever
comes to a Crisis, and the Pustules begin to digest, the purulent Matter then
diffuses out an offensive Smell, which will even infect those who have had the
Smallpox before; but as their Bodies are not liable to the Smallpox, the
Infection will beget a Fever full as bad, if not worse; and notwithstanding
one's Body being incapable of admitting the very same sort of Fever, yet the
Infection may produce a Fever of some other kind; so great is the Affinity in
Malignant and Pestilential Fevers one toward another.

I can give one Instance of myself in particular, by lying in the same Bed with
a Man who had a Quartan Ague; his Sweats were very sour and fetid, to which
Smell I bore so great an Antipathy, that it infected me, and had, as I thought,
received an Intermittent Fever, until the Smallpox came out to convince me to
the contrary. I remember a Child in the same House had the Smallpox, about ten
Days after me; and this Distemper went no farther; so that it is plain the
Constitution of the Air was not fit at that time for an Infection of the
Smallpox, no more than my Body was in a Constitution to receive in an
Intermittent Fever.

As I have compared the Smallpox to Pestilential Fevers, we should regard
every Symptom in the same manner; for both bleeding and blistering ought to be
used, when Nature is in danger of being overset, by the violent kecking in
drawing the Breath; or likewise the Pain in the Head, and Neck, or other
Symptoms being too violent for Nature to find out her true Course for Freedom.

We ought never to force any thing upon the Patient that he has any dislike to,
tho it is too common for the Nurse to urge the Patient to drink beyond his
Thirst, either Tare Drink, or some particular Liquor which she has an opinion
of; which frequently brings on a vomiting, and a Looseness, not by its Quality,
but by the Quantity he drinks: For although a Liquid be astringent, if the Sick
drink more than Nature can bear, it must purge it self off.

The Patient (as I said before in Pestilential Fevers) must be diverted with
such diluting Liquors, as best suits his Desire, in order to cherish Nature,
that she may be able to do her Part; yet we have Methods of relieving several
bad Symptoms in the Smallpox; but to set down what to apply when such a
Symptom appears, and such a Medicine in such a kind of Disorder, a Man might
write all his Life time, and his Work would be imperfect at last, and serve
only to delude, rather than instruct; therefore an Eye of Judgment looking on
the Patient in this and all other Diseases, will conduct Medicines more
effectual, than any Rule set forth by the greatest Author in the World.

Before I conclude upon this Subject, I ought to consider how it comes to pass
that the Smallpox are favorable to young Children, when their Bodies are more
liable to receive any kind of Hurt or Infection from the Air by that Tenderness
in them; yet we must allow that they are not so much subject to either Sympathy
or Antipathy, neither have they any Dread or Apprehension of Death, until the
Nurses begin to infect their tender Thoughts with Tales of frightful Ghosts; so
that the Smallpox is more favorable, if the Thoughts keep free from Malignity
and Dread; this is the best Reason I can give at present, but if Time and
Practice introduce me hereafter to a better Knowledge in this, or any other
Distemper, I shall be glad to publish it, since my Desire is to improve the Art
of healing, as far as Providence has given me a Commission.

Of the Measles.
THE Measles proceed from a Rawness or Heaviness in the Air, which clogs the
Pores of the Body, and hinders Perspiration, and is more apt to afflict
Children and young People, by reason of a greater Tenderness in them, than in
Persons that are in Years, whose Bodies are hardened to all Alterations.

The Measles certainly is a Fever, although it does not so readily show itself
by the Tokens common in other Fevers; yet if we examine strictly, we find it
very nervous and violent by two Symptoms in particular; the first and most
plain, is the Pain in the Optic Nerves, which produces a Discharge of sharp
Humor out of the Eyes; and when it happens that the Patient has not this
Discharge, the Pain in the Head and behind the Eyes is more violent.

Secondly, A Pain and Soreness in the Kidneys, with an Inflammation in all the
Urinary Passages, whereby the Water is in some measure suppressed, and tinged
of a reddish Color; and as one Evil begets another, so this Grief in the
Kidneys and Urinary Vessels, causes that violent Sickness which always ensues
and commonly lasts about eight or ten Hours before it begins to abate then the
Rash comes out; and for want of a free course of Urine, there commonly comes on
a Looseness at the same time, so the Patient begins to find some Ease by
intervals. Now the Symptoms go off by Degrees; only the Cough which began at
first, continues, and may prove of ill Consequence, if not removed in time by
proper means; such as Emulsions made with Sperma Ceti, to be drank frequently,
and a Mucilage made of Quince Seeds, with some Nutmeg grated into it, and a
little Sugar to make it agreeable, to be taken by a spoonful at a time, as
often as the Cough is troublesome.

Let him take a Paper of Powder made of prepared Coral and Lac Sulphur, of each
fifteen Grains, twice a Day in a quarter of a Pint of new Milk; these Medicines
will answer the End if continued for ten or fifteen Days, being made and
applied as they ought, I mean by having a due regard to the Constitution of the
Patient and the Symptoms of the Disorders; he may eat at the same time Broths,
and any nourishing Meats in Moderation, such as his Fancy prompts him to; he
may drink for his common Drink, Barley Water, and sometimes a Draught of Small
Beer, if it is not too stale; for the Pectoral Decoctions are of no service in
this Cough, neither are the common Linctus's, made of Oils and Pectoral Syrups.

All heating Medicines are hurtful, from the beginning quite through the whole
Course of the Disease; and the vain pretense of striking the Distemper out from
the Heart, is without any Grounds of Reason or Consideration.

The Patient must forbear all Spirituous Liquors, and Cordial Medicines, unless
we find the Spirits very much reduced by Sweats and other Evacuations; and even
then we should be very careful how we attempt to elevate, since most Medicines
under the Denomination of Cordials, are liable to encourage the Fever to run
beyond its natural Measure; and it is by this means that a Hectic Fever, and a
Consumptive Cough, so often follows the Measles and Fever of this Kind.

A Scarlet Fever is of the very same Nature, and must be treated in the same
manner.

As the Rash and Measles are so apt to affect the Lungs, I will set forth the
nature of a Hectic Fever, Coughs, and Consumptions in the following Chapter;
keeping close to Truth, which is the principal Virtue, and ought to be the Care
of every Author in Physic.

Of Consumptions.
COnsumptions which befall Young People, are always introduced by a Hectic
Fever, wherein the Blood is too thin and spirituous, and partly of a Scorbutic
Quality.

If we duly consider that the Lungs are supplied with Moisture no other way
than by what perspires out of the Diaphragma, and Pleura; it is not so
wonderful that a sharpness in the Blood should afflict the Lungs with that
continual hecking and tickling Cough: since it is plain that the Moisture
within the Thorax must consist of the Serum, and the most thin Particles from
the Blood; for both the Diaphragma and Pleura abound with Minute Sanguiferous
Vessels; and as a Consumptive Cough is introduced by this Heat, or sharpness in
the Blood, so this Hectic Fever is caused by Victuals of too high Nourishment,
and Liquors too Rich and Strong for Persons whose Blood is apt to be too
spirituous, being in their Youth and Vigor.

Some People, for want of a true Idea, will be apt to dispute this being the
only Cause of a Hectic Fever; yet I am certain it is; though it so often comes
at the Conclusion of other Fevers; it is not natural to succeed any of 'em; but
caused by the ill Measures aforesaid; neither is it difficult to cure, if the
Patient can be regulated into a proper Regimen, such as Panada, Mutton-Broth,
made without Turnips; Rice in any form, Jelleys, Flumery, Raw Milk, warm from
the Cow, and all Things that are cooling and healing.

He musts abstain from Salt Meats, Rich Soops, and all Victuals of high
Nourishment; neither must he drink Wines, Spirituous Drams, nor any kind of
Cordials.

When the Patient will set a Resolution to diet himself in the foregoing
Manner, we may promise a Cure by the following Method.

First take away nine or ten Ounces of Blood; then let the Patient drink
plentifully of Emulsions made of the Cold Seeds, with ten Drops of the Balm of
Gilead to every Quart; and let him take as often as the Cough troubles him, a
spoonful of a Mucilage made of Quince Kernels, with some Nutmeg grated into it,
and a little Sugar to make it agreeable, and no more, (for Sugar is apt to
cause too quick a Fermentation in the Stomach.) Pearl Juleps are of singular
use, being cooling and grateful; he may drink common Whey sometimes for a
Change, it is very proper, having in it an Emollient Quality; he may take a
gentle Decoction of Senna, and Rhubarb, to open his Body as often as there is
occasion; for it is necessary to keep him rather Laxative, than Costive.

The Patient must use no violent Exercise, nor give a Loose to Passions of the
Mind; for all rash Motions or Thoughts of Revenge, and all sudden Surprises, or
Thoughts of Pleasure, will cause remissive Blushes in the Countenance, and
sudden sharp Sweats, which remit and return, as often as those Passions affect
him.

This is the true Nature of this kind of Consumption, which is (by the Vulgar)
commonly called the galloping Consumption; and indeed a very proper Name, if we
consider that in this Distemper, Nature is too much elevated, and running her
Course unrein'd, falls flat before she makes out half her Length.

Of the Phthisic, etc.
NOW it is to be noted, that Old People's Blood may be made too rich; yet not
so apt to be spirituous and sharp, but rather heavy and clammy, therefore it
produces in them the Phthisic, Asthma, or some such kind of Disorder; wherein
the Lungs are overloaded with a tough Mucus, or Phlegm.

In this Case all spirituous Liquors (drank in Moderation) are proper, and
every thing that may quicken the Fermentation in the Stomach; for this is a
slackness of Motion, as the former is a quickness; therefore riding, and all
Brisk Exercises of the Body, are proper in this Case, as they are hurtful in
the former; and as the other is from the Force of Eagerness and Rashness in
Youth, this the Effect of Heaviness in Old Age; and although this sort of
Consumption is not of so sharp a Nature, yet it is much harder to cure;
notwithstanding the Patient may be very much relieved by expectorating
Medicines; even when he gasps for Breath, the Tubes in the Lungs being clogged
and contracted by the viscid Mucus or Phlegm.

The best and most effectual Remedies are these following: A Linctus made of
Oximel of Squills, Syrrup of Balsam and Linseed Oil, of each equal Quantities;
let the Patient take a Spoonful every Morning; but when it happens that his
Stomach will not bear this Linctus, make up instead of it, a Mixture of Gum
Ammoniacum, two Drams, dissolved in six Ounces of Penny-Royal-Water; he must
take three Spoonfuls of this Mixture every Morning; if it should purge him too
much, let him take less in Quantity.

An Ounce of Tincture of Hiera Picra, with thirty Drops of Liquid Laudanum, to
be taken every fourth Night going to Bed; Malt Drink is hurtful, because it is
heavy and clogging, therefore I advise him to Punch made with Oranges, to drink
moderately as his Spirits require it.

By this Means the Patient may be made so easy, or at least relieved so far, as
he shall find very little inconveniency in it, yet he may be afflicted with
this Sort of Consumption (I mean the Phthisic and Asthma) above twenty Years;
and even at last his Death may be imputed to Old Age.

In this Place it may be observed, that what Man soever would prolong his
Course with Nature, this must be his Rule, depress her gently, as there is
Occasion, in his youthful Years, and cherish her as he grows Old.

I wish I could set forth the Ideas I have of Consumptions in a fairer Light;
yet it may be understood from what I have said, that every wheesing Cough is
not a Consumption, nor every hecking or tickling Cough the Phthisic.

Thus the Virtue of a Physician consists in judging exactly the Nature of the
Distemper, and the Constitution of the Patient; and this was the Advantage that
Doctor Radcliff had, in knowing his Maker, (I mean he judged Nature) better
than other Men: So sprang his unparalleled Success.

Of the Dropsy.
SOME Physical Writers have erroneously drawn other Distempers to this Title,
making three or four different Sorts of Dropsies.

I beg their Pardon for saying that no Distemper is a Dropsy, but an Overset of
Water that presses against the Valves, and contracts the Passages which (by
Nature) are designed to receive or suck up that Water which is in the Abdomen,
in order to discharge it out of the Body.

A Tympany cannot be called a Dropsy, because it is Wind pent up without
Motion,, so it is called Tympanum, or a Drum.

And what is called a Dropsy in the Ovaria, is a Hurt by Coition, when the
Textures or Animalculas of the Seed are broken or imperfect, which being
received, embraced, and retained in the Orchis, draws to it the Mucus or
nourishment, which attends and flows to the Parts of Generation in a natural
and vital Conception. Now this Mucilaginous Matter concocted by vital Warmth,
becomes hard and tough; it increases in bigness, and grows every Day more hard
to cure.

When we meet with any one under this Misfortune, we must depress Nature by
Rough Medicines, which are cold and revulsive, in order to give a sudden Shock
to the Parts of Generation; for all warming Medicines are hurtful in this
Disease, because the Warmth of Nature glutinates all slimy Matter to a
Toughness, as a Coldness of Nature reduces it to a Softness or a Fluidity.

Thus a False Conception resembles a Natural one; yet although this Resemblance
between a Dropsy, a Tympany, and a Conception, may deceive the Eye, it ought
not to deceive the Understanding.

Therefore a real Dropsy is, when the Viscera and all the Urinary Vessels are
stunned and obstructed, which the Patient feels by a Heaviness and Numbness in
the Abdomen, and all the lower Part of the Body; the Bowels are relaxed, and
the Peristaltick Motion very slow; by this Slowness of the Internal Motion, and
Weakness in the Bowels and Urinary Vessels; the Water in the Cavity of the
Belly has no^ its Motion nor Freedom, to pass out of the Body; so it causes
first the Belly to swell, and the Legs soon after, by the Weight of this watery
Humor pressing downwards. And the shortness of Breath which always attends
this Distemper, is caused by the Cavity of the Belly being so filled with
Water, that it presses against the the Diaphragma or Midriff; thus it contracts
or straitens the Chest or Thorax, which contains the Heart and Lights, so that
this Pressure that the Water makes against the Midriff, hinders the Chest from
expanding, and the Lungs from dilating sufficiently for Respiration.

I may (with a good Assurance) object against the common Proceedings in this
Disease; since both Reason and Practice will defend me.

The Common Method is rough Catharticks and Emeticks; such as Turbiths Mineral,
Panacea of Antimony, Gambo-Elebor, Elaterium, and such like Medicines, which by
Repetition, relax and tear those Vessels that are already weakened with the
Disease: Thus the Patient is reduced into such a wea^ Condition, that it will
be past the Art of Man to restore him; notwithstanding he is flattered at
first, and thinks himself something better, when his Stomach and Bowels are
emptied by the aforesaid Evacuations: Thus the Physician and the Patient are
both deceived, for want of knowing that every rough Purge and straining Vomit
weakens the Peristaltick Motion, and benumbs the Viscera, and all the Urinary
Vessels that are designed to suck up the Water, when there is more in the
Belly, than the necessary Quantity.

Now it is worth the Physician's While to consider that the Bowels swim in this
Water; the Water is not in the Bowels, therefore if we aim at a perfect Cure,
we must use Diuretics, and restorative Medicines; for as soon as the Viscera
and Urinary Vessels recover their Strength, and the Bowels the Warmth and
natural Motion, the usual Passages will then be capable of receiving the Water,
and discharging it out, both by Urine and Stool.

I do not want to conceal any thing, that might be depended upon, to render my
Works more useful for the Health and Preservation of Mankind; although there
are some particular Medicines which I have found successful, and know to be
infallible, if duly administered, and the Patient at the same time rightly
managed; but so various are the Constitutions of Human Bodies, and so
particular are their Tempers, that if a Medicine does not suit with their Ways
of thinking, they can hardly be persuaded to take it; and even then they will
not repeat it, because it does not take away the Swelling all of a sudden, as a
Woman, at her full Time with Child, is delivered of her Big-belly by a Midwife.

Of the Stone and Gravel.
MOST Jellys, or mucilaginous Matter, fixed, or lying in any part of the Body
without motion, by vital Heat becomes hard or tough; and, in time, turns to
Bone or Stone.

So the Stone (being bred of Slime, which fixes itself in the Urinary Vessels)
is more subject to Children, than grown Persons; whose Bodies are by Nature
stronger, and more liable to cast off by Evacuation, that sort of slimy Matter,
which petrifies by lying in the urinary Vessels without motion.

Indeed, the Gravel is more apt to afflict grown People; for, as Time turns
most hard things to dust; so the Stone, as it grows ripe, begins to canker and
crumble to Sand and Gravel, which causes Pain as it passes out through the
Urethra; therefore it is a great Mistake, to think that the Gravel breeds the
Stone; for it is the Stone that produces the Gravel.

We must be very cautious in giving Diuretics; for by their forcing Quality
the Patient is very much tormented.

A Decoction of Mallows, Emulsions, and all oily Medicines, are necessary, by
mollifying and healing the Fibers in the urinary Passages: But no Medicine can
be more effectual, when the Pain is violent, than a Turpentine Glyster; which
gives Ease by its unctuous and healing Quality. Thus, as often as the sharpness
of the Disease returns, the Patient may be made tolerable easy; until Time
crumble the Stone into Particles, small enough to come away without much Pain.

It ought to be considered, that People in Years are apt to have Inflammations,
and Sorenesses in the Bladder and Pelvis, which are frequently mistaken for the
Stone.

Manna taken once in ten Days, is an exceeding good Medicine for any Soreness
or Ulcer in the Bladder or Kidneys; and is also very proper, even in the Stone
and Gravel, by preventing any Inflammation in the Kidneys: For Manna being
opening and cooling, gently carries off all corrosive Humors from those Parts.

As I was objecting against forcing Remedies, I will further say, that when we
attempt to force Nature, we commonly obstruct her, as is demonstrable to any
skilful. Practitioner: yet with Care the Stone may, in a great measure, be
caused to crumble to Pieces.

I once thought myself Master of this Knack of dissolving the Stone (as I
called it) having had surprising Success in three different Children, who were
about five or six Years old; which puffed me up with Vanity; until I was called
to a Child of Mr. West's, a Carpenter, in Swan Yard, in the Strand: I was then
very young and giddy headed; assured 'em I could dissolve the Stone, and bring
it away. Here I was disappointed; the Child's Pain increased so much, that they
sent to another, who had recourse to his Knife; and I was laughed at, and
despised; and perhaps it was better it happened so: For had I succeeded here, I
should have been more obstinate in my Practice, beyond Reason: Since this, I
never would attempt to break the Stone in the Bladder. Though, I confefs, if I
had a Child of my own afflicted with it, I would use all Means, before he
should receive that Hurt by Lithotomy, which they scarce ever perfectly recover.

Of the Pox.
THIS Disease has certainly been for Time out of mind, although it has shown
itself of late Years in sharper Symptoms, by reason of eating great quantities
of Sugar, and foreign Sweets, which create a corrosive Quality in the Fluids;
and I really believe it was this Distemper, that in old Times was called the
Plague of a Leprosy, and the hoary Ulcer; and was thought to be occasioned by
the Men cohabiting with their Women in the time of Natural Purgations; and to
prevent these kind of Disorders, or Uncleanness, the Elders made very strict
Laws to restrain the People at such Times. But if they had restrained every Man
to one Woman only, and likewise every Woman to one Man only, it would then have
had the desired Effect; for the Pox was caused then, as it may now, by Excess;
(for excess of any thing is Poison,) I mean Excess in Venery; when one Woman
admits, or is compelled to receive the Seeds of several Men one immediately
after another, though they are all sound Men, and the Woman likewise sound and
well, yet the variety of Seeds thus fermenting within the Matrix, will inflame
and corrode the Parts of Generation.

I need not set down the nature of a fresh Clap, because it is done by so many
before; nor the Method of Cure, since People, for the sake of saving their
Money, will apply to any Apprentice, or Quack, who plies 'em off with rough
Medicines, and puts even themselves to six times the Expense that is necessary,
and the Patient, to sixty times the Inconveniency. For there are some Symptoms,
at the first beginning, which are very sharp and dangerous, and prove of fatal
Consequence, if not managed with both Care and Judgment.

I have not had a great deal of Practice in Venereal Cases, yet I have met with
some particular Disorders which may be worth mentioning; such as stubborn
Gonorrhaeas; a continual pain, or rather a Tenderness upon the Bone of the
Nose; a Flux of sharp Humor from the Ears; an Ulcer in the Throat, or Uvula,
and such like Disorders: which I have met with in Persons whose Constitutions
have in a manner been worn out, by repeating Mercurial Medicines so often, that
at last they would neither purge nor salivate, by reason of the Glands being
stunned, and the Mucus and natural Moisture exhausted.

In such like Cases the Cure consists in warming restorative Medicines; the
Patient, at the same time, must stick to a nourishing Diet, in order to cherish
and strengthen Nature; for as the Glands recover their true Tone, and the
Fluids their vital Spirit, the mercurial Medicines, which lie dormant, will
then begin to work their Effect, either by a continual Purging, or a gentle
Salivation. This is what I can affirm from Expecience, which is a Proof beyond
Reason itself.

I would not have the World mistake me, to think that I am exclaiming against
Mercury; for I find it the most effectual, and the easiest Method of Cure; and
indeed the safest, if it is managed rightly. And that Hoarseness, or Disorder
upon the Lungs, which so frequently ensues a Salivation, proceeds not from the
Mercury, but from some Mismanagement, either in their Diet, or improper
Medicines given upon Mercury, under pretense of taking off the Salivation: For
Mercury is seldom mended by other Medicines, it is frequently made worse.
Neither does the Virtue of Dietdrinks consist in the Quality of the
Ingredients, but in the Quantity the Patient drinks. For suppose there should
remain a corrosive Quality in the Body after flu^ing; whether hot Water is not
as good an Antidote as a Decoction of the Woods? All that can be said, it is
not so agreeable and warming to the Stomach.

But however I am convinced that Mercury, if honestly prepared, leaves no
Poison behind it, if the Physician will let it work off in its own easy Manner;
yet as the Lungs are refined by a Salivation, they become very tender, and
liable to be hurt by all Cordial Medicines or Wines, and any Spirituous
Liquors: There is not half so much Danger of taking Cold as is supposed; for if
I was to salivate a Person at the Hazard of my own Life, I would keep him no
hotter ^han he himself found agreeable.

Of the Gout.
JUVENIS Voluptate abundans edit potatque; Senectute autem invadente, vigor
naturalis evanescet, multis occupaturque moeroribus.

So the Gout proceeds from Indulgencies we give ourselves up to, when we find a
Slackness of Desire; for then we begin to fear a Decay; and with vain Hopes of
prompting ourselves to our former Gaiety and Vigor, drink Wines and Spirituous
Liquors, without a Natural Thirst or real Desire, and eat Loads of Rich
Victuals, without the true Rule of Appetite.

Thus, by overloading the Stomach, the Fibers and Pores or Passages, by which
the Nourishment steams or perspires out of the Stomach into the Lacteals, are
relaxed or dilated; so that the Nourishment which is drawn into the Lacteals,
is too heavy, and of a crude and clammy Quality; which Distemper being
communicated to the Blood, irregulates the Motion of the Artery and the Nerve;
for there is a Nerve lies close along with every Artery, and at every Pulsation
of Blood from the Heart, these Nerves give a Jirk (for a better Expression I
may call it a receptive or an assistive Motion) which draws along the Pulsation
of Blood by the same Motion at the same Moment into every Artery in the Body;
for notwithstanding the Motion of the Heart being very forcible, it could not
drive the Blood with that Quickness into the extreme Parts at every Systole, if
it was not assisted by the Nerve in the Manner I have described.

Now the Blood being heavy and clammy, cannot circulate back again by the Veins
quick enough to receive the Blood from the Artery; and when an Artery is thus
obstructed, the Pulsations come by Pushes, or Thrusts, striving for Freedom,
yet the Nerve keeps it is true Motion; and this Irregularity of Time and Motion
between the Nerve and the Artery, tears some of the fine Membranes which brace
'em together.

Now those Membranes being tore by the aforesaid Pushes, or Thrusts, cause that
violent Pain, and produce a kind of Jelly, which by lying in a continual Heat,
grows Hard, so that in time it will resemble Chalk Stones, which I confess is
very surprising; yet an Egg Shell is more like Chalk, being formed of a Natural
Matter and a necessary Heat, as the Gout Stones are formed of false Matter, and
Supernatural Heat.

I am very certain that the Gout may be cured where the Patient will regulate
his Life, and conquer himself to a proper Diet.

I might make a long Discourse on the Particulars, from the Experience I have
had, having been afflicted with it myself before I was two and thirty Years
Old: I confess I am partly ashamed, as I impute the Gout to the aforesaid
Causes, yet I may tell it with some Pride, the Conquest I have made in being
entirely free from any Symptom of it now.

But I can hardly believe any one will restrain himself with so much Resolution
as I did, therefore I need not set down the Method I took with myself, only
advise the Patient never to eat above a Quarter of a Pound of Solid Victuals at
one Meal, although that Quantity may be eaten every three Hours; neither must
he drink above a Quarter of a Pint of Liquor at one Draught, yet he may drink
as often as Desire prompts him, so that his Liquor be not too strong, nor
stale, but rather new and upon the Ferment; for new working Small Beer, and
even parched Peace are very proper, likewise all windy Things whatsoever that
may in any Measure quicken Motion and Circulation; perhaps some Persons may
object against windy Things, for fear of the Cholick, yet it is without Reason;
for the Cholick cannot be cured without things that ferment in the Stomach, and
quicken the Peristaltick Motion.

In the Gout it is necessary that the Patient should drink plentifully, so his
Liquors are proper; for it is a kind of Fever, as we find when we are awaked
out of our Sleep with the Pain, and a rigorous Disorder in the Nerves
throughout the whole Body; yet it is not safe to attempt a Cure by the
aforesaid Method, nor any ways to depress Nature, until the violence of the Fit
goes off; therefore Strong Wines and all warming Bitters are proper to defend
the Stomach, while the Patient has the Fit upon him; yet a strong Decoction of
Camomile Flowers drank hot every Night going to Bed, is preferable to Snake
Root, or any other Bitter whatsoever.

I am not guilty of fancying one particular Medicine Universal, or fit to be
given in all Distempers; yet I will recommend the Elixir of Vipers in the Gout;
it may be given even in the violence of the Fit; it secures the Stomach by
creating an inward Briskness and Thirst; for a Thirst is a very good Symptom in
the Gout, as a devouring Appetite is a bad one, before the Fit comes on.

It is very remarkable how the Patient eats with a prodigious Greediness a Day
or two before the Fit begins, but not with a Natural Hunger, nor Pleasure; for
when a Man who is very hungry sits down calmly to a Dish of Soop, or some such
thing half digested, he may feel in three or four Minutes a Sweetness and
Delight flow to each Breast, as the Nourishment steams out of the Stomach into
the Lacteal Vessels; and when a Person debars himself from eating longer than
ordinary, Nature then calls in the Mucus from all the Glands, and the Moisture
in the Muscles from all the extreme Parts, to support the Heart and Spirit that
Motion may not cease; but still this Suction of Nature will reach farther; for
if a Man was to be quite debarred from eating and drinking, his Life might be
preserved considerably longer by a nourishing Poultice made of Bread moistened
with Wine and Gravy, and applied to each Breast, for the Breasts are most
capable of communicating a Nourishment to cherish and support the Animal
Spirits, because there is no Muscle or fleshy Substance outwardly, that has so
near a Communication to the Heart and Stomach; here I make a (...) Stop.

With some Doubt and Discouragement I am reflecting on my own Works; been
telling a Friend, a Man in Practice, that I have spent a few Hours in writing
the Natural Causes and Steps to the Cure of several Distempers, who gave me a
despisable Sneer, and told me that a great many Fools are published of late,
and are as much ashamed of themselves, when they come to see their Thoughts in
Print, as they were in love with their Works whilst in Manuscripts: Besides,
says he, can a giddy headed young Fellow of five and thirty be capable of
Matters in Physic, which ought to be from Thoughts most solid and sublime?

I confess the Spirit that leads me is self-Opinion, and I believe no Man
writes without it, and the stronger this Spirit is in any Author, the more
valuable are his Works, if there be but the Weight of Reason in his Thoughts;
and the Thoughts of several valuable and sublime Things are lost, for want of
being comprehended and encouraged.

Thus I recover myself again from that Reflection of Youth and Vanity, with an
Assurance that if a Man be ever capable of doing Wonders, it must be while he
is in his Prime; before heavy Days come, when his Senses grow slack and
imperfect; for then his Sight, his Taste, and Smell deceive him.

Suppose a Man whose Sight is decaying, was to give a Description of a Candle
burning about six Yards from him; how must he describe it to us? Must he say
there is a Circle round it, or Streams of Light, or some such Imperfection which
he sees, though he is sure it is not in the Candle, but in his Sense of Sight;
how is he sure? Because he remembers the Candle burnt perfect when his Sight
was clear. But the Disorders in the Eyes, I shall preserve among some practical
Observations and Experiments in Anatomy, which if I had a full Authority, I
should be glad to publish, with the Causes of several other Chronical Diseases:
For my Design is to set down the real Causes of Distempers, and ill Proceedings
in several remarkable Cases, whereby many bad Symptoms in several Diseases may
be shunned easier than cured; yet Wonders may be done in all Distempers by a
skilful Physician, and a careful Nurse, where the Patient complies with Rules
necessary for his Disorder.

I cannot believe it the Will of the Almighty, that a Man shall be snatched
away before he has run his due Course with Nature.

For certainly, when there is a Conception, it ought to come to a Natural
Birth, at a Natural Time; and after a Child is born, (if it is not hurt nor
hindered) it must grow to a Natural Strength, and the Course of Life to be of a
Natural Length; therefore Diseases are always caused by some Hurt or ill Rules
of Life.

People cannot die in their Youth, unless Nature be depressed, or overset;
Nature may be depressed even to Death by Hunger, Coldness, or Loss of Blood;
and She may be overset by Dread, or Surprise, violent Motion, or excessive
Eating and Drinking: How often do we find Nurses destroy Young Children by
Strong Liquors, or stuffing 'em to such a Degree, that Nature is overset, and
they are seized with Convulsions, and die.

Yet it may be necessary sometimes to curb, or rather depress Nature; at other
times it may be necessary to cherish, or rather prompt her; so the Course of
Life may in some Measure be prolonged by Management and Care.

But I am very sensible that Nature will change, and Life must come toward a
Period; for as Desire abates, we then begin to bow down our Faces with Care
against the Earth, to see that we tread our Steps in Safety; and when the Marks
of Age are carried in the Face of Man, he lies down to rest in Grief,
slumbering, in his Fancy hears the Bird of the Night, starts up in Fear of that
which is on High; While thus he listens, his Ears, and all the Gates are open,
until his Thoughts are overset with Dread, then the Harmony ceases, because the
Strings of Music are slack; thus, the Garrison is given up to the great
Conqueror, and the Soul to God that gave it.

FINIS.
INDEX.
MAlignant Fevers. Page 11 Pestilential Fevers. Page 17 Inflammatory Fevers.
Page 23 St. Anthony's Fire. ibid. A Malignant Pleurisy. Page 25 Intermittent
Fevers. Page 28 Smallpox. Page 31 Measles. Page 35 Consumptions. Page 38 Of
the Phthisic and Asthma. Page 42 Dropsy. Page 45 The Stone and Gravel. Page 50
The Pox. Page 53 The Gout. Page 57 The Effect and Force of Nourishment and
Hunger. Page 62 The Works of Nature, etc. Page 63

