A SUPPLEMENT TO THE STATE OF THE EXPEDITION FROM CANADA, CONTAINING GENERAL
BURGOYNE's ORDERS, RESPECTING THE PRINCIPAL MOVEMENTS, AND OPERATIONS OF THE
ARMY TO THE RAISING OF THE SIEGE OF TICONDEROGA.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. ROBSON, NEW-BOND-STREET; T. BECKET, THE CORNER OF THE
ADELPHI, STRAND; AND R. BALDWIN, PATERNOSTER ROW. MDCCLXXX.

(Price One Shilling and Sixpence.)

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE editor does not undertake to lay before the public the whole of General
Burgoyne's orders during the campaign of 1777. -- In so extensive a detail,
many would appear quite uninteresting at the present moment, and even at the
time they were given, except perhaps to the departments immediately concerned,
as far as regarded their execution: such are those respecting the daily duties,
the hospital, the commiserate, drivers, etc. Those only have been selected,
that have for their object the general arrangements and movements of the army,
and which may tend to illustrate the operations of the campaign. There are
likewise some few by Generals Carleton and Philips, which are introduced here,
as relating in particular to General Burgoyne's expedition.

The editor's principal inducement for offering these orders to the public, was
drawn not only from the idea that the state of the expedition is incomplete
without them, but likewise from the observation of the avidity with which
General Wolfe's orders were received by all ranks of people, and particularly
by the officers of the army. It was conceived, that if General Wolfe's orders
were esteemed as models to commanding officers of corpse, as well as instructive
lessons in their profession to those of an inferior rank, General Burgoyne's
would more fully answer that description, as they relate to military
transactions far more important, and to scenes infinitely more interesting to
the public. -- Beside that the author of them is known to add to the knowledge
and experience of the General all the exterior graces and refinement of the
scholar and the writer.

It is but justice to his Excellency the Lieutenant General to acknowledge,
that these orders are published without his concurrence or authority.

GENERAL ORDERS.
(By General Carleton.)
Quebec, May 10, 1777.
THE King having been pleased to order, that a detachment from the army under
my command be sent upon an expedition under Lieutenant General Burgoyne, and
that this detachment be composed of the grenadiers, light-infantry, and 24th
regiment; together with the 9th, 20th, 21st, 47th, 53d, and 62d regiments
(except a detachment of 50 men from each of the six last-mentioned regiments)
and all the German troops, except a detachment of 650 -- these corpse will
accordingly hold themselves in readiness to march at the shortest notice;
orders for which will be given by Lieutenant General Burgoyne, to whom, in the
mean time, they will make all reports, as well as to the commander in chief.
The detachments of 50, with a captain, two subalterns, and non-commissioned
officers in proportion, from each of the six regiments as above, will assemble
at the present headquarters of their respective regiments, and there remain
until further orders.

The artillery, the department of the quarter-master-general, hospital, and
commiserate, will likewise supply Lieutenant General Burgoyne with such returns
as he may call for, to enable him to lay before the commander in chief the
portions of the several articles they are capable of furnishing.

Two hundred days bat, baggage, and forage money, will be issued to the general
and staff officers, the hospital, regiments, Lieutenant Nutt's detachment, and
the three companies of Canadians: the distribution lists of which are to be
sent in, as soon as possible, to the pay-master-general's office.

(By General Philips)
Quebec, May 1st, 1777.
Major General Philips has been directed by the commander in chief to inform
the commanding officers of regiments of his excellency's desire, that the army
should take the field this campaign in the most perfect order.

This will depend so entirely upon the several regiments being prepared by
exercise and discipline* that it is recommended to you to employ the utmost
care and attention on such material points, where your own character and honor
are so intimately connected with the duty and good of his Majesty's service.

His excellency the commander in chief has instructed Major General Philips to
observe to you, that the good discipline of a regiment, in its general
economy, behavior, and conduct in action, will depend on the attention of
that respectable rank of gentlemen, the commanding officers of companies.

It is from this rank of officers, whose time of service and experience give
them every possible weight and respect in a regiment, that the subaltern
officers are to take their example and their orders. It is by the captains that
the younger officers are to be instructed, not only in the common military
rules, but in that propriety of conduct, strict subordination, and
indefatigable attention, so absolutely requisite in a regiment, and by which
alone the soldiers can be held in that obedience to, and confidence in their
officers, which will make them bear the fatigues, hardships, and dangers of a
campaign, with patience, with zeal, and with spirit.

Courage has ever belonged to the British troops, and there needs only to
observe, that a well disciplined body will always add to it a most essential
principle in war -- conduct.

It is necessary that the officers should be perfectly acquainted with the
soldiers of their company, and that soldiers should know their officers, and be
accustomed to the sound of their voices. The exercising by companies will be
the surest means to effect those purposes.

It is well understood, that all regiments exercise by companies; but it is
usually done with a view of joining in battalion. It is here meant, that each
company should be led to consider itself as a small, distinct body, and
exercised in various evolutions independent of the battalion* with every
possible view for single companies being taught to depend upon themselves.

As from the nature of the present war, the abilities and military skill of
officers may be required to be shown in detached parties, and as it may
frequently happen, that single companies will have to act, when an entire
battalion cannot always maneuver; by pursuing this idea, which the commander
in chief has expressed a strong desire of, it will leave the officers and
soldiers a dependence and attention on each other, and give confidence to both.

It will therefore be proper for every officer of a company to be perfectly
well acquainted with, and to exercise that company -- for the commanding
officer of a battalion to put himself at the head of one company, and to
maneuver that company; while the other companies, being drawn up at small
intervals of distance, follow the evolutions so given by the commanding officer.

As the commander in chief has already ordered regiments in their exercise to
make frequent changes of their positions and fronts, and to march over
difficult ground, it will give the commanding officers of companies
opportunities of showing a ready power of taking good posts; and also, though
there may be certain separations, owing to enclosures, ravines, ditches of
water, marshy ground, etc. of connecting the companies one with another, and
with the battalion.

Whenever a regiment, when marching or maneuvering, is obliged to break into
parts, from marshy ground, ravines, ditches, small hills, rocks, or thick
underwood, it should be done, if possible, by companies, which should divide as
little as possible, and never but in such parts, as an officer or sergeant may
have command of such separate division; and this not at the will of the
soldier, but from the distinct orders of the officers, so that the separated
divisions may join, as soon as the ground will permit, into companies, and from
companies into battalion.

The changing the order of companies at times, in drawing up the battalion,
will make the soldiers ready in forming on general principles, without
regarding local stations of companies.

His excellency has in view by this, that the soldiers learn to be steady and
attached to their own company and its officers -- that the officers, having a
thorough knowledge of their men, and being accustomed to such instances of
separation as have been described, suffer not the soldiers to act, but from
their words of command and orders -- that every company may form a respectable
body singly, and though attached to its place in battalion, yet always ready to
act separate from it, as the nature of the ground may require, or the nature of
the local service they may be sent on make necessary.

Major General Philips has endeavored to explain the commander in chief's
pleasure, by signifying how much his excellency depends on the support of
captains commanding companies in this army; and there can be no doubt of every
respectable and attentive obedience to his excellency's injunctions and orders.
The commander in chief has not directed any thing relative to commanding
officers and field officers of battalions; as his excellency, as well as every
general officer of the army, has reason to depend on their experience, and to
be assured of the strong exertion, and active and spirited zeal of the
field-officers for the particular character and credit of their own corpse, and
for the honor of his Majesty's service.

(By General Burgoyne)
Montreal, May 30th 1777.
THE regiments destined for the expedition under Lieutenant General Burgoyne
are to leave in their respective stores their blanket coats, leggings, and all
baggage that can be spared during the summer months.

The officers are depended upon not to incumber the service with more baggage
than is absolutely necessary for a campaign, where the movements may be
expected to be sudden and alert. The portions of batteaux to each regiment will
be regulated on those principles. Three women per company will be allowed to
follow the army.

The exercise of the troops under the Lieutenant General's orders is to be
confined to firing with ball-cartridges, bayonets fixed, and rapidity of
movements in marching, evolutions, and forming.

(By General Carleton)
Quebec, June 18, 1777.
THE 31st regiment is to move immediately to the posts of St. John's and the
Isle aux Noix, four companies to each place. One company of those at the Isle
aux Noix to move to the river Lacolle, in case Major General Philips shall
think it necessary, and signify the same to them. The companies at all these
posts to be aiding and assisting in transporting provisions, stores, and all
things necessary for the troops under Lieutenant General Burgoyne.

The 29th regiment to march and encamp at or near St. Therese, detaching two
companies to Chamblee. This regiment will likewise be aiding and assisting in
forwarding every thing necessary for General Burgoyne's army.

The royal highland emigrants will detach a company to Sorel for the like
purpose; and Brigadier-general Maclean will make a tour to the places on that
river, and order such part of his regiment to take post there, as he finds may
be necessary for the above purposes, or for assisting the officers of militia
in executing the orders sent to them.

GENERAL DISPOSITION OF THE ARMY.
St. John's, June 10th, 1777.
BRigadier-general Fraser will be joined by the Canadian companies of Monin and
Busherville, Captain Fraser's detachment, and a body of savages.

The German grenadiers, chasseurs, and light-infantry, under the command of
Lieutenant Colonel Breymen, form a corpse de reserve, and will never encamp in
the line.

The regiment of Reidesel's dragoons is also not of the line, and for the
present will be employed to cover headquarters.

The Provincial corpse of Peter's and Jessup are also not of the line. The
recruits of the 33d regiment, under the command of Lieutenant N^tt, are for the
present to serve on board the fleet.

VIEW of the whole ARMY encamped in Line of Battle.
Provincials.
Peter's Jessup. Indians.
German advanced Corpse, Lieut. Col. Brechmen. Berner's Chasseurs. Batt. Light
Infantry. Brunswick Grenadiers. Brigade of Artillery. Brigade of Artillery.
British advanced Corpse, Brig. Genesis Fraser. British Light Infantry. 24th
Battalion. British Grenadiers. Canadians.
Monin. Busherville. 3 Comp. Art.
33d Reg. Fraser's Marksmen. Brigade of Artillery. Brigade of Artillery.
Brigade of Artillery. Brigade of Artillery 1st Brigade of Germans, Brig. Genesis
Specht. Regiment of Reidesel. Regiment of Specht. Regiment of Rhentz. 2nd
Brigade of Germans, Brig. Genesis Gall. Regiment of Hesse Hanau. Regiment of
Prince Frederick. Lt Col. Baime. Reidesel's Dragoons. 2nd Brigade of British,
Brig. Genesis Hamilton. 21st Battalion. 62d Battalion. 20th Battalion. 1st Brigade
of British, Brig. Genesis Powell. 47th Battalion. 53d Battalion. 9th Battalion.
HEAD QUARTERS.

The line upon the next movement will encamp in order of battle as follows, and
will continue in the same order till countermanded. Right wing, first brigade
of British, commanded by Brigadier-general Powell, and composed of the 9th,
47th, and 53d battalions; second brigade of British, commanded by
Brigadier-general Hamilton, composed of the 20th, 21st, and 62nd battalions.
Left wing, first brigade of Germans, commanded by Brigadier-general Specht,
composed of the regiments of Rhentz, Specht, and Reidesel; second brigade of
Germans, commanded by Brigadier-general Gall, and composed of the regiments of
Prince Frederick and Hesse Hanau.

If it should become necessary to form two lines, the second line is to form by
the second brigade of British doubling upon the first; and by the second
brigade of Germans doubling in like manner on their first. The brigadiers are
always to encamp with their brigade.

Camp at River Bouquet, June 20th, 1777.
OFFICERS of all ranks commanding out-posts and detachments are constantly to
fortify, in the best manner the circumstances of the place and the implements
at hand will permit, felling trees with their points outward, barricading
churches and houses. Breastworks of earth and timber are generally to be
effected in a short time, and the science of engineering is not necessary to
find and apply such resources.

The practice of fortifying is useful in all services, but especially in this,
where the enemy, though infinitely inferior to the King's troops in open space
and hardy combat, is well fitted by disposition and practice for the stratagems
and enterprises of little war; and neither the distance of camps, nor the
interference of forests and rivers, are to be looked upon as security against
their attempts. Upon the same principle, it must be a constant rule, in or near
woods, to place advanced sentries, where they have a tree or some other
defense, to prevent them from being taken off by single marksmen. Together with
these precautions, officers will ever bear in mind, how much the public honor
and their own are concerned in maintaining a post; and that to justify a
retreat in this war, the number of the enemy must be much superior to that
which would make their justification, when acting against a brave and
disciplined force.

The officers will take all opportunities, and especially at the beginning of
the campaign, to inculcate into the minds of the men a reliance upon the
bayonet. Men of half their bodily strength, and even cowards, may be their
match at firing; but the onset of bayonets, in the hands of the valiant, is
irresistible.

The enemy, convinced of this truth, place their dependence in entrenchments
and rifle-pieces -- it will be our glory and preservation to storm where
possible. The attention of every officer is to be employed on his men; to make
use of his fusil, unless in very extraordinary cases of immediate personal
defense, would betray an ignorance of his importance and of his duty.

No occasion can make it necessary to keep the arms loaded in the bell tents;
nor are the battalions of the line ever to be loaded on the march, till very
near the time they may happen to engage.

No parties are to go from camp with or without arms, unless with a
proportionable number of officers. -- Not only the discipline and honor, but
even the safety of the troops, require the strictest prohibition from
straggling and plundering; and the savages, as well as the provost, will have
orders to punish all offenders in these respects instantly, and with the utmost
rigor.

The camp will always be extended as widely as the ground will admit, for the
sake of cleanliness and health -- but as it must often happen, that the extent
will be insufficient for the line to form in front of the camp, according to
the present established rules of open files and two deep -- the
quarter-master-general will therefore mark out at every new camp the proportion
of ground each battalion is to clear, over and above its own front, in order to
make the work equal. To clear this ground must be the immediate business after
arriving in camp; and in this country it may be often necessary to have an
alarmpost cleared in the rear, as well as in front. -- By clearing is meant the
removal of such obstructions as might prevent the ready forming of troops, to
receive or advance upon the enemy.

Quarter guards are always to face outward, and at the distance of one hundred
yards from the bells of arms, with a fleche of earth or timber thrown up before
them. When the encampment of the line is with the front to the water, and too
near to admit of this regulation, the quarter guard is to be posted in the
rear, or those of the flank regiments occasionally upon the flanks. Though the
ground will seldom admit a strict regularity in pitching the officers tents,
they are never to be placed so as to interfere with the line of defense.

When the Lieutenant General visits an out-post, the men are not to stand to
their arms, or pay him any compliment. The articles of war, which regard the
men, to be read at the head of every regiment tomorrow, at evening parade; and
afterward these regulations.

The daily duties are to be as follows -- One Brigadier-general for the day,
who will visit the out-posts, and have a general inspection of the camp. All
reports to be made through him, except when any alarm or other exigence
requires instant notice to the commander in chief -- A major of brigade for the
day, who is to parade all guards, detachments, etc. The picquet, when the last
brigade arrives, will consist of one field-officer for each wing, one captain
each brigade, one subaltern, one sergeant, one corporal and twenty men each
regiment -- a drummer to be furnished by the regiment that gives the captain.
The whole picquet to assemble half an hour before gun-firing, at the center of
the line, and to be exercised in marching and charging bayonets, under the
inspection of the brigadier of the day; in order that the British and German
troops may acquire an uniformity of pace and motions, when acting together in
the line. Half the picquet is always to be posted during the night at some
distance from the camp, and at such places as may be exposed to the secret
approaches of the enemy. It will be the care of the brigadier of the day to
post them.

Camp at Crown-point, June 28, 1777.
SHOULD it be necessary for the line to embark suddenly, two guns will be fired
on the right wing. Upon the signal being given, the men's tents to be struck
immediately, and stowed in the batteaux, together with their knapsacks,
blankets, provision and ammunition. -- As no other stores will be allowed to be
carried* seventeen batteaux will suffice for each battalion of British, and
twentytwo for each German battalion. Should it be necessary for the line to
march suddenly without embarking, four guns will be fired from the right -- at
which signal the line is to form, with all possible expedition, in front of the
bells of arms, and the tents to be left standing. This order to remain in force
during the campaign.

Headquarters at Skeensborough-house, July 10, 1777.
ON the sixth, the enemy was dislodged from Ticonderoga, by the mere
countenances and activity of the army, and driven on the same day beyond
Skeensborough on the right, and Hubberton on the left; with the loss of all
their artillery, and five of their armed vessels taken or blown up (by the
spirited conduct of Captain Carter of the artillery, with part of his brigade
of gun-boats) a great quantity of ammunition, provision, and stores of all
sorts, and all their baggage.

On the 7th, Brigadier Fraser, with little more than half the advanced corpse,
and without artillery (which with the utmost endeavors it was found impossible
to bring up) came up with 2000 of the enemy strongly posted, attacked and
defeated them, with the loss, on the enemy's side, of their principal officers,
200 men killed on the spot, a much greater number wounded, and 300 taken
prisoners.

On the 8th, Lieutenant Colonel Hill, at the head of the ninth regiment, was
attacked near Fort Anne, by more than six times his number, and repulsed the
enemy with great loss, after a continued fire of three hours. In consequence of
this action, Fort Anne was burnt and abandoned; and a part of this army is in
possession of the country on the other side.

These rapid successes, after exciting a proper sense of what we owe to God,
intitles the troops in general to the warmest praise -- and particular
distinction is due to Brigadier-general Fraser, who, by his conduct and
bravery, supported by the officers and soldiers under his command, effected an
exploit of material service to the king, and of signal honor to the profession
of arms. This corpse have the further merit of having supported fatigue and bad
weather, without bread and without murmur.

Divine service will be performed on Sunday morning at the head of the line,
and at the head of the advanced corpse; and on the same day at sunset, a
feu-de-joye will be fired with cannon and small-arms from Ticonderoga,
Crown-point, the camp at Skeensborough, and the post of Breymen's corpse.

Skeensborough-house, July 12, 1777.
IT is observed that the injunctions, before the army took the field, relative
to the baggage of officers, has not been complied with; and that the regiments
in general are incumbered with much more baggage than they can possibly be
supplied with means of conveying when they quit the lakes and rivers: warning
is therefore given to the officers, to convey by the batteaux, which will soon
return to Ticonderoga, the baggage that is not indispensably necessary to them,
or, upon the first sudden movement, it must inevitably be left on the ground.
Such gentlemen as served in America last war may remember that officers took up
with a soldiers tent, and confined their baggage to a knapsack for months
together.

When opportunity shall offer to carry forward the baggage, which will be left
at Ticonderoga, so as not to interfere with the transport of magazines, the
Lieutenant General will be happy to contribute to the convenience and comfort
of his officers.

Skeensborough-house, July 18, 1777.
THE disturbance of the 16th instant, between the British troops and the
Germans, was occasioned by liquor, and one of the first principles of military
order was so far forgotten by some British soldiers, that a guard was insulted.
Any conduct for the future, either of Germans or British, that shall tend to
obstruct the harmony which has hitherto so happily reigned between the two
nations, and which must continue among brave troops serving in the same cause,
unless violated by intoxication or misapprehension, will be punished as a
crime, the most fatal to the success and honor of the campaign.

Camp at Fort Edward, Aug. 5, 1777.
IT appearing that there is still some misapprehension, in some corpse of the
army, respecting the carriage of officers baggage, when the service shall make
it necessary to quit the rivers -- it is henceforward to be understood, that no
provision has been made by the King's orders, nor by those of his Excellency
Sir Guy Carleton, for this purpose; nor is there any example of such being
made, when the allowance of bat and forage money has been in the proportion of
that granted the last and present year to the army in Canada. Such gentlemen,
therefore, as have not already understood this general system of the service,
will provide themselves by purchase, as opportunity offers, always remembering,
that the prohibition of purchasing from savages is still in force.

Duer Camp, August 17, 1777.
IT was endeavored, among other objects, by the expedition which marched to
the left, to provide such a supply of cattle as would have enabled the army to
proceed without waiting the arrival of the magazines. That attempt having
failed of success, through the chances of war, the troops must necessarily halt
some days for bringing forward the transport of provisions; and the several
corpse will employ that time to collect the sick, convalescents, and such other
parties as are merely employed in regimental duties.

Duer Camp, August 18, 1777.
IT having been observed a common practice for officers to order to be taken
from the provision train, in the service of the king for this army, the carts
and horses for the carrying of baggage and other purposes, to avoid for the
future this danger and inconvenience to the service, it is in the most positive
manner ordered, that no cart or horse is to be used, but for the public
transport of the army; nor is any officer, accidentally coming to any
particular post, to interfere with the provision train, in any other manner
than to give it every aid and assistance in his power, which he is on all
occasions to do.

Camp near Batten Kill, Aug. 26, 1777.
THE Lieutenant General having received a report from Lieutenant Colonel
Breymen, relative to the action of Saintcoick Mills, and likewise having
received every collateral information possible, thinks it but justice to
declare publicly, that he has no reason to be dissatisfied with the personal
spirit of the troops; that, on the contrary, the officers commanding corpse
acted with intrepidity on that occasion. The failure of the enterprise seems to
be owing, in the first instance, to the credulity of those who managed the
department of intelligence, who suffered great numbers of the rebels to pass
and repass, and perhaps to count the number of the detachment; and upon
ill-grounded confidence induced Lieutenant Colonel Baume to advance too far.
The next cause was the slow movement of Lieutenant Colonel Breymen; who, from
bad weather, bad roads, and tired horses, together with other impediments
stated by Lieutenant Colonel Brehmen, could not reach 24 miles from eight in
the morning of the 15th, to four in the afternoon of the 16th. The succor
therefore arrived too late. The failure of ammunition, in the management of
which there seems to have been some improvidence, was another misfortune; the
rest seem common occurrences of war. Upon the whole, the enemy has felt very
little success; and there is no circumstance to affect the army with further
regret or melancholy, than that which arises from the loss of some gallant men.
-- But let the affair of the mill of Saintcoick remain henceforward as a lesson
against the imposition of a treacherous enemy, many of whom, in the very hour
of swearing allegiance to the king, fought*against his troops; and against
expending ammunition too fast, which obliged conquering troops to retreat. The
reflection on this affair will moreover excite alertness and exertion in every
corpse marching to the support of another, by showing in whatever degree these
qualities may be possessed by the commanding officers, and they are not to be
doubted in the present instance, yet, unless they are general, common accidents
may become fatal in the course of two hours, may decide the turn of an
expedition, and may even decide in some cases the fate of a campaign.

Batten Kill, Aug. 28, 1777.
GREAT irregularities having been committed by conductors and other followers
of the army, camp courts-martial will occasionally be assembled in the nature
of a general court martial, consisting of one captain, and four subalterns from
the line, who will try such offenders according to the clause in the mutiny
act, which subjects all followers of the army to military law.

As long as a brigadier shall be on duty at Ticonderoga, the brigadier with the
army shall command both brigades.

Batten Kill, Aug. 30, 1777.
STRICT economy in the receipt and delivery of provisions, at all times an
essential duty, now becomes an object of the greatest consequence. The fate of
the campaign may depend upon it; and as the preservation of the live cattle
demands the most particular attention, they are only to be slaughtered for the
sick, and in such cases as are absolutely necessary.

The commanding officers are therefore to send in an account, upon honor, of
the fresh provisions necessary for their sick to the commissary the day before
the general issue of provisions to the army, and be responsible that the proper
deduction of rations is made for the fresh provision received.

Whenever the stock of cattle shall be sufficient to admit of it, every
attention shall be paid to the comfort and convenience of officers; and notice
will be given when they can be supplied with rations of fresh provisions
instead of salt.

The Lieutenant General, meaning that every regiment should be on the same
regulation, directs, that the servants and bat-men be allowed as follows:
Servants. Bat-men. Field officer, -- 1 -- 2 Captain, -- 1 -- 1 Subalterns of a
company, -- 2 -- 1

When the men's tents are carried on bat-horses, a bat-man to be allowed to each
company.

The servants to be considered as effective in the ranks, and to attend every
evening parade. The other parades at roll-callings they are exempted from,
unless the regiments are under arms. The bat-men to be always armed, and to
form the baggage-guard. The commanding officers of regiments will take care
that this order be complied with strictly.

Whenever cattle are killed it must be always at night -- the commissaries are
made answerable for this. All cattle brought into camp to be sent to the board
of regulation, and by that board to be sent to the commissary-general. The
troops must be sensible, that buying cattle privately, and by that means
preventing a general supply, must prove very injurious to the service.

Batten Kill, September 4, 1777.
THE additional companies to be divided between the eight battalion companies
of each regiment. The men now wanting to complete are to be filled up, and the
supernumeraries to be accounted with by a particular pay bill, and a particular
account kept and regulated by the commanding-officer of each company.

Batten Kill, September 6, 1777.
THE army will march in a very short time. Each regiment will therefore make
such inspection and preparation in regard to their sick, their baggage, and
their regimental arrangements, as will permit them to move alertly, and with
their ranks as strong as possible.

The surgeons of regiments to meet the surgeons of the hospital, at fort
Miller, at one o'clock tomorrow, in order to concert proper measures for the
future conduct of the sick* and for keeping in a correct manner a proper
communication between the regimental and general hospitals.

Camp at Saratoga, September 13, 1777.
THE army may be required to take arms at the shortest notice. Officers
therefore are not to quit the camp, and no soldier or follower of the army is
to pass the Fish-kill, on pain of the severest punishment.

The present post of the six companies of the 47th regiment being dismissed to
cover the depot of provisions, these companies are not to take any duties of
the line, but will augment their picquet to 40 men, which, during the night,
will occupy a post on the island; and another on the point of land, on the
south side of the Fish-kill, where it falls into the river.

The 20th regiment will advance four companies to cover headquarters. -- They
will bring their tents, and receive orders from Sir Francis Clarke.

The picquets and quarter-guards of the line to be posted on the right flank of
the incampment, so as to form a line with the British light infantry.

If it should be necessary to form the line of battle in that front, the
regiments will march to it by two columns; the 9th regiment, followed by the
21st, making the column on the right, and the 62d regiment followed by the
20th, making the column on the left; in order to fill up the place between the
corpse of General Fraser and colonel Brehemn -- Brigadier Hamilton will order a
communication, and mark it to the commanding officers in such a manner that it
may be made in the night time with alertness and without confusion.

When Major General Philips, shall have directed the roads proper for the park
of artillery in this movement, they are to be reconnoitred by their respective
officers, that their march may not clash with the column.

If this movement is made, the 47th regiment keeps its ground, and is to defend
it to the last against any attack from the other side of the water; and the
four companies that cover the headquarters are to take post in the redoubt
above the bridge that leads to headquarters.

In case of any movement from this side of Hudson's river, Major General
Reidesel, will form the left wing of the army, at the head of their incampment,
but not march off their ground. The quartermasters and camp-colour-men of the
left wing are to mark out their ground tomorrow morning; but that wing is not
to pass the river till the last of the depot has crossed the bridge: for the
expediting which purpose all the departments concerned are to use their utmost
diligence.

Camp at Saratoga, September 14, 1777.
DURING the next march of the army the corpse are to move in such a state, as to
be fit for instant action. It is therefore unavoidably necessary to
circumspect, more than is at present done, brigade conveyances, in regard to
attendance upon baggage, cattle, and other inferior purposes.

The brigadiers will collect tomorrow from the commanding-officers of corpse
under their command a report of the number of rank and file each corpse can
march, and how the rest are disposed of.

It is to be a standing order for the rest of the campaign, that all picquets
and guards are to be under arms an hour before daylight every morning, and so
continue till it is quite light. All out-posts and out-lying picquets to send
patroles at the same time.

Camp near Swords-house, September 18, 1777.
TO the great reproach of discipline, of the common sense of soldiers who have
been made prisoners, the service has sustained a loss within these few days,
that might have cost some hundreds of the enemy to have brought on in action.
The Lieutenant General will no longer bear to lose men for the pitiful
consideration of potatoes or forage. The soldier is the property of the king,
and since friendly admonitions, repeated injunctions, and corporal punishment
will have no effect, the army is now to be informed, and it is not doubted the
commanding-officers will do it solemnly, that the first soldier caught beyond
the advanced sentries of the army will be instantly hanged.

In case of an action, the Lieutenant General will be found near the British
line, or he will leave word there where he may be followed; and a
subaltern-officer is to be sent from each of the following corpse, viz. one from
the British line, one from Brigadier-general Fraser's corpse, and one who speaks
French from the left wing. These officers to be on horseback.

Camp on Braemus Heights, September 21, 1777.
AS parties are to be employed today in making roads in order to advance
toward the enemy, it is the general's orders that the several corpse incamp on
their present ground immediately.

The Lieutenant General, having had an opportunity of observing the conduct of
the troops on all parts in the action of the 19th instant, thinks it incumbent
on him to give his public testimony of the exemplary spirit of the officers in
general, and in many instances of the private men. In both these distinctions
the artillery is to be included; and the brigade under Captain Jones deserves a
peculiar place. His warmest thanks to Major General Philips, cannot be omitted
on any occasion, when, added to the service of the department under his
immediate inspection, he finds himself under great obligation for a most able
and zealous second in command.

The zeal and spirit of Major General Reidesel also deserves the
Lieutenant-general's acknowledgement. The regular fire given by the troops he
brought up, and the good countenance of the Germans, were fully noticed.

Brigadier-general Fraser took his position at the beginning of the day with
great judgment, and sustained the action with his usual presence of mind and
vigor.

Brigadier-general Hamilton, acquitted himself honorably by his activity and
conduct, during an action of several hours.

Amidst these several actions of applause, the impetuosity and uncertain aim of
the British troops in giving their fire, and the mistake they are still under
of preferring it to the bayonet, is much to be lamented. The Lieutenant General
is persuaded this error will be corrected in the next engagement, upon the
conviction of their own reason and reflection, as well as upon that general
precept of discipline, never to fire but by order of an officer.

One hundred and twenty brave men of courage and fidelity, from the provincial
corpse of Jessup, Peter's, McAlpin and McKay, are to be incorporated, for this
campaign only, into the six British regiments, in the proportion of twenty to a
regiment. They will have a certificate from under the hand of the
Lieutenant General, to entitle them to a discharge on the 25th day of December
next. They will besides receive a gratuity on being incorporated, and another
at the expiration of their service: and these will be the whole number required
this campaign. Those corpse, whose establishment is to take place on a certain
number of men being raised, are allowed to recommend those furnished upon this
occasion as part of that number.

Braemus Heights, Sept. 25, 1777.
ALL picquet, quarter, and rear guards, to send out patroles round their
respective posts continually. The men off duty are to accoutre this night at
twelve o'clock, and hold themselves in readiness to turn out when ordered.

All the drivers to be assembled this evening at the time of rollcalling at the
different detachments, and to be informed, that seven men to those who deserted
have been scalped by the enemy's Indians, and that the Indians belonging to our
camp are in pursuit of the rest. They are also to be informed, that the first
deserter taken belonging to them will be hanged.

Braemus Heights, Sept. 28, 1777.
THE Lieutenant General has received intelligence of an attempt made by the
enemy on Ticonderoga, in which they have miscarried and retired; but have made
prisoners some part of the 53d regiment posted on the carrying-place of Lake
George. Till circumstances are more authentically known, it will be an act of
injustice to accuse any officer of so great a fault as suffering a surprise;
but the occasion cannot be overlooked of repeating to officers in general the
necessity of vigilance and unremitting alertness on their posts, and of warning
them, that no distance of the enemy, or situation of the ground, is security or
excuse, if they are off their guard.

ERRATUM.
Page 14, last line but two, for countenances, read countenance.

FINIS.

