AN ESSAY ON THE FORMATION, STRUCTURE, AND USE OF THE TEETH.

[PRICE ONE SHILLING.]

AN ESSAY ON THE FORMATION, STRUCTURE, AND USE OF THE TEETH.

WITH A SUPPLEMENT, CONTAINING The necessary Directions and Instructions for
cleaning and preserving them.

WHEREIN The Opinions of some ancient and modern Writers on the Subject, will
be impartially considered.

BY MAYER LEWIS, OPERATOR FOR THE TEETH IN OXFORD.

Dedicated to the GENTLEMEN of that University.

LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR, and sold by J. WHEEL, in Paternoster Row;
WILLIAM JACKSON, at Oxford; and Mess. FLETCHER and HODGSON, at Cambridge.

M DCC LXXII.

TO THE GENTLEMEN OF THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD.
GENTLEMEN,
THE numerous favors which, during a residence of five years in Oxford, I have
received from you, will, I hope, justify the propriety of this dedication; and
make that, which otherwise would appear an act of the highest presumption in
me, considered as a small tribute of my gratitude and respect.

Though I might be justly accused of a vanity nearly allied to the extravagance
of folly, should I presume to think that I had a deserved claim to your
attention and perusal of the following pages, either from the merit of their
author, or from their own intrinsic value, yet I cannot but hope for your
favorable acceptance of them, when I consider how nearly connected the subject
of this treatise is, not only with the necessary regard which ought to be paid
to that most valuable of all earthly blessings, and sublunary possessions,
health, but also with the objects of your present pursuits at the University,
and with your future connections with society in general. For give me leave
(not improperly or ludicrously) to observe, that however ample and extensive
the boundaries of your present studies may be, that assistance is certainly
requisite which can promote and facilitate the communication of them to the
world. The oratory of the pulpit and the bar, with regard to its excellence,
depends greatly on the preservation of the teeth; the teeth, which form the
regular pronunciation of the voice, and prevent, in a great measure, all
impediments and obstructions of the speech.

I could here dwell on the conveniences that attend the preservation of the
teeth in private life: the ease in mastication, and the assistance which it
gives to the mixture of our food with the salivary liquors, which mixture is
necessary toward digestion: the air of floridity and youth, which it imparts
to the complexion, and the prevention of all offensive and disagreeable
humors, which would otherwise grow in the mouth and gums. -- But I shall
reserve the discussion of these points to the proper places in which they will
be ranged in the following pages.

Could the wishes of an unimportant individual have any efficacy toward the
continuance of that celebrity and reputation in which Oxford, that excellent
seminary of learning and polite erudition, is deservedly held, I should be
happy in having a more effectual opportunity than the present of subscribing
myself,

GENTLEMEN, With the highest esteem And gratitude, Your most obedient, And
obliged humble servant, MAYER LEWIS.

AN ESSAY ON THE TEETH.
THE complaint which generally attends the execution of a work of this kind
seems to be, that the author, being puffed up with a vain conceit and opinion
of his own abilities and consequence, takes too frequent and unnecessary
occasions of introducing in his writings technical terms, and obscure
expressions of the art; making that, which professedly undertakes in a clear
and simple manner to treat of the disorders incidental to the teeth, and the
remedial applications necessary in such a case, a work of laborious inquiry,
and a mere display of anatomical knowledge. This error I will endeavor
cautiously to avoid; as well, because the natural history and anatomical
structure of the teeth have been explained and amply treated of in some late
very ingenious and elaborate treatises (those I mean written by Mr. John
Hunter, F. R. S. and surgeon to St. George's Hospital; and Mr. Beardmore,
surgeon dentist in ordinary to his Majesty) as because I should be too
circumscribed in such an attempt by the limits of these pages: such an attempt
requiring more time and leisure thoroughly to finish than I could be able to
secure from my necessary avocations of business. I therefore beg leave to
recommend the treatises above mentioned, from the perusal of which I have
received great pleasure and satisfaction, to those, whose curiosity or
profession lead them to attend to the minutiae of the subject.

My design is merely to give a plain and brief account of the teeth, the
compaints they are subject to, and the methods of cure; omitting nothing, I
hope, which is necessary to be known, and avoiding all obscurities of style and
meaning. The subject has been already amply and copiously treated of, and I
have not the vanity to think that I shall be able to set it, or any branch of
it, in a new or more instructive point of view.

The teeth are hard substances of bone and enamel growing in the cavities of
the upper and lower jaw. These cavities anatomists call the alveoli, which have
circular processes embracing the body of the tooth with great closeness, and
thereby are to be considered as principal supports of the teeth.

These alveolar processes are covered by a compact elastic substance or fleshy
covering, called the gums; which covering adhering firmly to the alveolar
processes invests and contains the teeth firm in their sockets: and are besides
an admirable protection for them against the injuries they might receive from
an exposure to the air and cold, and from the occasional pressure of our food
against the thin membrane which covers them. The circular ridge which separates
and distinguishes the body and roots, or fangs of the teeth, and to which the
gums grow up, and are closely attached, is called the neck or collar of the
tooth. The fangs or roots are those parts which are hid from our sight in the
sockets: they are covered with a thin vascular membrane, called the
periostaeum, which unites them firmly to the jaw. The inner substance of the
tooth is the bone, having an internal cavity, which extends nearly the whole
length of the tooth; beginning at the point of the root or fang, and ending in
the body of the tooth. This cavity is well supplied with nerves and blood
vessels, which nourish the teeth, promote their growth; and when subject to any
disorder or obstruction, are the seat of the most exquisite sensations of pain.
The enamel grows only on, and surrounds the body of the tooth. It is a very
white and smoothly polished substance, of a degree of hardness so great, as to
be impenetrable to our keenest instruments: in cutting or dividing it
therefore, we are obliged to use files, and even those must be skilfully used
by the operators, to prevent any damage being given to the remaining polish of
the enamel.

The shape of the teeth being within the immediate extent of every one's own
knowledge, I shall not here make mention of it. Their number is uncertain;
though I believe they rarely exceed thirty. Mr. Hunter says, that he once saw
only twentyseven, but never more than thirty-two; and makes thereupon this very
sensible remark, "That where the number is less than thirty-two, the deficiency
is in the last grinder." -- This is, however (I mean the number of teeth in a
full subject) a point of mere curiosity; since during the course of my
practice, I never could discover any difference in the formation or structure
of them, whether more or less in number: but they all equally as well perform
their usual functions, and answer the purposes for which they are designed. The
number is not certain, I think, for this reason, viz. that if it were, when the
jaw bone of a man is enlarged, and grows in proportion to the increase of his
age, we do not find any difference in the alveolar spaces, either with regard
to their number or extension, which would otherwise undoubtedly happen in the
case between a man, who in his perfect state, had thirty two teeth, and of
another, who had only thirty.

The above is a brief description of the situation and structure of the teeth:
the formation of them is curious and particular, which I will endeavor to give
as satisfactory and concise an account of, as the limits of this work will
permit.

The contents of the alveoli, or cavities in the jaw, in which the teeth grow;
are at almost the earliest state of infancy, some little soft pulpy substances
which are attached to the bottom of the sockets by a nervous filament, whose
vessels diffuse themselves through the pulpy substances, and the thin membrane
that covers them. Nourishment is hereby conveyed to these pulpy substances,
which, as the child increases in age, begin gradually to ossify, and advance
higher and higher from the sockets. The tooth is yet imperfectly formed, not
having gained any degree of strength and rigidity. By degrees they begin to
press against the gums, which, by constant attrition are inflamed and affected
with redness and swelling, and occasion great pain and uneasiness to the
infant. What is called the cutting of the teeth now begins, which is a violent
effort of nature to pierce through the confinement of the gums, where the teeth
have undergone the state of formation and ossification, and to appear above the
sockets. As this operation of nature is attended with great and continued pain
to the child, and frequently not finished without the hazard of much danger, it
has been a matter of surprise to some gentlemen of eminence in surgery. that a
new and more expeditious method has not been introduced to assist the cutting
of the teeth, and that the efforts and endeavors of nature have not been, as
in almost all other cases, promoted by the assistance of art. Those gentlemen
have thought, and with great appearance of reason and good sense, that no
danger or inconvenience would attend the opening of the gums at the particular
time of the first appearance of dentition, with an instrument, and thereby, by
making a way for the teeth to raise themselves from the sockets to prevent the
slow advances of nature. The instrument certainly must be managed with a nice
and skilful hand; or it may, by penetrating too deep, do much harm and damage
to the tooth itself, not yet sufficiently hardened. I cannot suggest to myself
any plausible objection to the propriety and expediency of this plan; however,
I willingly submit this opinion to the judgments of those gentlemen, who claim
a superior knowledge in this point, from their attendance upon children in
their infancy; my practice having been chiefly confined to the care of the
teeth in their full grown and perfect state.

Anatomists divide the teeth into three classes; viz. The incisores, or cutting
teeth, the canini, or canine teeth, and the molares or Grinders: the first
class including the four anterior teeth; the second including the two next, one
on each side, called the canine teeth, from the similarity and resemblance they
bear to the teeth of dogs; and the third including the rest. For a particular
description of which, I beg leave to refer the curious reader to Mr. Hunter's
late treatise, which I mentioned before, where he will receive every degree of
intelligence and satisfaction to his inquiries. I do not here take so much
notice of them, as perhaps some people may think I ought; as their situation
and parts are pretty universally marked out to every one's knowledge, and all
that could be said would amount only to some comparative remarks on their
different degrees of prominence, thickness, or other inherent properties.

Having thus briefly treated of the formation and structure of the teeth, the
third proposed point, viz. their use, comes under our consideration. This,
though already apppearing sufficiently clear and comprehensive, may be thought
to stand in need of no farther explanatory elucidation; but really the
preservation and care of the teeth being a matter of no small consequence,
indeed of much greater importance than the generality of mankind seem from
their indolence and inattention to them to suspect, I beg leave to be indulged
in a few words. The teeth are parts which will sooner decay and become
disordered through neglect, than any other parts of our Frame; and, when
disordered, occasion greater pain, and introduce a greater variety of other
complaints than can be conjectured upon casual consideration. An enumeration of
the benefits arising from their perfect state may therefore make us more
attentive to them, and more desirous of avoiding the numerous train of
inconveniences and disorders we shall feel upon their decay and imperfect state.

The most common and principal uses which we find to result from the growth and
perfection of the teeth, are the assistances they give us in mastication, and
in speech. I speak from the common experience which every one must be presumed
to be in possession of, when I mention the painful and unpleasant operation of
chewing our food, at a time when any accident or disorder has deprived us of
the temporary or entire loss of our teeth, not to mention any physical reasons
of the harm it may do our constitution, when the necessary assistance which the
food we eat requires to promote its speedy mixture with the salivary liquor,
facilitating thereby its passage into the stomach, and occasioning a pleasant
and safe digestion, is lost or impaired. Another inconvenience will arise in
this case, from the continual pressure of our food against the gums, which may
irritate and inflame them; occasioning, thereby, soreness and swellings.

In speech, we all know the well timed, and regular aid, which the teeth in
their perfect state give to our voice and pronunciation; and, by consequence,
the essential service they are of to the study and practice of oratory in
public life; where the form of the English government and constitution, the
elevated rank and esteem in which the liberal professions are held, and the
reputation and fashionable celebrity which public speaking claims, give the
happiest opportunities for eloquence to display her powers, and engage and
captivate the attention of the largest assemblies: and in private life, where a
graceful and elegant address are no less necessary to attach us to the good
opinion and favor of our neighbors, who would not be susceptible of so
favorable an impression in our behalf, by an imperfect and broken voice, and a
difficulty of expressing our sentiments with fluency, and facility; which I
affirm, will be the case in a disordered and rotten state of the teeth. The
tongue, indeed, modifies the voice, and gives it different forms, but I cannot
help being seriously of opinion, that the various graces of pronunciation arise
from the assistance of the teeth; I mean according to the propulsion of the
tongue against the teeth, which detains or transmits the sounds at pleasure.
This is, indeed, too curious, and indeed too philosophical an argument to be
attended too in this short treatise, nor is it at all of consequence in common
observations. The easiness wherewith we speak, and the pleasure we take in
hearing an harangue gracefully, and well pronounced are, I am sure, not
superficial or trifling recommendations to us to keep, when in our power, the
organs of speech perfect and unimpaired; of which organs I by no means reckon
the teeth in an inferior class.

A collateral advantage arising from the care and preservation of the teeth, is
the grace and symmetry they give to the countenance, keeping the complexion in
a state of youthful bloom, and preventing all wrinkles about the face; which
the depression of the jaws, in consequence of the loss of our teeth, would
inevitably occasion. It is, I am told by my own and other people's
observations, a prevailing fashion in the present age to keep the face and the
complexion as delicate and smooth as art can make them: (I speak not here of
our English ladies, whose care in this particular is laudable, graceful, and
characteristic of that amiable part of the creation) but, without meaning any
offense to that part of mankind, whom the uncouth rusticity and unpoliteness of
some amongst us think they disgrace by giving them the appellation of Beaus, I
beg leave to remind the younger part of my readers, that though they may
possibly take too much pains in adorning their persons, and thereby incur the
charge of effeminacy, and the want of a decent and proper manliness, yet I
think they may oftentimes take too little care in this particular; and none can
be attended with more disagreable and offensive sensations, both to themselves
and their friends, than the neglect of the teeth. -- Excuses may be made
frequently for any neglect of Dress -- slovenly apparel -- or unpowdered curls,
which may be occasioned by a want of time to undergo the various processes of
dressing, or the avocations of business. But no excuses can be made, or taken
for a dirty and foul set of teeth, which argue an habitual neglect of them, and
either a wilful or (what is just as bad in this case) an unintentional omission
of the employment of cleaning them; which employment, when rightly understood,
and frequently practiced, is attended with no length of time, nor the least
trouble.

The disorders to which the teeth are subject, either simply from the neglect
of them, or from an ill habit and state of body, are numerous. Suffice it here
to mention a few; a perfect knowledge of which will, I am persuaded, give
weight to my opinion and advice, relative to the care of them. The tooth ache,
is a pain, which, as it arises from various causes, I suppose, there are few
amongst us, who have at all times been totally exempt from. The pain and
anguish are more violent and excruciating than the visitation of diseases to
other parts of the body. Shakespeare, the immortal poet of the English nation
says, -- There never was philosopher yet,
Who could endure the toothache patiently.


Meaning certainly thereby, that with whatever great fortitude, and
philosophical patience, other disorders might be born and combated with. -- The
pain of the tooth ache surpassed all human resolution and courage. The anguish
is frequently so insupportable that it forces us to use violent means to obtain
some kind of temporary ease, which means occasion, not a long time after, a
greater and more afflicting return of the disorder. -- Such are, I think
unnecessary extraction of the teeth, which, according to some modern operators,
is the universal method of cure; without considering that the pain may be
oftentimes alleviated by gentle methods, and the tooth preserved entire. It
frequently happens that the pain is severely felt in sound teeth, owing to
ulcers and excrescencies on the gums, sudden colds, from sympathy with the
neighboring affected parts, or other causes. Can the extraction of those sound
teeth be therefore in such cases deemed necessary, or even expedient? common
experience and sense show the contrary. -- We cannot perform the operation
without increasing the evil which it is intended to diminish or remove. By
uncovering the roots, and baring the sockets of the neighboring teeth, we make
them loose, and susceptible of pain, and cause frequent inflammations in their
nerves and vascular parts. I have known not a few instances where the
extraction of one of the molares or grinders has considerably weakened the jaw,
though performed in a skilful manner, and by a violent distension of the
muscles of the jaw, brought on a great soreness and inflammation of them. I am,
however, a great friend to extraction when the circumstances of the case
positively demand it. Another method no less injudicious of expelling the pain,
and gaining a temporary relief, is the filling the mouth with acrid and hot
spices and substances, and burning spirituous liquors; which deaden all
sensation for a while, but when their influence is at an end the pain returns
with redoubled strength and severity: exclusive of the harm which such
applications certainly do the gums by disposing them to inflammations, and
occasioning sorenesses, and external swellings.

The tooth ache is frequently occasioned by acrid humors being lodged in the
sockets of the teeth, and purulent matter, which affects the roots of the
teeth, and is always attended with a foul and offensive smell of the breath. In
this case, if the cure be not speedily undertaken, the whole tooth becomes
quite rotten and carious: the nerves and vessels are corrupted, and ulcerations
of the parts will ensue. Of this kind is the scurvy, that most inveterate enemy
to the soundness of the teeth, which is however very effectually dissodged by
lancing the gums, and extracting the coagulated blood and matter. The tartar of
the teeth is another cause of their destruction, which is a yellowish substance
formed on the teeth, which hardens in time, and forms a complete incrustation
over them: deforming and discoloring them, and by secretly and imperceptibly
insinuating itself in the interstices of the teeth, open too great a passage
between them, prevent the growth of the gums by an inconvenient pressure of
them, and are productive of a numerous train of disorders. This tartar,
however, when early discovered, is very easily removed, being at first of a
soft pulpy nature, and may be rubbed off the teeth by washing the mouth with
clean water, and afterward gently rubbing the teeth with a soft spungy brush,
or by using any common tooth powder. When however it has formed an incrustation
too hard to be rubbed off in that manner, having acquired a strong adhesion to
the teeth, the operator's instrument must be used, but great care is necessary
to be taken in the use of it, so as not to damage the enamel. Some kind of an
inflammation in the gums generally attends this operation, which inflammation
may however be reduced with gentle means.

Venereal complaints, and the great quantities of mercury which are generally
administered, in such cases, affect the teeth and gums in a violent degree:
destroy the nourishment which the teeth should receive from the nerves and
blood vessels, impoverish and render the gums pale and flaccid, loosen the
teeth from their sockets, and occasion putrid disorders, attended with
foulnesses of breath. I am not versed in surgery enough to be able to declare
what methods, to prevent such complaints and evils, should be taken, during the
continuance of that venereal disorder to which they owe their rise, but
certainly would recommend at the re-establishment of the patient's health, that
he should have his teeth thorougly cleaned, his gums lanced, and all the other
necessary processes performed, whereby the gums will regain their former
redness and firmness, and adhere, as originally, closely to the teeth; the
teeth will be cleared from all foul discolorations, all the coagulated blood
will be removed from the sockets, and every part be braced a new and
strengthened.

The toothache is frequently communicated by sympathy, from one tooth to
another. This may seem surprising, but I find all writers on the subject I have
consulted, agree in the opinion, though without assigning any cause for so
extraordinary a phenomenon. We must not, however, carry our notions of
sympathetic affections so far as I remember one writer of my own country has
done. I mean one Durlach Cosel, who was a German and lived I think in the year
1558 under Ferdinand the First. In a treatise of his writing upon surgery,
(which I remember to have seen in manuscript in Leipsic) he positively affirms,
that sympathy may be communicated by contact to other animals: and mentions
some instances where he has known the toothache transferred from a man to a
cat, by applying the man's cheek for a considerable time together, to that of
the cat. The toothache left the man, and the animal was seized with the
violence of the pain, as was supposed, by the agony she seemed to labor under,
and the squalling she made. This will, I make no doubt, be looked upon by all
serious and sensible people as a foolish notion, and not founded in fact; and
indeed I am greatly surprised that that writer should so warmly insist on the
reality of it, as he was undoubtedly, by several works which he left behind
him, a man of great wisdom and learning.

I will now just mention a few cases, in which extraction of the teeth may be
expedient or necessary, which will introduce some observations upon artificial
teeth, and the practice of filling up hollow teeth with gold or lead.

When the scurvy, or other putrid humor, lies preying upon the roots or fangs
of the teeth, removed beyond the reach of those instruments that can extract it
from the gums by lancing them; when it destroys the nerves, and corrupts the
foundation of the tooth; in such cases, I must deem extraction necessary, and
that it is so, will incontestibly appear, since we find the root or fang of the
tooth quite covered with the corrupted matter, when we have pulled it out:
which corrupted matter there is no possibility of reaching with our
instruments, or expelling by any other means than extirpation, as it lies so
close and concealed. Were the tooth to continue in the head, the corrupted
matter would eat the tooth gradually upwards, and occasion a putrid decay of
the gums. Stumps or portions of the roots of teeth which have either been
broken off, or injudiciously extracted, ought certainly to be drawn. There is
not much pain in this operation, when skilfully performed, in a comparative
sense with regard to whole teeth being extracted. Mr. Beardmore's opinion is,
that "when any toothache arises from a portion of the root left behind, if the
patient is unwilling to try this second operation, the pain may be sometimes
removed by burning the nerve, or by applying a very small bit of lint dipped in
essential oil of cinnamon, over the hollow part of the stump, or by introducing
a bit of paste made of opium, camphor, and essential oil of pepper mint." But
with all possible deference to his opinion, I should certainly prefer the
extraction of the stump, and recommend it in such strong terms to the patient,
as would, I think induce him to submit to the operation. Palliative
applications may give ease, though Mr. Beardmore seems himself to own the case
to be uncertain, by making use of the word "sometimes;" but I think the pain
will return in a short time, or the gums will grow over these stumps, and being
constantly wounded by them, will be exposed to frequent inflammations, and
extremities of pain. I am happy in having Mr. Beardmore's authority to sanction
my opinion, that "The stump or root of a tooth is at all times easily taken
out, unless it grows to the jaw bone, which is a very rare case; and nothing is
more erroneous than the popular notion that stumps are very difficult to be
removed, and that digging and punching (as they call it) are absolutely
necessary."

Stopping the teeth, or filling them with gold, or lead, is a very useful
practice, and attended with no inconveniences. This is necessary when the
internal part of the tooth is destroyed, or wasted away, and something must be
put in the cavity, to prevent the air from piercing to the fang, or root of it,
and occasioning the toothache, or a further decay; as also for hindering loose
bits of our food, etc. from lodging in the said cavity. The cavity then, in
which the nerve formerly lodged, must be well filled up with gold or lead, and,
if occasion be, may be fastened by a wire or thread to the neighboring teeth:
however, after it has been well pressed down in the hole, there will be no
danger of its falling out.

When there is a real necessity of extracting teeth, or they grow loose from
any venereal or putrid disorder in the blood, I am a great friend to the
practice of supplying their places with artificial teeth. After a little use,
they equally as well perform the different offices of real teeth, in
mastication, in speech, and in appearance. Indeed to such a pitch of greatness
has the art and ingenuity of modern times arrived, that operators can make
them, and fit them in the sockets in such a manner as not to be discernible
from our natural teeth. After washing the mouth constantly for some time
afterward with some astringent liquors, we find that the gums will closely
adhere to these artificial teeth. I have frequently made and set whole rows of
artificial teeth, which have looked very ornamental, and have given an healthy
air to the countenance. The general objection seems to be that they do not fit
firm and easy in the sockets, but are apt to fall out. This objection I flatter
myself, in the course of my practice as a dentist, I can wholly obviate: for
without meaning or wishing to be my own paneygrist, or desirous of arrogating
any credit to extravagant professions which some modern operators for the teeth
among us do, I can safely pronounce that this branch of the profession has
employed greatly my time and attention, and I have, in consequence of that
attention, discovered a method of setting and fixing them almost immoveably in
the sockets, without the great number of wires and ligatures which are commonly
used.

It remains for me now to say something of the care and treatment of the teeth
and gums, to prevent diseases and complaints in them, -- the methods of cure,
and the necessary instructions for cleaning them, and preserving their polish
and whiteness. -- But I here perceive a difficulty which I was not aware of at
first, which is, the impossibility of all the rules and directions I mean to
propose being equally salutary and efficacious in all cases. -- Different modes
of treatment must be prescribed in different cases; -- and as it would be
morally impossible for me now to know the different state of the teeth in all
my different readers, the various complaints they labor under, and whether
they have ever taken care of their teeth or not, it is equally as impossible to
advance any directions which would be of necessary assistance to all, in all
cases; I shall however be exceedingly happy when any persons approve so far of
the sentiments and opinions advanced in the above pages, and think the contents
of this work of consequence enough to let me have the honor of attending them;
whereby I shall be able upon a personal and direct view of the case to decide
with some degree of certainty, and to found my advice upon ocular proofs. --
The scurvy must certainly be removed from the gums, and all tartareous
concretions separated from the teeth, and all putrid matter dislodged from the
sockets, before we can think of using any external application to make the
teeth white and clean: for otherwise, might they not be compared, with great
plausibility, to sepulchers and monuments, which are painted and adorned with
pure and splendid marble on the outside, but within contain nothing but
rotteness and corruption? -- I think it therefore necessary, as I said before,
to have the scurvy removed from the gums; all tartareous concretions separated
from the teeth; and all putrid matter dislodged from the sockets first; and
then external applications may be used to make the teeth white, and free them
from all discolorations.

I cannot help thinking, (notwithstanding what I am going to say opposes the
opinions and advice of some of our modern writers on the subject, though I
believe that Hoffman and Heister, two German writers of eminence on physic and
surgery, have introduced their approbation of the point in question) that the
occasional use of tooth-picks is necessary in an high degree to remove what
scraps of our food have lodged between the interstices of our teeth, and to
give a salutary stimulus to the gums. The objections I hear, are certainly
levelled against too constant an application of tooth-picks; but to argue
against a practice and use in general terms, because it is frequently abused,
and carried to too great extremities in particular instances, is absurd and
ridiculous. The custom of washing the mouth with clear water, after the use of
tooth-picks, is certainly judicious, and the custom of using occasionally cool
emollient gargles.

I could willingly indulge my pen in a further prolixity, but am fearful of
engaging the attention of my readers longer than their patience will
countenance: and likewise of making this a work of laborious and diligent
investigations, which is only a short collection of a few casual observations
and loose remarks, which I have hastily thrown together, and now venture to
solicit the patronage and protection of the Gentlemen of the University of
Oxford, as this publication is in consequence of the desire of many of them,
founded upon too favorable an opinion of the author's merit.

FINIS.

