ARCTIC ZOOLOGY.

VOL. II.

CLASS II. BIRDS.

PIED DUCK, No 488.
P. Marell sculp.


LONDON: PRINTED BY HENRY HUGHS.

M.DCC.LXXXV.

CLASS II. BIRDS.

CLASS II. BIRDS.
DIV. I. LAND BIRDS. II. WATER BIRDS.
DIV. I.
ORDER I. RAPACIOUS. Genus. I. VULTURE. Genus. II. FALCON. Genus. III. OWL.
II. PIES. Genus. IV. SHRIKE. Genus. V. PARROT. Genus. VI. CROW. The Genera
which have not the number prefixed, are not found in America.
Roller.
Genus. VII. ORIOLE. Genus. VIII. GRAKLE. Genus. IX. CUCKOO. Wryneck.
Genus. X. WOODPECKER. Genus. XI. KINGFISHER. Genus. XII. NUTHATCH. Genus.
XIII. TODY. Hoopoe.
Genus. XIV. CREEPER. Genus. XV. HONEY SUCKER.
III. GALLINACEOUS. Genus. XVI. TURKEY. Genus. XVII. GROUS. Genus. XVIII.
PARTRIDGE. Genus. XIX. BUSTARD.
IV. COLUMBINE. Genus. XX. PIGEON.
V. PASSERRINE. Genus. XXI. STARE. Genus. XXII. THRUSH. Genus. XXIII.
CHATTERER. Genus. XXIV. GROSBEAK. Genus. XXV. BUNTING. Genus. XXVI. TANAGRE.
Genus. XXVII. FINCH. Genus. XXVIII. FLYCATCHER. Genus. XXIX. LARK. Wagtail.
Genus. XXX. WARBLERS. Genus. XXXI. TITMOUSE. Genus. XXXII. SWALLOW. Genus.
XXXIII. GOATSUCKER.

DIV. II. WATER BIRDS.
VI. CLOVEN-FOOTED. Genus. XXXIV. SPOONBILL. Genus. XXXV. HERON. Genus. XXXVI.
IBIS. Genus. XXXVII. CURLEW. Genus. XXXVIII. SNIPE. Genus. XXXIX. SANDPIPER.
Genus. XL. PLOVER. Genus. XLI. OYSTER-CATCHER. Genus. XLII. RAIL. Genus. XLIII.
GALLINULE.
VII. PINNATED FEET. Genus. XLIV. PHALAROPE. Genus. XLV. COOT. Genus. XLVI.
GREBE.
VIII. WEB-FOOTED. Genus. XLVII. AVOSET. Genus. XLVIII. FLAMMANT. Genus. XLIX.
ALBATROSS. Genus. L. AUK. Genus. LI. GUILLEMOT. Genus. LII. DIVER. Genus. LIII.
SKIMMER. Genus. LIVE. TERN. Genus. LV. GULL. Genus. LVI. PETREL. Genus. LVII.
MERGANSER. Genus. LVIII. DUCK. Genus. LIX. PELECAN.

CLASS II. BIRDS.
DIV. I. LAND BIRDS.
ORDER I. RAPACIOUS.
I. VULTURE, Genesis Birds I.
86. CARRION.
Urubu, Aura Tzopilotl, Mexic. Margrave, 207, 208. -- Will. Orn. 68. -- Raii
Syn. Av. 180. Carrion Crow, Sloane Jam. ii. 294. -- Brown Jam. 471: Corvus
Sylvaticus, Barrere, 129. Gallinazo, Ulloa voy. i. 60. 201. Turkey Buzzard,
Josselyn. -- Lawson, 138. -- Catesby, i. 6. -- Bancroft, 152. -- Du Pratz, ii.
77. Vultur Aura, Lin. Syst. 122. -- De Buffon, i. 175. -- Pl. Enl. No 187. Le
Vautour du Brasil, Brisson, i. 468. -- Latham, i. 9. No 5. -- LEV. MUS.
WEIGHT four pounds and an half. Head small, DESCRIPTION.
covered with a naked wrinkled red skin, beset with black bristles. This gives
it some resemblance to a Turkey; from which it derives one of the names. The
nostrils are very large, and pervious: the whole plumage is dusky, dashed with
purple and green: legs of a dirty flesh-color: claws black.

These birds are common from Nova Scotia to Terra del Fuego; PLACE.
but swarm in the hotter parts of America; and are found in the islands, where
they are said to be far inferior in size to those of North America.

In the warm climates they keep in vast flocks. MANNERS.
Perch at night on rocks or trees; sitting with dishevelled wings to purify
their bodies, which are most offensively fetid. Toward morning they take
flight, soaring at a vast height, with the gentle motion of a kite; expecting
notice of their banquet by the tainted effluvia of carrion, excrements, or any
filth. They have most sagacious nostrils, and smell their prey at a vast
distance; to which they resort from all quarters, wheeling about, and making a
gradual descent till they reach the ground. They do not confine themselves to
dead animals, but feed on Snakes, and sometimes on Lambs. They are very tame,
and, while they are at their meals, will suffer a very near approach.

In the torrid zone, particularly about Carthagena, they haunt inhabited
places, and are seen in numbers sitting on the roofs of the houses, or walking
along the streets with a sluggish pace. In those parts they are useful, as the
IBIS in Egypt, devouring the noisome subjects, which would otherwise, by the
intolerable stench, render the climate still more unwholesome than it is.

When these birds find no food in the cities, they are driven by hunger among
the cattle of the neighboring pastures. If they see a beast with a sore on the
back, they instantly alight on it, and attack the part affected. The poor
animal attempts in vain to free itself from the devourers, rolling on the
ground with hideous cries: but in vain; for the Vultures never quit hold, till
they have effected its destruction. Sometimes an Eagle presides at the banquet,
and keeps these cowardly birds at a distance, until it has finished its repast.

USES.
Mischievous as they are in a few instances, yet, by the wise and beneficent
dispensations of Providence, they make in the hot climates full recompense, by
lessening the number of those destructive animals the Alligators, which would
otherwise become intolerable by their multitudes. During the season in which
these reptiles lay their eggs in the sand, the Vultures will sit hid in the
leaves of the trees, watching the coming of the female Alligator to deposit its
eggs, who then covers them with sand, to secure them, as she imagines, from all
danger: but no sooner does she retire into the water, than the birds dart on
the spot, and with claws, wings, and beak, tear away the sand, and devour the
whole contents of the depository.

No birds of this genus are found in northern regions of Europe or Asia, at
lest in those latitudes which might give them a pretense of appearing here. I
cannot find them in our quarter of the globe higher than the Grison Alps Will.
Orn. 67.
, or Silesia Schwenckfeldt av. Silesia, 375.
; or at farthest Kalish, in Great Poland Rzaczynski, Hist. Not. Polon. 298.
. Certainly the Count De Buffon was misinformed as to the habitation of the
species, which he ascribes to Norway Hist D'Ois. i. 164. Pl. Enl. 449.
. In the Russian dominions, the Bearded Vulture of Mr. Edwards, iii. tab. 106.
breeds on the high rocks of the great Altaic chain, and beyond lake Baikal Dr.
PALLAS'S Catalogue of the Birds of the Russian empire, which he favored me with
in MS. my surest clue to the Arctic birds.
; which may give it in Europe a latitude of 52. 20. in Asia of 55.

II. FALCON, Genesis Birds II.
86. A. SEA EAGLE.
Br. Zool. i. No 44. Falco Ossifragus, Lin. Syst. 124. -- Latham, i. 30. -- Pl
Enl. 12. 415. Gray Eagle, Lawson, 137. Land Oern, Leems, 230. L'Orfraie, De
Buffon, i. 112. pl. 3. -- LEV. MUS.
VARIES a little from the British species, and is much superior in size. The
length three feet three inches; of wing, twenty-five inches.

Feathers on head, neck, and back, brown, edged with dirty white: chin white:
breast and belly brown, spotted with white: coverts of wings brown, clouded;
primaries black: tail dusky; the middle mottled with white: legs feathered half
down.

PLACE.
Very common in the northern parts of America, and endures its severest winters,
even as high as Newfoundland. These birds prey on sea fowls, as well as land,
and on young Seals, which they seize floating, and carry out of the water.

Eagles, and all sorts of birds of prey, abound in America, where such quantity
of game is found. Multitudes are always seen below the falls of Niagara,
invited by the carcases of Deer, Bears, and other animals, which are so
frequently hurried down in attempting to cross the river above this stupendous
cataract.

This species is very frequent in Kamtschatka; and is found during summer even
on the Arctic coast: is very common in Russia and Sibiria; nor is it more rare
about the Caspian sea, where they breed on the loftiest trees.

87. BLACK EAGLE.
Br. Zool. i. No 43. Falco Fulvus, Lin. Syst. 125. -- Latham, i. 32, No 6.
White-tailed Eagle, Edw. i. 1. -- LEV. MUS. L'Aigle commun, De Buffon, i. 86,
-- Pl. Enl. 409. -- LEV. MUS.
THE whole plumage is of a dusky-brown: the breast marked with triangular spots
of white; in which it varies from the British kind: the tail white, tipped with
black; but in young birds dusky, blotched with white: legs covered to the toes
with soft rust-colored feathers: vent feathers of the same color.

Inhabits Hudson's Bay, and northern Europe as far as Drontheim Especially in
the winter, Leems, 233.
. PLACE.
Is found on the highest rocks of the Uralian chain, where it is not covered
with wood Dr. Pallas.
; but is most frequent on the Sibirian, where it makes its nest on the loftiest
rocks. It is rather inferior in size to the former; but is a generous,
spirited, and docile bird. The independent Tartars train it for the chase of
Hares, Foxes, Antelopes, and even Wolves. The use is of considerable antiquity;
for Marco Polo, the great traveller of 1269, observed and admired the diversion
of the great Cham of Tartary; who had several Eagles, which were applied to the
same purposes as they are at present M. Polo, in Purchase, iii. 85. in Bergeron.
74.
. I must add, that the Tartars esteem the feathers of the tail as the best they
have for pluming their arrows.

The Kalmucs use, besides this species of Eagle, that which the French call
Jean le Blanc De Buffon.
, and also the Lanner; all which breed among them: but people of rank, who are
curious in their Falcons, procure from the Baschkirians the Gyrfalcon and the
Peregrine, which inhabit the lofty mountains of the country Extracts, iii. 303.
A name by which I quote an abridgement of the travels of PALLAS, GMELIN,
LEPECHIN, and others, published by the SOCIETE TYPOGRAPHIQUE, at Berne, under
the title of HISTOIRE DES DECOUVERTES, faites par diverse savans voyageurs dans
plusieurs contrees de la Russie et de la Perse, 4 vols. 8vo.
.

88. BLACK-CHEEKED EAGLE.
F. With a dusky and blue bill; yellow cere: head, neck, and breast, of a deep
ash-color: each cheek marked with a broad black bar passing from the corner of
the mouth beyond the eyes: back, belly, wings, and tail, black: legs yellow,
feathered below the knees.

SIZE, AND PLACE.
Is about the size of the last. Communicated to me by the late Tailor White, Esquire
who informed me that it came from North America. Is described by Mr. Latham, i.
35, No 10; and seems to be the species engraven by M. Robert, among the birds
in the menagery of Louis XIV.

89. WHITE-HEADED EAGLE.
Falco Leucocephalus, Lin. Syst. 124. Bald Eagle, Lawson, 137. -- Catesby, i. 1
Le Pygargue a tete blanch, De Buffon, i. 99. Pl. Enl. 411.
. Brickell, 173. -- Latham, i. 29. -- LEV. MUS. Le Pygargue a tete blanch, De
Buffon, i. 99. -- Pl. Enl. 411. -- LEV. MUS.
BILL, cere, and feet, pale yellow: head, neck, and tail, of a pure white: body
and wings of a chocolate-color. It does not acquire its white head till the
second year.

This Eagle is lesser than the foregoing species, but of great spirit: preys on
Fawns, MANNERS.
Pigs, Lambs, and fish: is the terror of the Osprey, whose motions it watches.
The moment the latter has seized a fish, the former pursues till the Osprey
drops its prey; which, with amazing dexterity, it catches before it falls to
the ground, be the distance ever so great. This is matter of great amusement to
the inhabitants of North America, who often watch their aerial contests. This
species frequently attends the sportsman, and snatches up the game he has shot,
before he can reach it.

These birds build in vast decayed cypresses Catesby.
, or pines, impending over the sea, or some great river, in company with
Ospreys, Herons, and other birds: and their nests are so numerous, as to
resemble a rookery. The nests are very large, and very fetid by reason of the
relics of their prey. Lawson says, they breed very often, laying again under
their callow young; whose warmth hatches the eggs. In Bering's isle they make
their nests on the cliffs, near six feet wide, and one thick; and lay two eggs
in the beginning of July.

90. WHITE EAGLE.
THIS most beautiful and scarce species is entirely white, except the tips of
the wings, which are black. We know nothing of this bird, but what is collected
from Du Pratz Du Pratz, ii. 75. Latham, i. 36.
. The natives of Louisiana set a high value on the feathers, and give a large
price for those of the wings; with them they adorn the Calumet, or pipe of
peace. Different nations make use of the wings, or feathers of different birds;
but, according to Hennepin, always decorate it with the most beautiful.

The Calumet is an instrument of the first importance among the Americans. It
is nothing more than a pipe, CALUMET.
whose bowl is generally made of a soft red marble Du Pratz, i. 298. Kalm, iii.
230.
: the tube of a very long reed, ornamented with the wings and feathers of
birds. No affair of consequence is transacted without the Calumet. It ever
appears in meetings of commerce, or exchanges; in congresses for determining of
peace or war; and even in the very fury of a battle. The acceptance of the
Calumet is a mark of concurrence with the terms proposed; as the refusal is a
certain mark of rejection. Even in the rage of a conflict this pipe is
sometimes offered; and if accepted, the weapons of destruction instantly drop
from their hands, and a truce ensues. It seems the sacrament of the Savages;
for no compact is ever violated, which is confirmed by a whiff from this holy
reed. The Dance of the Calumet is a solemn rite which always confirms a peace,
or precedes a war. It is divided into three parts: the first, appears an act of
devotion, danced in measured time: the second, is a true representation of the
Pyrrhic dance Strabo, lib. x. p. 736. edit. Amstel. 1707.
: the third, is attended with songs expressive of the victories they had
obtained, the nations they had conquered, and the captives they had made.

From the winged ornaments of the Calumet, and its conciliating uses, writers
compare it to the Caduceus of Mercury, which was carried by the Caduceatores,
or messengers of peace, with terms to the hostile states. It is singular, that
the most remote nations, and the most opposite in their other customs and
manners, should in some things have, as it were, a certain consent of thought.
The Greeks and the Americans had the same idea, in the invention of the
Caduceus of the one, and the Calumet of the other. Some authors imagine, that
among the Greeks the wings were meant as a symbol of eloquence. I rather think
that the twisted Serpents expressed that insinuating faculty; and that the
emblem was originally taken from the fatal effect the rhetoric of Satan had on
our great mother, when he assumed the form of that reptile, which the highest
authority represents as more subtle than any beast of the field. On this the
heathen mythology formed their tale of Jupiter taking the figure of a Serpent,
to insinuate himself into the good graces of Olympias; who, like Eve, fell a
victim to his persuasive tongue. As to the wings, it is most probable that they
were to show the flight of discord; which the reconciled parties gave, with all
the horrors of war, to the air, and sport of the winds.

The Oole, or Eagle, is a sacred bird among the Americans. In case of sickness,
they invoke this bird to descend from heaven (which in its exalted flight it
approaches nearer than any other) and bring down refreshing things; as it can
dart down on its rapid wing quick as a flash of lightning Adair's Hist. Am.
Indians, 179.
.

91. OSPREY.
Fishing Hawk, Catesby, i. 2. -- Lawson, 137. -- Brickell, 173. Osprey.
Josselyn's Rarities, ii. -- Br. Zool. i. No 46. -- Latham, i. 45. Le Balbuzard,
De Buffon, i. 103. pl. 2. Falco Haliaetus. Blafot. Fisk-orn, Faun. Suec. No 63.
Fisk Gjoe, Leems, 234. -- Pl. Enl. 414. -- LEV. MUS.
F. With blue cere, and feet: head, and lower part of the body, white: upper
part brown: two middle feathers of the tail plain brown; the rest barred with
white and brown.

This, in all respects, resembles the European kind. MANNERS.
Notwithstanding it is so persecuted by the Bald Eagle, yet it always keeps
near its haunts. It is a species of vast quickness of sight; and will see a
fish near the surface from a great distance That agreeable traveller, the
reverend Dr. Burnaby, adds, that it is often seen resting on the wing for some
minutes, without any visible change of place, before it descends. Travels in
America, 2d ed. p. 48.
: descend with prodigious rapidity, and carry the prey with an exulting scream
high into the air. The Eagle hears the note, and instantly attacks the Osprey;
who drops the fish, which the former catches before it can reach the ground, or
water. It sometimes happens that the Osprey perishes in taking its prey; for if
it chances to fix its talons in an overgrown fish, it is drawn under water
before it can disengage itself, and is drowned.

It is very frequent in Kamtschatka; and in summer, PLACE.
even under the Arctic zone of Europe and Asia. Is very common in Sibiria, and
spreads far north; probably common to the north of America, and Asia. Is rare
in Russia. It is likewise very frequent as low on the Wolga as the tract
between Sysran and Saratoff, where they are said to be the support of the Ern
Eagle, as they are of the White-tailed Eagle in America, each living by the
labors of the Osprey. The Tartars have a superstition, that a wound from its
claws is mortal, either to man or fish, and consequently dread its attack
Extracts, i. 479.
.

92. ROUGH-LEGGED.
Falco Lagopus Brunnich, No 15. -- Leems Lapm. 236. Rough-legged Falcon, Br.
Zool. ii. App. 529. -- Latham, i. 75. -- LEV. MUS.
F. With a yellow cere, and feet: head, neck, and breast, of a yellowish white,
marked with a few oblong brown spots: belly of a deep brown: thighs white,
striped with brown: scapulars blotched with yellowish white and brown: coverts
of the wings edged with rust-color; primaries black: tail, little longer than
the wings; the part next to the rump white; the end marked with a black bar;
the tips white: legs feathered to the toes: feet yellow. Length two feet two
inches. SIZE.


PLACE.
Inhabits England, Norway, Lapmark, and North America. Was shot in Connecticut.

93. ST. JOHN'S.
Latham, i. 77, No 58.
F. With a short dusky bill: head of a deep brown: hind part of the neck, back,
scapulars, and coverts of the tail, marked with bars of black, and dull white,
pointing obliquely: coverts of the wings deep brown; the greater spotted on
their inner sides with white; the primaries dusky, the lower part white, barred
with deep ash-color and black: the under side of the body brown, marked
sparingly with white and yellowish spots: tail shorter than the extremity of
the wings; the end white; beneath that is a bar of black, succeeded by two or
three black and cinereous bands; the rest of the tail marked with broad bars of
white, and narrower of ash-color: the legs are clothed with feathers to the
toes, which are yellow, and very short.

SIZE.
Length, one foot nine inches.

PLACE.
Inhabits Hudson's Bay and Newfoundland. BL. MUS.

(...) ^alcon No. 93. Chocolate Colored Fal^^^


94. CHOCOLATE-COLORED.
Latham, i. 54. No 34. A; 76. No 57.
F. With a short and black bill, and yellow cere. The whole plumage of a deep
bay or chocolate-color, in parts tinged with ferruginous: primaries black; the
lower exterior sides of a pure white, forming a conspicuous spot or speculum:
the wings reach to the end of the tail: the exterior sides of the five outmost
feathers of the tail, dusky; their inner sides blotched with black and white;
the two middle, black and cinereous: the legs and toes feathered; the last
remarkably short. LENGTH one foot ten inches.

Inhabits Hudson's Bay and Newfoundland. Preys much on Ducks. PLACE.
Sits on a rock and watches their rising, when it instantly strikes at them.

95. NEWFOUNDLAND.
Latham, i. 79. No 60.
F. With a yellow cere: deep yellow irides: hind part of the head ferruginous:
crown, back, scapulars, and coverts of wings, brown, edged with a paler color:
belly rust-colored, blotched with deeper shades: thighs of a mottled ash,
marked with round dusky spots, and on the lower parts with four large dark
blotches: the tail crossed by four bars of deeper and lighter brown: legs
yellow, strong, and feathered half way down. LENGTH twenty inches. The
description borrowed from Mr. Latham.

Inhabits Newfoundland. PLACE.


96. SACRE.
Belon, Hist. des Ois. 108. -- Buffon, i. 246. Speckled Patridge Hawk of
Hudson's Bay, Phil. Trans. lxii. 383. -- Latham, i. 78. Nos 58, 59.
F. With a dusky bill; upper mandible toothed: irides yellow: cere and legs
bluish. Head, and upper part of the body, of a dusky brown: hind part of the
head mottled with white: whole under side of the body, from chin to vent,
white; the middle of each feather marked with a dusky spot: wings reach almost
to the end of the tail: coverts, scapulars, and primaries, of a deep brown,
elegantly barred transversely with white: tail brown, marked on each side with
oval transverse spots of red: feathers on the thighs very long, brown spotted
with white: the fore part of the legs covered with feathers almost to the feet.
LENGTH two feet. Weight two pounds and an half.

PLACE.
Inhabits Hudson's Bay and Newfoundland: found also in Tartary, and is a species
celebrated there for the sport of falconry. It is a hardy species; for it never
quits the rigorous climate of Hudson's Bay. Preys on the white Grous, which it
will seize even while the fowler is driving them into his nets. It breeds in
April and May, in desert places. The young fly in the middle of June. The
females are said to lay only two eggs.

97. PERIGRINE.
Br. Zool. i. No 48. -- Latham, i. 68, No 49; 73. No 52. Spotted Hawk, or
Falcon; and Black Falcon, Edw. i. 3, 4. Le Faucon, De Buffon, i. 249. pl. 16.
-- LEV. MUS.
F. With a short strong bill, toothed on the upper mandible, of a bluish color:
cere yellow: irides hazel: forehead whitish: crown, and hind part of the head,
dusky: the back, scapulars, and coverts of wings, elegantly barred with deep
blue and black: the primaries dusky, with transverse oval white spots: the
throat, chin, and breast, of a pure white, the last marked with a few dusky
lines pointing down: the belly white, crossed with numerous dusky bars, pointed
in the middle: legs yellow: toes very long.

The American species is larger than the European. They are subject to vary.
The black Falcon, and the spotted Falcon of Mr. Edwards, are of this kind; each
preserve a specific mark, in the black stroke which drops from beneath the
eyes, down toward the neck. The differences in the marks in the tail may
possibly proceed from the different ages of the birds; for few kinds differ so
much in the several periods of life as the Rapacious.

Inhabits different parts of North America, PLACE.
from Hudson's Bay as low as Carolina. In Asia, is found on the highest parts
of the Uralian and Sibirian chain. Wanders in summer to the very Arctic circle.
Is common in Kamtschatka.

98. GENTIL.
Gentil Falcon, Br. Zool. i. No 50. F. Gentilis. Falk. Faun. Suec. No 58. --
Latham, i. 64. -- LEV. MUS.
F. With a dusky bill: yellow cere, irides, and legs: head and upper side of
the neck ferruginous, streaked with black: under side, from chin to tail,
white, marked with dusky heart-shaped spots: back, coverts of wings, and
scapulars, brown, edged with rust-color: primaries dusky, barred on the
exterior side with black: wings reach only half the length of the tail: tail
long, barred with four or five broad bands of black cinereous; each of the
first bounded by a narrow line of dirty white.

In size superior to the European kind, SIZE.
being two feet two inches long. Shot in the province of New York. PLACE.
Is found in northern Europe, as far as Finmark Leems, 337. Strom. 224.
.

99. GOSHAWK.
Br. Zool. i. No 52. F. Palumbarius, Faun Suec. No 67. -- De Buffon, i. 230. --
Latham, i. 58. -- LEV. MUS.
F. With a bluish bill, black at the tip: yellowish green cere: yellow legs:
head brown; hind part mottled with white: over each eye extends a long whitish
line: hind part of the neck, back, and wings, of a deep brown color: breast and
belly white, crossed with numerous undulated lines of brown: tail of a
cinereous brown, crossed by four or five bars of black: wings shorter than the
tail.

That which I saw in the Leverian Museum, was superior in size to the European.
PLACE.
Mr. Lawson says, they abound in Carolina: are spirited birds, but lesser than
those of Muscovy. Is common in that country, A WHITE VARIETY.
and Sibiria. Dr. Pallas adds, that there is a large white variety on the
Uralian mountains, mottled with brown and yellow. These are yet more frequent
in the east part of Sibiria; and in Kamtschatka they are entirely white. These
are the best of all Hawks for falconry. EXCELLENT FOR FALCONRY.
They extend to the river Amur; and are used by the emperor of China in his
sporting progresses Bell. ii. 87.
, attended by his grand falconer, and a thousand of the subordinate. Every bird
has a silver plate fastened to its foot, with the name of the falconer who had
the charge of it; that in case it should be lost, it might be brought to the
proper person: but if he could not be found, the bird is delivered to another
officer, called the Guardian of lost birds; who keeps it till it is demanded by
the falconer to whom it belonged. That this great officer may the more readily
be found, among the army of hunters, who attend the emperor, he erects a
standard in the most conspicuous place Bergeron, 75, 76.
.

The emperor often carries a Hawk on his hand, to let fly at any game which
presents itself; which are usually Pheasants, Partridges, Quails, or Cranes.
Marco Polo saw this diversion about the year 1269 Bergeron, 75. 76.
; a proof of its antiquity in these parts, when it formed so regular and
princely an establishment in the state of this great eastern monarch; the
origin of which might have been in some long preceding age. The custom of
carrying a Falcon extended to many countries, and was esteemed a distinction of
a man of rank. The Welsh had a saying, that you may know a gentleman by his
Hawk, Horse, and Grehound. In fact, a person of rank seldom went without one on
his hand. Harold, afterward king of England, is painted going on a most
important embassy, with a Hawk on his hand, and a Dog under his arm Monumens de
la Monarchy Francoise, i. 372.
. Henry VI. is represented at his nuptials, attended by a nobleman and his
Falcon Mr. Walpole's Anecdotes of Painting, i. 33.
. Even the ladies were not without them, in earlier times; for in an ancient
sculpture in the church of Milton Abbas, in Dorsetshire, appears the consort of
King Athelstan with a Falcon on her royal fist Hutchins's Dorsetshire, ii. 443.
tearing a bird: and, perhaps to indulge his queen in her passion for the
diversion, he demanded of my countrymen (besides an immense tribute) some of
their most excellent Hounds, and of their best Hawks: which proves the high
esteem in which our Dogs and Falcons were held in those early days Malmsbury,
lib. ii. c. 6.
.

100. RED-TAILED.
American Buzzard, Latham, i. 50. -- LEV. MUS.
F. With a dusky bill, and yellow cere: head, lower part of the neck, and chin,
brown, mixed with white: breast and belly white, varied with long stripes of
brown, pointing downwards: femoral feathers very long, white, and marked with
long dentated stripes of pale brown: upper part of the neck, and back, of a
very deep brown: coverts and tertials brown, barred or edged with white:
primaries dusky, barred with cinereous: tail of a pale rust-color, marked near
the end with a dusky narrow bar: legs yellow. SIZE of the Goshawk.

Inhabits North America. Sent from Carolina to Sir Ashton Lever. PLACE.


101. LEVERIAN.
F. With a dusky bill, greatly hooked: head striped with brown and white: upper
part of the body and wings of a deep brown; each feather elegantly marked at
the end with a large white spot: the whole under side of the body white: the
outmost feathers of the tail marked with nine white, and the same number of
dusky bars; middle feathers with dusky and cinereous: the wings extend beyond
the end of the tail: legs strong and yellow.

PLACE.
SIZE of a Buzzard. Sent to Sir Ashton Lever from Carolina.

102. RED-SHOULDERED.
Barred-breasted F. Latham, i. 56, No 36. -- LEV. MUS.
F. With a slender dusky bill; yellow cere; and legs, head, and neck, of a
yellowish white, streaked downwards with dusky lines: back of a deep brown,
edged with rust-color: lesser coverts of wings ferruginous, spotted with black;
primaries and secondaries black, spotted on each side most distinctly with
white: breast and belly of a light tawny; the first streaked downwards with
black; the last traversed with deeper tawny: tail short and dusky, crossed by
seven narrow bands of white; the two nearest to the ends more remote than the
others: legs weak. LENGTH twenty-two inches.

PLACE.
Inhabits Long Island. This is a new species, preserved in Mrs. BLACKBURNE'S
Museum.

103. BUZZARD.
Ash-colored Buzzard, Edw. ii. 53. -- Latham, i. 55, No 35. 48; No 28. -- De
Buffon, i. 223. Falco Buteo. Quidfogel, Faun. Suec. No 60. -- Br. Zool. i. 54.
-- LEV. MUS.
F. With a dusky bill, and bluish yellow cere: head, and hind part of the neck,
of a cinereous brown, streaked with yellow: back brown; lower part and rump
barred with rust-color, sometimes with white: the coverts of the wings brown;
the greater and scapulars spotted with white; the three first quil-feathers
black, white at their bases; the interior webs of the rest blotched with black
and white: the throat and breast yellowish, marked thinly with oblong brown
spots: belly white, varied with great spots of brown: feathers of the thighs
long, white, crossed with sagittal bars of yellow: tail marked with about nine
bands of black and light cinereous; the tip white: legs short, strong, and
yellow. LENGTH two feet two inches.

The American varies in size, and sometimes slightly in color; PLACE.
but in both has so much the habit of the English Buzzard, as not to merit
separation. It is called in New York, the great Hen Hawk, from its feeding on
poultry. It continues there the whole year. Lays in May five eggs: the young
fly about the middle of June. It is also an inhabitant of Hudson's Bay and
Newfoundland; and in Europe as high as Sondmor, in Norway; where, from its
attacking the Eagle, it is called Orne-Falk. Migrates, before winter, from
Sweden. Is scarce in Russia; and very few are found in Sibiria. Is found in
winter as low as Woronesch In Russia, lat. 52 north.
.

104. PLAIN.
F. With the bill black: head dusky: nape spotted with white: back, and coverts
of wings, and tail, of an uniform deep brown: under side of the neck, breast,
and belly, and thighs, deep brown, slightly spotted with white: primaries
dusky: inner webs marked with great oval spots of white, mottled with brown:
middle feathers of the tail plain brown; inner webs of the rest mottled with
white; exterior webs and ends slightly edged with the same: legs strong:
yellow? Wing reaches near the length of the tail. LENGTH, from bill to tail,
two foot one.

PLACE.
Inhabits Hudson's Bay.

105. MARSH.
Marsh Hawk, Edw. iv. 291. -- Latham, i. 90. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
F. With a bluish bill; orange cere, orbits, and legs: irides hazel: a black
line extends from the corner of the bill beyond the eyes; above that is another
of white, which encircles the cheeks, and meets in front of the neck: head,
throat, and upper part of the breast, varied with black and rust-color: back,
and coverts of the wings, brown: rump white: breast and belly, and thighs, of a
bright ferruginous: tail dusky brown, crossed by four black bands: legs strong,
thick, and short; which are specific distinctions from the next. LENGTH two
feet.

PLACE.
Inhabits Pensylvania: frequents, during the summer, marshy places; where it
feeds on the small birds, Frogs, Snakes, and Lizards. At approach of winter
quits the country.

106. RINGTAIL.
Br. Zool. i. No 59. -- Edw. iii. 107. -- Latham, i. Nris 75, 75 A, and No 34,
is a rust-colored variety. Falco Pygargus, F. Hudsonius, Lin. Syst. 128. --
Muller, No 72. -- BL. MUS.
F. With a dusky bill and yellow cere: a white line over each eye: head, upper
part of the neck, and back, dusky brown: coverts and primaries of the same
color; the inner sides of the last white: breast, belly, and thighs, whitish,
marked with ferruginous spots: vent and rump white, encircling the root of the
tail: the middle feathers of the tail dusky; the next of a bluish ash-color;
the outmost white, all marked transversely with orange bars: legs long, and
very slender.

This species is superior in size to the British Ringtail; SIZE.
but having most of the characters of that bird, we doubt not but that it is
the same. Like the European kind, skims along the ground in search of prey,
which is Mice, Frogs, and small birds. Builds its nest indifferently on the
ground, or on the lower parts of trees. It is subject to vary to a deep
rust-color; plain, except on the rump and tail.

Inhabits Hudson's Bay. Weight, in Hudson's Bay, SIZE AND PLACE.
seventeen ounces and a half. Length twenty-one inches. Extent three feet
seven. Is very common in the open and temperate parts of Russia and Sibiria;
and extends as far as lake Baikal DR. PALLAS.
. It is not found far in the north of Europe. Linnaeus omits it among the birds
of his country; but Mr. Brunnick describes one, which had been shot in lat. 58,
on the little island of Christiansoe In the Baltic, a little north-east of
Bornholm.
.

107. WINTER.
F. With a black bill; yellow cere: head of a deep brown: back the same, tinged
with rust: hind part of the neck streaked with white: the coverts of the wings
dusky, edged with dull white; those on the ridge with orange; ends of the
primaries dusky; the other parts barred with brown and white: breast and belly
white, marked with heart-shaped spots: thighs sulphur-colored, speckled with
dusky: vent feathers white: tip of the tail white; then succeeds a broad dusky
bar; the remaining part barred with brown, tawny, and black: legs long, and
very slender.

SIZE.
Is of an elegant form, and about the size of the RINGTAIL.

PLACE.
Inhabits the province of New York: appears at approach of winter, and retires
in the spring. BL. MUS.

Mr. Latham's northern Falcon, No 62, seems to differ from this only in age, or
sex.

108. SWALLOW-TAILED.
Hirundo maxima Peruviana, avis praedatoris calcaribus instructa, Feuilles voy.
Peru, tom. ii. 33. Herring, or Swallow-tailed Hawk, Lawson, 138. -- Brickell,
175. -- Catesby, i. 4. Le Melan de la Caroline, Brisson, i. 418. -- De Buffon,
i. 221. Falco Furcatus, Lin. Syst. 129. -- Latham, i. 60. -- LEV. MUS.
F. With a black bill, less hooked than usual with rapacious birds; base of the
bill hid in feathers, and bristly: the eyes large; irides red: head, neck,
breast, and belly, of a snowy whiteness: back, coverts of wings, and scapulars,
black, glossed with purple and green: inner webs of the primaries and
secondaries white toward their base; the tertials white: tail of the same
color with the back; and most extremely forked; the outmost feather above eight
inches longer than the middlemost: the legs yellow.

PLACE.
This most elegant species inhabits only the southern parts of North America;
and that only during summer. Like Swallows, they feed chiefly flying; for they
are much on wing, and prey on various sorts of insects. They also feed on
Lizards and Serpents; and will kill the largest of the regions it frequents
with the utmost ease. They quit North America before winter. We are not
acquainted with their retreat. It probably is in Peru: at lest we have the
proof of one being taken in the South Sea, off the coast which lies between Ylo
and Arica, in about the latitude 23 south, on September 11th, by the reverend
the Father Louis Feuilee Journal des obserru. etc. vol. ii. 33.
.

^wallow ^ailed ^alcon N^ 108.


109. BUZZARDET.
F. With dusky bill: head, cheeks, neck, breast, and belly, white, marked with
large brown spots, more sparingly dispersed over the breast and belly: lesser
coverts, brown; the others colored like the head: primaries dusky: thighs
white, with small sagittal spots of brown: tail dusky, barred and tipped with
white: legs yellow. LENGTH fifteen inches. It has much the habit of the
Buzzard; but the legs in proportion are rather longer.

In the LEVERIAN Museum. Except in the almost uniform color of the tail, Mr.
Latham's species, p. 97, No 83, agrees with this.

110. LITTLE.
Little Hawk, Catesby, i. 5. -- Latham, i. 110, No 94. Emerillon de Cayenne,
Buffon, i. 291. -- Pl. Enl. No 444. Falco Sparverius, Lin. Syst. 128. -- LEV.
MUS. -- BL. MUS.
MALE.
F. With bluish bill, and yellow cere: crown of fine light gray, with a red
spot in the middle; on the hind part a semicircle formed of round black spots:
cheeks white, bounded on each side with a large black spot: throat white:
breast of a pale yellow, spotted with black: back of a brilliant bay, crossed
by broad black bars: coverts of the wings of a beautiful gray, thinly spotted
with black; primaries black, spotted on their inner webs with white: tail long;
the middle feathers barred near the end with a black band, and tipped with white;
the two exterior feathers white, crossed with three or four black bars: legs
yellow.

Length eleven inches and a half. SIZE.
Weight only three ounces and an half. This varies in color from the female, in
the same manner as the European Kestrils.

These birds inhabit America, from Nova Scotia to the Antilles; PLACE.
are active and spirited. They prey on small birds, Mice, Lizards, and insects.
The FEMALE is the following.

Emerillon de St. Domingue, De Buffon, i. 291. -- Pl. Enl. No 465. -- Latham,
i. 111, No 95. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
F. With a short and very crooked bill: crown of a deep slaty blue, obscurely
spotted with red: hind part of the neck, back, and tail, of a bright
ferruginous color and black, elegantly disposed in narrow transverse bars:
coverts of the wings of the same colors; primaries black: under side of the
neck, breast, and belly, of a dirty white, marked with large ferruginous spots:
thighs and vent feathers white: legs long, slender, and orange-colored: tail
long, crossed with eleven black, and the same number of bright ferruginous bars.

The New York Merlin of Mr. Latham, i. 107, No 94, bears so great a resemblance
to this, that I do not venture to separate them.

111. PIGEON.
Pigeon Hawk, Catesby, i. 3. -- Phil. Trans. lxii. 382. -- Latham, i. 101.
Falco Columbarius, Lin. Syst. 128. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
F. With a dusky bill, and yellow cere: crown, back, and coverts of the wings
and rump, of a bluish gray, with the middle of each feather streaked with
black: the hind part of the head spotted with reddish white: cheeks and under
side of the body white, with large oblong spots of black: primaries and
secondaries dusky; their insides marked with great oval spots of white: tail
long; black tipped with white, and crossed with four bars of bluish gray: legs
yellow.

SIZE.
Its length is from ten to twelve inches. The weight six ounces.

PLACE.
It inhabits America, from Hudson's Bay as low as South Carolina. In the last it
attains to a larger size. In Hudson's Bay it appears in May on the banks of
Severn river, breeds, and retires south in autumn. It feeds on small birds; and
on the approach of any person, flies in circles, and makes a great shrieking.
It forms its nest in a rock, or some hollow tree, with sticks and grass; and
lines it with feathers: and lays from two to four eggs, white, spotted with
red. In Carolina it preys on Pigeons, and young of the wild Turkies.

112. DUBIOUS.
F. With a dusky bill: yellow cere and irides: head dusky, streaked with
rust-color: back and coverts of wings brown, edged with rust; the primaries
dusky ash-color, barred with black, and the inner webs marked transversely with
oval ferruginous spots: tail long, of a deep cinereous, with four broad bars of
black: breast and belly dirty white, marked with oblong streaks of brown: legs
yellow.

Length about ten inches. Weight six ounces. SIZE.
In the marks and colors of the tail it much resembles the Sparrow Hawk: in the
spots on the breast it agrees with the English Merlin.

Inhabits New York and Carolina. PLACE.
I have my doubts whether this is any more than a variety of the preceding,
especially as the English SPARROW HAWK varies with the same colors.

113. DUSKY.
F. With a bluish bill; upper mandible armed with a sharp process; yellow cere:
head, back, and coverts of the wings, and tail, a dusky brown, slightly edged
with ferruginous: hind part of the neck spotted with white: primaries dusky;
inner webs marked with oval spots of a pale rust-color: tail short, tipped with
white, and barred with four broad dusky strokes, and the same number of narrow
ones of white: the hind part of the head spotted with white: from the chin to
the tail whitish, streaked downwards with distinct lines of black: legs deep
yellow.

Inferior in size to the last. Inhabits the province of New York. SIZE, AND
PLACE.
BL. MUS.

A. GOLDEN EAGLE, Br. Zool. i. No 42. Orn. Faun. Suec. No 54. -- LEV. MUS.
F. With a bluish bill: plumage dusky and rust-color: tail dusky brown,
blotched at the base with ash-color: legs feathered to the toes. Weight about
twelve pounds.

PLACE.
Inhabits Sweden; perhaps Norway. Found about the southern part of the Urallian
mountains, and the mountains which border Sibiria on the south. Grows scarcer
toward the east.

B. CINEREOUS EAGLE, Br. Zool. i. No 45. -- Latham, i. 33. Vultur Albiulla,
Lin. Syst. 123.
F. With pale yellow bill, irides, cere, and feet: plumage light cinereous:
body and coverts of the wings clouded with darker: primaries dusky: tail white.

SIZE, AND PLACE.
In size equal to the Black Eagle. Inhabits Europe, as high as Iceland and
Lapmark Leems, 331.
. Is common in Greenland; but does not extend to America: at lest, if it does,
it varies into the White-headed Eagle, to which it has great affinity, in
particular in its feeding much on fish: the Danes therefore call it Fiske-orn
Brunnick, No 12.
. Is common in the south of Russia, and about the Volga, as far as trees will
grow. Is very scarce in Sibiria; but has been observed in the eastern parts
about Nertschink. It seems to be the species called by the Tungusi, Elo; which
breeds on the banks of the Khariousowa, a river which falls into the Penshina
sea Hist. Kamtschatka, 501.
.

It inhabits Greenland the whole year, sitting on the rocks with flagging wing,
and flies slowly. It makes its nest on the lofty cliffs, with twigs, lining the
middle with mosses and feathers. Lays two eggs. Sits in the latter end of May,
or beginning of June.

These birds prey on young Seals, which they seize as they are floating on the
water; but oft-times, by fixing their talons in an old one, they are
overmatched, and drawn down to the bottom, screaming horribly. They feed also
on fish, especially the Lumpfish, and a sort of Trout Salmo. Carpio, Faun.
Groenl. 170, No 124.
; on Ptarmigans, Auks, and Eider Ducks. They sit on the top of rocks, attentive
to the motion of the diving birds; and, with quick eyes, observe their course
by the bubbles which rise to the surface of the water, and catch the fowls as
they rise for breath.

The Greenlanders use their skins for clothing, next to their bodies. They eat
the flesh, and keep the bill and feet for amulets. They kill them with the bow,
or take them in nets, placed in the snow, properly baited; or tempt them by the
fat of Seals, which the Eagles eat to an excess; which occasions such a
torpidity as to make them an easy prey.

C. CRYING EAGLE, Planga et Clanga, Aristot. Hist. An. lib. ix. Morphnos,
Clanga, Anataria, Will. Orn. 63. -- Raii Syn. av. 7, No 7. Spotted Eagle,
Latham, i. 38. Le Petit Aigle, De Buffon, i. 91. -- BR. MUS.
F. With a dusky bill and yellow cere: color of the plumage a ferruginous
brown; the coverts of the wings, and scapulars, elegantly varied with oval
white spots; on the greater coverts very large: primaries dusky; the ends of
the greater white: breast and belly of a deeper color than the rest of the
plumage, streaked downwards with dull yellow: tail dark brown, tipped with dirty
white: legs feathered to the feet, which are yellow. LENGTH two feet.

PLACE.
Is found in many parts of Europe, but not in Scandinavia: is frequent in Russia
and Sibiria, and extends even to Kamtschatka. Is less generous and spirited
than other Eagles; and is perpetually making a plaintive noise, from which it
was styled by the ancients Planga and Clanga; and Anataria, from its preying on
Ducks, which Pliny Lib. x. c. 3.
describes with great elegance. The Arabs used to train it for the chase; but
its quarry was Cranes, and other birds: the more generous Eagle being flown at
Antelopes, and various quadrupeds. This species was even itself an object of
diversion; and made the game of even so small a Falcon as the Sparrow Hawk:
which would pursue it with great eagerness, soar above, then fall on the Eagle,
and, fastening with its talons, keep beating it about the head with its wings,
till they both fell together to the ground. This Sir John Chardin has seen
practiced about Tauris.

D. ICELAND FALCON, Gent. Mag. 1771, p. 297, fig. good. Falco Islandus Fuscus,
Brunnick, 2, No 9. Le Gerfault d' Island, Brisson, i. 373, tab. xxxi. -- Pl.
Enl. 210. Falco Gyrfalco, Lin. Syst. 130. -- Faun. Suec. No 64. -- Latham, i.
82, No 68; and 71, No 50 B. parag. 2d. -- LEV. MUS.
F. With a strong bill, much hooked, and the upper mandible sharply angulated
on the lower edges; cere bluish: head of a very pale rust-color, streaked
downwards with dusky lines: neck, breast, and belly, white, marked with
cordated spots: thighs white, crossed with short bars of deep brown: back and
coverts of wings dusky, spotted and edged with white: the exterior webs of the
primaries dusky, mottled with reddish white; the inner barred with white: the
feathers of the tail crossed with fourteen or more narrow bars of dusky and
white; the dusky bars regularly opposing those of white: the wings, when
closed, reach almost to the end of the train: legs strong and yellow. The
LENGTH of the wing, from the pinion to the tip, sixteen inches.

This species is an inhabitant of Iceland, is the most esteemed of any for the
sport of falconry, and is, with the two following, reserved for the kings of
Denmark; who sends his falconer, with two attendants, annually into the island
to purchase them. They are caught by the natives; a certain number of whom in
every district are licensed for that purpose. They bring all they take, about
Midsummer, to Besfested, to meet the royal falconer; and each brings ten or
twelve, capped, and perched on a cross pole, which they carry on horseback, and
rest on the stirrup. The falconer examines the birds, rejects those which are
not for his purpose, and gives the seller a written certificate of the
qualities of each, which entitles him to receive from the king's
receiver-general seventeen rixdollars for F, or the purest white Falcon; ten
for E, or those which are lest white; and seven for this species Brunnick, p. 2.
. This brings into the island between two and three thousand rixdollars
annually Olaffen, i. 32.
.

They are taken in the following manner: MANNER OF TAKING.
-- Two posts are fastened in the ground, not remote from their haunts. To one
is tied a Ptarmigan, a Pigeon, a Cock or Hen, fastened to a cord that it may
have means of fluttering, and so attract the attention of the Falcon. On the
other post is placed a net, distended on a hoop, about six feet in diameter.
Through this post is introduced a string, above a hundred yards long, which is
fastened to the net, in order to pull it down; and another is fastened to the
upper part of the hoop, and goes through the post to which the bait is tied. As
soon as the Falcon sees the fowl flutter on the ground, he takes a few circles
in the air, to see if there is any danger, then darts on its prey with such
violence as to strike off the head, as nicely as if it was done with a razor.
He then usually rises again, and takes another circle, to explore the place a
second time: after which it makes another stoop; when, at the instant of its
descending, the man pulls the dead bird under the net; and, by means of the
other cord, covers the Falcon with the net, at the moment it has seized the
prey; the person lying concealed behind some stones, or else lies flat on his
belly, to elude the sight of the Falcon Horrebow, 59, 60.
.

As soon as one is caught, it is taken gently out of the net, for fear of
breaking any of the feathers of the wings or tail; and a cap is placed over its
eyes. If any of the tail-feathers are injured, the falconers have the art of
grafting others Brunnick, p. 3. Horrebow, 58.
; which sometimes has occasioned a needless multiplication of species.

The Iceland Falcons are in the highest esteem. They will last ten or twelve
years; whereas those of Norway, and other countries, seldom are fit for sport
after two or three years use. Yet the Norwegian Hawks were in old times in
great repute in this kingdom, and even thought bribes worthy of a king. Geoffry
Le Pierre, chief justiciary, gave two good Norway Hawks to King John, that
Walter Le Madina might have leave to export a hundred weight of cheese. John,
the son of Ordgar, gave a Norway Hawk to have the king's request to the king of
Norway, to let him have his brother's chattels; and Ralf Havoc fined to King
Stephen in two Girfals (Gyrfalcons) and two Norway Hawks, that he might have
the same acquittance that his father had Madox, Antiq. Exch. 469. 497.
.

ANTIQUITY OF FALCONRY.
I cannot fix the precise time of the origin of falconry; the passage in
Aristotle, and the epigram in Martial, do by no means fix it to the periods in
which they wrote. The philosopher Arist. de Mirabil. Auscult.
informs us, that there was a district in Thrace, in which the boys used to
assemble at a certain time of the year, for the sake of bird-catching. That the
spot was much frequented by Hawks, which were wont to appear on hearing
themselves called: and would drive the little birds into the bushes, where they
were caught by the children; and that the Hawks would even sometimes take the
birds and fling them to these young sportsmen; who (after finishing their
diversion) gratefully bestowed on their assistants part of their prey. This
tale may have some truth at the bottom; it being notorious that Larks, and even
Partridges, will, by the terror of a Hawk passing over them, lie so still as to
suffer themselves to be taken by any passenger. Here seems to have been no
training of these Thracian Hawks, but a mere casual concurrence of Hawks and
small birds, which afforded now and then an amusement to the youth of the
country. The thought expressed on the ancient gem, of little Genii engaged in
the chase of Deer, assisted by an Eagle, may have originated from this story.

The Poet only describes another kind of bird-catching, in the following
epigram on the fate of a Hawk: Praedo fuit volucrum, famulus nunc Aucupis, idem
Decipit, et captas non sibi, moeret, aves Lib. xiv. ep. 216.
.
By the word decipit, it is plain that the Hawk was not trained; but was merely
used as a stale, either to entice small birds under a net, or to the limed
twigs: the last is a method still in use in Italy. The Italians call it
Uccellare con la Civetta; for instead of a Hawk, they place a small species of
Owl on a pole, in the middle of a field; and surround it, at various distances,
with lime-twigs. The small birds, from their strange propensity to approach
rapacious fowls, fly around, perch on the rods, and are taken in great numbers
Olina, 65.
. A Hawk would serve the purpose full as well. Pliny mentions the use of
bird-lime Hist. Not. lib. xci. c. 44.
; and Longus, in his elegant romance of Daphnis and Chloe, employs the latter
to catch little birds for his beloved Fr. ed. octavo, 82.
.

I cannot find any certainty of Hawks being trained for diversion before the
time of King Ethelbert, the Saxon monarch; who died in the year 760 Saxon Chr.
60.
. He wrote into Germany for a brace of Falcons, which would fly at Cranes and
bring them to the ground Quoted by Mr. Whitaker in Hist. Manchester, from Max.
Bibliotheca Patrum, xiii. p. 85. ep. 40.
, as there were very few such in Kent. This shows how erroneous the opinion
was, of those who place it in the reign of the emperor Frederic Barbarossa,
barossa Spelman's Gloss.
, who was drowned in 1189. By the application of Ethelbert to Boniface,
archbishop of Mentz, for the brace of Falcons, it is evident, that the
diversion was in perfection in Germany before the year 752, the time in which
that prelate was martyred by the Pagans. It seems to me highly probable, that
falconry was invented in Scythia, and passed from thence into the northern
parts of Europe. Tartary is even at present celebrated for its fine breed of
Falcons; and the sport is in such general esteem, that, according to Olearius,
there was no hut but what had its Eagle or Falcon Olearius's travels, 177.
. The boundless plains of that country are as finely adapted to the diversion,
as the wooded or mountanous nature of most part of Europe is ill calculated for
that rapid amusement.

The antiquity of falconry in Tartary is evinced by the exhibition of the sport
on the very ancient tombs Strahlenberg, tab. A. B.
found in that country; in which are figured horsemen at full speed, with Hawks
on their hands: others again, in the same attitude, discharging their arrows at
their game, in the very manner of the ancient Scythians.

From Germany, falconry got footing in England; and became so favored a
diversion, that even sanguinary laws were enacted for the preservation of
rapacious fowls. Edward III. made it death for the stealing of a Hawk: and to
take its eggs, even in a person's own ground, was punishable with a fine at the
king's pleasure, and imprisonment for a year and a day. In the reign of James
I. the amusement was carried to such an extravagant pitch, that Sir Thomas
Monson is said to have given a thousand pounds for a cast of Hawks.

E. DUSKY. Falco Fuscus, Faun. Groen. 56, No 34. b. Gray Falcon, Crantz, i. 78.
-- Egede, 64.
F. With dusky irides: lead-colored cere and feet: brown crown, marked with
irregular oblong white spots: forehead whitish: cheeks blackish: hind part of
the head and throat white: breast and belly of a yellowish white, striped
downwards with dusky streaks: the back dusky, tinged with blue, the ends of the
feathers lightest, and sprinkled over with a few white spots, especially
toward the rump: wings of the same colors, variegated beneath with white and
black: the upper part of the tail dusky, crossed very faintly with paler bars;
the under side whitish.

Lesser than the Collared Falcon. SIZE.


Inhabits all parts of Greenland, PLACE.
from the remotest hills to those which impend over the sea. They are even seen
on the islands of ice remote from shore. They retire in the breeding-season to
the farthest part of the country, and return in autumn with their young. They
breed in the same manner as the Cinereous Eagle, but in more distant places;
and lay from three to five eggs. The tail of the young is black, with great
brown spots on the exterior webs.

They prey on Ptarmigans, Auks, and all the small birds of the country: have
frequent disputes with the Raven, but seldom come off victors; for the Raven
will, on being attacked, fling itself on its back; and, either by defending,
itself with its claws, or by calling, with its croaking, numbers of others to
its help, oblige the Falcon to retire. The Greenlanders use the skin, among
many others, for their inner garments; the wings for brushes; the feet for
amulets: but seldom eat the flesh, unless compelled by hunger.

It is also a native of Iceland.

F. GYRFALCON, Br. Zoo. No 47, tab. xix. -- Latham, i. 71, No 50 A, and No 50
B, 1st paragr. and 83, No 69. Falco Islandus, Faun. Groenl. 58, No 35. --
Brunnick, Nris 7, 8. -- Crantz, i. 78. -- Egede, 64. -- Horrebow, 58. -- LEV.
MUS.
F. With a yellow cere: bluish bill, greatly hooked: eye dark blue: the throat
of a pure white: the whole body, wings, and tail, of the same color, most
elegantly marked with dusky bars, lines, or spots, leaving the white the far
prevaling color. There are instances, but rare, of its being found entirely
white. In some, the whole tail is crossed by remote bars of black or brown; in
others, they appear only very faintly on the middle feathers: the feathers of
the thighs are very long, and unspotted: the legs strong, and of a light blue.

SIZE.
Its weight forty-five ounces Troy: length near two feet: extent four feet two.
PLACE.
Of the same manners and haunts with the former. Is very frequent in Iceland;
is found in Lapmark Leems, 235.
, and Norway Strom.
; and rarely in the Orknies, and North Britain. In Asia, it dwells in the
highest points of the Urallian and other Sibirian mountains, and dares the
coldest climates throughout the year. It is kept, in the latitude of
Petersburg, VERY HARDY.
uninjured in the open air during the severest winters, when the Peregrine
Falcon, No 97, loses its claws by the frost.

Mr. Hutchins At the time this sheet was printing, I had the good fortune to
meet with Mr. Hutchins, surgeon, a gentleman many years resident in Hudson's
Bay; who, with the utmost liberality, communicated to me his MS. observations,
in a large folio volume: in every page of which his extensive knowledge appears.
The benefit which this work will, from the present page, receive, is here once
for all gratefully acknowleged.
has often observed it about Albany fort, where it appears in May, and retires
before winter. It feeds on the white, and other Grous. This species ought to be
added to the American class.

This species is pre-eminent in courage as well as beauty, and is the terror of
other Hawks. It was flown at all kinds of fowl, how great soever they were; but
its chief game used to be Herons and Cranes.

G. COLLARED. Falco Rusticolus, Lin. Syst. 125. -- Faun. Suec. No 56. -- Faun.
Groenl. No 34. -- Latham, i. 56.
F. With a lead-colored bill, tipped with black: head broad and flat, streaked
lengthways with black and white; on the cheeks the white predominates: the
throat, under side of the neck, and breast, are of a pure white; that on the
neck almost surrounds it, forming a species of collar: the belly is of the same
color, marked with a few dusky cordated spots: the back is waved with ash-color
and white; the tip of each feather white: the coverts of the wings of the same
colors, but more obscure: the exterior webs of the primaries dusky: the tail
rounded, crossed with twelve or thirteen whitish and dusky bars: the legs
yellow. SIZE of a Hen.

Is rarely found in the remotest parts of Greenland. PLACE.
Inhabits also Sweden; and extends eastward as far as Simbirsk, lat. 54, in the
government of Casan Extracts, i. 315.
.

H. KITE, Br. Zool. i. No 53. -- Latham, i. 61, No 43. Falco Milvus Glada,
Faun. Suec. No 57. Le Milan Royal, De Buffon, i. 197. -- Pl, Enl. 422. -- LEV.
MUS.
F. With yellow bill and cere: white head, streaked with black: body
ferruginous, with a few dusky spots: tail much forked and ferruginous.

Weight forty-four ounces. Length twenty-seven inches: SIZE.
extent five feet one.

Inhabits the north of Europe, as high as Jarlsberg, PLACE.
in the very south of Norway Hammer, Faun. Norway.
; but does not extend farther. This species, the Sea Eagle, Lanner, Buzzard,
and Kestril, quit Sweden, in flocks, at approach of winter, and return in
spring Amoen. Acad. iv.
. Of these, the Buzzard and Kestril winter at Woronesch, in Russia, in lat. 52
Extracts, i. 100.
; and, together with the Lanner and Kite, about Astrakan Vol. ii. 142.
, in lat. 46. 30; but the far greater part of the Kites are supposed to retire
into Egypt, being seen in September passing by Constantinople Forskahl, Descr.
Arab. 7.
, in their way from the north; and again in April returning to Europe Will. Orn.
75.
, to shun the great heats of the east. They are observed in vast numbers about
Cairo, where they are extremely tame, and feed even on dates, I suppose for
want of other food Belon Obs. xxxvi. p. 107. b.
. They also breed there; so that, contrary to the nature of other rapacious
birds, they increase and multiply twice in the year; once in the mild winters
of Egypt, and a second time in the summers of the north. It makes its
appearance in Greece in the spring; and in the early ages, says Aristophanes
Aves.
, it governed that country: and men fell on their knees when they were first
blessed with the sight of it, because it pronounced the flight of winter, and
told them to begin to sheer their vernal fleeces. The CRANE likewise, by its
autumnal departure, warns the mariner to hang up his rudder, and take his rest,
and every prudent man to provide their winter garments: and the SWALLOW again
informed them when they were to put on those of summer. Thus, adds the chorus
of birds, are we to you as AMMON, DODONA, APOLLO: meaning, in those early days,
that man consulted only these natural calendars, and needed no other than what
they took from the flight of birds See this subject most ingeniously handled in
Mr. STILLINGFLEET'S Essays, in the Calendar of Flora.
, or the flowering of plants.

They inhabit England in all seasons. I have seen their young taken, the last
week in May, or first in June, in the great woods belonging to Sir Joseph
Banks, in Lincolnshire; and have often observed them in various places in the
depth of winter.

I. HONEY BUZZARD, Br. Zool. i. No 56. -- Latham, i. 52, No 33. Falco Apivorus
Slaghok, Faun. Suec. No 65. -- LEV. MUS.
F. With an ash-colored head; dark brown above; below white, spotted or barred
with rusty brown: tail brown, barred with two dusky bars, remote from each
other: legs strong and yellow: bill and cere black. LENGTH twenty-three inches.
WEIGHT thirty ounces.

Inhabits as far north as the district of Sondmor, in Norway Strom. 235.
. PLACE.
Is found in plenty in the open parts of Russia and Sibiria, near woods; and
preys much upon Lizards.

K. LANNER, Br. Zool. i. No 31. -- Latham, i. 86. Falco Lannarius, Faun. Suec.
No 62. -- De Buffon, i. 243.
F. With a white line over each eye: cere and legs bluish: breast white, tinged
with yellow, and marked with brown spots: primaries and tail dusky; the first
marked with oval rust-colored spots on the inner webs; the last, on both.

Inhabits Iceland, the Feroe isles, and Sweden; PLACE.
the Tartarian deserts and the Baraba. Breeds on very low trees. None in the
north or east of Sibiria. Much esteemed for falconry.

L. MOOR BUZZARD, Br. Zool. No 57. -- Latham, i. 53. Falco Aeruginosus, Faun.
Suec. No 66. Hons-tjuf, Le Busard, De Buffon, i. 218. pl. x. -- Pl. Enl. 424:
F. Entirely of a chocolate brown, tinged with rust: on the hind part of the
head a light clay-colored spot: slender long yellow legs: cere black.

Weight twenty ounces. Length twenty-one inches. SIZE.


Found in the Transbaltic countries, as far north as Sondmor The same.
. PLACE.
Common in the south of Russia: not in Sibiria. It continues the whole year in
Sweden.

M. KESTRIR, Br. Zool. i. No 60. -- Latham, i. 94. Falco Tinnunculus,
Kirko-Falk, Faun. Suec. No 61. -- Muller, No 65. La Cresserelle, De Buffon, i.
280. pl. xviii. -- Pl. Enl. 401, 471.
Male. F. With the crown and tail of a fine light gray, the last marked with a
black bar near the end: back and wings of a purplish red, spotted with black.
Female. Head reddish; crown streaked with black: back, tail, and coverts of
wings, dull rust-color, barred with black: legs yellow. WEIGHT of Male six
ounces and a half: of Female eleven.

PLACE.
Frequent in the deserts of Tartary and Sibiria, in the open countries, where
small trees are found for it to breed in. Migrates into Sweden, at the time in
which the White Wagtail returns, and the Saffron, Snowdrop, and bulbous Violet,
blossom. Each of these birds quit the country about the same day, in September
Calendar of Flora, and Migr. av. in Amoen. Acad. v. 397. 382. -- Is found as
far south as as the Holy Land. Hasselquist, Itin. 291.
. Not found farther north?

N. SPARROW HAWK, Br. Zool. i. No 62. -- Latham, i. 99. Sparfhok, Faun. Suec.
No 68. -- Muller, No 71. -- Strom. 235. L'Epervier, De Buffon, i. 225. pl. xi.
-- Pl. Enl. 412, 467.
F. With head, back, and coverts of wings and tail, (in some) of a deep bluish
gray; in others, of a deep brown, edged with rust-color: breast and belly of a
whitish yellow, with waved bars of deep brown or dull orange: tail cinereous,
with five broad black bars; the tips white.

Weight of the male five ounces: female nine.

PLACE.
Found as high as Sondmor, and in the Feroe islands, in the south of Russia; but
none in Sibiria.

O. HOBBY, Br. Zool. i. No 61. -- Latham, i. 103. Falco Subluteo, Faun. Suec.
No 59.
F. With crown, back, and coverts of a bluish black: from the crown a black
stroke points down the cheeks, which are white: breast white, with oblong black
spots: thighs and vent pale orange: inner webs of primaries marked with oval
reddish spots: two middle feathers of the tail plain dove-color; the inner webs
of the others marked like the primaries: legs yellow. WEIGHT of the male seven
ounces.

Schonen, the most southern province of Sweden Faun, Suec.
, and, I believe, PLACE.
does not extend farther north. This species winter about Woronesch and
Astrakan Extracts, ii. 142.
; and frequents the same places in Sibiria with the KESTRIL.

III. OWL. Genesis Birds. III.
* EARED OWLS.
114. EAGLE.
Great Horned Owl, Edw. 60. -- Latham, i. 119. Great Gray Owl, Josselyn, 96. --
Lawson, 145. Jacurutu, Margrave, 199. Stria Bubo Uf, Faun. Suec. No 69.
O. With a dusky bill: yellow irides: horns shorter than the European Eagle
Owl; those, with the head, black, marked with tawny: circle round the eyes
cinereous, edged with black: on the throat a large cruciform mark of a pure
white, reaching to the beginning of the breast: upper part of the breast dusky
and tawny; the lower part thickly barred with black ash-color, mixed with
yellow: coverts of wings, scapulars, and back, elegantly painted with zigzag
lines, cinereous, black, and orange; the scapulars also marked with a few great
white spots: primaries broadly barred with black and ferruginous: tail of a
deep brown, crossed with brown dusky bars, and marked with numerous transverse
cinereous lines: legs and feet covered with soft light brown feathers to the
very claws, which are very strong and hooked.

SIZE.
This species is inferior in size to the EAGLE OWL, Br. Zool. i. No 64; but
seems only a variety.

PLACE.
It is common to South and North America, as high as Hudson's Bay. Makes, during
night, a most hideous noise in the woods, not unlike the hollowing of a man; so
that passengers, beguiled by it, often lose their way.

The savages have their birds of ill omen, as well as the Romans. They have a
most superstitious terror of the Owl; which they carry so far as to be highly
displeased at any one who mimics its hooting Colden's Six Indian Nations, i. 17.
.

This species is common in Kamtschatka, and even extends to the Arctic regions;
in the first of which it very often inclines to white. It is found as low as
Astrakan.

115. LONG-EARED.
Br. Zool. i. No 65. Strix Otus, Faun. Suec. No 71. -- Latham, i. 121.
O. With very long ears, of six feathers each, yellow and black: irides yellow:
back and coverts of wings deep brown, gray, and yellowish rust-color: primaries
barred with dusky and ferruginous: breast and belly pale yellow, with slender
brown strokes, pointing downwards: tail barred with cinereous and dusky; the
bars of the middle feathers bound above and below with white: feet feathered to
the claws. LENGTH fourteen inches: EXTENT of the English specimens three feet
four If no mistake is made in Mr. Hutchins's MS. the extent is less by far than
that of the English kind.
. Weight ten ounces.

Observed by Mr. Hutchins about Severn settlement in Hudson's Bay, PLACE.
where it lives in the woods, far from the sea: at night sallies in search of
prey. Approaches the tents of the inhabitants, and is very clamorous. Builds
its nest in trees, and lays four white eggs in April. Never migrates.

Inhabits Sweden, and the northern and southern parts of the Russian dominions,
and the eastern parts of Sibiria. Is found as far south as Astrakan, and even
in the hot climate of Egypt Hasselquist, Itin. 233.
.

116. SHORT-EARED.
Short-eared Owl, -- Br. Zool. i. No 66. -- Phil. Trans. lxii. 384. -- Latham,
i. 124. La Chouette ou la grande Cheveche, De Buffon, i. 372. tab. xxvii. --
Pl. Enl. 438. -- BL. MUS. -- LEV. MUS.
O. With a lesser head in proportion than the former: bill dusky: irides
yellow: head, back, and coverts of the wings, pale brown, edged with dull
yellow: breast and belly yellowish white, marked with a few dusky streaks
pointing downwards: thighs, legs, and toes, covered with plain yellow feathers:
primaries dusky, barred with red: tail of a deep brown, marked on each side of
the middle feathers with a large yellow circle, with a brown spot in the
middle. In some, the feathers are yellowish, obliquely barred with black. The
horns, or ears, consist of only a single feather, which it can raise or depress
at pleasure. The wings reach beyond the end of the tail. SIZE.
LENGTH fourteen inches. Weight fourteen ounces.

PLACE.
Found in plenty in the woods near Chateau Bay, on the Labrador coast. It is
also an inhabitant of the Falkland Islands; so probably is common to North and
South America. In Hudson's Bay it is called the Mouse Hawk. It never flies,
like other Owls, in search of prey; but sits quiet on a stump of a tree,
watching, like a Cat, the appearance of Mice. It breeds near the coast; makes
its nest with dry grass upon the ground; and migrates southwards in autumn.
Father Feuillee speaks of an Owl he found in Peru that has some resemblance to
this, particularly in the Hawk-like shape of the bill. He says it burrows under
ground to a great depth, like a Rabbet; for which reason he names it Ulula
Cunicularia Voy. Peru, ii. 562.
. It is very common in the northern and woody parts of Sibiria. Comes boldly to
the night fires, and assaults men, when it is often killed with sticks.

In Europe it is found in Great Britain, and reaches to the Orkney isles. Does
not perch, but sits on the ground, on which it lays its eggs amidst the heath.
Appears and disappears in Lincolnshire with the Woodcock. Perhaps migrates to
Sweden or Norway, where it is also found, and even as high as Iceland See Strix
Funerea, Faun. Suec. No 75. Pontop. Atlas Danica, tab. 25. Olaffen's Iceland,
ii. tab. 46.
. Flies and preys by day, in dark and cloudy weather. Friendly to the farmer,
by being an excellent mouser. Does not fly far; but if disturbed, soon alights,
and sits looking about; at which times its horns are very conspicuous. This
circumstance hitherto unattended to; so that it has been ranked among the
Earless Owls.

117. RED.
Little Owl, Catesby, i. 7. -- Latham, i. 123. Strix Afio, Lin. Syst. 132. --
BL. MUS. -- LEV. MUS.
O. With yellow irides: horns, head, back, and wings, of a pleasant tawny red,
streaked with black: the scapulars marked with large white spots: primaries
barred with black, red, and white: breast pale tawny, marked with oblong black
spots: tail red, barred with dusky: feet covered with feathers to the claws.
LENGTH ten inches and a half.

Inhabits New York, and as low as the Carolinas. PLACE.
Lives in the woods near the coast.

118. MOTTLED.
Latham, i. 126. -- BL. MUS. -- LEV. MUS.
O. With the face white, spotted with brown: head, wings, and upper part of the
body, mottled with ash-color and pale red: the scapulars marked with great
white spots; as are the coverts of the wings: the primaries with black and pale
ferruginous: breast and belly whitish, varied with dusky ragged stripes,
pointing downwards: toes feathered to the claws. LENGTH eleven inches.

Inhabits the province of New York. Breeds in May, PLACE.
and continues in the country the whole year.

** WITHOUT EARS.
119. WAPACUTHU.
O. With glossy black bill, and claws much incurvated: base of the bill beset
with strong bristles: irides bright yellow: space between the eyes, cheeks, and
throat, white: the ends of the feathers on the head black: scapulars, and all
the coverts of the wings, white, elegantly barred with dusky reddish marks,
pointing downwards: primaries, secondaries, and tail feathers, irregularly
spotted and barred with pale red and black: back and coverts of the tail white,
mixed with a few dusky spots: breast and belly dirty white, crossed with
innumerable reddish lines: vent white: legs feathered to the toes, which are
covered with hairs. WEIGHT five pounds: length two feet: extent four.

PLACE.
Inhabits the woods about Hudson's Bay: makes its nest on the moss, on the dry
ground. The young are hatched in May, and fly in June; and are white for a long
time after. Feeds on Mice and small birds. Called by the Indians, Wapacuthu, or
the Spotted Owl. The Europeans settled in the bay, reckon it a very delicate
food.

120. SOOTY.
Cinereous Owl, Latham, i. 134, No 19. -- BR. MUS.
O. With a whitish bill: bright yellow irides: circlets consist of elegant
alternate lines of black and pale ash-color: head, hind part of the neck, and
coverts of wings, sooty, marked with narrow bars of dirty white: primaries deep
brown, with broad bars, composed of lesser of dusky and pale cinereous: tail
most irregularly marked with oblique strokes of brown and dirty white: the
breast and belly whitish, greatly covered with large oblong blotches of dusky
brown: as a singular mark, from the chin to the vent is a space, about an inch
in breadth, entirely naked: legs feathered to the feet. WEIGHS three pounds:
length two feet: extent four.

PLACE.
Inhabits Hudson's Bay the whole year. Flies in pairs. Feeds on Mice and Hares.
Flies very low; yet seizes its prey with such force, that, in winter, it will
sink into the snow a foot deep; and, with great ease, will fly away with the
AMERICAN HARE, No 38, alive in its talons. It makes its nest in a pine tree, in
the middle of May, with a few sticks lined with feathers; and lays two eggs,
spotted with a darkish color. The young take wing in the end of July.

121. SNOWY.
Great White Owl, Edw. 61. -- Ellis's voy. 40. -- Du Pratz, ii. 91. --
Clayton's Virginia. -- Ph. Trans. iii. 589. Great Speckled Owl, Egede,
Greenland, 64. Strix Nyctea, Harfang, Faun. Suec. No 76. -- Buffon, i. 387. --
Latham, i. 132, No 17. -- BL. MUS. -- LEV. MUS.
O. With a head less in proportion than other Owls: irides yellow: whole
plumage of a snowy whiteness, sometimes pure, oftener marked with dusky spots:
the legs and feet covered warmly to the very claws with long snowy feathers of
the most delicate and elegant texture: the claws are of a fine contrasting
blackness, very large and very crooked. Its length two feet; SIZE.
but it varies greatly in weight, from three pounds to one and a half.

It inhabits the coldest parts of America, PLACE.
even as high as the remote mountains in the icy center of Greenland; from
which, in intense cold, it migrates to the shores. It adds horror even to that
country, by its hideous cries, resembling those of a man in deep distress.

It is rare in the temperate parts of America, and seldom strays as low as
Pensylvania or Louisiana. Is very common in Hudson's Bay, in Norway, and
Lapland. It fears not the rigor of the season, but bears the cold of the
northern regions the whole year. It flies by day, and is scarcely to be
distinguished from the snow: it flies pretty swiftly, and falls perpendicularly
on its prey. Feeds on the White Grous, and probably on the Hares; for to the
last circumstance it owes its Swedish name, Harfang. It preys also on Mice, and
Carrion; and in Hudson's Bay is almost domestic, harboring in places near the
tents of the Indians.

Is scarce in Russia; grows more common on the Uralian mountains, and all over
the north and east of Sibiria, and in its Asiatic empire, even in the hot
latitude of Astrakan Extracts, i. 91. ii. 142.
; are very numerous in Kamtschatka.

122. BARRED.
Latham, i. 133, No 18. -- BL. MUS. -- LEV. MUS.
O. With a pale yellow bill, beset with strong bristles: irides yellow:
circlets whitish, barred with dusky lines: head, back, coverts of the wings,
and the breast, barred with dark brown, and white tinged with yellow; the
primaries with black and white: the belly white, marked downwards with long
stripes of deep brown: tail barred with broad bands of black, and narrower of
white: wings reach only half the length of the tail: feet feathered to the
claws.

SIZE.
A large species, two feet long; the extent four. Weight three pounds.

PLACE.
Inhabits Hudson's Bay, and New York. Preys on Hares, Grous, Mice, etc.

123. HAWK.
Little Hawk Owl, Edw. 62. -- Lathams, i. 142, No 29; 143, No 30; 147, No 36;
148, No 37. -- Phil. Trans. lxi. 385. Le Chat-huant de Canada, Brisson, i. 518.
-- De Buffon, i. 391. Chouette a longue queue de Sibirie, Pl. Enl. 463. -- LEV.
MUS.
O. With yellow irides: head finely spotted with dusky and pure white: back
brown, with a few large white spots: primaries of a deep brown, regularly
spotted with white on each web: upper part of the breast white; lower part and
belly barred with brown: tail very long, and cuneiform, marked with broad bars
of brown, and narrow of white: feet protected with feathers to the claws.

LENGTH seventeen inches. WEIGHT twelve ounces. Never hatches above two young
at a time; which, for some months after flight, retain a rusty brown plumage.

PLACE.
This species is common to North America, Denmark, and Sweden. The Savages who
come down to Hudson's Bay, call it Cabetitutch. It (...)
flies high, like a Hawk, and preys by day on the White Grous. Like the
Short-eared Owl, will hover over the nocturnal fires. Is a bold bird; will
attend the fowler, and often steal the game he has shot, before he can pick it
up. Was seen by the navigators near Sandwich sound, in lat. 61 north.

This bird is very frequent in all Sibiria, and on the west side of the Uralian
chain, as far as Casan and the Volga: not in Russia.

124. WHITE.
Tuidara, Margrave, 205. Barn Owl, Clayton's Virginia. -- Phil. Trans. iii.
589. White Owl, Br. Zool. i. No 67. -- Latham, i. 138. Strix Flammea, Faun.
Suec. No 73. L'Effraie, ou L'Effrasaie, De Buffon, i. 366. pl. xxvi. -- Pl.
Enl. 440. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
O. With a white bill: dusky irides: head, back, and coverts of wings, of a
pale beautiful yellow, with two gray and two white spots placed alternately on
each side of the shafts: breast and belly wholly white: interior sides of the
feathers of the tail white; exterior marked with obscure dusky bars: legs
feathered: feet covered with short hairs. LENGTH fourteen inches. WEIGHT eleven
ounces.

This bird is common to North and South America, and to Europe. PLACE.
Was found by the navigators near Sandwich sound, lat. 61 north. Is rare in
Sweden, and, I believe, not found farther north. Inhabits Tartary. The Mongol
and Kalmuc Tartars almost pay it divine honors; because they attribute to this
species the preservation of the founder of their empire, Cingis Khan. That
prince with his small army happened to be surprised and put to flight by his
enemies, and forced to conceal himself in a little coppice: an Owl settled on
the bush under which he was hid, and induced his pursuers not to search there,
as they thought it impossible any man could be concealed in a place where that
bird would perch. From thenceforth they held it to be sacred, and every one
wore a plume of the feathers of this species on his head. To this day the
Kalmucs continue the custom, on all great festivals; and some tribes have an
idol in form of an Owl, to which they fasten the real legs of one Extracts, ii.
142.
.

125. BROWN.
Brown Owl, Br. Zool. i. No 69. -- Latham, i. 140. -- De Buffon, i. 372. -- Pl.
Enl. 438. Strix Ulula, Faun. Suec. No 78. -- BL. MUS. -- LEV. MUS.
O. With dark hazel irides: head, wings, and back, of a deep brown spotted with
black: coverts of the wings and scapulars varied with white spots: breast of a
pale ash-color, marked with dusky jagged strokes pointing downwards: feet
feathered to the claws. LENGTH about fourteen inches. WEIGHT nineteen ounces.

PLACE.
Inhabits Newfoundland: rare in Russia: unknown in Sibiria: found in Sweden and
Norway Brunnick, No 19.
.

126. LITTLE.
Little Owl, Br. Zool. i. No 70. -- De Buffon, i. 377. Strix Passerina, Faun.
Suec. No 79. -- Latham, i. 149, No 38, No 39; 150, No 40. -- BL. MUS. -- LEV.
MUS.
O. With pale yellow irides: bill whitish brown: head light brown, speckled
with white: back, and coverts of the wings, and scapulars, of the same color,
marked in parts with white spots: the breast whitish, varied with rust-color:
tail barred with white, and marked regularly on each web with circular white
spots: feet feathered to the claws. It varies in length, from eight to seven
inches. The smallest I have seen is from Nova Scotia; which has white circlets
about the eyes, and fewer white spots on its plumage.

PLACE.
Inhabits from Hudson's Bay to New York. Called by the natives of the first,
Shipmospish. Lives in all seasons among the pines: builds its nest half way up
the tree: lays two eggs. Are most solitary birds. Keep close in their retreat
the whole day; but are most active mousers during night. Frequent in Russia;
less so in Sibiria.

* EARED.
A. SCANDINAVIAN EARED OWL, Strix Scandiaca, Faun. Suec. No 70. -- Latham i.
120.
O. With the plumage entirely white, sprinkled with black spots.

Size of a Turkey: in all respects like the Snowy Owl, SIZE.
except the ears.

Inhabits the Lapland alps. Mentioned by Linnaeus; PLACE.
who seems to take his description from a painting of Rudbeck's; but its
existence is confirmed by Mr. Tonning of Drontheim Rariora Norvegiae, in Amoen.
Acad. vii. 479.
.

* * EARLESS.
B. TAWNY OWL, Br. Zool. i. No 68. -- Latham, i. 139. Strix Stridula, Skrik
Uggla, Faun. Suec. No 77. -- Pl. Enl. 437. -- LEV. MUS.
O. With a plain head: dusky irides: plumage of the head, and the whole upper
part of the body, tawny, spotted and powdered with dusky spots: breast and
belly yellowish, mixed with white, marked downward with dusky streaks: tail
blotched, barred, and spotted with pale rust-color and black: toes feathered to
the claws. WEIGHT nineteen ounces.

Inhabits Europe, as far as Sweden. Frequent in the south of Russia, PLACE.
and deserts of Tartary; and breeds in the nests of Rooks. None in Sibiria: a
suspicion that it is found in Hudson's Bay?

ORDER II. PIES.
IV. SHRIKE. Genesis Birds IV.
127. GREAT.
Great Shrike, Br. Zool. i. No 71. Lanius Excubitor, Warfogel, Faun. Suec. No
80. -- Latham, i. 160. White Whisky John, Phil. Trans. lxii. 386. La
Pie-grieche Grise, De Buffon, i. 296. pl. xx. -- Pl. Enl. 445. -- LEV. MUS.
S. With a black bill and legs: cinereous crown, hind part of the neck, and
back: cheeks white, crossed from the bill with a bar of black: under side, from
chin to tail, white, marked with semicircular lines of a pale brown: lesser
coverts black; those on the joints of the wings ash-color: primaries black,
marked with a single band of black; secondaries tipped with white: the tail
cuneiform; the two middle feathers black, the tips of the next on each side
white; on the rest the white prevales, till the exterior, when the black almost
entirely vanishes: beyond each eye of the female is a brown bar.

PLACE.
Inhabits North America, from Hudson's Bay to Louisiana. In Hudson's Bay, lives
in the woods remote from shores, and is the first bird there which brings out
its young in the spring. Makes its nest with dry grass or bents, and lines it
thickly with feathers: lays seven eggs, of a pale blue color, blotched with
brown.

Is frequent in Russia, but does not extend to Sibiria; yet one was taken by
our navigators within Bering's straits, in lat. 66, on the Asiatic side of the
Frozen Sea. Has the same manner of transfixing and tearing its prey as the
English kind.

128. BLACK-CROWNED.
S. With the bill, legs, crown, and sides of the head, back, and coverts of
wings, black: primaries black, marked with a small spot of white, and another
on the ridge of the wing: throat, cheeks, and vent, pure white: breast and
belly tinged with ash-color: tail long; middle feathers black; the rest marked
at their ends with white, which increases to the exterior; in which the black
almost vanishes. Rather inferior in size to the last.

Inhabits North America. PLACE.
Seems to be La Pie Griesche de la Louisiane, Brisson, ii. 162; Latham, i. 162.

129. CRESTED.
Lanius Canadensis, Lin. Syst. 134. -- De Buffon, i. 316. -- Pl. Enl. 479. fig.
2. -- Latham, i. 182. La Pie Griesche de Canada, Brisson, ii. 171. -- LEV. MUS.
S. With black bill and legs: head adorned with a reddish crest: cheeks dusky,
spotted with white: hind part of neck and back brown, inclining to red: throat
and breast of a yellowish red: belly and vent of a fine ash-color: coverts of
the wings black, edged with white; primaries with white on their exterior
sides: tail black, bordered on each side, and tipped with white. LENGTH six
inches and a half: EXTENT about eleven.

Inhabits Canada. PLACE.


130. NATKA.
S. With the bill slightly incurvated at the end, black, except the upper half
of the lower mandible: crown, lower part of the upper side of the neck, and the
back, black: over each eye is a white line, extending to the very nape; beneath
that one of black: from chin to vent is wholly white: a narrow white circle
quite encompasses the neck: lesser coverts of the wings black; greater white,
more or less dashed down the shafts with black: primaries dusky, fringed with
yellowish brown; secondaries black, edged and tipped with white: tail black, a
little rounded; the four outmost feathers tipped with white: rump cinereous,
the edges of the feathers gray: legs black. LENGTH seven inches one-fourth.

Brought from Natka sound in North America. PLACE.
Communicated to me by Mr. Latham.

131. RED-BACKED.
Br. Zool. i. No 72. -- Latham, i. 167. Lanius Collurio, Faun. Suec. No 81.
Pie-grieche de la Louisiane, De Buffon, i. 307. -- Pl. Enl. 397. -- LEV. MUS.
S. With gray crown and rump: ferruginous back and coverts of wings: black line
across the eyes: breast and belly roseate: tail black; exterior feathers edged
with white: head and upper part of the FEMALE dirty rust-color; line over the
eyes the same color: breast and belly dirty white, marked with dusky
semicircular lines. LENGTH seven inches and a half.

PLACE.
Inhabits Russia; not Sibiria. Is found in Sweden and Christiansoe. The Count De
Buffon says, he received one from Louisiana. I imagine, that, as the Norwegians
give the Great Shrike and this a name, that they may be found in their country.
The first they call Klavert, the last Hanvark. Mr. Ekmark has observed both of
them, only during summer, in Est Gothland; but is not certain whether they
winter. Each species appears in Italy in the spring; retires in autumn.

A. GRAY, Lanius Nengeta, Lin. Syst. 135. -- Latham, i. 183. Gray Pie of
Brasil, Edw. 318.
S. With the crown, hind part of the neck, back, and coverts of the wings, deep
cinereous: a black line passes from the bill through the eyes to the hind part
of the head: greater coverts and secondaries black, tipped with dirty white;
primaries black: breast and belly light ash-color: tail black; ends of the
outmost feathers white. Much larger than No 127, the common Great Shrike; and
differs specifically.

Inhabits Russia, but is more frequent in Sibiria; PLACE.
where it lives in the forests the whole winter. Taken and tamed by the
fowlers; and kept by the Russians for the diversion it affords in the manner of
killing its prey. They stick a rod with a sharp point into the wall of a room,
on which the Shrike perches. They turn loose a small bird, which the former
instantly seizes by the throat, strangles, and then spits it on the point of
the stick, drawing it on with its claws and bill. Thus it serves as many as are
turned to it, and afterward eats them, thus suspended, at its leisure EDWARDS,
Gl. p. 233.
. The Germans style it Wurch-angel, or the Suffocating-angel. The old English,
Wariangel, which signifies a bird of some very mischievous qualities; as is
evident from Chaucer.

This Sompnour, which that was as full of jangles,
As full of venime ben thise Wariangles The Freres tale. Full of venime, because
it was believed, that the thorn on which it stuck its prey was venomous.
.
B. LESSER GRAY, Pie Grieche d'Italie, De Buffon, i. 298. -- Pl. Enl. 32.
S. With the forehead black: a black line crosses the eyes, like as in the
former: head, hind part and sides of the neck, back, and coverts of wings,
cinereous, palest on the rump: ridge of the wing white: primaries black, with a
white spot near the base; secondaries black, tipped with white: throat white:
breast and belly tinged with rose-color: tail marked like the preceding.

Inhabits Russia, but not Sibiria. Found in Italy and Spain. PLACE.


V. PARROT, Genesis Birds V.
132. CAROLINA.
Parrokeeto, Lawson, 142. -- Latham, i. 227. -- LEV. MUS. Parrot of Carolina,
Catesby, i. 11. -- Du Pratz, ii. 88. Psittacus Carolinensis, Lin. Syst. 141. --
Brisson, iv. 350. La Perruche a tete jaune, De Buffon, vi. 274. Le Papegai a
tete aurore, De Buffon, vi. 247.
P. With the forehead, ridge of the wings, and feathers round the knees,
orange: head and neck yellow: back, body, and coverts of wings and tail, green:
primaries dusky, mixed with blue and green; the upper exterior sides edged with
yellow: tail very long and cuneiform: legs white. LENGTH thirteen inches.
WEIGHT three ounces and a half.

PLACE.
Inhabits the southern parts of North America, but never appears higher than
Virginia. It is in general a migratory bird, even in Carolina; arriving at the
season when mulberries are ripe, which they are very fond of, and which are the
earliest fruits of the country, except strawberries. They infest, in autumn,
the apple-orchards in vast flocks, and make great havoc by splitting the fruit
for the sake of the kernels only, being very greedy of them, and the seeds of
cypress, and other trees. They devour too the buds of the birch.

Few of these tender birds continue in Carolina during the whole year. They
breed in hollow trees, in low swampy grounds. When taken, they easily grow
tame, but do not speak. Their intestines are said to be a speedy poison to Cats.

EGGS.
The eggs of Parrots are roundish, and generally of a pure white; those of the
Maccaws spotted, like the eggs of a Partridge. The number usually two; yet the
Count De Buffon gives an instance of a Perroquet, in a state of confinement,
which laid four eggs every spring, during five or six years: one of the eggs
was addle; the others productive Ois. vi. 115.
.

133. ILLINOIS.
Tui-apeta-jube, Margrave, 206, No 2. -- Will Orn. 116. -- Raii. Syn. av. 34. --
De Buffon, vi. 269. -- Latham, i. 228. Psittacus Pertinax, Lin. Syst. 142. La
Perruche. Illinoise, Brisson, iv. 353. Yellow-faced Parrot, Edw. 234.
P. With a cinereous bill: orange-colored irides: forehead, cheeks, and
sometimes the hind part of the head, of a rich orange: crown, upper part of the
body, tail, and coverts of the wings, of a fine green: primaries green, edged
externally with blue: breast and belly of a yellowish green: vent yellow: tail
very long and cuneiform. Of the same size with the former. Perhaps differs only
in sex?

Inhabits the interior parts of North America, PLACE.
in the country of the Illinois, south of lake Michigam: it is also met with in
the Brazils. Is a lively bird; but its voice not very articulate. Father
Charlevoix met with some on the banks of the Theatiki, a river that rises a
little south of lake Michigam, and runs into the Missisipi. He says, that those
he saw were only stragglers, which migrated before winter; but that the main
body passed the whole year on the borders of the Missisipi Journal Historique,
vi. 124.
.

The Count De Buffon confines the whole genus of Parrots to exactly twenty-five
degrees on each side of the Equator Ois. vi. 82.
. LATITUDES OF PARROTS.
It always gives me pain to differ in opinion with so illustrious a character;
but I must produce my authorities of their being common at far greater
distances. On the continent of America, two species have been observed by the
Spaniards about Trinity Harbor, in the South Seas, in north lat. 41. 7
Barrington's Miscellanies, 489. 491.
. Dr. Forster saw, in the raw, rainy latitude of Dusky Bay, in New Zealand, 46
south, two kinds. In the neighborhood of Botany Bay, in New Holland, in south
lat. 34, five species were discovered; among which, the greater variety of the
sulphur-crested Cockatoo appeared in amazing multitudes. But what is most
wonderful, a small species of this tender genus is to be met with as low as
Port Famine, in the streights of Magellan, in north lat. 53. 44 See
Spilbergen's voy. in Purchase, i. 80; Wood's in Dampier's voy. iv. 112; and
Byron's, in Hawksworth's Coll. i. 38. Besides these authorities, Lieut. Gore
(since Captain) and Mr. Edwards, now surgeon at Caernarvon, who sailed with Mr.
Byron, confirmed to me the existence of these birds in the streights of
Magellan.
, in flocks innumerable. They inhabited the vast forests of the country. Their
food must be confined to buds and berries; for no fort of fruit trees have been
observed there. The forests likewise were frequently bounded by mountains,
probably clothed with eternal snow.

VI. CROW. Genesis Birds XII.
134. RAVEN.
Br. Zool. i No 74. Corvus Corax, Lin. Syst. 155. Korp, Faun. Suec. No 85. --
Leems, 240. -- Faun. Groenl. p. 62. -- Latham, i. 367. -- De Buffon, iii. 13.
-- LEV. MUS.
C. With the point of the bill a little incurvated, with a small tooth on each
side, of a black color, glossed with blue. It varies to white, and to pied. In
the Feroe isles is a breed which are black and white, and are said to keep in a
place separate from the common kind Brunnick, p. 8.
.

The largest of the genus. Weighs three pounds. SIZE.
Length two feet two inches.

Very numerous as far north as Finmark, Iceland, and Greenland, where it
frequents the huts of the natives, and feeds on the offals of the Seals Egede,
64.
. Preys in concert with the White Bear, Arctic Fox, and Eagle. Devours the eggs
of birds, especially the Ptarmigan: eats shore-fish, and shellfish: drops the
last from on high to break them, and get at the contents. Turns roundin the
air, and is dexterous; changes its prey from its bill to its feet, or from its
feet to its bill, by way of ease. Eats also berries, and, when almost famished,
dried skins and excrements. Nestles on high rocks, which overhang and afford a
canopy. Couples in March; lays in April. Each preserves a district to itself.
The male sits in the day; the female in the night: the former-sleeps close by
its mate. Have strong affection to their young brood. Hearing its croaking
echoed, repeats it; as if admiring its own note. At approach of storms,
collects under shelter of rocks.

Caught by the natives. Its flesh is eaten. The skins reckoned the best for
clothing: the wings used for brushes: the quils split, are made into
fishing-lines. They also inhabit Newfoundland, and now and then appear as low
as Virginia and Carolina Lawson, 139.
.

This bird is, among the American savages, an emblem of return of health. Their
physicians, or rather magicians, when they visit a sick person, invoke the
Raven, and mimic his croaking voice Adair's Hist. Am. 173.
. The northern Indians, on the contrary, detest this and all the Crow kind Mr.
Hutchins.
. It inhabits Kamtschatka and Sibiria; but not within the Asiatic Arctic
regions.

135. CARRION.
Br. Zool. i. No 75? -- Latham, i. 370. Blaae Raage, Brunnick, No 29. Corvus
Corone, Faun. Suec. No 86. La Corbine, ou l'Corneille, De Buffon, iii. 45. --
Pl. Enl. 483. -- LEV. MUS.
C. With the plumage wholly black, glossed with violet: bill strong, thick, and
arched: nostrils covered with strong black bristles: ends of the feathers of
the tail slightly pointed. LENGTH eighteen inches and a half. Weight from
twenty to twenty-two ounces Voyage, i. 121.
.

PLACE.
Inhabits the province of New York, and the inland parts of Hudson's Bay. Mr.
Blackburn observed, that it retains there the same manners as the European
species; and never migrates from New York. MR. KALM says, that they fly in
great numbers, and have a cry much resembling the Rook See article Rook, p.
250, A. where a comparison is made of the differences between these two birds.
. By his account, they appear of a mixed nature, feeding not only on grain, but
on carrion; and are also very pernicious to young poultry. Like Rooks, they
pull up the corn of the country, the new-sown maize; and, when it ripens, do
pick a hole in the leaves which surround the ears, exposing it to corruption,
by letting in the rain. The inhabitants of Pensylvania and New Jersey were wont
to proscribe them, setting three pence or four pence on the head of each Crow;
but the law was soon repealed, because of the great expense it brought on the
public stock Voyage, ii. 65.
. Mr. Kalm also remarks this agreement with the Rook species, that they settle
much on trees, both in February and the spring.

These birds are so rare in Sweden, that Linnaeus gives only one instance of
its being killed in his country. Yet it is found in the diocese of Drontheim,
and in the Feroe islands. They are scarce in Russia; and only in the north.
Grow more common in Sibiria, and are found plentifully beyond the Lena, where
the Hooded Crow ceases. Was observed about Botany Bay, in New Holland; and is
met with in the Philippine isles De Buffon, iii. 66.
.

136. MAGPIE.
Br. Zool. i. No 78. -- Latham, i. 392. -- De Buffon, iii. 85. Corvus Pica,
Skata, Skiura, Skara, Faun. Suec. No 92. -- LEV. MUS.
C. Variegated with black and white, the black most beautifully glossed with
green and purple: the tail very long, cuneiform, black, resplendent with the
same rich colors as the body. Length eighteen inches: weight nine ounces.

Visits Hudson's Bay, where the natives call it Oue ta-kee Ask, or the
Heart-bird. It migrates, and but seldom appears there Phil. Trans. lxii. 387.
.

Is found in Europe, as high as Wardhuys, in lat. 71. PLACE.
It is esteemed there an augural bird. If it perches on the church, it is
supposed to portend the death or removal of the minister: if on the castle,
that of the governor Leems, 241.
. The Magpies swarm in the temperate parts of Russia. Common in Sibiria, and
even as far as Kamtschatka, and the isles.

137. CINEREOUS.
Corvus Canadensis, Lin. Syst. 158. -- Latham, i. 389. Le Geay Brun de Canada,
Brisson, ii. 54. -- De Buffon, iii. 117. -- LEV. MUS.
C. With a black bill, strong, strait, notched near the end of the upper
mandible: nostrils covered with a tuft of whitish feathers reflected downwards:
the forehead, cheeks, and under part of the body, of a dirty reddish white: the
feathers on the crown long and black, forming a species of crest, like that of
the English Jay: the plumage on the back brown, silky, loose, and unwebbed,
like that of the Jay: wings black: tail long, cuneiform, blade; the three
outmost feathers tipped with dirty white: legs black. LENGTH near eleven inches:
extent fifteen. Weight two ounces and a half.

PLACE.
Inhabits Hudson's Bay, Newfoundland, and Canada, and the woods on the western
coasts of America. These birds breed early in spring: their nests are made of
sticks and grass, and built in pine-trees. They have two, rarely three, young
ones at a time. Their eggs are blue. The young are quite black, and continue so
for some time. They fly in pairs. The male and female are perfectly alike. They
feed on black moss, worms, and even flesh. When near habitations or tents, they
are apt to pilfer every thing they can come at, even salt meat. They are bold,
and come into the tents to eat victuals out of the dishes, notwithstanding they
have their hoard of berries lodged in the hollows of trees. They watch persons
baiting the traps for Martins, and devour the bait as soon as they turn their
backs. These birds lay up stores for the winter; and are seldom seen in
January, unless near habitations: they are a kind of mock-bird. When caught,
they pine away, and die, though their appetite fails them Mr. Hutchins.
. Detested by the natives of Hudson's Bay.

138. BLUE.
Jay, Clayton's Virginia. -- Phil. Trans. iii. 590. -- Lawson, 141. Blue Jay,
Catesby, i. 15. -- Edw. 239. -- Latham, i. 386. Corvus Cristatus, Lin. Syst,
157. Le Geay Bleu de Canada, Brisson, ii. 55. -- De Buffon, iii. 120. -- BL.
MUS. -- LEV. MUS.
C. With a strong thick bill: head adorned with a rich blue crest: a stripe of
black from the bill extending beyond the eyes: throat and cheeks white: neck
surrounded with a black collar: breast of a pale vinaceous red: belly white;
back of a pale purple: coverts of the wings and secondaries of a rich blue,
beautifully barred with black; the secondaries, and one order of the coverts,
tipped with white: tail long and cuneiform, barred with blue and black; the tips
of all white, excepting those of the two middlemost: legs black. LENGTH twelve
inches.

Inhabits Newfoundland, Canada, and as far south as Carolina. PLACE.
Has the same actions and jetting motion as the English Jay, but its cry is
less harsh. It feeds on fruits and berries, and commonly spoils more than it
eats. It is particularly fond of the berries of the bay-leaved Smilax. Resides
in the country all the year. Lays in May five or six eggs, of a dull olive,
with rusty spots.

C. With a crested head: bill, neck, and back, black: 139. STELLER'S Latham, i.
387.
.
lesser coverts of the wings dusky; the others of a rich resplendent blue:
exterior webs of the primaries of the same color; the inner dusky; the
secondaries of a beautiful rich blue, crossed with narrow black bars, remote
from each other: the rump, belly, and breast, of a dull blue: tail very long,
cuneiform, and of a fine glossy blue; the middle feathers slightly barred. SIZE
of an English Jay.

Inhabits the woods about Natka or George sound, in North America. PLACE.
It had been before discovered by Steller, when he landed on the same side of
that continent. Described from a specimen in the collection of Sir JOSEPH BANKS.

A. ROOK, Br. Zool. i. No 76. -- Latham, i. 372. Corvus Frugilegus, Roka, Faun.
Suec. No 87. -- De Buffon, iii. 55.
C. Black, glossed with purple: a tinge of dull green over part of the tail:
the ends of the feathers of the tail broad, and rounded; those of the Crow,
acute: the bill straiter, slenderer, and weaker, than that of the Carrion Crow:
the length two inches and a half; that of the latter only two inches and a
quarter. The bill of the CROW is of a more intense black. The nostrils and base
of the bill of the ROOK naked, and whitish, occasioned by being often thrust
under ground in search of food. The WEIGHT of both nearly the same, about
twenty-one ounces: the LENGTH about eighteen inches: the EXTENT of wings in the
ROOK three feet one inch and a half; of the Crow, two inches and a half less I
once had the curiosity to compare the measurements of these common birds, and
found them as above; but they are often inferior in sizes to the subjects I
examined.
.

PLACE.
This species is not found farther north than the south of Sweden. It breeds
there; but is driven away by the severity of the winter. No mention is made of
it in the Danish or Norwegian Faunae. Is common in Russia, and the west of
Sibiria; but there are none in the east. They migrate in the beginning of March
to the environs of Woronesch, and mingle with the common Crows Extracts, i. 103.
.

B. HOODED CR. Br. Zool. i. No 77. -- Latham, i. 374. Corvus Cornix, Kraka,
Faun. Suec. No 88. Krage, Leems, 239. -- De Buffon, iii. 61.
C. With black head, wings, and tail; ash-colored body.

Inhabits Europe, as high as the Feroe islands and Lapmark, PLACE.
where it continues the whole year; but in the northern countries often retires
to the shores, where it lives on shellfish. Is very common in all Russia and
Sibiria: none beyond the Lena. Migrates to Woronesch, and passes the winter
there. Grows very large beyond the Ob, and often varies to entire blackness.
This bird, and the Raven, in October quit the sub-alpine woods, where they
breed; and spread all over the plains of Italy. This species extends to Syria,
as do the Raven, Crow, Jackdaw, and Magpie Russel's Aleppo, 69.
.

This species, the RAVEN, CROW, JACKDAW, PIE, and JAY, pass their winter at
Woronesch Extracts, i. 100.
, removing probably from hotter as well as colder climates; for three of the
above can endure the severest cold.

C. JACKDAW, Br. Zoel. i. No 81. -- Latham, i. 378. Kaia, Faun. Suec. No 89. --
De Buffon, iii. 69.
C. With white irides: hind part of the head light gray: breast and belly dusky
ash: rest of the bird black. LENGTH thirteen inches.

Inhabits as far north as Sondmor: PLACE.
is sometimes seen in the Feroe isles. Migrates from Smoland and East Gothland
the moment that harvest ends; and returns in the spring, attendant on the
Stares. Winters about Upsal, and passes the night in vast flocks in ruined
towers, especially those of ancient Upsal. Common over all Russia, and the west
of Sibiria. A few are seen beyond lake Baikal. Are migratory, unless in the
south of Russia.

D. NUTCRACKER, Br. Zool. ii. App. p. 625. -- Latham, i. 400. -- De Buffon,
iii. 122. Merula Saxatilis, Aldr. av. ii. 284. Corvus Caryocatactes, Notwecka,
Notkraka, Faun. Suec. No 91.
C. With primaries and tail black, the last tipped with white: vent white: rest
of the plumage of a rusty brown: crown, and converts of the tail, plain; every
other part marked with white triangular spots. SIZE of a Jackdaw.

PLACE.
Is found as high as Sondmor. Does not migrate. Common in the pine-forests of
Russia and Sibiria, and even in Kamtschatka. Lives on nuts and acorns, and on
the kernels of pine-cones. Nestles in the bodies of trees, which it perforates
like the Woodpecker.

E. JAY, Br. Zool. i. No 79. -- Latham, i. 384. -- De Buffon, iii. 107. Corvus
Glandarius, Allonskrika, Kornskrika, Faun. Suec. No 90.
C. With a black spot on each side of the mouth: very long feathers on the
head: body purplish ash: greater coverts of wings beautifully barred with rich
blue, black, and white. LENGTH thirteen inches.

PLACE.
Is met with as high north as Sondmor. Not migratory. Common in the woods of
Russia and Sibiria; but none beyond the Lena.

F. ROCK, Greater Redstart, Will. Orn. 197. La Paisse Solitaire, Belon, Oys.
322. Codirosso Maggiore, Olina, 47. -- Latham, i. 176. -- De Buffon, iii. 354.
-- Aldr. av. ii. 282. Stein-Rotela, Gesu. av. 732.
C. With crown, and neck above, and coverts of wings, brown and dirty white. In
the males, the middle of the back marked with a spot, consisting of a bar of
blue, black, and rust-colored: throat, breast, and belly, orange, spotted with
white, and a few dusky spots: two middle feathers of the tail dusky; the rest
ferruginous: has the same loose silky texture of feathers as the Jay. SIZE of a
Stare.

Found as high as the forests of Lapland. Is called by the Swedes, PLACE.
Lappskata and Olyckfugl; by the Norwegians, Gertrudsfogel; also Ulyksfuegl,
from its being supposed to forebode ill-luck. Linnaeus, for the same reason,
styles it Lanius Infaustus; and in his Fauna, Corvus Infaustus Syst. 138. Faun.
Suec. No 93.
. It is common in the woods of the north of Russia and Sibiria. Is a most
audacious bird. Linnaeus relates, that in dining amidst the Lepland forests, it
would often snatch away the meat before him. Breeds in crevices of rocks. Feeds
on worms and insects. Sings finely, and is often preserved in cages for its
song.

ROLLER. Genesis Birds XIII.
G. GARRULOUS, Br. Zool. ii. App. p. 530 quarto, 624 octavo. -- Latham, i. 406.
-- De Buffon, iii. 133. -- Aldr. i. 395. Coracias Garrula, Spansk-kraka,
Bla-kraka, Faun. Suec. No 94.
R. With a naked spot beyond each ear: head, neck, back, breast, belly, and
greater coverts of the wings, of a light bluish green: back ferruginous:
coverts of the tail, lesser coverts of the wings, and lower parts of the
secondaries, of a rich blue; primaries black above, blue beneath: middle
feathers of the tail dirty green; the rest of a light blue: the exterior
feathers on each side much longer than the rest, and tipped with black: legs
yellowish. SIZE of a Jay.

This elegant bird is found not spread, but as if it were in a stream, PLACES.
from the southern parts of Norway to Barbary and Senegal: from the south of
Russia to the neighborhood of the Irtish, only, in that empire; and southerly,
to Syria Russel's Aleppo, 69.
. In Sweden, it arrives with the Cuckoo; retires at the conclusion of the
harvest Amoen. Acad. iv. 583.
. It makes its nest in the birch, preferably to all other trees De Buffon, iii.
139: from this circumstance, one of its German names is Birck-heher, or the
Birch Jay.
; and in places where trees are wanting, such as Malta and Barbary, it forms
its nest in clayey banks. Zinanni says it lays five eggs, of clear green,
sprinkled with innumerable dark specks Zinanni delle Nova, etc. p. 68. tab. x.
fig. 29.
. It feeds on fruits, acorns, and insects. Is a shy bird; but, at times, is
seen in company with Crows and Pies on the plough lands, picking up worms, and
grains of corn. Schwenckfelt says, that in autumn it grows very fat, and is
esteemed as a delicacy Av. Silefiae, 244.
. It is remarkably clamorous. Is migratory. M. Adanson observed them in
Senegal, in flocks, in the month of September, and supposes they winter there
Voy. Senegal, Engl. ed. 25. 107.
.

VII. ORIOLE. Genesis Birds XIV.
140. RED-WING.
Acolchichi, Fernand. Nov. Hisp. p. 14. -- Will. Orn. 395. -- Raii Syn. av. 166.
-- Latham, i. 428. Black Bird (2d sp.) Lawson, 139. Red-winged Starling,
Catesby, i. 13. -- Du Pratz, ii. 91. Le Troupiale a Aisles Rouges, Brisson, ii.
97. Le Commandeur, De Buffon, iii. 214. -- Pl. Enl. 402. Oriolus Phoeniceus,
Lin. Syst. 161.
O. With black bill and legs: plumage of a fine jetty blackness, except the
lesser coverts of the wings, which are of a bright scarlet, with the lowest row
white. LENGTH ten inches. The FEMALES are of a dusky color.

Inhabit from the province of New York to the kingdom of Mexico. In North
America they are called Red-winged Starlings, PLACE.
and Swamp Black-birds; in Mexico, Commendadores, from their red shoulders,
resembling a badge worn by the commanders of a certain Spanish order. That
kingdom seems to be their most southern residence. They appear in New York in
April, and leave the country in October. MANNERS.
They probably continue the whole year in the southern parts, at lest Catesby
and Lawson make no mention of their departure. They are seen in flocks
innumerable, obscuring at times the very sky with their multitudes. They were
esteemed the pest of the colonies, making most dreadful havoc among the maize
and other grain, both when new sown, and when ripe. They are very bold, and not
to be terrified with a gun; for, notwithstanding the sportsman makes slaughter
in a flock, the remainder will take a short flight, and settle again in the
same field. The farmers sometimes attempt their destruction, by steeping the
maize in a decoction of white hellebore before they plant it. The birds which
eat this prepared corn are seized with a vertigo, and fall down; which
sometimes drives the rest away. This potion is particularly aimed against the
PURPLE GRAKLES, or PURPLE JACKDAW, which consorts in myriads with this species,
as if in conspiracy against the labors of the husbandman. The fowler seldom
shoots among the flocks, but some of each kind fall. They appear in greatest
numbers in autumn, when they receive additions from the retired parts of the
country, in order to prey on the ripened maize.

Some of the colonies have established a reward of three pence a dozen for the
extirpation of the Jackdaws: and in New England, the intent was almost
effected, USES.
to the cost of the inhabitants; who at length discovered that Providence had
not formed even these seemingly destructive birds in vain. Notwithstanding they
caused such havoc among the grain, they made ample recompense, by clearing the
ground of the noxious worms The Caterpillar of the Bruchus Pisi, or Pease
Beetle, in particular. See Kalm, i. 173. 176.
with which it abounds. As soon as the birds were destroyed, the reptiles had
full leave to multiply: the consequence was the total loss of the grass, in
1749; when the New Englanders, late repentants, were obliged to get their hay
from Pensylvania, and even from Great Britain.

NEST.
The Red-winged Orioles build their nests in bushes, and among the reeds, in
retired swamps, in the form of a hang-nest; leaving it suspended at so
judicious a height, and by so wondrous an instinct, that the highest floods
never reach to destroy it. The nest is strong, made externally with broad
grass, a little plastered; thickly lined with bent or withered grass. The eggs
are white, thinly and irregularly streaked with black.

Fernandez says, that in Mexico they build in trees near towns; and both he and
Catesby agree, that they sing as well in a state of confinement as of nature;
and that they may be taught to speak. I agree with M. de Buffon, that, in case
the manner of their nidification is as Fernandez asserts, the disagreement in
the different countries is very wonderful.

In Louisiana they appear only in winter, and are taken in a clapnet, placed on
each side of a beaten path made on purpose, and strewed over with rice. As soon
as the birds alight, the fowler draws the net, and sometimes takes three
hundred at a haul. They are also eaten in the English colonies. Fernandez does
not commend their flesh, which, he says, is unpalatable and unwholesome.

Du Pratz speaks of two kinds: this, and another which is gray and black, with
a red shoulder; like the species in question. YOUNG, OR FEMALES?
I suspect he forms out of the young birds, not yet arrived at full color, a
new kind; or perhaps a female bird: for I have received from Dr. Garden one
under that title, which agrees with the description given by M. Du Pratz. These
are streaked with pale rusty brown: cheeks black: over each eye a white line:
breast and belly black, spotted with pale brown: lesser coverts of the wings
rich orange.

141. WHITE-BACKED.
White-backed Maize Thieves, Kalm, ii. 274.
A Species mentioned barely as above by Mr. Kalm, with the addition of their
being less than the last: that they sing finely, and appeared flying now and
then among the bushes near Saratoga; but that he saw them for the first time
near New York. PLACE.
As Mr. Kalm seems not to have had a distinct sight of these birds, it is
possible that they are the WHITE-WINGED ORIOLES of Mr. Latham, ii. 440: the
coverts of whose wings are white; the rest of the plumage entirely black. His
species came from Cayenne.

142. BALTIMORE.
Baltimore bird, Catesby, i. 48. -- Latham, i. 432. Le Baltimore, Brisson, ii.
109. -- De Buffon, iii. 231. -- Pl. Enl. 506. Oriolus Baltimore, Lin. Syst.
162. -- BL. MUS. -- LEV. MUS.
O. With the head, throat, neck, and upper part of the back, black: MALE.
lesser coverts of the wings orange; the greater black tipped with white: breast,
belly, lower part of the back, and coverts of the tail, of a bright orange:
primaries dusky, edged with white: two middle feathers of the tail black; the
lower part of the rest of the same color, the remaining part orange: legs black.

FEMALE.
Head and back of the female olive, edged with pale brown: coverts of the wings
of the same color, marked with a single bar of white: under side of the body,
and coverts of the tail, yellow: tail dusky, edged with yellow. LENGTH of this
species seven inches.

PLACE.
Inhabits from Carolina, Lawson, 145.
to Canada De Buffon.
. Suspends its nest to the horizontal forks of the Tulip or Poplar trees,
formed of the filaments of some tough plants, curiously woven, mixed with wool,
and lined with hairs. It is of a pear shape, open at top, with a hole on the
side, through which the young discharge their excrements, and are fed. In some
parts of North America, this species, from its brilliant color, is called the
Fiery Hang-nest. It is called the Baltimore bird, from its colors resembling
those in the arms of that nobleman.

It quits North America before winter, and probably retires to Mexico, the
Xochitototl of Fernandez Av. Nov. Hisp. 39.
seeming to be the same species.

143. BASTARD.
Bastard Baltimore, Catesby, i. 49. -- Latham, i. 433. Le Baltimore Batard,
Brisson, ii. 111. -- De Buffon, iii. 233. -- Pl. Enl. 506. Oriolus Spurius,
Lin. Syst. 162. -- BL. MUS. -- LEV. MUS.
O. With the head, neck, and upper part of the back, of a full glossy black:
breast and belly of a fine orange bay: lower part of the back, and coverts of
the tail, of the same color: the lesser coverts of the wings light bay; the
greater black, edged with dirty white: the quil feathers dusky, edged with
white: tail cuneiform and black.

The head of the female, and hind part of the neck, deep olive: throat black:
coverts of wings dusky, edged with white; primaries Baltimore Oriole N. ^^2
and secondaries of the same colors: under side of the body of a greenish
yellow: tail dusky, edged with yellow.

Inhabits North America. Arrives in New York in May. PLACE.
Lays five eggs; and usually hangs its nest in an apple tree.

144. BLACK.
Latham, ii. 445, No 37. Le Troupiale Noir, Brisson, ii. 103. tab. x. -- De
Buffon, iii. 320. -- Pl. Enl. 534. -- BR. MUS.
O. With a black bill, an inch long: legs of the same color: whole plumage
black and glossy. LENGTH near ten inches. EXTENT one foot. WEIGHT two ounces
and a quarter.

FEMALE. With head, breast, and belly, dusky, tinged with cinereous; the rest
of the plumage of as greenish brown.

Inhabits North America, even a far as Hudson's Bay. PLACE.
Arrives there in the beginning of June, as soon as the ground is thawed
sufficiently for them to get food, which is Worms and Maggots. They sing with a
fine note till the time of incubation, when they desist, and only make a
chucking noise till the young take their flight, when they resume their song.
They build their nests in trees, about eight feet from the ground; and form
them with moss and grass. Lay five eggs, of a dark color, spotted with black.
Gather in great flocks, and retire southerly in September. A bird, which I
apprehend to be only a lesser variety, is described by the Comte de Buffon,
iii. 221. Pl. Enl. 606. Latham, ii. 446.

145. BROWN-HEADED.
O. With the head of a rusty brown: the body and wings black, glossed with
green: the tail of a dusky color. SIZE of a common Blackbird. -- BR. MUS. LEV.
MUS.

Inhabits New York, PLACE.
and appears there in small flocks during summer. Perhaps migrates to St.
Domingo, where it is also found, and is called there, according to Mr. Kuchan's
account, Siffleur, or Whistler; but differs from that described by M. De
Buffon, iii. 230, which is entirely yellow beneath.

146. RUSTY.
O. With dusky bill and legs: head, and hind part of the neck, of a blackish
purplish hue, with the edges of the feathers rust-colored: from the bill, over
and beneath the eyes, extends a black space, reaching to the hind part of the
head: throat, under side of the neck, the breast, and back, black, edged with
pale rust: belly dusky: wings and tail black, glossed with green. LENGTH
between seven and eight inches.

PLACE.
Appears in New York in the latter end of October, and makes a very short stay
there: it probably is on its way southerly from Hudson's Bay, where it is also
found.

147. WHITE-HEADED.
Le Cassique de la Louisiane, De Buffon, iii. 242. -- Pl. Enl. 646.
O. With the head, neck, belly, and rump, white: the rest of the plumage
changeable violet, bordered with white, or in some parts intermixed. LENGTH ten
inches French.

PLACE.
Inhabits Louisiana.

148. HUDSONIAN WHITE-HEADED.
O. With a dusky bill: head and throat pure white: ridge of the wing, some of
the under coverts, first primary, and thighs, of the same color: all the rest
of the bird dusky, in parts glossed with green: on the breast a few oblong
strokes of white: legs dusky. LENGTH eight inches and a half. EXTENT thirteen
and a half. WEIGHT an ounce and three quarters.

PLACE.
Inhabits Hudson's Bay. A very rare species. Quere, if only differing in sex
from the last. -- LEV. MUS.

149. OLIVE.
Le Carouge Olive de la Louisiane, De Buffon, iii. 251. -- Pl. Enl. 607.
O. With the head olive, tinged with gray: hind part of the neck, the back,
wings, and tail, of the same color, tinged with brown, brightest on the rump
and the beginning of the tail: the sides also olive, dashed with yellow; the
same color edges the greater coverts and primaries: the throat is
orange-colored: the under side of the body yellow: legs a brownish ash-color.
LENGTH six or seven inches French. EXTENT from ten to twelve.

Inhabits Louisiana. PLACE.


150. YELLOW-THROATED.
O. With a bright yellow stroke over each eye: cheeks and throat of the same
color: all the rest of the plumage tinged with green, only some of the coverts
of the wings are tipped with white: bill and legs dusky. LENGTH nine inches.
EXTENT fifteen and a half.

Was shot in Hudson's Bay. PLACE.


151. UNALASCHKA.
Latham, ii. 447, No 40.
O. With a brown bill; between its base and the eyes a white mark: plumage
above, brown; the middle of each feather clouded: chin white, bounded on each
side by a dark diverging line: fore part of the neck and breast of a rusty
brown: coverts of the wings, the secondaries, and tail, brown, edged with rust:
primaries and belly plain: sides dusky: legs brown. LENGTH eight inches.

Brought by the late navigators from Unalaschka. PLACE.


152. SHARP-TAILED.
Latham, i. 448.
O. With the crown brown and cinereous: cheeks brown, surrounded by a border of
light clay-color, commenced at the base of each mandible of the bill: throat
white: breast, sides, and vent, of a dull pale yellow, spotted with brown:
belly white: back varied with ash-color, black, and white: greater and lesser
coverts of the wings dusky, deeply bordered with rust-color; primaries black,
slightly edged with rust: the feathers of the tail slope off on each side to a
point, not unlike those of a Woodpecker; are of a dusky color, and obscurely
barred: the legs of a pale brown. SIZE of a Lark.

PLACE.
Inhabits the province of New York. -- From Mrs. Blackburn's collection.

VIII. GRAKLE. Genesis Birds, XV.
153. PURPLE.
Tequixquiacatzanatl i. e. The Salt Starling, because in Mexico it frequents
the salt lakes.
, Fernandez Mex. 21. La Pie de la Jamaique, Brisson, ii. 41. -- De Buffon, iii.
97. -- Pl. Enl. 538. Merops Niger iride sub-argentea, Brown's Jamaica, 476.
Purple Jackdaw, Catesby, i. 12. -- Latham, i. 462. Black Bird, Lawson, sp. 2d,
139. -- Sloane Jamaica, ii. 299. Gracula Quiscula, Lin. Syst. 165. -- BL. MUS.
-- LEV. MUS.
G. With a black bill: silvery irides: head and neck black, glossed over with a
most resplendent blue, variable as opposed to the light: back and belly, with
green and copper-color, growing more dusky toward the vent: tail long, and
cuneiform: legs black: wings and tail rich purple. Female entirely dusky;
darkest on the back, wings, and tail.

LENGTH of the male thirteen inches and a half: SIZE.
the WEIGHT about six ounces. LENGTH of the female eleven inches and a half.

These birds inhabit the same countries as the Red-wing Orioles, and generally
mingle with them. They sometimes keep separate; but usually combine in their
ravages among the plantations of maize. After that grain is carried in, they
feed on the seeds of the Water Tare Grass, or Zizania aquatica. Their good
qualities, in clearing the country from noxious insects, have been recited
before, in page mixed with the history of their congenial companions.

They appear in New York and Philadelphia in February, PLACE.
or the beginning of March; and sit perched on trees near the farms, and give a
tolerably agreeable note. They also build in trees, usually in retired places,
making their nests externally with coarse stalks, NEST.
internally with bents and fibers, with plaster at the bottom. They lay five
or six eggs, of a pale plue color, thinly spotted and striped with black. After
the breeding-season, they return with their young from their most distant
quarters, in flights continuing for miles in length, blackening the very sky,
in order to make their depredations on the ripening maize. It is unfortunate
that they increase in proportion as the country is more cultivated; following
the maize, in places they were before unknown, wheresoever that grain is
introduced.

They migrate from the northern colonies at approach of winter; but continue in
Carolina the whole year, feeding about the barndoor. Their flesh is rank, and
unpalatable; and is only the food of birds of prey. The small Hawks dash among
the flocks, and catch them in the air.

They are also found in Mexico, and in the island of Jamaica. They are
sometimes eaten; but their flesh is hard, rank, and of bad nourishment.

154. BOAT-TAIL.
Gracula Barri^a, Lin. Syst. 165. -- Latham, i. 460. Le Troupiaie Noir, Icterus
Niger, Brisson, ii. 105. -- De Buffon, iii. 220. -- Pl. Enl. 534. Monedula tota
nigra, Sloane, 299. -- Raii Syn. av. 185. -- LEV. MUS.
G. With the bill an inch and a half long, sharp, and black: plumage black,
glossed with purple: tail cuneiform, expanded when walking; in flight, or on
the perch, folded, so as to form an oblong cavity in its upper part. LENGTH
about thirteen inches.

PLACE.
Inhabits not only the greater Antilles, but the warmer parts of North America;
consorting with the Purple Grakles, and Red-winged Orioles. Feeds on maize and
insects; in the islands on Bananas.

IX. CUCKOO. Genesis Birds, XIX.
155. CAROLINA.
Cuckoo of Carolina, Catesby, i. 9. -- Lawson, 143. Le Coucou de la Carolina,
Brisson, iv. 112. Cuculus Americanus, Lin. Syst. 170. -- Latham, i. 537. --
LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
C. With the upper mandible of the bill black, the lower yellow: head, and
whole upper part of the body, and coverts of the wings, cinereous; under side
entirely white: primaries brown on their exterior, orange on their interior
sides: tail long; two middle feathers entirely cinereous, the others tipped with
white: legs dusky. LENGTH twelve inches.

Inhabits North America. Arrives in New York in May. PLACE.
Makes its nest in June, usually in apple trees; and lays four eggs, of a
bluish white color. The nest is made of small sticks and roots, and resembles
greatly that of the English Jay; but is smaller. It retires from North America
in autumn.

This bird, as well as all the foreign Cuckoos, have only the generical
character of the well-known European species. They differ in their economy,
nor have the opprobrious notes of that bird.

A. EUROPEAN CUCKOO, Br. Zool. i. No 82. tab. xxxvi. fem. -- Latham, i. 509.
Cuculus Canorus, Gjok, Faun. Suec. No 96. Le Coucou, De Buffon, vi. 305. --
LEV. MUS.
C. With dove-colored head, hind part of the neck, back, rump, and coverts:
throat, and under side of the neck, of a pale gray: breast and belly white,
barred with black: primaries dusky; inner webs marked with white oval spots:
tail cuneiform; middle feathers black, tipped with white; the rest marked with
white spots on each web. FEMALE. Neck of a brownish red: tail barred with
rust-color and black, and spotted with white.

PLACE.
Inhabits all parts of Europe, as high as Saltens Fogderie, in Norway Pontop.
ii. 75.
, within the Arctic circle; and even at Loppen, in Finmark Leems, 291.
. It is found equally high in Asia; and extends as far east as Kamtschatka. In
all places it retains its singular note, and its more singular nature of laying
its eggs in the nests of small birds, and totally deserting them Dr. PALLAS.
. Of the above circumstance I beg leave to add a proof, which fell under my own
notice in June 1778; when I saw a young Cuckoo, almost full grown (when I first
discovered it) in the nest of a white Wagtail, beneath some logs in a field
adjacent to my house. The Wagtail was as solicitous to feed it, as if it had
been its own offspring; for, many days after the Cuckoo fled, it was seen often
perched on the adjacent walls, still attended and fed by the Wagtail.

It arrives in the northern and eastern parts of Asia, about the tenth of June.

WRYNECK. Genesis Birds, XX.
B. WRYNECK, Br. Zool. i. No 83. -- Latham, i. 548. Jynx Torquilla Gjoktyta,
Faun. Suec. No 97. Le Torcol, De Buffon, vii. 84. -- Pl. Enl. 698. -- LEV. MUS.
W. With a black and colored list dividing lengthways the crown and back: upper
part of the body elegantly pencilled with gray, black, white, and ferruginous:
tail consists of ten feathers, gray, speckled with black, and marked
equidistant with four broad black bars.

Extends over all Russia and Sibiria, and even to Kamtschatka. PLACE.
Found in Sweden, and as high as Drontheim, in Norway; and probably migrates as
far as the Cuckoo. The Swedes call this bird Gjoktyta, or the bird which
explains the Cuckoo: probably for the same reason as the Welsh and English
style it the Cuckoo's Man, as it seems its attendant, and to point out its
arrival.

X. WOODPECKER. Genesis Birds, XXI.
156. WHITE-BILLED.
Quatotomomi, Fernand. Mex. 50. -- Will. Orn. 390. Ipecu, Marcgrave, 207. --
Will. Orn. 138. -- Raii Syn. Quad. 43. -- Latham, ii. 553. Picus principalis,
Lin. Syst. 173. Largest White-bill Woodpecker, Catesby, i. 16. -- Lawson, 142.
-- Barrere Fr. Equin. 143. -- Kalm, ii. 85. Grand Pic noir a bec blanc, De
Buffon, vii. 46. -- Pl. Enl. 690.
W. With a bill of ivory whiteness; great strength; three inches long: irides
yellow: a conic crest, of a rich scarlet color, on the hind part of the head:
head, throat, neck, breast, and belly, black: beneath each eye is a narrow
stripe of white, crooked at its beginning, running afterward strait down the
sides of the neck: upper part of the back, primary feathers, and coverts of the
wings, black; lower part of the back, and the secondaries, white: tail black.

This is a gigantic species, weighing twenty ounces; and in bulk equal to a
Crow.

PLACE.
Inhabits the country from New Jersey to the Brasils. Is in North America a
scarce bird; in South America more common. It breeds in the kingdom of Mexico
in the rainy season; for which reason Nieremberg styles it Picus Imbrifoetus
Eusebius. Nieremberg.
. The Spaniards call them Carpenteros, Carpenters, on account of the multitude
of chips which they hew out of the trees, either in forming their nests, or in
search of food, insects, and worms, which lurk beneath the bark. They are very
destructive to trees; for they have been known to cut out a measure of chips in
an hour's time Catesby.
. Instinct directs them to form their holes in a winding form, in order the
better to protect their nests from the injury of the weather Barrere.
.

Canada is destitute of these birds. The Indians of that severe climate
purchase the bills from the savages of the more southern parts, at the rate of
two or three Buck skins apiece, in order to form the coronets Catesby.
of their sachems and warriors. These coronets were made with several
materials. Gay plumes formed the rays; the beaks of birds, claws of rare
animals, and the little horns of their Roes, were the other ornaments. They
were never worn but on high solemnities; either when a warrior sung the song of
war, or was setting forward on his march to meet the enemy. He went forth like
a Spartan hero, dancing, and crowned Lafitau Moeurs de Sauvage, ii. 60.
.

157. PILEATED.
Larger Red-crested Woodpecker, Catesby, i. 17. Le Pic noir hupe de Virginie,
Brisson, iv. 29. Picus Pileatus, Lin. Syst. 173. -- Latham, i. 554. Le Pic noir
a huppe rouge, De Buffon, vii. 48. -- Pl. Enl. 718. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
W. With a bill two inches long, of a dusky color on the upper, and whitish on
the lower mandible: irides of a gold-color: a tuft of light brown feathers
reflected over the nostrils: the crown adorned with a rich scarlet crest,
bounded by a narrow buff-colored line; beneath that is a broad band of black,
reaching from the eyes to the hind part of the head; under this is another line
of buff-color, commencing at the bill, and dropping down on each side of the
neck to the pinions of the wings: from the lower mandible a line of scarlet
extends along the lower part of the cheeks: chin and throat white: fore and
hind part of the neck, back, breast, belly, and tail, black: the wings black,
marked with a double line of white: legs dusky. LENGTH eighteen inches. WEIGHT
nine ounces.

Inhabits the forests of Pensylvania and New York. PLACE.
When the maize begins to ripen, this and the other kinds make great havoc, by
settling on the heads, and picking out the grain; or making holes in the
leaves, and letting in the wet, to the destruction of the plant Kalm.
. It breeds and resides the whole year in the country. It extends as high as
lat. 50. 31. north; being found near the banks of Albany river, near four
hundred miles from its discharge into Hudson's Bay. Lays six eggs, and brings
forth its young in June. The Indians deck their Calumets with the crest of this
species.

158. GOLDEN-WING.
Golden-winged Woodpecker, Catesby, i. 18. Le Pic Raye de Canada, Brisson, iv.
70. Picus Auratus, Lin. Syst. 174. -- Latham, i. 597. Le Pic aux ailes dorees,
De Buffon, vii. 39. -- Pl. Enl. 693. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
W. With a black bill, bending like that of a Cuckoo: crown cinereous; on the
hind part a scarlet spot: cheeks and under side of the neck of a pale red: from
each corner of the mouth a black line extends along the cheeks: the upper part
of the breast is marked with a black crescent; the remainder and the belly
whitish, spotted with black: back and coverts of wings of a fine pale brown,
barred with black: the primaries cinereous; their shafts of a most elegant
gold-color; the under side of the webs of a glossy yellow: rump white, spotted
with black: tail black, edged with white: the shafts of all the feathers
gold-colored, except those of the two middle feathers: legs dusky. LENGTH
twelve inches. WEIGHT five ounces. The FEMALE wants the black on each side of
the throat.

PLACE.
Inhabits from Hudson's Bay to Carolina, and again on the western side of North
America. In the first is migratory, appearing in April, and leaving the country
in September. All the American Woodpeckers agree with those of Europe in
building in hollow trees, and in laying six white eggs. The natives of Hudson's
Bay call this species, Ou-thee-quan-nor-ow, Ferruginous Woodpecker. No. 159.
Nuthatch No. 170.
from the golden color of the shafts and under side of the wing feathers Phil.
Tr. lxii. 387.
.

The Swedish Americans call it Hittock, and Piut Kalm, ii. 36.
; words formed from its notes. It is almost continually on the ground; and
never picks its food out of the sides of trees, like others of the genus:
neither does it climb, but sits perched, like the Cuckoo; to which it has some
resemblance in manners, as well as form. It feeds on insects. Grows very fat,
and is reckoned very palatable. It inhabits the Jersies, and other provinces to
the south, the whole year.

159. FERRUGINOUS.
Latham, i. 592. Le Pic Mordore, De Buffon, vii. 34. -- Pl. Enl. 524.
W. With a dusky bill: the crown and pendent crest of a pale yellow: a crimson
bar extends from the mouth along the lower part of the cheek: the cheeks, back,
and coverts of the wings, of a deep ferruginous color: lower part of the back
of a pale yellow: primaries ferruginous, barred on their inner webs with black.
SIZE of the Green Woodpecker.

This new species was sent to me by Dr. Garden, of Charlestown, PLACE.
South Carolina.

160. RED-HEADED.
Red-headed Woodpecker, Catesby, i. 20. -- Lawson, 3d sp. 143. -- Du Pratz, 92.
-- Latham, i. 561. Picus Erythrocephalus, Lin. Syst. 174. Le Pic a test rouge,
de la Virginie, Brisson, iv. 53. -- Pl. Enl. 117. Le Pic noir a domino rouge,
De Buffon, vii. 55. -- Pl. Enl. 117. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
W. With a lead-colored bill: head and neck of the most deep and rich scarlet:
back, coverts of wings, primaries, and tail, of a glossy blackness: the
secondaries white, marked with two black bars: breast and belly white: legs
black. The head of the FEMALE is brown. LENGTH nine inches and a half. WEIGHT
two ounces.

PLACE.
Inhabits Pensylvania, and the neighboring provinces. Feeds on maize and apples;
and is a most destructive species. They pick out all the pulp, and leave
nothing but the mere rind. They feed also on acorns. They were formerly
proscribed; a reward of two pence was put on their heads: but the law was
repealed. They migrate southward at approach of winter. When they are observed
to linger in numbers in the woods, in the beginning of winter, the inhabitants
reckon it a sign of a mild season Kalm, ii. 87.
.

This species extends across the continent to the western coast of America.

161. CAROLINA.
Red-bellied Woodpecker, Catesby, i. 19. Picus Carolinus, Lin. Syst. 174. --
Latham, i. 570. Le Pic vary de la Jamaique, Brisson, iv. 59. -- De Buffon,
vii. 72. Woodpecker of Jamaica, Edw. 244. -- BL. MUS.
W. With the forehead, crown, and hind part of the head, of an orange red;
under side of a light ash-color, tinged with yellow: the vent spotted with
black: the back and wings closely barred with black and white: middle feathers
of the tail black, the outmost barred with black and white. The crown of the
female is light gray: hind part of the head red. LENGTH eleven inches. WEIGHT
two ounces eleven penny-weights.

PLACE.
Inhabits North America, and the greater Antilles.

162. SPOTTED.
Great Spotted Woodpecker? Br. Zool. i. No 85. -- Latham, i. 564. Le Pic vary,
Brisson, iv. 34. -- De Buffon, vii. 57. -- Pl. Enl. 196. 595. Picus Major,
Faun. Suec. No 100. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
W. With buff forehead; black crown, bounded behind with a crimson band: vent
feathers crimson: back black: scapulars white: wings and tail barred with black
and white: breast and belly white, tinged with yellow. LENGTH nine inches.
EXTENT sixteen. WEIGHT two ounces three quarters. FEMALE wants the crimson
marks.

Sent to Mrs. Blackburn from New York. Inhabits Europe, PLACE.
as high as Lapmark. Extends to the most eastern part of Sibiria.

163. CANADA SPOTTED.
L'Epeiche de Canada, De Buffon, vii. 69. -- Pl. Enl. 347. -- Brisson, iv. 45.
W. With white forehead, throat, breast, and belly: crown, black; beneath is a
band of white, encircling the head; from each eye another of black, uniting
behind, and running down the hind part of the neck; each side of this bounded
by white; that again bounded by black, commencing at the base of the bill, and
uniting with the scapulars: the back black; scapulars of the same color, mixed
with a few white feathers: wings spotted with black and white: middle feathers
of the tail black; the outmost black and white. SIZE of the last.

Inhabits Canada. PLACE.


164. HAIRY.
Hairy Woodpecker, Catesby, i. 19. -- Latham, i. 572. Picus Villofus, Lin.
Syst. 175. Le Pic vary de la Virginie, Brisson. iv. 48. L'Epeiche ou Pic
Chevelu de Virginie, De Buffon, vii. 75. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
W. With the crown black: the hind part of the head marked with a crimson spot;
the cheeks with two lines of white and two of black: whole under side of the
body white: back black, divided in the middle lengthways with a line of white
unconnected feathers, resembling hairs: the wings black, spotted in rows with
Phil. Trans. lxii. 388.
white: two middle feathers of the tail black; the two outmost entirely white;
the rest black, marked crossways with white. The female wants the red spot on
the head. LENGTH nine inches. WEIGHT two ounces.

PLACE.
Inhabits from Hudson's Bay Phil. Trans. lxii. 388.
to Carolina. In the last very destructive to apple trees.

165. DOWNY.
Smallest Spotted Woodpecker, Catesby, i. 21. Picus Pubescens, Lin. Syst. 175.
-- Latham, i. 573. Le Petit Pic vary de la Virginie, Brisson, iv. 50. Fourth
Woodpecker, Lawson, 143. L'Epeiche ou Petit Pic vary de Virginie, De Buffon,
vii. 76. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
W. Of the size of a Sparrow. In all respects resembles the last, except in
size; and in having the outmost feather of the tail marked with a single white
bar.

PLACE.
Inhabits Pensylvania and Carolina, and is very numerous. It is also found, but
more rarely, near Albany fort, in Hudson's Bay. The Woodpecker tribe is the
most pernicious of all the birds of America, except the PURPLE GRAKLE; but this
little species is the most destructive of its whole genus, because it is the
most daring. It is the pest of the orchards, alighting on the apple trees,
running round the boughs or bodies, and picking round them a circle of
equidistant holes. It is very common to see trees encircled with numbers of
these rings, at scarcely an inch's distance from each other; so that the tree
dries and perishes.

166. YELLOW-BELLIED.
Yellow-bellied Woodpecker, Catesby, i. 21. Picus Varius, Lin. Syst. 176. --
Latham, i. 574. Le Pic Vary, Brisson, iv. 62. Le Pic Vary de Carolina, De
Buffon, vii. 77. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
W. With a crimson crown, surrounded by a line of black: cheeks white, with two
lines of black: chin crimson: breast and belly light yellow; the first spotted
with black: coverts black, crossed by two bars of white: primaries spotted with
black and white: tail black; interior webs of the two middle feathers barred
with white; the two outmost feathers edged with the same color. The FEMALE
wants the red on the crown. LENGTH nine inches. WEIGHT one ounce thirteen
penny-weights.

Inhabits the same country with the former. Is very numerous, PLACE.
and very destructive to the fruits.

167. YELLOW-LEGGED.
THIS is inserted on the suspicious authority of Albin Vol. iii. 9. -- Brisson,
iv. 24, who follows Albin, calls it, Le Pic noir de la Nouvelle Angleterre.
. He says, that it is of the size of the Little English Spotted Woodpecker;
that the hind part of the head is black; the ridges of the wings, and the lower
part of the belly, white; the rest of the plumage, and the tail, black; the
legs yellow.

168. THREE-TOED.
Three-toed Woodpecker, Edw. 114. -- Phil. Trans. lxii. 388. -- Latham, i. 600,
601. Picus Tridactylus, Lin. Syst. 177. -- Faun. Suec. No 103. Le Pic vary de
la Cayenne, Brisson, iv. 55. -- LEV. MUS.
W. With black feathers reflected over the nostrils: crown of a bright gold
color: irides blue: cheeks marked lengthways with three black and two white
lines: hind part of the neck and back black; the last spotted on the upper part
with white: coverts of the wings black; primaries black, spotted with white:
all the under side of the body white; the sides barred with black: the middle
feathers of the tail black; the outmost spotted with white: legs dusky: toes,
two before, only one behind; which forms the character of this species. LENGTH
eight inches. EXTENT thirteen. WEIGHT two ounces.

PLACE.
Inhabits Hudson's Bay, and Norton Sound, lat. 64. Is frequent in Sibiria, and
common as far as Moscow, in the alps of Dalecarlia in Sweden, and in those of
Switzerland M. Sprunglin's collection at Stettlin, near Bern, who told me it
was common among the Alps.
.

A. BLACK W. Picus Martius, Lin. Syst. 173. Spillkraka, Tillkraka, Faun. Suec.
No 93. -- De Buffon, vii. 41. -- Will. Orn. 135. -- Latham, i. 552. -- LEV. MUS.
W. With the crown of the head of a rich crimson: the rest of the plumage of a
full black: the head of the female marked with red only behind. LENGTH eighteen
inches. EXTENT twenty-nine. WEIGHT near eleven ounces.

PLACE.
Inhabits the forests of Germany, Switzerland, and the north, from Petersbourg
to Ochotsk, on the eastern ocean, eastward, and to Lapmark westward. It
migrates to Woronesch, about the third of March, and continues coming in
greatest numbers in April. Is called there The Fusilier; and is the most
cunning, and difficult to be shot, of all the tribe.

It does vast damage to trees, MANNERS.
by making holes of a great depth in the bodies to nestle in. A bushel of dust
and chips, a proof of its labors, are often found at the foot of the tree.
Makes as much noise in the operation, as a woodman does with an axe. Rattles
with its bill against the sides of the orifice, till the woods resound. Its
note very loud. Lays two or three white semi-transparent eggs. Feeds on
caterpillars and insects, especially Ants.

B. GREEN, Br. Zool. i. No 84. -- Latham, i. 577. Picus Viridis, Wedknar,
Gronspik, Grongjoling, Faun. Suec. No 99. -- De Buffon, vii. 7. -- LEV. MUS.
W. With crimson crown: green body; lightest below. LENGTH thirteen inches.

Inhabits Europe, as high north as Lapmark, PLACE.
where it is called Zhiaine Leems, 292.
. Is found in Russia; but disappears toward Sibiria.

C. GREY-HEADED, Edw. 65. -- Latham, i. 583.
W. With a gray head, and neck of a bluish gray: nostrils covered with harsh
black feathers, extending in a line to the eyes: a black line, beginning at the
base of the lower mandible, points beneath the cheeks toward the hind part of
the neck: under side of the body of the color of the head, dashed with green:
all other parts so exactly like the last, that I should suppose it to have been
a variety, had not my very scientific friend, PALLAS, assured me that it was a
distinct species, and inferior in size to the common GREEN.

PLACE.
It is found in Norway, and among the alps of Switzerland Catalogue of Swiss
birds in M. Sprunglin's cabinet, which that gentleman favored me with. This
species was not unnoticed by the great GESNER. See his Hist. av. ed. p. 710,
line 20.
; and common in the north of Russia, and still more in Sibiria. The Tungusi, of
Nijmaia Tungouska, roast this species, bruise the flesh, and mix it with any
grease, except that of the Bear, which dissolves too readily. They anoint their
arrows with it, and pretend, that the animals, which are struck with them,
instantly fall Gmelin. voy. Sibiria, ii. 113.
.

D. MIDDLE SPOTTED W. Br. Zool. i. No 86. -- Latham, i. 565. Picus Medius,
Faun. Suec, No 101. -- Brisson, iv. 38.
W. With a crimson crown and vent: in all other respects like the GREAT
SPOTTED, No 162, except in size, being rather less.

E. LEST SPOTTED W. Br. Zool. i. No 87. Picus Minor, Faun. Suec. No 102. Le
Petit Epeiche, De Buffon, vii. 62. -- Pl. Enl. 598. -- Brisson, iv. 41. -- LEV.
MUS.
W. With a crimson crown: the rest of the head, breast, and belly, like those
of the former: back barred with black and white: the white on the wings
diffused in broad beds. WEIGHT under an ounce. LENGTH six inches. EXTENT eleven.

PLACE.
The MIDDLE is only found in Russia. This, and the GREAT SPOTTED, extend to the
eastmost parts of Sibiria; but all three are found as high as Lapmark Leems,
292.
, the extremity of northern Europe, far within the polar circle; a country
which is one vast forest of pines, firs, and birch Flora Lapp. Proleg. 21.
. Innumerable insects, or their, larvae, lurk in all seasons in the bark of the
trees; so that this tribe of birds is never compelled, for want of food, to
shun even the most rigorous winters of that severe climate. It also bears the
heats of the torrid zone; for I discovered it among the drawings in the
collection of Governor Loten, made in the island of Ceylon.

XI. KINGFISHER. Genesis Birds, XXIII.
169. BELTED.
Kingfisher, Catesby, i. 69. American Kingfisher, Edw. 115. Le Martin pescheur
hupe de la Caroline, Brisson. iv. 512. and de St. Domingue, 515. Alcedo Alcyon,
Lin. Syst. 180. -- Latham, i. 637. Le Jaguacati, De Buffon, vii. 210. -- LEV.
MUS.
K. With a black bill, two inches and a half long: head crested with long
bluish gray feathers: above the upper mandible of the bill, on each side, is a
white spot; beneath each eye is another: chin and throat white: the upper part
of the breast crossed by a broad gray belt; the lower part, and belly, white:
the sides of a vermilion color; in some crossing the breast: upper part of the
neck, the back, and coverts of the wings, of a pleasant bluish gray: the
secondaries of the same color; their ends, and those of the lower order of
coverts, tipped with white: primaries black, barred with white: tail gray; the
two middle feathers plain; the rest barred with white: the legs orange. LENGTH
thirteen inches. WEIGHT three ounces and a half.

Inhabits Hudson's Bay, Norton Sound, PLACE.
and other parts of North America. The Achalalacti, i. e. the Devourer of fish,
of the Mexicans Fernandez, Nov. Hisp. 13.
, seems to be the same bird. It has the same cry, manners, and solitary
disposition, with the European species; and feeds not only on fish, but
Lizards. It makes its nest in the face of high banks, penetrating deep into
them in an horizontal direction. Lays four white eggs, which discharge the
young in June. It migrates in Mexico; is there eaten, but is observed to have
the same rankness as other piscivorous birds.

A. EUROPEAN KINGFISHER, Br. Zool. i. No 88. -- Latham, i. 626. Le
Martin-Pecheur, Buffon, vii. 164. -- Pl. Enl. 77. Alcedo Ispida, Lin. Syst.
179, -- LEV. MUS.
K. With the crown, and coverts of the wings, of a deep green, spotted with
caerulean: scapulars and back bright caerulean: tail rich deep blue: breast and
belly orange red.

PLACE.
Said by Du Pratz to be found in North America; but, as I never saw it in any
collection, doubt the fact. Inhabits the temperate parts of Russia and Sibiria,
and is frequent about the Jenesei, but not farther east. It does not extend to
Sweden, and it even seems a rarity in Denmark Muller, Prod. Zool. Dan. 13.
.

The Tartars and Ostiaks use the feathers of this bird as a love-charm. They
fling them on water, and preserve those which swim; believing, that the woman,
whom they touch with one of these feathers, will immediately become enamoured
with them. The Ostiaks preserve the bill, feet, and skin, in a purse, and
imagine them to be preservatives against all sorts of misfortunes Gmelin, voy.
ii. 112.
.

The most singular northern philtre, is a sort of mushroom, worn by the youth
of Lapland in a purse, ante pubem pendulo. LINNAEUS'S apostrophe is very
diverting.

O ridicula VENUS, tibi, quae in exteris regionibus uteris caffea et chocolata,
conditis et saccharatis, vinis et bellariis, gemmis et margaritis, auro et
argento, serico et cosmetico, saltationibus et conventiculis, musica et
comoediis, tibi sufficit hic solus exsuccus fungus. Flora Lappon. 368. XII.
NUTHATCH. Genesis Birds, XXIV.
170. CANADA.
NUTHATCH, Br. Zool. i. No 89? -- Latham, i. 648. 651. Le Torchepot de Canada,
Brisson, iii. 592. Sitta Europea Notwacka, Faun. Suec. No 104. La Sittelle, De
Buffon, v. 460. -- LEV. MUS.
N. With the crown, hind part of the neck, and shoulders, black: back and rump
of a light blue gray: over each eye a white line: cheeks white: primaries
dusky, edged with gray: breast and belly of a pure white: two middle feathers
of the tail gray; the others black, with a white spot at the end: vent
rust-colored. SIZE of the European; of which it seems a mere variety.

Inhabits Canada, and as far south as New York; PLACE.
and extends to the western side of America, Kamtschatka Among a small
collection of drawings made in that country by one of our voyagers.
, Sibiria, and Russia; Sweden, and Sondmor Strom. 247.
in Norway: and does not migrate.

171. BLACK-HEADED.
Nuthatch, Catesby, i. 22, lower figure. -- Latham, i. 650. B. Le Torchepot de
la Caroline, Brisson, iii. 22.
N. With the bill, head, and hind part of the neck, black: over each eye is a
white line: back of a fine gray: wings dusky, edged with gray: breast and
belly, and vent feathers, red: two middle feathers of the tail gray; the rest
black, marked with a white spot. Less than the European.

Inhabits the temperate parts of America. PLACE.


172. LEST.
Small Nuthatch, Catesby, i. 22. -- Brisson, iii. 958. -- Latham, i. 651. C. La
Petite Sittelle a tete Brune, De Buffon, v. 474.
N. With a brown head, marked behind with a white spot: back gray: wings of a
deep brown: under side of the body of a dirty white: two middle feathers of the
tail gray; the others black.

PLACE.
Inhabits Carolina, and other parts of North America.

XIII. TODY. Genesis Birds, XXV.
173. DUSKY.
Todi Sp. quarta, Pallas Spicil. vi. 17. -- Latham, ii. 661, No 9. -- BR. MUS.
T. With a bill half an inch long, broad at the base, slightly indented above
the nostrils, and a little bent near the point; base beset with bristles; upper
mandible brown, lower white: colors above dusky; below yellowish white:
primaries and tail of the same color with the back, edged with dirty white:
legs dark. SIZE of a Hedge Sparrow.

Inhabits Rhode Island. Has the actions of a Flycatcher. PLACE.
Frequents decayed trees, and feeds on insects. Has a brief agreeable note,
which it repeats twice or thrice. -- BR. MUS.

HOOPOE. Genesis Birds, XXVII.
A. HOOPOE, Br. Zool. i. No 90. -- Latham, i. 687. -- De Buffon, vi. 439. Upupa
Epops, Harfogel, Popp, Faun. Suec. No 105. -- LEV. MUS.
H. With a high crest, of pale orange tipped with black: back and wings barred
with black and white: neck reddish brown: breast and belly white: only ten
feathers in the tail; black, with a white crescent Correct the description of
this part in the British Zoology.
across the middle: legs black. LENGTH twelve inches.

PLACE.
Inhabits Europe, as far as Sweden, where it is called Harfugl, or Soldier-bird,
not only on account of its plumed head, but because the common people believe
its appearance to be an omen of war. The Norwegians style it Aerfugl; it is
therefore likely that it may sometimes visit their country. It is properly a
southern bird, and extends even to Egypt and India. Is common in the southern
deserts of Russia and Tartary; grows scarcer beyond the Ob; yet some are seen
beyond lake Baikal. Dr. Pallas confirms to me its filthy manners See Br. Zool.
i. 258. -- Is rarely seen in Britain.
. He assures, that it breeds, in preference, in putrid carcases; and that he
had seen the nest of one in the privy of an uninhabited house, in the suburbs
of Tzaritsyn. Lays from two to seven cinereous eggs. Usually has no nest of its
own. Breeds sometimes in hollow trees, holes in walls, or on the ground.
Migratory.

XIV. CREEPER. Genesis Birds, XXVIII.
174. EUROPEAN.
Br. Zool. i. No 91. -- Catesby, App. xxxvi. Certhiu Familiaris Krypare, Faun.
Suec. No 106. -- Latham, i. 701. Le Grimpereau, De Buffon, v. 481. -- LEV. MUS.
C. With head and neck brown, streaked with black: rump tawny: coverts of wings
varied with brown and black: primaries dusky, edged with white, and edged and
barred with ferruginous marks: breast and belly silvery: tail very long,
consisting of twelve sharp-pointed feathers of a tawny hue.

Inhabits North America. Is found, but very rarely, PLACE.
in Russia and Sibiria. Found in Sweden, and never quits the country; and
extends as far north as Sondmor Strom, 244.
.

175. BAHAMA.
Bahama Titmouse, Catesby, i. 59. Yellow-bellied Creeper, Edw. 362. Certhia
Flaveola, Lin. Syst. 187. -- Latham, i. 737. Le Grimpereau de Martinique, ou le
Sucrier, Brisson, iii. 611. Le Sucrier, De Buffon, v. 542.
C. With a dusky bill head, and back: cheeks black: above each eye is a yellow
line: rump yellow: wings dusky; the primaries crossed with a bar of white:
neck, breast, and belly, yellow: tail black; the exterior feathers tipped with
white.

The female has the same marks, but the colors are more obscure.

Inhabits the Bahama Islands, and the Antilles; PLACE.
in the last it lives among the sugarcanes, and sucks the sweet juice which
exudes from them De Buffon, v. 542.
.

XV. HONEYSUCKER. Genesis Birds, XXIX This genus may be divided into those with
strait and those with incurvated bills; but there being none of the last in
North America, the distinction is omitted.
.
176. RED-THROATED.
Passer Muscatus, Gesner, av. 655. Ourissia sive Tomineio, Clus. Exot. 96.
Guainumbi Prima, (foem.) Marcgrave, 196. Colibry, Viamelin, or Rising Bird,
Josselyn's voy. 100. -- Rarities, 6. -- LEV. MUS. Trochilus Colubris, Lin.
Syst. 191. -- Latham, i. 769. L'Oyseau Mouche a rouge gorge, Brisson, iii. 716.
Humming Bird, Catesby, i. 65. -- Lawson, 146. -- Edw. 38. Le Rubis, De Buffon,
vi. 13.
H. With a black bill, three quarters of an inch long: crown, upper part of the
neck, back, and coverts of the wings, of a most resplendent variable green and
gold: chin and throat of a shining rich scarlet, changing, as opposed to the
light, from gold to a full black; these feathers lie nearly as compactly as
scales: breast and belly white; the sides green: middle feathers of the tail
green; the exterior purple.

The chin, throat, and whole under side, of the female, is white: the exterior
feathers of the tail tipped with white.

MANNERS.
This bird, so admirable for its minuteness, vast swiftness of flight, food, and
elegance of form and colors, gave rise to numbers of romantic tales. They were
not the Europeans alone, who were struck with its great beauty; the natives of
America, to whom it was so familiar, were affected with its gemmeous
appearance, and bestowed on it titles expressive of its resplendent colors.
Some nations called it Ourissia, and Guaracyaba, or the Sunbeam; others,
Guanaeygaba, or Hairs of the Sun; others again named it Huitzitzil, or
Vicililin, or the Regenerated; because they believed it died annually, and was
re-animated at the return of the flowers it fed on: that it stuck its bill into
the trunk of a tree, and remained lifeless for six months; when the vital
powers re-migrated, and restored to nature one of its most brilliant wonders.

It flies with a swiftness which the eye is incapable of following. SWIFTNESS.
The motion of the wings is so rapid as to be imperceptible to the nicest
observer. Lightning is scarcely more transient than its flight, nor the glare
more bright than its colors. FOOD.
It never feeds but upon wing, suspended over the flower it extracts
nourishment from; for its only food is the honied juice lodged in the
nectarium, which it sucks through the tubes of its curious tongue. Like the
Be, having exhausted the honey of one flower, it wanders to the next, in
search of new sweets. It admires most those flowers which have the deepest
tubes. Thus the female Balsamine, and the Scarlet Monarda, are particular
favorites. Whosoever sets those plants before the window is sure to be visited
by multitudes of these diminutive birds. It is a most entertaining sight to see
them swarming around the flowers, and trying every tube of verticillated
plants, by putting their bills into every one which encircles the stalk. If
they find that their brethren have been beforehand, and robbed the flower of
the honey, they will, in rage, pluck off, and throw it on the ground.

The most violent passions animate at times their little bodies. RAGE.
They have often dreadful contests, when numbers happen to dispute possession
of the same flower. They will tilt against one another with such fury, as if
they meant to transfix their antagonists with their long bills. During the
fight; they frequently pursue the conquered into the apartments of those houses
whose windows are left open, take a turn round the room, as Flies do in
England, and then suddenly regain the open air. They are fearless of mankind;
and in feeding will suffer people to come within two yards of them; but on a
nearer approach, dart away with admirable swiftness.

Fernandez Oviedo, an author of great repute, speaks from his own knowledge of
the spirited instinct, even of this diminutive bird, in defense of its young:
So that when they see a man clime ye tree where they have their nests, they
flee at his face, and stryke him in the eyes, coming, goying, and returnyng,
with such swyftness, that no man would lightly believe it, that has not seen
it Hist. of West Indies, translated by Richard Eden, p. 199.
.

Father Charlevoix gives a more apocryphal instance of the courage of this
bird, in its attack on its disproportioned enemy the Raven. As soon as the last
appears, the Honeysucker flies up like lightning, beds itself beneath the
Raven's wing, and, piercing him with his needle-like bill, till the bird is
heard to croak with agony, at length tumbles to the ground dead, either from
the fall or the wound. This relation seems of a piece with the combat of the
Wren with the Eagle, mentioned by Aristotle Hist. An. lib. ix. c. 11. vol. i.
931. -- Charlevoix, v. 232.
: but, to do justice both to the French voyager and Grecian philosopher, I must
add, that each of them delivered their reports from oral evidence.

Many fables have been related of the melody of the song of these birds. NOTE.
In fact, their only note is screep, screep, screep; but the noise which they
make with their wings, especially in the morning, when numbers are in motion,
is a sort of buzz or sound resembling that of a spinning-wheel. Their note is
chiefly emitted when they happen to strike against each other in their flight.

NESTS.
Their nests are found with great difficulty, being built in the branch of a
tree, amidst the thick foliage. It is of elegance suitable to the architects;
formed on the outside with moss; in the inside lined with the down or gossamer
collected from the Great Mullein, or Verbascum Thapsus; but it is also
sometimes made of flax, hemp, hair, and other soft materials. It is of an
hemispherical shape. Its inner diameter an inch: its depth half an inch. The
female is said to be the builder; the male supplying her with materials. Each
assists in the labor of incubation, which continues during twelve days. They
lay only two eggs, white, and as small as pease. The first is very singular,
and contrary to the general rule of nature; which makes, in all other
instances, the smallest and most defenseless birds the most prolific. The
reasons of the exception in this case are double. The smallness of their bodies
causes them commonly to escape the eyes of birds of prey; or if seen, their
rapid flight eludes pursuit: so that the species is preserved as fully as if
they had been the most numerous breeders.

The Indians of Mexico, Peru, and Maynas, make most exquisite pictures of the
feathers of birds; but those of the Honeysuckers form the most brilliant part.
Some use them as ornaments, and hang them as pendants in their ears, which give
a blaze emulous of the Ruby and Emerald. In order to compose pictures, the
Indians draw off the feathers with small pincers, and with fine paste most
artfully join them together. They dispose them with such skill, as to give the
true lights and shade to the performance, and imitate nature with the greatest
fidelity. These were meant to decorate the idols and temples; for, before the
depression of the Indian spirit by the tyranny of the Spaniards, religion was
highly cultivated among the Mexicans and Peruvians; and, notwithstanding it was
cruel, was attended with great splendour.

The generical name (in the Brasilian tongue) of these birds, is Guianumbi.
There are several species, but only one which is found in North America. This
kind is found from Canada, PLACE.
through that great continent, as low as Louisiana, and from thence to the
Brasils. It breeds even in the northern climate of Canada; MIGRATES.
but retires not only from thence, but even from the warm provinces of
Carolina, at approach of winter. In Hispaniola, the mountains of Jamaica, and
the Brasils, countries where there are a perpetual succession of flowers, they
reside throughout the year.

177. RUFFED.
Latham, i. 785.
H. With long strait slender bill: head of a rich variable green and gold: the
feathers on the neck long, and disposed on each side in form of a ruff, and of
a most brilliant crimson and copper color: back, and coverts of the tail,
rust-colored: breast and belly white, the last dashed with red: feathers of the
tail pointed; the ends brown, bottoms ferruginous: coverts of wings green:
primaries deep blue.

FEMALE.
Crown, upper part of the neck, back, and coverts of wings and tail, green and
gold: throat white, spotted with brown and variable copper: belly white, dashed
with rust: primaries deep blue: middle feathers of the tail green; those on the
side ferruginous at their bottoms, black in the middle, and tipped with white.

PLACE.
Inhabit in great numbers the neighborhood of Natka Sound. The Indians brought
them to our navigators alive, with a long hair fastened to one of their legs.

ORDER III. GALLINACEOUS.
XVI. TURKEY. Genesis Birds, XXXI.
178. WILD.
Turkey, Josselyn's voy. 99. -- Rarities, 8. -- Clayton's Virgin. -- Ph. Tr.
Abridg. iii. 590. -- Lawson, 149. -- Catesby, App. xliv. Le Coc d'Inde, Belon,
248. Gallo-pavus, Gesner, av. 481. -- Icon. 56. Gallo-pavo, Aldrov. av. ii. 18.
Gallo-pavo, the Turkey A. 3. Gallo-pavo Sylvestris Novae Angliae, 2 New England
Wild Turkey, Raii. Syn. av. 51. Meleagris Gallo-pavo, M. capite caruncula
frontali gularique, maris pectore barbato, Lin. Syst. 268. Le Dindon, De
Buffon, ii. 132. -- Brisson, i. 158. tab. xvi. -- Pl. Enl. 97.
T. With the characters described in the definition of the genus. DESCRIPTION.
Color of the plumage dark, glossed with variable copper color and green:
coverts of the wings, and the quil-feathers, barred with black and white. Tail
consists of two orders; the upper, TAIL.
or shorter, very elegant; the ground color a bright bay; the middle feathers
marked with numerous bars of shining black and green; the greatest part of the
exterior feathers of the same ground with the others, marked with only three
broad bands of mallard green, placed remote from each other; the two next are
colored like those of the middle; but the end is plain, and crossed with a
single bar, like the exterior.

The longer, or lower order, were of a rusty white color, mottled with black,
and crossed with numerous narrow waved lines of the same color, and near the
end with a broad band.

Wild Turkies preserve a sameness of coloring. The tame, as usual with domestic
animals, vary. It is needless to point out the differences, in so well-known a
bird. The black approach nearest to the original stock. This variety I have
seen nearly in a state of nature, in Richmond and other parks. A most beautiful
kind has of late been introduced into England, WHITE VARIETY.
of a snowy whiteness, finely contrasting with its red head, and black pectoral
tuft. These, I think, came out of Holland, probably bred from an accidental
white pair; and from them preserved pure from any dark or variegated birds.

SIZE.
The sizes of the wild Turkies have been differently represented. Some writers
assert, that there have been instances of their weighing sixty pounds; but I
find none who, speaking from their own knowledge, can prove their weight to be
above forty. Josselyn says, that he has eaten part of a Cock, which, after it
was plucked, and the entrails taken out, weighed thirty New England Rarities, 8.
. Lawson, whose authority is unquestionable, saw half a Turkey serve eight
hungry men for two meals Hist. Carolina, 149 and 27.
; and says, that he had seen others, which, he believed, weighed forty pounds.
Catesby tells us, that out of the many hundreds which he had handled App. xliv.
The greatest certain weight is given by Mr. Clayton, who saw one that reached
38 lb. -- Ph. Trans.
, very few exceeded thirty pounds. Each of these speak of their being double
that size, merely from the reports of others.

MANNERS.
The manners of these birds are as singular as their figure. Their attitudes in
the season of courtship are very striking. The males fling their heads and neck
backwards, bristle up their feathers, drop their wings to the ground, strut and
pace most ridiculously; wheel round the females, with their wings rustling
along the earth, at the same time emitting a strange found through their
nostrils, not unlike the grurr of a great spinning-wheel. NOTES.
On being interrupted, fly into great rages, and change their note into a loud
and guttural gobble; and then return to dalliance.

The sound of the females is plaintive and melancholy.

The passions of the males are very strongly expressed by the change of colors
in the fleshy substance of the head and neck, IRASCIBLE.
which alters to red, white, blue, and yellowish, as they happen to be
affected. The sight of any thing red excites their choler greatly.

They are polygamous, one cock serving or hens. POLYGAMOUS.
They lay in the spring; and will lay a great number of eggs. They will persist
in laying for a great while. They retire to some obscure place to sit, the
cock, through rage at loss of its mate, being very apt to break the eggs. The
females are very affectionate to the young, and make great moan on the loss of
them. They sit on their eggs with such perseverance, that, if they are not
taken away when addle, the hens will almost perish with hunger before they will
quit the nest.

Turkies greatly delight in the seeds of nettles; but those of the purple
Fox-glove prove fatal to them De Buffon.
.

They are very stupid birds; quarrelsome, and cowardly. It is diverting to see
a whole flock attack the common Cock; who will for a long time keep a great
number at bay.

They are very swift runners, in the tame as well as the wild state. SWIFT.
They are but indifferent flyers. They love to perch on trees; PERCH HIGH.
and gain the height they wish, by rising from bough to bough. In a wild state,
they get to the very summit of the loftiest trees, even so high as to be beyond
the reach of the musket Lawson, 45.
.

In the state of nature they go in flocks even of five hundred Lawson, 149.
. GREGARIOUS.
Feed much on the small red acorns; and grow so fat in March, that they cannot
fly more than three or four hundred yards, and are then soon run down by a
horseman. In the unfrequented parts bordering on the Missisipi, they are so
tame as to be shot with even a pistol Adair's Amer. 360.
.

They frequent the great swamps It is in the swamps that the loftiest and most
bulky trees grow: the wet, with which they are environed, makes them a most
secure retreat.
of their native country; HAUNTS.
and leave them at sunrising to repair to the dry woods, in search of acorns,
and various berries; and before sunset retire to the swamps to roost.

The flesh of the wild Turkey is said to be superior in goodness to the tame,
but redder. Eggs of the former have been taken from the nest, and hatched under
tame Turkies; the young will still prove wild, perch separate, yet mix and
breed together in the season. The Indians sometimes use the breed produced from
the wild, as decoy-birds, to seduce those in a state of nature within their
reach Lawson, 149.
.

Wild Turkies are now grown most excessively rare in the inhabited parts of
America, and are only found in numbers in the distant and most unfrequented
spots.

The Indians make a most elegant clothing of the feathers. They twist the
inner webs into a strong double thread of hemp, or inner bark of the
mulberry-tree, and work it like matting. It appears very rich and glossy, and
as fine as a silk shag Lawson, 18. Adair, 423.
. They also make fans of the tail; and the French of Louisiana were wont to
make umbrellas by the junction of four of the tails Du Pratz, ii. 85.
.

When disturbed, they do not take to wing, but run out of sight. It is usual to
chase them with dogs; when they will fly, and perch on the next tree. They are
so stupid, or so insensible of danger, as not to fly on being shot at; but the
survivors remain unmoved at the death of their companions Du Pratz, 224.
.

PLACE.
TURKIES are natives only of America, or the New World; and of course unknown to
the ancients. Since both these positions have been denied by some of the most
eminent naturalists of the sixteenth century, I beg leave to lay open, in as
few words as possible, the cause of their error.

MISTAKEN BY BELON.
Belon 248. Hist. des Ois.
, the earliest of those writers who are of opinion that these birds were
natives of the old world, founds his notion on the description of the Guinea
Fowl, the Meleagrides of Strabo, Athenaeus, Pliny, and others of the ancients.
I rest the refutation on the excellent account given by Athenaeus, taken from
Clytus Milesius, a disciple of Aristotle, which can suit no other than that
fowl. "They want, says he, natural affection toward their young. Their head is
naked, and on the top is a hard round body, like a peg or nail: from their
cheeks hangs a red piece of flesh, like a beard: it has no wattles, like the
common poultry: the feathers are black, spotted with white: they have no spurs:
and both sexes are so like, as not to be distinguished by the sight. Varro Lib.
iii. c. 9.
and Pliny Lib. x. c. 26.
take notice of the spotted plumage, and the gibbous substance on the head.
Athenaeus is more minute, and contradicts every character of the Turkey: whose
females are remarkable for their natural affection; which differ materially in
form from the males; whose heads are destitute of the callous substance; and
whose heels (in the male) are armed with spurs.

Aldrovandus, who died in 1605, ALDROVANDUS,
draws his arguments from the same source as Belon; I therefore pass him by,
and take notice of the greatest of our naturalists, GESNER Av. 481.
; AND GESNER.
who falls into a mistake of another kind, and wishes the Turkey to be thought
a native of India. He quotes Aelian for that purpose; who tells us, that in
India are very large poultry, not with combs, but with various-colored crests,
interwoven like flowers: with broad tails, neither bending, nor displayed in a
circular form; which they draw along the ground, as Peacocks do when they do
not erect them: and that the feathers are partly of a gold color, partly blue,
and of an emerald color De Anim. lib. xvi. c. 2.
.

This, in all probability, was the same bird with the Peacock Pheasant of Mr.
Edwards, Le Paon de Tibet of M. Brisson, and the Pavo Bicalcaratus of Linnaeus.
I have seen this bird living. It has a crest, but not so conspicuous as that
described by Aelian; but it has those striking colors in form of eyes: neither
does it erect its tail like the Peacock Edw. ii. 67. Brisson, i. 291. Lin.
Syst. 268.
. The Catreus of Strabo Lib. xv. p. 1046.
seems to be the same bird. He describes it as uncommonly beautiful, and
spotted; and very like a Peacock. The former author De Anim. lib. xvii. c. 23.
gives a more minute account of this species, and under the same name. He
borrows it from Clitarchus, an attendant of Alexander the Great in all his
conquests. It is evident from his description, that it was of this kind; and it
is likewise probable, that it was the same with his large Indian poultry before
cited. He celebrates it also for its fine note; but allowance must be made for
the credulity of Aelian. The Catreus, or Peacock Pheasant, is a native of
Tibet, and in all probability of the north of India, where Clitarchus might
have observed it; for the march of Alexander was through that part of India
which borders on Tibet, and now known by the name of Penj-ab, or Five Rivers.

NOT NATIVES OF EUROPE;
I shall now collect from authors the several parts of the world where Turkies
are unknown in the state of nature. Europe has no share in the question, it
being generally agreed, that they are exotic in respect to our continent.

NOR OF ASIA.
Neither are they found in any part of Asia Minor, or the Asiatic TURKEY,
notwithstanding ignorance of their true origin first caused them to be named
from that empire. About Aleppo, capital of Syria, they are only met with
domesticated, like other poultry Russell, 63.
. In Armenia they are unknown, as well as in Persia, having been brought from
Venice by some Armenian merchants into that empire Tavernier, 146.
; where they are still so scarce, as to be preserved among other rare fowls in
the Royal menagery Bell's Travels, i. 128.
.

In India they are kept for use in our settlements, and imported from Europe,
as I have been more than once informed by gentlemen long resident in that
country.

Du Halde acquaints us, that they are not natives of China; but were introduced
there from other countries. He errs, from misinformation, in saying that they
are common in India.

I will not quote Gemelli Careri, to prove that they are not found in the
Philippine islands, because that gentleman, with his pen, traveled round the
world in his easy chair, during a very long indisposition and confinement Sir
James Porter's Obs. Turkey, i. 1.
.

But Dampier bears witness that none are found in Mindanao I. 321.
.

The hot climate of Africa barely suffers these birds to exist in that vast
continent, except under the care of mankind. NOR AFRICA:
Very few are found in Guinea, except in the hands of the Europeans: the
negroes declining to breed any, on account of their great tenderness Barbot, in
Churchill's Coll. v. 29. Bosman, 229.
.

Prosper Alpinus satisfies us that they are not found either in Nubia or in
Egypt. He describes the Meleagrides of the ancients; and only proves that the
Guinea-hens were brought out of Nubia, and sold at a great price at Cairo Hist.
Not. Aegypti, i. 201.
, but is totally silent about the Turkey of the moderns.

Let me in this place observe, that the Guinea-hens have long been imported
into Britain. They were cultivated in our farm-yards: for I discover, in 1277,
in the grainge of Clifton, in the parish of Ambrosden, in Buckinghamshire,
among other articles, VI. mutilones, and sex AFRICANAE faeminae Kennet's
Parochial Antiq. 287.
; for this fowl was familiarly known by the names of Afra Avis, and Gallina
Africana and Numida. It was introduced into Italy from Africa, and from Rome
into our country. They were neglected here by reason of their tenderness and
difficulty of rearing. We do not find them in the bills of fare of our ancient
feasts Neither in that of George Nevil, archbishop of York, in 1466, nor among
the delicacies mentioned in the Northumberland Household Book, in the beginning
of the reign of Henry VIII.
: neither do we find the Turkey: which last argument amounts to almost a
certainty, that such a hardy and princely bird had not found its way to us. The
other likewise was then known here by its classical name; for that judicious
writer, Dr. Caius Caii Opusc. 93.
, describes, in the beginning of the reign of Elizabeth, the Guinea fowl, for
the benefit of his friend Gesner, under the name of Meleagris, bestowed on it
by Aristotle Hist. An. lib. vi. c. 2.
.

Having denied, on the very best authorities, that the Turkey ever existed as a
native of the old world, I must now bring my proofs of its being only a native
of the new; and of the period in which it first made its appearance in Europe.

BUT OF AMERICA.
The first precise description of these birds is given by Oviedo; who in 1525
drew up a summary of his greater work, the History of the Indies, for the use
of his monarch Charles V. This learned man had visited the West Indies and its
islands in person, and paid particular regard to the natural history. It
appears from him, that the Turkey was in his days an inhabitant of the greater
islands, and of the main land. He speaks of them as Peacocks; for, being a new
bird to him, he adopts that name, from the resemblance he thought they bore to
the former: But (says he) the neck is bare of feathers, but covered with a skin
which they change after their fantasy into diverse colors. They have a horn
as it were on their front, and HAIRS on the breast In Purchase, iii. 995.
. He describes other birds, which he also calls Peacocks. They are of the
gallinaceous genus, and known by the name of Curassao birds; the male of which
is black, the female ferruginous.

The next who speaks of them as natives of the main land of the warmer parts of
America, is Francisco Fernandez, sent there by Philip II. to whom he was
physician. This naturalist observed them in Mexico. MEXICO.
We find by him, that the Indian name of the male was Huexolofl, of the female
Cihuatotolin: he gives them the title of Gallus Indicus, and Gallo-Pavo. As the
Indians as well as Spaniards domesticated these useful birds, he speaks of the
size by comparison, saying that the wild were twice the magnitude of the tame;
and that they were shot with arrows or guns Hist. Av. Nov. Hisp. 27.
. I cannot learn the time when Fernandez wrote. It must be between the years
1555 and 1598, the period of Philip's reign.

Pedro de Ciesa mentions Turkies on the Isthmus of Darien Seventeen Years
Travels, 20.
. DARIEN.
Lery, a Portuguese author, asserts that they are found in Brasil, and gives
them an Indian name In De Laet's Descr. des Indes, 491.
; but since I can discover no traces of them in that diligent and excellent
naturalist Marcgrave, who resided long in that country, I must deny my assent.
But the former is confirmed by that able and honest navigator Dampier, who saw
them frequently, as well wild as tame, in the province of Yucatan Voyages, vol.
ii. part 2d. p. 65, 85, 114.
, YUCATAN.
now reckoned part of the kingdom of Mexico.

In North America they were observed by the very first discoverers. N. AMERICA.
When Rene de Laudonniere, patronized by Admiral Coligni, attempted to form a
settlement near the place where Charlestown now stands, he met with them on his
first landing, in 1564, and by his historian, has represented them with great
fidelity in the Vth plate of the recital of his voyage De Bry.
. From his time, the witnesses to their being natives of this continent are
innumerable. They have been seen in flocks of hundreds in all parts, from
Louisiana even to Canada: but at this time are extremely rare in a wild state,
except in the more distant parts, where they are still found in vast abundance.

It was from Mexico or Yucatan that they were first introduced into Europe;
WHEN FIRST INTRODUCED INTO EUROPE.
for it is certain that they were imported into England as early as the year
1524, the 15th of Henry VIII Baker's Chr. Anderson's Dict. Com. i. 354.
Hackluyt, ii. 165. makes their introduction about the year 1532. Barnaby Googe,
one of our early writers on husbandry, says they were not seen here before
1530. He highly commends a Lady Hales, of Kent, for her excellent management of
those fowl. p. 166.
. We probably received them from Spain, with which we had great intercourse
till about that time. They were most successfully cultivated in our kingdom
from that period; insomuch that they grew common in every farm-yard, and became
even a dish in our rural feasts by the year 1585; for we may certainly depend
on the word of old Tusser, in his account of the Christmas husbandlie fare Five
hundred points of good husbandry, p. 57.
.

Beef, mutton, and porke, shred pies of the best,
Pig, veale, goose and capon, and Turkey well dressed:
Cheese, apples, and nuts, jolie carols to hear,
As then in the country, is counted good cheer.
But at this very time they were so rare in France, that we are told that the
very first which was eaten in that kingdom appeared at the nuptial feast of
Charles IX. in 1570 Anderson's Dict. Comm. i. 410.
.

They are now very common in all parts of Russia, but will not thrive in
Sibiria. Are cultivated in Sweden, and even in Norway, where they degenerate in
size Pontopp. 78.
.

XVII. GROUS. Genesis Birds. XXXVI.
179. RUFFED.
Ruffed Heathcock, or Grous, Edw. 248. -- Latham. Morehen, La Hontan, i. 69.
Pheasant, Lawson, 139. Tetrao umbellus, Lin. Syst. 275. -- Tetrao togatus,
ibid. La gelinote hupee de Pensylvanie, Brisson, i. 214. -- and, La gross
gelinote de Canada -- 207. Le Coq de Bruyere a fraise, De Buffon, Ois. ii. 281.
-- Pl. enl. 104. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
GR. With a great ruff on the hind part of the neck, to be raised or depressed
at pleasure: the head crested: that, hind part of the neck, the ruff, back, and
coverts of the wings, prettily varied with brown, ferruginous, and black: the
black on the ruff disposed in broad black bars: the coverts of the tail marked
with heart-shaped spots of white: chin white: fore part of the neck yellowish:
breast and belly dirty white, barred with cinereous brown: primaries barred on
their outmost sides with black and rust-colour.

Tail large, expansible like a fan; in some of a cinereous color, in others
orange, most elegantly barred with narrow undulated lines of black; near the
end with a broad band of ash-color, another of black, and tipped with white.

Legs feathered to the feet: toes naked and pectinated.

Female wants both crest and ruff. Crown dusky: back mixed with black and
rust-colour like a Woodcock: breast, belly, and coverts of the wings, barred
with dirty white and cinereous brown: tail short, brown, tipped with white; two
middle feathers mottled with red.

SIZE.
In size these birds observe a medium between a Pheasant and a Partridge. Length
1 foot 5 inches.

PLACE.
They inhabit North America, from Hudson's Bay Phil. Trans. lxii. 393.
to the Carolinas, and probably to Louisiana The accounts given by Bossu, Engl.
ed. i. 95. and by Du Pratz, ii. are too flight for us to determine the species
they mean. Charlevoix, in his account of Canada, vol. v. describes it very well.
.

MANNERS.
The history of this species is very curious: all which I beg leave to
transcribe from Mr. Edwards, according to the accounts given him by Mr. Bartram
and Mr Brook, who had frequent opportunity of observing its manners; to which
I shall add another, borrowed from the Travels of the Baron La Hontan.

FROM MR. BARTRAM.
He is (says Mr. Bartram) a fine bird when his gaiety is displayed; that is,
when he spreads his tail like that of a Turkey-cock, and erects a circle of
feathers round his neck like a ruff, walking very stately with an even pace,
and making a noise something like a Turkey; at which time the hunter must fire
immediately at him, or he flies away directly two or three hundred yards,
before he settles on the ground. There is something very remarkable in what we
call their thumping; which they do with their wings, by clapping them against
their sides, as the hunters say. They stand upon an old fallen tree, that has
lain many years on the ground, where they begin their strokes gradually, at
about two seconds of time distant from one another, and repeat them quicker and
quicker, until they make a noise like thunder at a distance; which continues,
from the beginning, about a minute; then cease for about six or eight minutes
before it begins again. The sound is heard near half a mile, by which means
they are discovered by the hunters, and many of them killed. I have shot many
of them in this position; but never saw them thump, they mostly seeing me
first, and so left off. They commonly exercise in thumping spring and fall, at
about nine or ten in the morning, and four or five in the afternoon. Their food
is chiefly berries and seeds of the country: their flesh is white, and choice
food. I believe they breed but once a year, in the spring, and hatch twelve or
fourteen at a brood; which keep in a company till the following spring. Many
have attempted to raise the young ones, and to tame them; but to no purpose.
When hatched under a hen, they escape into the woods soon after they are
hatched, where they either find means to subsist, or perish.

The history of this bird is thus further illustrated by Mr. Brook of
Maryland, in North America: The ruffed Grous, or Pheasant, MR. BROOK.
breeds in all parts of Maryland, some countries on the Eastern shore excepted.
They lay their eggs in nests they make in the leaves, either by the side of
fallen trees, or the roots of standing ones. They lay from twelve to sixteen
eggs: the time of incubation is in the spring; but how long their eggs are
hatching I cannot say; but probably it is three weeks, the time that a Dunghill
Hen sits. I have found their nests when a boy, and have endeavored to take the
old Pheasant, but never could succeed: she would almost let me put my hand upon
her before she would quit her nest; then by artifice she would draw me off from
her eggs, by fluttering just before me for a hundred paces or more; so that I
have been in constant hopes of taking her. They leave their nests as soon as
they are hatched; and I believe they live at first on ants, small worms, etc.
When they are a few days old, they hide themselves so artfully among the
leaves, that it is difficult to find them: as they grow up, they feed on
various berries, fruits, and grain of the country: grapes they likewise are
fond of in the season; but the Pheasant is more particularly fond of the
ivy-berry. I do not know any other animal that feeds on this berry: I know it
is poison to many. Though the Pheasant hatches many young at a time, and often
sits twice a year, the great number and variety of Hawks in Maryland feeding on
them, prevents their increasing fast. The beating of the Pheasant, as we term
it, is a noise chiefly made in the spring of the year by the cock-bird; it may
be distinctly heard a mile in a calm day: they swell their breasts like the
Powting Pigeon, and heat with their wings, which make a noise not unlike a drum
in sound; but the Pheasant shortens each sounding note, till they run one into
another undistinguishably, like striking two empty bottles together.

LA HONTAN.
In order to perfect, as far as I am able, the history of this bird, I shall
give a quotation from Baron La Hontan's Voyages to North America, published in
English, (vol. i. p. 67.) where he speaks of a bird found near the lakes of
Canada, which, I think, can be no other than the above-described, though the
names given them disagree.

La Hontan says, I went in company with some Canadese on purpose to see that
fowl flap with its wings: believe me, this sight is one of the greatest
curiosities in the world; for their flapping makes a noise much like a drum,
for about the space of a minute; then the noise ceases for half a quarter of an
hour; after which it begins again. By this noise we were directed to the place
where the unfortunate More-hen sat, and found them upon rotten mossy trees. By
flapping one wing against the other they mean to call their mates; and the
humming noise that ensues thereupon may be heard half a quarter of a league.
This they do in the months of April, May, September, and October; and, which is
very remarkable, the More-hen never flaps in this manner but upon one tree. It
begins at break of day, and gives over at nine o'clock in the morning, till
about an hour before sunset, then it flutters again, and continues so to do
till night.

Mr. GRAHAM.
To these accounts I beg leave to add the following, out of the Philosophical
Transactions; which informs us, that this species of Grous bears the Indian
name of Puskee, or Puspuskee, at Hudson's Bay, on account of the leanness and
dryness of their flesh, which is extremely white, and of a very close texture;
but when well prepared, is excellent eating. They are pretty common at Moose
Fort and Henly House; but are seldom seen at Albany Fort, or to the northward
of the above places. In winter they feed upon juniper-tops, in summer on
gooseberries, raspberries, currants, cranberries, etc. They are not migratory;
staying all the year at Moose Fort: they build their nest on dry ground, hatch
nine young at a time, to which the mother clucks as our common hens do; and, on
the lest appearance of danger, or in order to enjoy an agreeable degree of
warmth, the young ones retire under the wings of their parent.

180. PINNATED.
Urogallus minor fuscus cervice plumis alas imitantibus donata, Catesby, App.
tab. i. Tetrao Cupido, Lin. Syst. 274. -- Latham. La Gelinote hupee d'Amerique,
Brisson, i. 212. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
GR. With head, cheeks, and neck of a reddish brown, marked with dusky lines:
chin and throat of a pale rusty brown: on the head is a small crest: on each
side of the neck a most singular tuft (five feathers in each) gradually
lengthening to the fifth, which is about three inches long: the upper feathers
ferruginous and white; the lower black: back and scapulars black and pale
rust-colour; the former spotted with white: breast and belly barred with white
and pale brown: tail barred with pale brown and black.

Legs covered with soft brown feathers: toes naked and pectinated.

SIZE of a Pheasant. A peculiar species, SIZE.
not to be confounded with the preceding The Comte De Buffon, ii. 282. falls
into this mistake.
. Described from the real bird by Mr. Catesby; and by myself from the specimens
in Mrs. Blackburn's cabinet; which were sent from the province of Connecticut.
PLACE.
Is frequent about a hundred miles up Albany river, in Hudson's Bay.

The tufts, which distinguish this species from all others, are rooted high on
the neck, not far from the hind part of the head. The bird has the power of
erecting or dropping them at pleasure. When disturbed, it would spread them
horizontally, like little wings; at other times let them fall on the sides of
the neck Catesby.
. It is probable, that they assist in running or flying, or perhaps both, as
the real wings are very short, in proportion to the weight of the body. These
appendages are peculiar to the cock, and almost the only difference between it
and the hen.

181. SHARP-TAILED.
Long-tailed Grous, Edw. 118. -- Ph. Tr. lxii. Tetrao Phafianellus, Lin. Syst.
273. -- Latham. Le Coq de Bruyeres a longue queue, de la Baye de Hudson,
Brisson, App. 9. -- De Buffon, ii. 286.
GR. With the head, cheeks, and hind part of the neck, varied with reddish
brown and black: the back and coverts of the tail of the same color: the
scapulars and great coverts of the wings ferruginous, spotted with black, and
great spots of white: primaries black, spotted with white: breast and sides
white, elegantly marked with sagittal spots of black: belly white: tail short
and cuneiform; the two middle feathers two inches longer than the others; the
tail is of the same color with the back, only the exterior feathers are spotted
with white: the legs are covered with soft and long feathers, extending over
the pectinated toes, which would be otherwise naked.

SIZE.
The LENGTH of this species is seventeen inches: the EXTENT of wings
twenty-four: WEIGHT two pounds.

PLACE.
Inhahits Hudson's Bay; and, according to Dr. Mitchel, the unfrequented parts of
Virginia; but none have been brought over to England from any other place than
the Bay.

Linnaeus confounds this with the Wood Grous, or Cock of the Wood Br. Zool. i.
No 92. tab. xl.
. Comparison will show with how little reason the Comte De Buffon Ois. ii. 279.
makes it to be the female of the next species, our Spotted Grous. If the
female of that was not ascertained, the difference in the form of the tail
would be sufficient to establish a distinction; by which it approaches nearest
to the European Pheasant of any bird in North America.

The Indians about Hudson's Bay call this species the Au Kuskow. It continues
there the whole year; lives among the small larch bushes, and feeds, during
winter, on the buds of that plant and the birch; in the summer, on all sorts of
berries. The females lay from nine to thirteen eggs. The young, like others of
this genus, run as soon as hatched, and make a puling noise like a chicken.
They differ chiefly from the cock, in having less of the red naked skin over
the eyes. The cock has a shrill crowing note, but not very loud. When
disturbed, or while flying, it makes a repeated noise of cuck, cuk; and makes a
noise with the feathers of its tail like the cracking of a fan. The flesh of
these birds is of a light brown color, plump, and very juicy.

182. SPOTTED.
Black and Spotted Heathcock (male) Edw. 118. Brown and Spotted Heathcock
(female) Edw. 71. Tetrao Canadensis (male) Lin. Syst. 274. Tetrao Canace
(female) Lin. Syst. 275. -- Latham. La Gelinote de la Baye de Hudson, Brisson,
i. 201. and the same, App. 10. (male.) La Gelinote de Canada, Brisson, i. 203.
tab. xx. fig. 1. 2. (m. and fem.) -- De Buffon, ii. 279. -- Pl. Enl. 131, 132.
GR. With a white spot before and behind each eye: head, neck, back, and
coverts of the wings and tail, dusky brown, crossed with black: throat of a
glossy black, bounded by a white line, commencing at the external corner of
each eye: breast of the former color: belly white, marked with great black
spots: tail black, external feathers tipped with orange: legs feathered: toes
naked and pectinated.

The FEMALE is of a reddish brown, barred and spotted with black: FEMALE.
belly of a dirty white, spotted with black: tail of a deep brown, barred with
mottled bands of black; the tips of the exterior feathers orange.

The WEIGHT is twenty-three ounces: LENGTH fifteen inches: SIZE.
EXTENT near two feet.

PLACE.
Inhabits Hudson's Bay, Newfoundland, and Canada. Is called by the English of
Hudson's Bay, the Wood Partridge, from its living in pine woods. These birds
are very stupid; so that they are often knocked down with a stick; and are
usually caught by the natives with a noose fastened to a stake. In summer they
are very palatable; for in that season they feed on berries. In winter they
live on the shoots of the spruce-fir, which infects the flesh with a very
disagreeable taste. If it is true, that this species lays but five eggs Ph. Tr.
lxii. 390.
, it is a strange exception to the prolific nature of the genus.

183. WHITE.
White Partridge, Edw. 72. -- Ellis's Voy. 37. La Lagopede de la Baie de
Hudson, De Buffon, ii. 276. tab. ix. -- Latham. La Gelinote blanch, Brisson,
i. 216.s Pl. Enl. Tetrao Lagopus, suecis Snoripa, Lappis Cheruna, Faun. Suec.
No 203
GR. With a black bill: scarlet eyebrows, very large in the male; in the
female far less conspicuous. Head, neck and part of the back, SUMMER PLUMAGE.
coverts of the tail, and scapulars, deep orange, crossed with numerous dusky
lines, and often marked with great blotches of white: belly, legs, and middle
feathers of the tail, white: the rest of the tail dusky, tipped with white: the
shafts of the quill feathers black: the legs and toes warmly clad with a very
thick and long coat of soft white feathers: the claws broad and flat, adapted
for digging.

WINTER PLUMAGE.
Such is the summer dress: in winter they change their color to white, or, more
properly speaking, moult, and change their colored plumes for white ones.
DOUBLY FEATHERED.
By a wonderful providence, every feather, except those of the wings and tail,
becomes double; a downy one shooting out at the base of each, as expressed in
the plate, which gives an additional protection against the cold. In the latter
end of February, the summer plumage begins to appear first about the rump, in
form of brown stumps Drage's Voy. ii. 9.
, the first rudiments of the coat they assume in the warm season, when each
feather is single, suitable to the time. I ought to have observed before, that
the SPOTTED GROUS also changes its single for double feathers at approach of
winter, notwithstanding it undergoes no change of color.

The WEIGHT of this species is twenty-four ounces: SIZE.
its LENGTH sixteen inches and a quarter: EXTENT twenty-three.

These birds are met with round the globe, PLACE.
within and without the arctic circle, and as high as lat. 72, in the countries
round Hudson's Bay, and as low as Newfoundland; in Norway; perhaps in the N. of
the Russian dominions in Europe The feathers of the Russian kind, whichsoever
it was, in early times, about Pechora, were an article of commerce, and were
sold for two pence of their money per Pood, or 38 lb. Purchase, iii. 536.
, and certainly in Asia all over Sibiria, as far as Kamtschatka, and in the
islands which lie between that country and America. Finally, they abound in
Lapland and Iceland; and I repeat, with certainty, NORWAY.
that Norway has supplied me with this species, which was sent to me by the
late Mr. Fleischer, of Copenhagen, along with the lesser kind, which proved to
be the same with the White Grous of the Alps, and the Ptarmigan of the
Highlands of Scotland. Each of the varieties of the Norwegian birds were in
their summer dress; and differed most materially in size as well as color, the
one being in all respects like the American kind: the lesser agreed in every
point with that which I describe, No 95, vol. i. of my British Zoology.

The natives distinguish the kinds. The larger, NORWEGIANS DISTINGUISH TWO
KINDS.
which inhabits forests, is styled by them Skorv Ripe, or the Wood Grous; the
lesser, which lives in the mountains, is called Fiaeld Ripe, or the Mountain
Grous The Russian White Grous inhabits indifferently woods, mountains, plains,
and marshes. The British species or variety is in Russia about half the size of
the Sibirian kind.
. They all burrow under the snow; and form extensive walks beneath. There they
feed, especially in Lapland, on the seeds of the dwarf birch Fl. Lap. 268.
, and in the season on variety of berries of mountain plants. During winter
they are taken and brought to Bergen by thousands; are half roasted, and put
into firkins, and transported to other countries Pontoppidan, ii. 92.
.

The lesser variety is not unknown in America. The sort here described is found
in amazing quantities, especially about Hudson's Bay, where they breed in all
parts along the coasts, make their nests on dry ridges on the ground, and lay
from nine to eleven eggs, powdered with black.

This is the only species of Grous in N. America to which Providence has given
that warm protection to its feet, evidently to secure them against the cold of
their winter lodgings: and, as they are greatly sought after by Eagles, Owls,
and other birds of prey, a fine provision is made for their safety, by the
change of color, which renders them not to be distinguished from the snow they
lie on.

Every morning they take a flight into the air directly upwards, to shake the
snow from their wings and bodies. They feed in the mornings and evenings, and
in the middle of the day bask in the sun. In the morning they call to one
another with a loud note, interrupted; feeding in the intervals, and calling
again.

In the beginning of October, they assemble in flocks of two hundred, and live
much among the willows, the tops of which they eat; whence they are called
Willow Partridges. About the beginning of December they appear in less plenty,
retiring from the flats about the settlements on Hudson's Bay to the mountains,
where in that month the snow is less deep than in the lowlands, to feed on
cranberries and other berries Drage's Voy. i. 174.
. In Greenland they resort in summer to the mountains for the sake of the
crowberries Empetrum Nigrum. See Crantz. Greenl. i. 64, 75.
, which they eat even with the leaves of the plant. In winter they descend to
the shores, where the winds sweep the snow off the rocks, and enable them to
pick up a sustenance.

They are an excellent food, and much searched after by the Europeans in
Hudson's Bay. They are generally as tame as chickens, especially in a mild day:
sometimes they are rather wild; but by being driven about, or shot at with
powder, they grow so weary, by the short flights they take, as soon to become
very tame again. Sometimes the hunters, when they see the birds likely to take
a long flight, imitate the crying of a Hawk, which intimidates them so much,
that they instantly settle. When the female is killed, the male can scarcely be
forced from the body of its mate Faun. Groenl. p. 117.
.

The usual method of taking them is in nets made of twine, twenty feet square,
fastened to four poles, and supported in front in a perpendicular direction
with sticks. A long line is fastened to these props, the end of which is held
by a person who lies concealed at a distance. Several people are then employed
to drive the birds within reach of the net, which is then pulled down, and
often covers at one haul fifty or seventy. At this time they are so plentiful,
that ten thousand are taken for the use of the settlement from November to the
end of April. In former days, they must have been infinitely more numerous; for
Sir Thomas Button relates, that when he wintered there in 1612, he took
eighteen hundred dozens of these and other fowl Quoted in North-west Fox, 228.
: but this is a trifle to the success of M. Jeremie, who asserts, that there
were eaten in one winter, between himself and seventy-nine others, ninety
thousand Grous, and twenty-five thousand Rabbets Recucil de Voy. au Nord. iii.
344.
.

The Laplanders take them by forming a hedge with the boughs of birch-trees;
leaving small openings at certain intervals, and hang in each a snare. The
birds are tempted to come and feed on the buds or catkins of the birch; and
whenever they endeavor to pass through the openings they are instantly caught.

184. ROCK.
ROCK Gr. With a black line from the bill to the eye. In all other parts of the
plumage of the same colors with the WHITE, No 183; but inferior in size by one
third.

Differs in nature. Feeds on the tops of small birch. Frequents only the dry
rocky grounds, and the larch plains. Makes a singular snoring noise, with its
neck streched out, and seemingly with difficulty. Is very numerous in the
northern parts of Hudson's Bay, and never visits the southern end, except in
very hard weather. Never takes shelter in the woods, but sits on the rocks, or
burrows in the snow. Is inferior in goodness to the preceding.

A. WOOD GROUS, Br. Zool. i. No 92. Tetraonis alterum Genus, Plinii, lib. x. c.
22. Tetrao urogallus Kjader, Faun. Suec. No 200. -- Latham. La Tetras ou le
grand Coq de Bruyere, De Buffon, ii. 191. tab. v. -- Pl. Enl. 73, 74.
MALE.
GR. With head, neck, and back crossed with slender lines of black and gray:
upper part of the breast glossy green: tail black; the feathers on each side
spotted with white: legs feathered: toes naked and pectinated. SIZE.
LENGTH two feet eight: WEIGHT sometimes fourteen pounds.

FEMALE.
Length of the female only two feet two: color ferruginous and black, disposed
generally in bars.

Notwithstanding the opinions of Linnaeus and the Count De Buffon, this species
is unknown in North America. Its most southerly habitation, as far as I can
discover, is the Archipelago, PLACE.
it being found in the islands of Crete and of Milo. One was shot in the last,
perched on a palm tree, on whose fruit it probably fed. I suspect that it does
not extend into Asia Minor; for Doctor Russell does not enumerate it among the
Syrian birds. As the Tetrao, which Athenaeus Lib. xiv. p. 654.
calls a sort of Pheasant, was found in the ancient Media, it may still be met
with in the northern part of Persia. If Aristotle intends this species by the
words Tetrix and Ourax Hist. An. lib. vi. c. 1.
, it was likewise found in Greece; but he applies those names only to a bird
which lays its eggs on the grassy ground, and says no more.

Pliny gives a far clearer description of the Tetraones of Italy. Decet
TETRAONAS suus nitor, absolutaque nigritia, in superciliis cocci rubor. This
certainly means only the cock of the Black Grous; which is distinguished by the
intense blackness and the brilliant gloss of its plumage, as well as by its
scarlet eyebrows, which is common to it and the Wood Grous; which last is the
species described by the ancient naturalist; truly in some respects,
hyperbolically in others. He says it is of the size of a Vulture, and not
unlike it in color Hist. Not. lib. x. c. 22.
. Both these assertions approach the truth; for the upper part of the body has
a dusky or sooty look, not unlike that of the Vulture of the Alps. But when he
speaks of its being the heaviest bird next to the Ostrich, we see plainly he
goes beyond all bounds.

It is a species found in most parts of the wooded and mountanous countries of
Europe, and extends even to the arctic Lapmark Leems, 241.
: is common in Russia and Sibiria; in the last are found greater and lesser
varieties. It is found even as far as Kamtschatka.

B. SPURIOUS GR. Tetrao Hybridus. Racklehane. Roslagis Rostare, Faun. Suec. No
201.
GR. With a spotted breast and forked tail. In size equal to the hen of the
preceding. Is much scarcer, more timid, and its note very different. Linnaeus
says it is a mixed breed between the WOOD and BLACK GROUS; but his account of
it is obscure.

C. BLACK GROUS, Br. Zool. i. No 93. Tetrao ius, Plinii. Tetrao Tetrix, Orre,
Faun. Suec. No 202. Le Petit Tetras oa Coq de Bruyere a queue forchue, De
Buffon, ii. 210. -- Pl. Enl. 172, 173.
GR. With a white spot on the shoulders, and white vent feathers: rest of the
plumage of a full black, glossed with blue: tail much forked, exterior feathers
curling outward. Weight near four pounds. Length one foot ten inches.

Female weighs but two pounds. The tail is slightly forked and short: the
colors rust, black, and cinereous.

PLACE.
Inhabits Europe, as high as Lapland: extends over Russia and Sibiria as far as
birch-trees grow, of the catkins and buds of which it is very fond. Feeds much
on the populus balsamifera The Taccamahacca of North America. Catesby, i. 34.
, which gives its flesh a fine flavor. In northern Europe, this and the last
species live during summer on whortle-berries, and feed their young with gnats.
In summer the males perch on trees, and animate the forests with their crowing.
In winter they lie on the ground, become buried in the snows, and form walks
beneath, in which they often continue forty days Amoen. Acad. iv. 591.
. They are at present taken in snares; but in Lapland were formerly shot with
arrows Olaus Gent. Septr. lib. xix. c. 13.
.

During winter, there is at present a very singular way of taking the BLACK
GROUS in Sibiria. In the open forests of birch, a certain number of poles are
placed horizontally on forked sticks: by way of allurement, small bundles of
corn are placed on them; and not remote, are set certain tall baskets of a
conic shape, with the broadest part uppermost: within the mouth is placed a
small wheel, through which passes an axis fixed so nicely as to admit it to
play very readily, and permit one side or the other, on the least touch, to
drop down, and again recover its situation. The BLACK GROUS are soon attracted
by the corn on the horizontal poles; first alight on them, and after a short
repast fly to the baskets, attempt to settle on their tops, when the wheel
drops sideways, and they fall headlong into the trap, which is sometimes found
half full.

D. PTARMIGAN, Br. Zool. i. No 95. Tetrao Lagopus. Suecis Snoripa. Lappis
Cheruna, Faun. Suec. No 203. Le Lagopede, De Buffon, ii. 264. tab. ix.
GR. With the head, neck, back, scapulars, and some of the coverts of the
wings, marked with narrow lines of black, ash-color, and rust, intermixed with
some white: wings and belly white: outmost feathers of the tail black; those of
the middle cinereous, mottled with black, and tipped with white. The male has a
black spot between the bill and the eye; which in the female is scarcely
visible. One which I weighed in Scotland was nineteen ounces. Another weighed
by Mr. Ray, in the Grisons country, only fourteen. It regularly changes its
colors at approach of winter.

PLACE.
Inhabits Greenland, Iceland, Lapland, all Scandinavia, and Russia; but I
believe does not extend to Sibiria or Kamtschatka. This, from its haunts, is
called by the Norwegians, Fiaelde Ripe, or Mountain Grous. But in Russia it
inhabits indifferently woods, mountains, plains, and marshes. Its feathers were
formerly an article of commerce. It is taken among the Laplanders, by the same
stratagem as the WHITE GROUS, No 183.

The Greenlanders catch it in nooses hung to a long line, drawn between two
men, dropping them over the neck of this silly bird. They sometimes kill it
with stones; but of late oftener by shooting. It is said, that when the female
is killed the male unwillingly deserts the body Faun. Groenl. p. 117.
.

The Greenlanders eat it either dressed, or half rotten, or raw, with seals
lard. The intestines, especially those next to the rump, and fresh drawn, are
reckoned great delicacies. They also mix the contents with fresh train-oil and
berries; a luxury frequent among these people. The skins make a warm and
comfortable shirt, with the feathers placed next to the body. The women
formerly used the black feathers of the tail as ornaments to their head-dresses.

E. REHUSAK. Montin, in Act. Physiogr. Lund. i. 150.
GR. With neck rust-colored, spotted with black: back and coverts of tail
black, varied with rusty streaks: breast divided from the lower part of the
neck by a dark shade: rest of the breast and vent white; the hen spotted with
yellow: primaries white: tail black; end whitish: thighs white, with some rusty
spots: legs feathered to the toes: toes naked, covered with large brown scales.
SIZE of a small Hen.

Inhabits both the woods and alps of Lapland. PLACE.
Lays thirteen or fourteen reddish eggs, marked with large brown spots. When
disturbed, flies away with a loud noise, like a coarse laugh. The Keron, or
common Ptarmigan, on the contrary, is silent. The Keron inhabits the Alps only.

F. HAZEL GR. Will. Orn. 175. Tetrao bonasia. Hiarpe, Faun. Suec. No 204. La
Gelinotte, De Buffon, ii. 233. tab. vii. -- Pl. Enl. 474, 475.
GR. With the chin black, bounded with white: head and upper part of the neck
crossed with dusky and cinereous lines: behind each eye a white line: coverts
of wings and scapulars spotted with black and rust-color: breast and belly
white, marked with bright bay spots: feathers of the tail mottled with ash and
black; and, except the two middlemost, crossed with a broad single bar of
black: legs feathered half way down. FEMALE wants the black spot on the chin,
and white stroke beyond the eyes. SIZE.
Its size superior to an English Partridge.

Inhabits the birch and hazel woods of many parts of Europe, PLACE.
as high as the diocese of Drontheim, and even Lapland Scheffer Lapl. 138.
; and is not unfrequent in the temperate parts. Paulsen Catalogue of Iceland
Birds, MS.
says that it migrates into the south of Iceland in April, and departs in
September? It lays from twelve to twenty eggs: perches usually in the midst of
a tree: is attracted by a pipe, imitative of its voice, to the nets of the
sportsmen, who lie concealed in a hovel Gesner Av. 230.
. Is excellent meat, insomuch that the Hungarians call it Tschasarmadar, or the
bird of Caesar, as if it was only fit for the table of the Emperor. Is found in
most parts of the Russian dominions with the Ptarmigan, but grows scarcer
toward the east of Sibiria.

XVII. PARTRIDGE. Genesis Birds, XXXVII.
185. MARYLAND.
American Partridge, Clayton, Ph. Tr. abridg. iii. 590. -- Lawson, 140. --
Catesby, App. plate xii. -- Du Pratz, ii. 86. Tetrao Virginianus, Lin. Syst.
277. Le Perdrix d'Amerique, Brisson, i. 231. -- Et de la Nouvelle Angleterre,
229. -- De Buffon, ii. 447.
P. With white cheeks and throat, bounded by a line of black on all sides, and
marked with another passing beneath each eye: breast whitish, prettily marked
with semicircular spots of black: upper part of the breast, coverts of wings,
scapulars, and coverts of tail, bright bay, edged with small black and white
spots; scapulars striped with yellowish white: primaries and tail of a light
ash color.

The head of the female agrees in the white marks of the male, but the
boundaries are ferruginous. There is also more red on the breast. In other
respects the colors nearly correspond. In SIZE, above half as big again as the
English Quail.

PLACE.
Frequent from Canada to the most southern parts of North America, perhaps to
Mexico. Are great breeders, and are seen in covies of four or five and twenty.
Breed the latter end of April, or beginning of May. Collect, toward the
beginning of June, in great flocks, and take to the orchards, where they perch
when disturbed. Feed much on buck-wheat; grow fat, and are excellent meat.
Migrate from Nova Scotia, at approach of winter, to the southern provinces; but
numbers reside in the latter the whole year. The males have a note twice
repeated, which they emit, while the females are sitting, usually perched on a
rail or gate. Make a vast noise with the wings when they arise.

Of late they have been introduced into Jamaica; IN JAMAICA:
are naturalized to the climate, and increase greatly in a wild state; and, as
I am informed, breed in that warm climate twice in the year.

A. COMMON PARTRIDGE. Tetrao Perdix. Rapphona. Faun. Suec. No 205. La Perdrix
Grise, De Buffon, ii. 401. -- Pl. Enl. 27.
INHABITS as high as Sweden; but has not yet reached Norway Brunnich, No 201.
. Found in the west, and all the temperate parts of Russia and Sibiria, and
even beyond lake Baikal, where it winters about steep rocky mountains exposed
to the sun, and where the snow lies lest.

During winter, in Sweden it burrows beneath the snow; and the whole covey
retires there, leaving a spiracle at each end of their lodge.

B. QUAIL, Br. Zool. i. No 97. -- Wachtel, Faun. Suec. No 206. -- LEV. MUS. --
BL. MUS.
IS found no further north than Sweden. It appears there in the beginning of
the leafing month (May); and is neither heard or seen there in autumn or
winter, unless it should, as Linnaeus supposes, migrate to the southern
province, or Schonen, or retire to the Ukraine, Wallachia, etc Amoen. Acad. iv.
592.
.

Quails swarm so greatly, at the time of their migration, about the Dnieper,
and in the south of Russia, that they are caught by thousands, and sent to
Moscow and Petersburgh in casks. They are common in all parts of Great Tartary;
but in Sibiria only in the south, as their passage is hindered by the lofty
snowy mountains. It is said they winter beneath the snow; and in great frosts,
to be found torpid in the Ant-hills. Beyond lake Baikal, the Quails exactly
resemble those of Europe, but are quite mute. These are used by the Chinese in
fighting, as we do Cocks.

XVIII. BUSTARD. Genesis Birds. XXXIX.
186. NORTON SOUND.
I Am sorry that I have it not in my power to do more than ascertain that a
bird of the BUSTARD genus is found in North America. Captain KING was so
obliging as to inform me, that he saw on the plains near Norton Sound, N. lat.
64, great flocks of a large kind. They were very shy; ran very fast, and for a
considerable way before they took wing; so that he never could get one shot.

I often meet with the word Outarde, or Bustard, among the French voyagers in
North America; but believe it to be always applied to a species of Goose.

The Great Bustard, Br. Zool. i. No 98, is frequent over all the desert of
Tartary, and beyond lake Baikal. Is a solitary bird; but collects into small
flocks at the time of its southern migration, and winters about Astracan
Extracts, 143.
.

^. LESSER BUSTARD, Br. Zool. i. No 99. Tetrao Tetrax, Faun. Suec. No 196. La
Petite Outarde ou la Cane-petiere, De Buffon, ii. 40. -- Pl. Enl. 10. 25. --
LEV. MUS.
B. With crown, back, scapulars, and coverts of the wings, ferruginous and
black; primaries black at their ends, white at their bottoms; the secondaries
quite white: neck black, marked near the top and bottom with a white circle:
breast and belly white: middle feathers of the tail crossed with rust and
black, the rest white. FEMALE entirely ferruginous and black, except wings and
belly. SIZE of a Pheasant.

Appears in Sweden rarely in the spring: not traced further north. PLACE.
Very frequent in the southern and south-west plains of Russia, and in small
flocks when it migrates. Continues a good way into the deserts of Tartary; but
is never seen in Sibiria.

ORDER IV. COLUMBINE.
XIX. PIGEON. Genesis Birds, XL.
187. PASSENGER.
Pigeon, Josselyn's Voy. 99. Wild Pigeon, Lawson, 140. -- Kalm. ii. 82. Pigeon
of Passage, Catesby, i. tab. 23. Wood Pigeon, Du Pratz, ii. 88. Columba
Migratoria, Lin. Syst. 285. Le Pigeon sauvage d'Amerique, Brisson, i. 100. --
De Buffon, Ois. ii. 527. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
P. With a black bill: red irides: head, and hind part and sides of the neck,
of a slaty blue; on each of the last a large shining golden spot: coverts of
the wings of a dark blueish gray, marked with a few black spots: quil feathers
brown: tail of a great length, and cuneiform: the middle feathers dusky gray,
the next paler, the outmost white. WEIGHT nine ounces.

MANNERS.
These birds visit the provinces of North America in most amazing numbers every
hard winter. They appear in greater or lesser numbers, according to the
mildness or severity of season; for when the weather proves mild, few or none
are seen in the southern parts. Necessity alone obliges them to change their
quarters, in search of acorns, FOOD.
mast, and berries, which the warmer provinces yield in vast abundance. When
they alight, the ground is soon cleared of all esculent fruits, to the great
loss of the hog, and other mast-eating animals. When they have devoured every
thing which has fallen on the surface, they form themselves into a great
perpendical column, and by rotation keep flying among the boughs of the trees,
from top to bottom, beating down the acorns with their wings, and some or
other, in succession, alight on the earth and eat Du Pratz.
. The species of food they are fondest of is the small acorn, called the Turkey
acorn, it being also a favorite food of those birds. In Canada they do vast
damage in autumn, by devouring the corn, before they begin their southern
flight The same.
.

They build their nests in trees, NESTS.
and coo like the English Wild Pigeon; and lay two eggs. They breed in the more
northern parts, from the country south of Moose Fort, in Hudson's Bay Ph. Tr.
lxii. 398.
, to that between Fort Frederick and Fort Anne, and the woods about the river
Onandago Bartram's Journey to Onandago, 36. -- Kalm's Travels, ii. 311.
. During the time of incubation and nutrition, they feed first on the seeds of
the Acer Rubrum, Lin. -- Catesby, i. 62.
red maple, which ripens in May; and after that, on those of the elm Ulmus
Americana, Lin.
. It appears by those accurate observers, Mr. Bartram and Mr. Kalm, that they
continue in their breeding-places till the middle at lest of July: the first
having seen them in June; the last, the 19th of July. Mr. Hutchins assures me,
that they continue in the inland parts of Hudson's Bay till December; and when
the ground is covered with snow, feed on the buds of juniper.

As soon as these birds find a want of food, MIGRATIONS.
they collect in vast flocks, and migrate to such places as are likely to
supply them with subsistence. VAST NUMBERS.
The multitudes which appear during the rigorous seasons are so immense, that
the mention of them, unless supported by good authority, would seem incredible.
They fly by millions in a flock; and in their passage literally intercept the
light of the sun for a considerable space. As soon as one flock has passed,
another succeeds, each taking a quarter of an hour before the whole flock is
gone. This continues, in some seasons, for three days without any intermission
Catesby.
.

The inhabitants of New York and Pennsylvania are frequent witnesses of the
phenomenon, and kill numbers of these migrants from their balconies, and the
roofs of their houses. When they alight on trees to roost, they often break the
limbs of stout oaks, unable to support the weight of the crowds which perch on
them. The ground beneath the trees on which they have lodged a night, is
covered with their dung to a considerable depth Lawson, 44. -- The Rev. Mr.
Burnaby relates the prodigious flights he saw passing in September, southerly,
over New England. He adds, he scarcely met with any other food in the inns he
was at. p. 132.
.

Josselyn, who observed these Pigeons in 1638, in New England, before they were
disturbed by population, says, he has seen flights of them moving at Michaelmas
to the southward, four or five miles long, so thick that he lost sight of the
sun. He adds, that they return in spring; RETURN.
and that they join nest to nest, and tree to tree, by their nests, for many
miles together, in the woods Voy. 99.
. Kalm mentions their passage through Jersey in March.

The inhabitants of North America profit by this kind gift of Providence, and
shoot them in their passage; for they are very fat, and excellent meat. The
Indians watch the roosting-places; go in the night, and, knocking them down
with long poles, bring away thousands. Formerly, you could not go into a little
Indian town, in the interior parts of Carolina, THEIR OIL.
but you would find a hundred gallons of Pigeons oil or fat, which they use
with their mayz, as we do butter Lawson, 44.
. They scorn to obtain that useful article from the quiet employ of the dairy;
but are fond of the similitude, provided it could be obtained by any means
suitable to their active spirit.

M. du Pratz hit upon an ingenious expedient of taking them on roost, by
placing under the trees vessels filled with flaming sulphur; the fumes of which
ascending, brought them senseless to the ground in perfect showers.

I shall conclude this account with what was communicated to me by the late Mr.
Ashton Blackburne, from his own observations, or those of his friends, who were
eyewitnesses to the wondrous facts related of these birds.

New York, June 21, 1770.
I think, says Mr. Blackburne, this as remarkable a bird as any in America.
They are in vast numbers in all parts, and have been of great service at
particular times to our garrisons, in supplying them with fresh meat,
especially at the out-posts. A friend told me, that in the year in which Quebec
was taken, the whole army was supplied with them, if they chose it. The way was
this: every man took his club (for they were forbid to use their firelocks)
when they flew, as it was termed, in such quantities, that each person could
kill as many as he wanted. They in general begin to fly soon after daybreak,
and continue till nine or ten o'clock; and again about three in the afternoon,
and continue till five or six: but what is very remarkable, they always fly
westerly. The times of flying here are in the spring, about the latter end of
February or the beginning of March, and continue every day for eight or ten
days; and again in the fall, when they begin the latter end of July or the
beginning of August. They catch vast quantities of them in clap-nets, with
stale pigeons. I have seen them brought to this market by sacks-full. People in
general are very fond of them; and I have heard many say they think them as
good as our common Blue Pigeon; but I cannot agree with them by any means. They
taste more like our Queest, or Wild Pigeon; but are better meat. They have
another way of killing them -- They make a hut of boughs of trees, and six
stale Pigeons on the ground at a small distance from the hut. They plant poles
for the Wild Pigeons to light on when they come a salting (as they term it)
which they do every morning in the season, repairing to the marshes near the
seaside; then the persons in the hut pull the stale Pigeon, when the birds
will alight in vast numbers on the poles, and great multitudes are shot. Sir
William Johnson told me, that he killed at one shot with a blunderbuss, a
hundred and twenty or thirty. Some years past they have not been in such plenty
as they used to be. This spring I saw them fly one morning, as I thought in
great abundance; but every body was amazed how few there were; and wondered at
the reason.

I must remark one very singular fact: that, notwithstanding the whole people
of a town go out a pigeoning, as they call it, they will not on some days kill
a single hen bird; and on the very next day, not a single cock (and yet both
sexes always fly westerly); and when this is the case, the people are always
assured that there will be great plenty of them that season. I have been at
Niagara when the sentinel has given the word that the Pigeons were flying; and
the whole garrison were ready to run over one another, so eager were they to
get fresh meat.


188. CAROLINA.
Picacuroba, Marcgrave, 204. Turtle Dove, Lawson, 142. -- Du Pratz, ii. 88. La
Tourterelle de la Caroline, Brisson, i. 110. Turtle of Carolina, Catesby, i.
24. -- De Buffon, ii. 557. -- Pl. Enl. 175. Columba Carolinensis, Lin. Syst.
286. Long-tailed Dove, Edw. 15. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
P. With the orbits naked and blue: crown, neck, back, and scapulars, brown;
the last spotted with black: some of the lesser coverts of a lead-color: quil
feathers dusky: beneath each eye in the male a black spot; on each side of the
neck another, variable, with green, gold, and crimson: breast of a pale
claret-color: belly and thighs of a dull yellow: tail very long and cuneiform;
the two middle feathers brown; the others white, marked in the middle with a
black spot. LENGTH fourteen inches.

Inhabits Carolina the whole year; and is found as far south as the West Indies
and Brasil. Feeds much on the berries of the poke or Phytolacca Decandria
Phytolacca Decandria, Lin. Sp. Pl. 631.
, and the seeds of the mug-apple or Podophyllum Passenger Pigeon. No. 187.
Carolina Pigeon* No. 186.
Peltatum Lin. Sp. Pl. 723.
. Lawson says, it is a great devourer of peace; on which account the Americans
catch as many as they can in traps; and as an additional reason, because of the
delicacy of their flesh.

189. WHITE-CROWNED.
White-crowned Pigeon, Catesby, i. 25. Bald-pate, Brown. Jam. 468. -- Sloane,
ii. 303. Le Pigeon de la Roche, de la Jamaique, Brisson, i. 137. -- De Buffon,
ii. 529. Columba Leucocephala, Lin. Syst. 281.
P. With the end of the bill white; the base purple: crown white, beneath that
purple: hind part of the neck changeable green, edged with black.

Inhabit the Bahama islands, and breed among the rocks; PLACE.
and prove of great use to the inhabitants, who take vast numbers. This species
is found also in Jamaica, where Brown says they feed on the feeds of the
mangrove and wild coffee.

I do not recollect that our navigators saw any Pigeons on the western side of
America; but the Spaniards saw abundance in lat. 41. 7. north In Barrington's
Miscellanies, 492.
.

190. CANADA.
La Tourterelle de Canada, Brisson, i. 118. -- De Buffon, ii. 552. -- Pl. Enl.
176. Columba Canadenfis, Lin. Syst. 285.
P. With the crown, hind part of the head, and upper part of the back, of a
cinereous brown: the lower part of the back and rump ash-colored: lower part of
the neck and the breast cinereous, dashed with rust: coverts of the wings
spotted with black: primaries dusky, the exterior edges of the greater
yellowish: the tail long and cuneiform; the middle feathers ash-colored; the
exterior on each side white, marked on their inner side with a red spot, and
beneath that with a great black one.

The head, neck, back, breast, and coverts of the wings, of the female have the
feathers terminated with dirty white and yellow.

PLACE.
Inhabits Canada. Greatly resembles, in size, form, and some of the colors, the
Carolina Pigeon: I guess therefore, that it is here needlessly separated from
that species.

191. GROUND.
Picuipinima, Marcgrave, 204. -- Raii Syn. Av. 62. 184. -- Sloane. Jam. ii.
305. -- Brown, 469. Ground Dove, Catesby, i. 26. La petite Tourterelle,
Brisson, i. 113. Columba Passerina, Lin. Syst. 285. Le Cocotzin, Fernandez, 24.
-- De Buffon, ii. 559. -- Pl. Enl. 243.
P. With a yellow bill tipped with black: red irides: upper part of the head,
body, and coverts, of a cinereous brown; the coverts spotted with black: breast
and belly a variable purple, spotted with a deeper: SIZE.
the two middle feathers of the tail cinereous brown, those of the sides dusky:
legs yellowish. In SIZE does not exceed a Lark.

PLACE.
This diminutive species is not found further north than Carolina, where they
sometimes visit the lower parts near the sea, where shrubs grow, in order to
feed on the berries; especially of the pellitory, or toothach tree Xanthoxylum
Clava Herculis, Lin. Sp. Pl. 1455. -- Catesby, i. 26.
, which gives their flesh a fine flavor. The species is continued through the
warm parts of America, the islands Mexico and Brasil. The French islanders call
them Ortolans, from their excessive fatness and great delicacy. They take them
young, when they will become very tame.

THERE is not a single species of Pigeon to be found in Kamtschatka; a proof
that the birds of this genus do not extend far to the north-west of America:
otherwise the narrow sea between the two continents could never confine birds
of so swift and strong a flight.

A. The STOCK DOVE, Will. Orn. Columba Oenas. Skogsdufva, Faun. Suec. No 207.
IS very frequent in a wild state in the south of Russia, breeding in the
turrets of village-churches, and in steep rocky banks of rivers; but at
approach of winter, migrates southward. It does the same in Sweden Ekmark Migr.
av. in Amoen. Acad. iv. 593.
. Is among the birds of the Feroe isles, and sometimes strays as far Finmark
Leems, 245.
.

No Pigeons are seen in Sibiria, till you come beyond lake Baikal, where a very
small variety (with a white rump) breeds in great plenty about the rocks. This
is the same with our ROCK PIGEON, one stock or origin of our tame Pigeons. This
species breeds in the cliffs as far north as the diocese of Bergen in Norway
Pontop. ii. 69. -- Since the publication of the last edition of the British
Zoology, I have been informed, by the Rev. Mr. Ashby, of Barrow, near
Newmarket, that multitudes of Stock Doves breed in the rabbet-burrows on the
sandy plains of Suffolk, about Brandon; and that the shepherds annually take
the young for sale.
. Haunt during winter the cliffs of the Orknies, by myriads.

B. RING DOVE, Br. Zool. i. No 102. Columba Palumbus. Ringdufwa, Faun. Suec. No
208. Le Ramier, De Buffon, ii. 531.
COMMON in the Russian forests: very scarce in Sibiria; none in the north-east.
Visits Sweden in summer: migrates in autumn. None in Norway.

None of the Pigeon tribe inhabit the arctic zone, by reason not only of the
cold, but of defect of food.

ORDER V. PASSERINE.
XX. STARE. Genesis Birds. XLI.
192. CRESCENT.
Lark, Lawson, 144. -- Catesby, i. 33. Le Merle a collier d'Amerique, Brisson,
ii. 243. L'Etourneau de la Louisiane -- 449. Le Fer a Cheval, ou Merle a
collier d'Amerique, De Buffon, Ois. iii. 371. -- Pl. En. 256. -- Latham, iii.
6. Alauda Magna, Lin. Syst. 289. Sturnus Ludovicianus -- 290. -- LEV. MUS. --
BL. MUS.
ST. With a dusky head, divided in the middle by a pale brown line, bounded on
the side by two others: on the corner of each eye, above the bill, is a yellow
spot: whole upper part of the body, neck, and wings, reddish brown and black:
breast and belly of a rich yellow; the former marked with a black crescent:
primaries pale brown, barred with a darker: tail very short, the feathers
sharp-pointed; the three outmost white, marked with a pale brown stripe on the
exterior side; rest of the feathers light brown, marked with pointed bars of
black: legs long.

SIZE.
LENGTH above ten inches: WEIGHT between three and four ounces.

PLACE.
Inhabits most parts of the continent of North America: lives in the savannas,
feeding chiefly on the seeds of grasses; sits on small trees and shrubs; has a
jetting motion with its tail; is reckoned excellent meat; has a musical but not
a various note. Arrives in New York in March, or the beginning of April: lays
in June, in the grass, five white eggs, thinly spotted with pale rust-color.
Leaves the country in September or October.

193. LOUISIANE.
Sturnus Ludovicianus, Lin. Syst. 290. -- Latham, iii. 6. L'Etourneau de la
Louisiane, De Buffon, iii. 192. -- Brisson, ii. 449. -- Pl. Enl. 256.
ST. With a whitish bill, tipped with brown: with the crown, back, wings, and
tail of a rusty ash-color; the first marked along the middle with a white line;
and another of the same color over each eye; inner webs of the four outmost
feathers white: in front of the neck a large black spot; each feather tipped with
gray: rest of the fore part of the neck, breast, and belly, of a rich yellow:
thighs and vent dirty white.

Inhabits Louisiana. PLACE.


A. STARE, Br. Zool. i. No 104. STARE.
Sturnus, vulgaris Stare, Faun. Suec. No 213. L'Etourneau, De Buffon, iii. 176.
-- Latham, iii. 2. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
ST. With a yellow bill: black body glossed with purple, and spotted with
yellow and white: legs black.

Inhabits Europe as high as Salten, in the diocese of Drontheim, PLACE.
in Norway; and in great numbers in Naesne Helgeland Leems, 194.
, in Feroe, and in Iceland Brunnich, 64.
. They migrate from Norway, a few excepted, which lodge in the fissures of the
rocky isle near Stavanger, at the southern extremity of that kingdom, and come
out to bask in the sunny days of winter. They are found in vast flocks in all
parts of Russia, and the west of Sibiria; but are very scarce beyond the
Jenesei. In many places of England reside the whole year: in others, migrate
after the breeding-seasons by thousands to other countries.

WATER OUZEL.
B. WATER OUZEL, Br. Zool. i. No 111. Sturnus cinclus, Watnstare, Faun. Suec.
No 214. Le Merle d'Eau, De Buffon, viii. 134. -- Latham, iii. 48. -- LEV. MUS.
-- BL. MUS.
ST. Dusky above: throat and breast white: belly rust-colored: tail black.
WEIGHT two ounces and a half: LENGTH seven inches and a half.

PLACE.
Found in Europe as high as Feroe and Finmark Leems, 261.
: in the Russian empire, as far as Kamtschatka. The Tartars believe, that the
feathers of this bird, tied to their nets, produce good fortune in their
fishery Voy. en Sibirie, ii. 112.
.

XXI. THRUSH. Genesis Birds. XLII.
194. MIMIC.
Mock-bird, Catesby, i. -- Lawson, 143. Le Moqueur, De Buffon, Ois. ii. 323. --
Pl. Enl. 645. -- Brisson, ii. 262. -- Latham, iii. 40. Turdus Polyglottos, T.
Orpheus, Lin. Syst. 293. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
TH. With a black bill and legs: head, neck, back, and lesser coverts on the
ridge of the wing, ash-colored: the other coverts dusky, slightly edged with
white: quil feathers black; white on their lower parts: under side of the body
white: tail very long; the middle feathers dusky; two outmost feathers white;
the exterior margins black.

The breast of the female of a dirty white.

A. The Lesser, Edw. 78.
DIFFERS from the former in having a white line over each eye; and in being
somewhat inferior in size. Jamaica Sloane, ii. 306.
.

B. Varied. Tetronpan, Fernanaez, 38.
WITH a spotted breast; probably a young bird of one of the others.

These birds shun the cold parts of America; PLACE.
and are found from the province of New York as far south as Mexico and the
Antilles. They are so impatient of the rigorous season, as to retire at
approach of winter from all the provinces north of Carolina or Virginia. In the
first they inhabit the whole year. They visit New York in April, or the
beginning of May, but are rather scarce in that part of America: they breed
there in June, and lay five or six blue eggs, thickly spotted with dull red.

They build often in fruit trees Lawson.
; are very familiar, and love to be conversant about dwellings; and, during
summer, usually deliver their song perched on the chimney's top. During
breeding season, are very shy, and will desert their nest if any one looks on
the eggs Kalm, i. 218.
: but are sometimes preserved, and brought alive to England.

During summer they feed on berries, mulberries, and other fruits, and insects.
In winter, when other food is scarce, on the berries of the Dogwood Cornus
Florida, Lin. Sp. Pl.
. When tamed, feed on every thing.

VARIOUS SONG.
These birds are perhaps the first among the choristers of the woods; and are
justly famed not only for the variety, fullness, and melody of their own notes,
but their imitative faculty of the notes of all other birds or animals, from
the Humming-bird to the Eagle. They will even imitate the sound of other
things. I have heard of one, confined in a cage, that would mimic the mewing of
a cat, the chattering of a magype, and the creaking of a sign in high winds.
The Mexicans call them Cencontlatolli Fernandez, p. 20.
, or the birds of four hundred tongues, on account of their vast variety of
notes and imitative powers. In the warmer parts of America they sing
incessantly from March to August, day and night, beginning with their own
compositions, and then finishing by borrowing from the whole feathered choir,
and repeat their tunes with such artful sweetness, as to excite pleasure and
surprise. The super-excellence of their songs makes ample amends for the
plainness of their plumage.

They may be said not only to sing, but dance: for, as if excited by a sort of
ecstasy at their own admirable notes, they gradually raise themselves from the
place where they stand, with their wings extended, drop with their head down to
the same spot, and whirl round with distended wings, accompanying their melody
with variety of pretty gesticulations Catesby.
. They are birds of vast courage; and will attack any large bird.

195. FERRUGINOUS.
Ground Mocking-bird, Lawson, 143. Fox-coloured Thrush, Catesby, i. 28. Turdus
rufus, Lin. Syst. 293. -- Latham, iii. 39. La Grive de la Caroline, Brisson,
ii. 223. Le Moqueur Francois, De Buffon, iii. 323. -- Pl. Enl. 645. -- LEV.
MUS. -- BL. MUS.
TH. With yellow irides: head, and whole upper part of the body, coverts of the
wings, and the tail, of a pale rust-color: under part of a dirty white, spotted
with brown: across the coverts of the wings are two white lines: tail very
long: legs brown. LENGTH twelve inches.

Inhabits North America, from New York to Carolina. PLACE.
In the former, arrives in May, and migrates to the south in August: continues
in Virginia and Carolina the whole year: builds in low bushes, and (in New
York) breeds in June, and lays five white eggs, closely spotted with
rust-colour.

It feeds on berries, especially those of the cluster bird-cherry, of which all
the Thrush kind are very fond. It is called in America the French Mocking-bird,
from the variety of its notes; but they are far inferior to the real.

196. RED-BREASTED.
Fieldfare of Carolina, Catesby, i. 29. La Grive de Canada, Brisson, ii. 225.
La Litorne de Canada, De Buffon, iii. 307. -- Pl. Enl. 558. Turdus migratorius,
Lin. Syst. 295. -- Latham, iii. 26. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
TH. With the bill half yellow and half black: head and cheeks black: orbits
covered with white feathers: chin and throat black, streaked with white: under
part of the neck, the breast, and upper part of the belly, of a deep orange:
vent white: back and rump of a deep ash-color: coverts and quil feathers dusky,
edged with white: inner coverts of the wings orange: tail black; the outmost
feather marked with white: legs brown. SIZE of an English Throstle.

PLACE.
Inhabits North America, from Hudson's Bay to Natka Sound, on the western coast;
and south as low as Carolina. Quits the warmer parts in the spring, and retires
north to breed. Appear in pairs in Hudson's Bay, on Severn River, at the
beginning of May. At Moose Fort, these birds build their nest, lay their eggs,
and hatch their young, in fourteen days; but at Severn settlement, which lies
in 55, or four degrees more north, the same is not effected in less than
twenty-six days Ph. Transact. lxii. 399.
. They are also very common in the woods near St. John's, in Newfoundland.

They arrive in New York in February, and lay their eggs in May, and quit the
country in October: in each country where they pass the summer, they adapt
their retreat to the time in which winter sets in.

NESTS.
They make their nests with roots, moss, etc.; and lay five eggs, of a most
lively seagreen color. The cock is most assiduous in assisting its mate in
making the nest and feeding the young; and in the intervals chears her with its
musical voice.

Like the English Fieldfare, they come and go in large flocks. They have two
notes; one a loud scream, like the Missel-bird: the other, a very sweet song,
which it delivers from the summit of some lofty tree.

They feed on worms, insects, and berries. Mr. Catesby brings a proof, that it
is not the heat of the season alone that forces them away. He had, in Virginia,
some trees of the Aluternus, in full berry; the first which were known in
America: a single Fieldfare was so delighted with them, as never to quit them
during the whole summer.

They are called in America, the Robin; not only from the redness of the
breast, but from their actions and tameness, as I have observed in those kept
in aviaries.

Varied Thrush No. 197.


197. VARIED.
TH. With a dusky crown: upper part of the neck and back of an iron gray:
cheeks black: beyond each eye is a bright bay line: throat, under side of the
neck, and breast, of the same color; the breast crossed by a black band: sides
orange-colored: middle of the belly white: lesser coverts of the wings iron
gray: greater, dusky, tipped with bright ferruginous: primaries dusky, crossed
and edged with bay: tail long, of a deep cinereous color: legs pale brown. SIZE
of the former.

Inhabits the woods of Natka Sound. Latham, iii. 27. PLACE.


198. TAWNY.
TH. With the head, back, and coverts, tawny; the head the brightest: cheeks
brown, spotted with white: throat, breast, and belly, white, with large black
spots: rump, primaries, and tail, of a pale brown: the ends of the tail
sharp-pointed: legs pale brown. SIZE of the Redwing Thrush.

From the province of New York. BL. MUS. -- Latham, iii. 28. PLACE.


199. BROWN.
TH. With the head, neck, back, cheeks, coverts, and tail, of an olive brown:
primaries dusky: breast and belly of a dirty white, marked with great brown
spots: legs dusky. SIZE of the former; and a native of the same country. BL.
MUS. -- Latham, iii. 28.

200. RED-LEGGED.
Merle appelle Tilli? Feuillee, i. 126. Red-leg'd Thrush, Catesby, i. 30. Le
Merle cendre de l'Amerique, Brisson, ii. 288. Turdus plumbeus, Lin. Syst. 294.
-- Latham, iii. 33. Le Tilly, ou la Grive cendree de l'Amerique, De Buffon,
iii. 314. -- Pl. Enl. 560.
TH. With a dusky bill: irides, edges of the eyelids, and legs, red: throat
black: whole body of a dusky blue: tail long, and cuneiform: tail dusky, with
the three exterior feathers on each side tipped with white. WEIGHT two ounces and
a half. The hen is a third part less than the cock.

PLACE.
Inhabits the Bahama islands, Andros, and Ilathera. Has the voice and gestures
of Thrushes. Feeds on berries, especially of the gum elimy tree Amyris
Elemifera, Lin. Sp. Pl. i. 495.
.

201. LITTLE.
Little Thrush, Catesby, i. 31. -- Edw. 296. -- Latham, iii. 20. Le Mauvis de
la Caroline, Brisson, ii. 212. La Grivette d'Amerique, De Buffon, iii. 289. --
Pl. Enl. 398. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
TH. With the head, whole upper part of the body, wings, and tail, of an
uniform brown color: eyelids encircled with white: chin white: breast, and
under side of the neck, yellowish, marked with large brown spots: belly white:
legs long, and brown. SIZE of a Lark.

PLACE.
Inhabits Canada, Newfoundland, and the whole continent of North America, and
even Jamaica. In all the cold parts, even as low as Pensylvania, they migrate
southward at approach of winter. They arrive in that country in April, and
breed there. They inhabit thick woods, and the dark recesses of swamps: are
scarce, and not often seen Catesby.
. In Jamaica they inhabit the wooded mountains Sloane, ii. 305.
. They feed on berries, etc. like other Thrushes, but want their melody.

202. UNALASCHA.
TH. With the crown and back brown, obscurely spotted with dusky: breast
yellow, spotted with black: coverts of the wings, primaries, and tail, dusky,
edged with testaceous. SIZE of a Lark.

PLACE.
Found on Unalascha. Latham, iii. 23.

203. GOLDEN-CROWNED.
Golden-crowned Thrush, Edw. 252. Motacilla aurocapilla, Lin. Syst, 334. --
Latham, iii. 21. Le Figuier a tete d'or, Brisson, iii. 504. La Grivelette de
St. Domingue, De Buffon, Ois. iii. 317. -- Pl. Enl. 398. -- BL. MUS.
TH. With the crown of the head of a bright gold-color, bounded on each side by
a black line: upper part of the body, wings, and tail, of an olive brown: under
side of the neck, breast, and sides, white, spotted with black; or, as the
French expressively call, it grivelees: belly in some of a pure white; in
others, spotted: legs of a yellowish brown. In SIZE lesser than the last.

Inhabits Pensylvania, and probably all the southern provinces. PLACE.
It builds its nest on the ground, on the side of a bank, in the form of an
oven, with leaves, lining it with dry grass, and lays five white eggs, spotted
with brown. Migrates on approach of winter to the islands, such as St. Domingo,
Jamaica, etc. Some having been taken at sea in November in their passage
Edwards.
.

204. HUDSONIAN.
TH. With a black bill: general color of the plumage deep blueish ash: crown,
nape, coverts of the wings, and primaries, more or less edged with pale
chestnut: coverts of the tail of the same color: tail deep ash, rounded at the
end: legs black. LENGTH of the whole bird seven inches and a half.

Inhabits Hudson's Bay. LEV. MUS. PLACE.


205. NEW YORK.
TH. With a dusky strong bill, half an inch long: head, neck, and breast,
mottled with light rust-color and black: back very glossy: and the edges of the
feathers ferruginous: from the bill, above and beneath each eye, extends to the
hind part of the head a band of black: belly dusky: wings and tail black,
glossed with green: tail rounded: legs black. SIZE of an English BLACKBIRD.

PLACE.
Appears in the province of New York in the latter end of October, in its way
from its more northern breeding place. BL. MUS.

206. LABRADOR.
Latham, iii. 46. -- BL. MUS. -- LEV. MUS.
TH. With a black bill, rather slender, near an inch long. In one specimen the
plumage wholly black, glossed with variable blue and green From Hudson's Bay.
-- LEV. MUS.
: in another New York. -- BL. MUS.
, the feathers on the head, neck, and beginning of the back, slightly edged
with deep rust: tail, and rest of the plumage, full black; tail even at the end.

PLACE.
Inhabits Labrador, and the province of New York.

A. FIELDFARE, Br. Zool. i. No 106. Turdus pilaris. Suecis Kramsfogel. Uplandis
Snoskata, Faun. Suec. No 215. La Litorne, De Buffon, iii. 301. -- Pl. Enl. 490.
-- Latham, iii. 24. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
TH. With head and rump cinereous: back and wing coverts chestnut: breast and
belly of a rusty white, spotted with black. WEIGHT about four ounces. LENGTH
ten inches.

PLACE.
These birds swarm in the woods of Sweden and Norway: breed in the highest
trees; and continue, at lest in Sweden, the whole year Amoen. Acad. iv. 594.
. In Norway, I do not trace them further north than the diocese of Bergen. They
migrate in great numbers into Britain at Michaelmas, and depart about the
beginning of March; but I have no certainty of the place they come from.
Multitudes are found in all seasons in Poland Klein Migr. av. 178.
: multitudes also migrate from other places to the Polish woods in autumn.
Perhaps the woods in all those countries may be overcharged with them, so that
annually numbers may migrate into other places, without being missed by the
inhabitants. Pontoppidan says, that Fieldfares are in great flocks in autumn,
when berries are most plenty Hist. Norway, 69.
. Possibly, after they have exhausted the woods, they may migrate to us,
compelled both by cold and want of food. They appear constantly in the Orknies,
near the approach of winter, in their way south, and feed during their
residence in those isles on the berries of empetrum nigrum, arbutus alpina, and
uva ursi, and those of the juniper. They arrive in England about Michaelmas,
and leave it early in March. They are frequent in the forests of Russia,
Sibiria, and even Kamtschatka, as is the REDWING THRUSH. Both visit Syria
Russel's Aleppo, 65, 71.
, and both migrate into Minorca in the end of October, and winter in that
climate Cleghorn's Minorca, 56.
.

B. MISSEL TH. Br. Zool. i. No 105. Turdus viscivorus, Biork-Trast, Faun. Suec.
No 216. Le Draine, De Buffon, iii. 295. -- Pl. Enl. 489. -- Latham, iii. 16.
TH. Olive-brown above: whitish yellow below, spotted with black: inner coverts
of wings white: tail brown; three outmost feathers on each side tipped with
white. WEIGHT near five ounces: LENGTH eleven inches.

Inhabits Europe as far as Norway; PLACE.
but not higher than the middle part. Common in Russia; but has not reached
Sibiria.

C. THROSTLE, Br. Zool. i. No 107. Turdus musicus. Faun. Suec. No 217. La
Grive, De Buffon, iii. 280. -- Pl. Enl. 406. -- Latham, iii. 18. -- LEV. MUS.
-- BL. MUS.
TH. Above of an olive-brown: breast white, with large dusky spots: inner
coverts of the wings of a deep orange: cheeks white, spotted with brown. WEIGHT
three ounces: LENGTH nine inches.

PLACE.
Inhabits Europe as far north as Sondmor Strom, 260.
. Is found in most parts of Russia, where juniper grows, especially about the
river Kama: not in Sibiria.

D. REDWING, Br. Zool. i. No 108. Turdus iliacus. Klera. Kladra. Talltrast.
Faun. Suec. No 218. Le Mauvis, De Buffon, iii. 309. -- Latham, iii. 22.
TH. With a whitish line above each eye: and the cheeks bounded beneath by
another: head, and upper part of body, brownish: on each side of the neck a
spot of deep yellow: tail of an uniform brown: breast white, spotted with
brown: inside of the wings deep orange. WEIGHT two ounces and a quarter.

PLACE.
Is met with as remote as Sondmor, and even in Iceland. In Sweden sings sweetly,
perched on the summit of a tree, among the forests of maples: builds in hedges,
and lays six blueish green eggs, spotted with black Faun. Suec. No 218.
. Appears in England with the Fieldfare, and has with us only a piping note.
Such numbers of these birds, Throstles, and Fieldfares, are killed for the
market in Polish Prussia, that excise was paid in one season at Dantzick for
thirty thousand pairs, besides what were smuggled or paid duty in other places
Klein, Migr. av. 178.
. Found with the Fieldfare in the Russian dominions.

E. Latham, iii. 28. -- LEV. MUS. KAMTSCHATKAN.

TH. With a dusky bill: crown, upper side of the neck, back, and wings, light
brown: from the base of the bill, on each side, a black line passes to the
eyes, and a little beyond; over each, a line of white: chin and throat of an
elegant rose-color: breast and belly of a whitish brown: tail of a light brown,
and rounded. LENGTH six inches.

Inhabits Kamtschatka. PLACE.


F. ORIOLE, Br. Zool. ii. App. p. 626, 8vo. -- 4to, 532. tab. iv. -- Will. Orn.
198. Oriolus galbula, Lin. Syst. 160. -- Faun. Suec. No 95. Loriot, De Buffon,
iii. 260. tab. xvii. -- Pl. Enl. 26.
TH. With head and whole body of a rich yellow: bill red: wings black; the
primaries marked with a yellow spot: tail black; tips yellow. FEMALE dull
green: ends of the exterior feathers of the tail whitish. LENGTH ten inches.

Inhabits many parts of Europe. Has been shot in Finland; PLACE.
but is in Sweden a rare bird. Seen in England but very seldom: affects warm
climates: frequent in India and China. Found in the temperate parts of the
Russian empire, as far as lake Baikal: none beyond the Lena. Is almost
constantly flitting from place to place: makes no long residence in any. Builds
a hanging nest between the forks of a bough, usually of some lofty tree. Lays
four or five eggs, of a dirty white, spotted with dusky. Is reckoned very good
meat. Receives its name of Loriot from its note. Feeds on insects, berries, and
fruits.

G. ROSE-COLORED OUZEL, Br. Zool. ii. App. p. 627. 8vo. -- 4to. tab. v. Turdus
roseus, Faun. Suec. No 219. -- Will. Orn. 194. -- De Buffon, iii. 348. tab.
xxii. -- Pl. Enl. 251. -- Latham, iii. 50.
TH. With a crested head: head, neck, wings, and tail, black, glossed with
variable purple, blue, and green: breast, belly, back, and lesser coverts of
the wings, of a fine rose-color. SIZE of a Stare.

Linnaeus, on the authority of Mr. Adlerheim, says it is found in Lapland. Has
been shot in a garden at Chester; and twice besides near London. Is migratory.
I cannot discover its breeding-place in Europe. Is found during summer about
Aleppo, where it is called, from its food, the Locust-bird Russel's Aleppo, 70.
.

Appears annually in great flocks about the river Don: and in Sibiria about the
Irtish, where there are abundance of Locusts, and where it breeds between the
rocks.

H. RING-OUZEL, Br. Zool. i. No 110. Turdus torquatus, Faun. Suec. No 221.
Ring-trost, Norvegio, Brunnich, No 237. -- De Buffon, iii. 340. -- Latham, iii.
46. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
TH. With wings and tail black: upper part of the body dusky; lower part the
same, edged with ash-color: breast marked with a white crescent. LENGTH eleven
inches.

PLACE.
Inhabits Europe as high as Lapmark Gjelavaelgo Lapponum. -- Leems, 260.
. Is not found in Russia and Sibiria: is, in the south of England, and in
France, an errant passenger, for a week or two, to other countries: in alpine
parts, resident. Is met with about Mount Caucasus, and in Persia.

Belon Oyseaux, 319.
says, that in his time they swarmed so in their season about Embrun, that the
hosts were used to treat their guests with them instead of other game. We are
told by the Count de Buffon, that they build their nests on the ground at the
foot of some bush; from which they are called Merles Terriers.

I. BLACKBIRD, Br. Zool. i. No 109. Turdus merula. Trast. Kohltrast. Faun.
Suec. No 220. -- Latham, ii. No 46. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
TH. With a yellow bill: plumage and legs intensely black. FEMALE with bill and
plumage of a dusky hue. LENGTH nine inches and a half: WEIGHT about four ounces.

Inhabits Europe as high even as Drontheim. PLACE.
Is uncommon in Russia, except beyond the Urallian chain, and in the western
provinces. But about Woronesch, this bird, and the STARE, do not make their
appearance till about the 17th or 18th of April Extracts, i. 107.
, searching for food in other places during the severe season.

XXII. CHATTERER. Genesis Birds, XLIII.
207. PRIB.
Chatterer, Catesby, i. 46. -- Edw. 242. -- Br. Zool. i. No 112. Le Jaseur de
la Caroline, Brisson, ii. 337. -- De Buffon, Ois. iii. 441. -- Latham, ii. 93.
-- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
CHAPTER With a black bill: black band of feathers across the forehead, extended on
each side of the eyes toward the hind part of the head: head crested; color of
that and neck a pale reddish brown: chin black: back deep brown: rump gray:
coverts of wings cinereous: quil feathers dusky; ends of the seven last tipped
with wax-like, or enameled appendages, of a bright scarlet color: tail dusky,
tipped with bright yellow: breast whitish: belly and thighs of a light yellow:
legs black. LENGTH seven inches. FEMALE wants the scarlet appendages to the
wings.

PLACE.
Inhabits America, from Nova Scotia to Mexico and Cayenne De Buffon.
. The Mexican name is Coquantototl. Fernandez Hist. av. Nov. Hisp. 55.
says, it lives in the mountanous parts of the country. Feeds on seeds; but is
remarkable neither for its song, or the delicacy of its flesh. It migrates in
flocks to New York the latter end of March; breeds there in May and June; and
retires south in flocks in November.

The differences between this bird, and the CHATTERERS of the old continent,
are these: -- it is about an inch inferior in length: it wants the rich yellow
on the wings; but, as a recompense, has the same beautiful color on the belly.

IN EUROPE.
The European varieties are found as high as Drontheim, and appear in great
numbers during winter, about Petersburg and Moscow, and in all parts of Russia,
and are taken in flocks. They do not breed there: retiring to the very arctic
circle for that purpose. It is said, that they never have been observed beyond
the river Lena: and that they are much scarcer in Sibiria than Russia. Mr. Bell
saw some about Tobolski in December Travels, i. 198.
. The navigators found them, September 1778, on the western coast of America,
in lat. 64. 30.: long. 198. 30.

XXIII. GROSBEAK. Genesis Birds, XLV.
208. CROSSBILL.
Le Be croise, De Buffon, iii. 449 -- Pl. Enl. 218. -- Br. Zool. i. No 115.
Loxia curvirostra. Korssnaf. Kiagelrifvare, Faun. Suec. No 224. -- Latham, ii.
106. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
GR. With each of the mandibles crooked, and crossing each other at the tips:
wings, head, neck, and body, of a full red: wings and tail dusky: the coverts
crossed with two white lines.

The FEMALE is of a dirty green: rump of a deep yellow: the colors of each sex
vary wonderfully; there being scarcely two which agree in the degree of shades
of red or green: but the bills are sufficient distinctions from all other birds.

Inhabits the northern latitudes of North America, PLACE.
from Hudson's Bay to Newfoundland. Mr. Edwards mentions one taken off
Greenland; but that individual must have been driven there by a storm, since it
could never have subsisted in that woodless region, its food being the kernels
of pine-cones, apples, and berries.

These birds arrive at Severn river in Hudson's Bay, the latter end of May; but
so greatly affect a cold climate, as to proceed even more northward to breed.
They return in autumn at the first setting-in of the frost. Their habitations
are the forests of pines.

They are found in all the evergreen forests of Russia and Sibiria. In
Scandinavia, as high as Drontheim. In England they only appear in certain
years. I do not find that they migrate in any part except in America.

The American species varies from the European in being much less; and in the
two white lines across the wings.

209. PINE.
PINE GROSBEAK, Br. Zool. i. No 114. -- Edw. 123. Le Dur-bec, De Buffon, iii.
444. -- Pl. Enl. 135. Loxia enucleator. L. Canadensis, Lin. Syst. 299, 304.
Tallbit, Swansk-Papgoia, Faun. Suec. No 223. -- Latham, ii. 111. -- LEV. MUS.
GR. With a very strong thick bill, hooked at the end: head, and upper part of
the body, of a rich crimson; each feather marked with black in the middle:
lesser coverts incline to orange; the others dusky, crossed by two white lines:
the primaries and tail dusky: lower part of the neck, breast, and belly, of a
pale crimson: vent cinereous: legs black. FEMALE of a dull dirty green; twice
the size of the English Bullfinch.

PLACE.
Inhabits Hudson's Bay Ph. Trans. lxii.
, Newfoundland, and Canada, and as far as the western side of North America:
visits Hudson's Bay, in April: frequents the groves of pines and junipers:
sings on its first arrival, but soon grows silent: makes its nest on trees, at
a small height from the ground, with sticks, and lines it with feathers. Lays
four white eggs, which are hatched in June. The clerk of the California
observed these birds first on the 25th of January: they fed on the poplar tree
Voy. to Hudson's Bay, ii. 5.
. It is remarked, that birds of plain colors only inhabit the frigid climates:
but this gay bird is an exception.

It is likewise an inhabitant of the northern parts of Europe, as far as
Drontheim; and in Asia, in all the pine forests: is frequent in Sibiria, and
the north of Russia: is taken in autumn about Petersburg, and brought to market
in plenty. In spring it retires to Lapland.

I have seen them in the pine forests near Invereauld, in the county of
Aberdeen, in Scotland, in the month of August; therefore suspect they breed
there.

210. CARDINAL.
Coccothraustes Indica cristata, Aldr. ii. 289. Virginian Nightingale, Will.
Orn. 245. -- Raii Syn. av. 85. Redbird, Lawson, 144. -- Catesby, i. 38. La
Cardinal hupe, De Buffon, iii. 458. Grosbec de Virginie, Brisson, iii. 253.
Loxia Cardinalis, Lin. Syst. 300. -- Latham, ii. 118. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
GR. With a light red bill; base encompassed with black feathers: head adorned
with an upright pointed crest: head, neck, and body, of a rich scarlet color:
wings and tail of a dark and dull red. FEMALE of a much duller hue, with brown
cheeks and back: belly of a dirty yellow. LENGTH nine inches.

Inhabits the country from Newfoundland to Louisiana. PLACE.
Is a hardy and familiar bird: very docile. Lives much on the grain of mayz,
which it breaks readily with its strong bill. Lays up a winter provision of
that grain; and conceals it very artfully in its retreat, first with leaves,
and then with small branches, with an aperture for an entrance Du Pratz, ii. 94.
.

Their song is remarkably fine; so that they are called the Virginian
Nightingale. They sit warbling in the mornings, during spring, on the tops of
the highest trees Kalm, ii. 71. -- He says that they are very destructive to
Bees.
. They also sing when confined in cages, and are much sought on account of
their melody. In a state of confinement the female and male are at such enmity,
that they will kill one another. They seldom are seen in larger numbers than
three or four together. I have heard that their note is toned not unlike that
of a Throstle; and that when tame, they will learn to whistle. Arrives in the
Jersies and New York in the beginning of April; and during the summer, haunts
the magnolia swamps. In autumn retires to the south.

211. POPE.
Crested Cardinal, Brown's Illustr. tab. xxiii. Le Paroure hupe, De Buffon,
iii. 501. -- Pl. Enl. 103. -- Latham, ii. 124.
GR. With a most elegant upright pointed crest: that, head, and neck, of a most
rich scarlet: sides of the neck, breast, and belly, white: upper part of the
neck, back, wings, and tail, dark gray: legs flesh-color.

SIZE a little inferior to the last. Is said to have a soft feeble note Du
Pratz, ii. 93.
.

PLACE.
Inhabits from Louisiana to Brasil.

212. RED-BREASTED.
Loxia Ludoviciana, Lin. Syst. 306. -- Latham, ii. 126. -- Brisson, iii. 247.
Le Rose Gorge, De Buffon, iii. 460. -- Pl. Enl. 153. -- BL. MUS.
GR. With the head, chin, and back, deep black: coverts of the wings black,
crossed with two white lines: upper part of the primaries black; lower white:
tail black; inner webs of the two outmost feathers marked with a large white
spot: breast and inner coverts of the wings of a fine rose-color: lower part of
the back, belly, and vent, white: legs black. Head of the FEMALE spotted with
white: breast yellowish brown, spotted with black.

PLACE.
Inhabits from New York to Louisiana. Arrives in New York in May: lays five
eggs: retires in August. Is in that province a scarce bird.

213. SPOTTED.
GR. With the middle of the head, neck, and whole under side of the body,
white, marked with narrow spots of brown: above each eye is a long bar of
white, reaching from near the bill to the hind part of the head: back, wings,
and tail, brown: the coverts of the wings crossed with two white lines: inner
coverts of the wings of a fine yellow: on the inner side of the outmost
feathers of the tail is a white spot: legs dusky.

PLACE.
Inhabits New England. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS. -- Latham, ii. 126.

214. FANTAIL.
Grosbec appelle queue en eventail de Virginie, Pl. Enl. 380. -- De Buffon,
iii. 463. -- Latham, ii. 128.
GR. With a dusky bill: scarlet head, neck, breast, and belly; colors most
lively on the head: back and wings dusky, tinged with scarlet: the coverts of
the tail a rich red: tail dusky, edged with red: lower belly and thighs in some
white, perhaps females.

Inhabits Virginia. Mr. Blackburne sent one from New York, PLACE.
shot in November. This species has a custom of spreading its tail like a fan,
from which arose the name.

215. YELLOW-BELLIED.
GR. With a yellow bill: red head; hind part of an olive brown: hind part of
the neck, and whole under side, of a fine red: wings, lower part of the back,
and the tail, olive, the two middle feathers of the last excepted, which are
red: belly yellow.

Inhabits Virginia. From Mr. Kuckahn's collection. -- Latham, ii. 125. PLACE.


216. DUSKY.
GR. With the head, neck, and back, dusky, edged with pale brown: coverts of
the wings dusky, crossed with two bars of white: quil feathers dark; their
outmost edges of a pale yellowish green: middle of the throat white: the
breast, and sides of the belly, white spotted with brown.

New York. Killed in June. -- BL. MUS. -- Latham, ii. 127. PLACE.


217. BLUE.
Loxia Caerulea, Lin. Syst. 304. -- Latham, ii. 116. Pyrrhula Carolineus
Caerulea, Brisson, iii. 223. tab. xi. Blue Grosbeak, Catesby, i. 39. -- De
Buffon, iii. 454. -- Pl. Enl. 154.
GR. With a narrow black list round the base of the bill: head, whole body, and
coverts of the wings, of a deep blue; the last marked with a transverse bar of
red: primaries and tail brown, dashed with green: legs dusky. FEMALE of a dark
brown, with a small mixture of blue.

PLACE.
Inhabits Carolina during summer only. Is a scarce bird, and seen only in pairs.
Has but a single note.

218. PURPLE.
Loxia violacea, Lin. Syst. 306. -- Latham, ii. 117. Purple Grosbeak, Catesby,
i. 40. Pyrrhula Bahamensis violacea, Brisson, iii. 326. La Bouvreuil ou Bec
rond violet de la Caroline, De Buffon, iv. 395. -- LEV. MUS.
GR. With head and body entirely purple: wings and tail of the same color: over
each eye a stripe of scarlet: throat and vent feathers of the same color.
FEMALE wholly brown, with red marks similar to the cock.

PLACE.
Inhabits the Bahama islands. Feeds much on the mucilage of the poison Amyris
Toxifera, Lin. Sp. Pl. 496.
wood-berries. From the trunk of this tree distills a liquid, black as ink, said
to be a poison.

219. GRAY.
Le Grisalbin, De Buffon, iii. 467. -- Latham, ii. 134. Grosbec de Virginie,
Pl. Enl. 393, No 1.
GR. Entirely of a light gray color, except the head and neck, which are white.
SIZE of a Sparrow.

PLACE.
Inhabits Virginia.

220. CANADA.
Loxia Canadensis, Lin. Syst. 309. -- Latham, ii. 127. Le Flavert, De Buffon,
iii. 462. -- Brisson, iii. 229. -- Pl. Enl. 152.
GR. With the upper part of the plumage of an olive green; the lower
light-colored, and inclining to yellow: chin black: base of the bill surrounded
with feathers of the same color: legs gray.

PLACE.
Supposed, from the Linnaean name, to inhabit Canada: but is also found in
Cayenne.

A. BULFINCH, Br. Zool. i. No 116. Loxia Pyrrhula. Domherre, Faun. Suec. No
225. Le Bouvreuil, De Buffon, iv. 372. -- Latham, ii. 143. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL.
MUS.
GR. With a short thick bill: full black crown: whole under side rich crimson:
tail black. Under part of the FEMALE of a light brown.

Is found in Europe as high as Sondmor Faun. Suec. No 222.
. PLACE.
Frequent in the north of Russia; and during winter, all over Russia and
Sibiria, where it is caught for the table. The LOXIA ATRA, Brunnich, No 244, a
bird shot at Christiansoe, and described as wholly black, except a white line
on the wings, and the outmost feather in the tail, seems only a variety of this
species.

GREEN GR. Br. Zool. i. No 113. Loxia chloris. Swenska, Faun. Suec, No 226. Le
Verdier, De Buffon, iii. 171. -- Latham, ii. 134. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
GR. With the plumage of a yellowish green.

Inhabits Europe as far north as Drontheim. Is rare in Russia. PLACE.
Seen about the Kama. None in Sibiria: yet Steller describes it among the birds
of Kamtschatka. Inhabits Sweden the whole year, as does the BULFINCH.

C. HAW GR. Br. Zool. i. No 113. Le Gros-bec, De Buffon, iii. 444. tab. xxvii.
-- Pl. Enl. 99, 100. Loxia coccothraustes. Stenkneck, Faun. Suec. No 222. --
Latham, ii. 109. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
GR. With a large conic thick bill: crown and cheeks bay: hind part of the neck
of a fine gray: chin black: breast dirty flesh-color: back, and coverts of
wings, deep brown: tail short; inner webs white. WEIGHT two ounces.

PLACE.
Is a species that seldom is seen far north. Newly arrived in Schonen, where it
does much damage to cherry-orchards. Lives on the kernels of fruits, and even
on walnuts and almonds, which it easily breaks with its strong bill. Is
migratory: appears only accidentally in England. Known only in the west and
south of the Russian empire, where fruits grow, wild or cultivated. Disappears
in other parts, as far as beyond lake Baikal; where they come from the south in
great plenty, and feed on the pyrus baccata, a tree peculiar to that country.
They build their nest, like that of the Turtle, with dry sticks fastened with
slender roots; and lay five blueish eggs, spotted with brown.

Spotted Grosbeak. No. 213. White Crowned Bunting No. ^^^


XXIV. BUNTING. Genesis Birds, XLVI.
221. WHITE-CROWNED.
Emberiza Leucophrys, Forster. -- Phil. Trans. lxii. 403, 426. -- Latham, ii.
200.
B. With a red bill: white crown: sides of the head black: beneath the eyes a
black line joining the former: space between both white: front, sides of the
neck, and breast, cinereous: back and coverts of the wings of a rusty brown,
spotted with black, crossed with two lines of white: scapulars edged with
white: primaries brown: tail long, and of the same color: legs flesh-colored.
LENGTH seven inches and a half: EXTENT nine: WEIGHT three-quarters of an ounce.

Inhabits the country round Hudson's Bay. PLACE.
Visits Severn river in June. Feeds on grass seeds, grubs, insects, etc. Makes
its nest at the bottom of willow-trees: lays four or five eggs, of a dusky
color. Appears near Albany Fort in May: breeds there, and retires in September.
Its flight short and silent; but when it perches, sings very melodiously.

222. SNOW.
Br. Zool. i. No 122. -- Tawny B. No 121. -- Edw. 126. Emberiza nivalis, Lin.
Syst. 308. -- Latham, ii. 16. Sno-sparf, Faun. Suec. No 227. tab. i. --
Sneekok, vinter fugl. Cimbris. -- Snee fugl. Fialster Norvegis, Brunnich, No
245. L'Ortolan de Neige, De Buffon, iv. 329. -- Pl. Enl. 497. -- LEV. MUS. --
BL. MUS.
B. With a short yellow bill, tipped with black: crown tawny: neck of the same
color: breast and belly of a dull yellow, declining into white toward the
vent: back and scapulars black, edged with reddish brown: the coverts of the
tail white on their lower, yellowish on their upper parts: on the wings is a
large bed of white: the other parts black and reddish brown: tail a little
forked; three outmost feathers white; the third black, tipped with white; the
rest wholly black: legs black: hind claw long, but not so strait as that of the
Lark. WEIGHT one ounce five drams: LENGTH six inches and a half: EXTENT ten.

PLACE. HUDSON'S BAY.
The earliest of the migratory birds of Hudson's Bay. Appeared in 1771, at
Severn settlement, on April 11th; stayed about a month or five weeks; then
proceeded farther north to breed Phil. Trans. lxii. 403.
. Return in September; stay till November, when the severe frosts drive them
southward. Live in flocks: feed on grass seeds, and are conversant about
dunghills: are easily caught, under a small net baited with oatmeal, and are
very delicate meat. I am not certain of the winter retreat of these birds out
of Hudson's Bay; but having seen one of this species among those sent to Mrs.
Blackburn from New York, I imagine that they spread over the more southern
parts of North America in the rigorous season, as they do over Europe in the
same period.

CHANGE OF COLOR.
These birds have a summer and a winter dress. The first we have described.
Against the rigorous season they become white on their head, neck, and whole
under side: great part of their wings, and the rump, assumes the same color:
the back, and middle feathers of the tail, are black. But Linnaeus, who was
very well acquainted with this species, says, that they vary according to age
and season. Mr. Graham sent to the Royal Society two specimens; one in its
summer feathers, which exactly answered to our TAWNY BUNTING, No 121; the
other, to our SNOW BUNTING, No 122, in its winter feathers. On this evidence, I
beg the readers of the British isles to consider the above as one and the same
species.

GREENLAND.
Hudson's Bay is not the farthest of their northern migrations. They inhabit
not only Greenland Crantz, i. 77.
, but even the dreadful climate of Spitzbergen, where vegetation is nearly
extinct, and scarcely any but cryptogamious plants are found. It therefore
excites wonder, how birds, which are graminivorous in every other than these
frost-bound regions, subsist: yet are there found in great flocks, both on the
land and ice of Spitzbergen Lord Mulgrave's Voy. 188. -- Marten's Voy. 73.
. They annually pass to this country by way of Norway: for in the spring,
flocks innumerable appear, especially on the Norwegian isles: continue only
three weeks, and then at once disappear Leems, 256.
. As they do not breed in Hudson's Bay, it is certain that many retreat to this
last of lands, and totally uninhabited, to perform in full security the duties
of love, incubation, and nutrition. That they breed in Spitzbergen is very
probable; but we are assured that they do so in Greenland. They arrive there in
April, and make their nests in the fissures of the rocks, on the mountains, in
May: the outside of their nest is grass; the middle of feathers; and the lining
the down of the Arctic Fox. They lay five eggs, white, spotted with brown: they
sing finely near their nest.

They are caught by the boys in autumn, when they collect near the shores in
great flocks in order to migrate; and are eaten dried Faun. Greenl. 118.
.

In Europe they inhabit, during summer, the most naked Lapland Alps; and
descend, in rigorous seasons, into Sweden, and fill the roads and fields; on
which account the Dalecarlians call them Illwarsfogel, or bad-weather birds.
The Uplanders, Hardvarsfogel, expressive of the same. The Laplanders style them
Alaipg. Olaus Magnus speaks of them under the name of Aviculae nivales De Gent.
Septentr. lib. xix. p. 156.
, but mixes much fable in his narrative: he perches them also on trees; whereas
they always sit upon the ground.

Leems Finmark, 255.
remarks, I know not with what foundation, that they fatten on the flowing of
the tides, in Finmark, and grow lean on the ebb. The Laplanders take them in
great numbers in hair springes, for the tables, their flesh being very delicate.

They seem to make the countries within the whole arctic circle their summer
residence; from whence they overflow the more southern countries in amazing
multitudes, at the setting in of winter in the frigid zone. In the winter of
1778-9, they came in such multitudes into Birsa, one of the Orkney islands, as
to cover the whole barony; yet, of all the numbers, hardly two agreed in colors.

NORTH OF BRITAIN.
Lapland, and perhaps Iceland, furnishes the north of Britain with the swarms
that frequent those parts during winter, as low as the Cheviot hills, in lat.
55. 32. Their resting-places, the Feroe isles, Schetland, and the Orknies. The
highlands of Scotland, in particular, abound with them. Their flights are
immense; and they mingle so closely together, in form of a ball, that the
fowlers make great havoc among them. They arrive lean, soon become very fat,
and are delicious food. They either arrive in the highlands very early, or a
few breed there; for I had one shot for me at Invercauld, the 4th of August.
But there is a certainty of their migration, for multitudes of them often fall,
wearied with their passage, on the vessels that are sailing through the
Pentland Frith Bishop Pocock's Journal, MS.
.

In their summer dress they are sometimes seen in the south of England Morton's
Northamp. 427.
, the climate not having severity sufficient to affect the colors; yet now and
then a milk-white one appears, which is usually mistaken for a white Lark.

RUSSIA. SIBIRIA.
Russia and Sibiria receive them, in their severe season, annually, in amazing
flocks, overflowing almost all Russia. They frequent the villages, and yield a
most luxurious repast. They vary there infinitely in their winter colors; are
pure white, speckled, and even quite brown Bell's Travels, i. 198.
. This seems to be the influence of difference of age more than of season.

GERMANY.
Germany has also its share of them. In Austria they are caught, and fed with
millet, and afford the epicure a treat equal to that of the Ortolan Kramer
Anim. Austr. 372.
.

223. BLACK.
Fringilla Hudsonias, Forster. -- Ph. Trans. lxii. -- Latham, ii. 666.
Snow-bird, Catesby, i. 36. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
B. With a white short bill: blue eye: head, neck, wings, body, and tail, of a
footy blackness, edged with rust: breast, belly, and vent, of a pure white:
exterior sides of the primaries edged with white; of the secondaries, with pale
brown: exterior webs of the outmost feathers of the tail white: of the specimen
described in the Transactions, the two outmost are wholly white, and the third
marked with a white spot; the rest dusky. LENGTH six inches and a half: EXTENT
nine: WEIGHT half an ounce.

Appears near Severn settlement not sooner than June: PLACE.
stays a fortnight: frequents the plains: feeds on grass seeds: retires into
the arctic parts to breed. Returns to Hudson's Bay in autumn, in its passage to
the south. Migrates into New York, where it continues the whole winter. Appears
in the southern provinces, as low as Carolina, but chiefly in snow, or when the
weather is harder than ordinary Lawson, 146.
. Arrive in millions, in very rigorous seasons, and fly about the houses and
barns to pick up the corn. Frequent the gardens, and the small hills, to feed
on the scattered seeds of grass. Are called by the Swedes, Snovogel, or
Snow-bird; by the Americans, Chuck-bird Kalm, ii. 51, 81.
. They do not change their colors in any season of the year. Are esteemed very
delicate meat.

224. TOWHEE.
Towhee-bird, Catesby, i. 34. -- Latham, ii. 199. Fringilla Erythrophthalma,
Lin. Syst. -- Brisson, iii. 169. Le Pinson noir, aux yeux rouges, De Buffon,
iv. 141. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
B. With the head, coverts of the wings, whole upper side of the body, and
breast, black: middle of the belly white: sides orange: quil feathers black,
edged with white: tail long, and black; exterior edge of the outmost feathers
white; and a large white spot on the end of the three first; middle feathers
entirely black.

FEMALE of a rusty brown: belly white, bounded by dirty yellow: irides in both
sexes red. LENGTH eight inches and a half.

PLACE.
Inhabits New York and Carolina. Has a pretty note.

225. RICE.
Maia Fernandez, 56. C. ccxix. -- Will. Orn. 386. -- Raii Syn. Av. Rice-bird,
Hortulanus Carolinensis, Catesby, i. 14. -- Edw. 291. Emberiza oryzivora, Lin.
Syst. 311. -- Latham, ii. 288, 289. L'Ortolan de la Caroline, Brisson, iii.
282. L'Agripenne, ou l'Ortolan de Riz, De Buffon, iv. 337. -- Pl. Enl. 388. --
LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
B. With the head, and whole under side of the body, black: hind part of the
neck in some pale yellow; in others, white: coverts of the wings, and
primaries, black; the last edged with white: part of the scapulars, lesser
coverts of the wings, and rump, white: back black, edged with dull yellow: tail
of the same colors, and each feather sharply pointed: legs red. LENGTH seven
inches and a quarter.

Head, upper part of the neck, and back, of the FEMALE, yellowish brown,
spotted with black: under part of a dull yellow: sides thinly streaked with
black. The bird described by le Comte de Buffon, under the title of l'Agripenne
de la Louisiane Hist. d'Ois. iv. 339. -- Pl. Enl. 388. fig. 2.
, seems to be no other than a female of this species, varied by having some of
the secondary feathers wholly white.

PLACE.
These birds inhabit in vast numbers the island of Cuba, where they commit great
ravages among the early crops of rice, which precede those of Carolina. As soon
as the crops of that province are to their palate, they quit Cuba, and pass
over the sea, in numerous flights, directly north; and are very often heard in
their passage by sailors frequenting that course. Their appearance is in
September, while the rice is yet milky; and commit such devastations, that
forty acres of that grain have been totally ruined by them in a small time.

They arrive very lean; but soon grow so fat, as to fly with difficulty; and,
when shot, often burst with the fall. They continue in Carolina not much above
three weeks, and retire by the time the rice begins to harden. They are
esteemed to be the most delicate birds of the country. I am informed, that the
male birds have a fine note.

It is very singular, that, among the myriads which pay their autumnal visit,
there never is found a single cock-bird. Mr. Catesby verified the fact by
dissecting numbers, under a supposition, that there might have been the young
of both sexes, which had not arrived at the full colors; but found them all to
be females, which are properly the RICE-BIRDS. Both sexes make a transient
visit to Carolina in the spring. It is said, that a few stragglers continue in
that country the whole year.

RICE, the periodical food of these birds, is a grain of India Raii Hist. Pl.
ii. 1446.
: it probably arrived in Europe (where it has been much cultivated) by way of
Bactria, Susia, Babylon, and the lower Syria Strabo, lib. xv. p. 1014.
. The time in which it reached Italy is uncertain: for the Oryza of Pliny is a
very different plant from the common Rice; but the last has been sown with
great success about Verona for ages past; and was imported from thence, and
from Egypt Anderson's Dict. ii. 327.
, into England; until, by a mere accident, it was introduced into Carolina. It
was first planted there about 1688, by Sir Nathaniel Johnson, then governor of
the province; but the seed being small and bad, the culture made little
progress.

Chance brought here, in 1696, a vessel from Madagascar; the master of which
presented a Mr. Woodward with about half a bushel, of an excellent kind The
same, 238 -- and Catesby, ii. Account of Carolina, xvii.
; and from this small beginning sprung an immense source of wealth to the
southern provinces of America; and to Europe relief from want in times of
dearth. Within little more than half a century, a hundred and twenty thousand
barrels of Rice have been in one year exported from South Carolina; and
eighteen thousand American Traveller, 95, 101. -- In a news-paper of last year,
I met with the following article: -- A Gentleman died lately in Carolina,
without any nearer relation than a third cousin. He determined to leave his
estate, consisting of three fine plantations, to some person whose public
deserts would justify such a step. The Gentleman, on consideration, determined
in favor of Mr. Ashby, a gentleman in the province, whose ancestor had
introduced the culture of rice, by which Carolina had increased so amazingly in
wealth, declaring at the same time in his will, that if there had been any
living person to whom his country was equally obliged, in the same line of
peace, he would have preferred him. Mr. Ashby, on his death, which happened
lately, took possession of the Gentleman's estate, in consequence of this will.
-- How much more rational is such a conduct, than endowing colleges or
hospitals!
from Georgia: and all from the remnant of a sea store, left in the bottom of a
sack! -- Ought I not to retract the word chance, and ascribe to PROVIDENCE so
mighty an event from so small a cause?

226. PAINTED.
Painted Finch, Catesby, i. 44. -- Lawson, 144. Emberiza ciris, Lin. Syst. 313.
-- Edw. 130, 173. Le Verdier de la Louisiane, dit vulgairement le Pape,
Brisson, iii. 200. App. 74. -- Pl. Enl. 159. -- De Buffon, iv. 176. -- Latham,
ii. 206. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
B. With the head, and hind part of the head, of an exquisite deep blue: orbits
scarlet: back, greater coverts, and secondaries, green: primaries dusky: the
upper orders of lesser coverts of a fine blue; the lower, orange: rump, and
whole under side of the body, of a rich scarlet; the sides declining into
yellow: tail dusky, edged with green.

This beautiful species is some years in arriving at the height of its colors.
At first is of a plain brown, like a hen Sparrow; in the next stage, becomes
blue; in the third, attains the perfection of its gay teints.

The FEMALE is brown, and has over its plumage a tinge of green.

Inhabits Carolina in the summertime; but migrates in winter perhaps as far as
Vera Cruz, in Spanish America, PLACE.
where the Spaniards call it Mariposa pintada, or the Painted Butterfly. It
chooses a tree for nestling equal to its own elegance of form and color;
affecting the orange for that purpose.

227. LOUISIANE.
Hortulanus Ludovisianus, Brisson, iii. 278. -- De Buffon, iv. 325. -- Pl. Enl.
158. Emberiza Ludovicia, Lin. Syst. 310. -- Latham, ii. 177.
B. With the crown reddish, surrounded with a black mark, in form of a
horse-shoe: another black line beneath each eye: the whole upper part of the
body of a rusty brown, spotted with black: lower part of the back, lesser
coverts of the wings, and rump, black: breast and belly reddish; toward the
vent growing more faint: tail and primaries black.

Inhabits Louisiana. Nearly allied to the European species: PLACE.
perhaps a female, or young bird.

228. BLACK-THROATED.
B. With a large and thick bill: fore part of the head of a yellowish green:
hind part and cheeks cinereous: above each eye a line of rich yellow: on the
corner of the mouth another: on the throat a black spot: breast and belly of a
fine yellow: back, scapulars, and secondaries, black, edged with reddish brown:
lesser coverts of a bright bay: primaries and tail of a dusky brown: vent and
thighs white: legs dusky.

Inhabits New York. LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS. -- Latham, ii. 197. PLACE.


229. UNALASCHA.
B. With a yellow line from the bill, reaching over each eye: crown dusky,
divided lengthways with a white line: back black, edged with pale brown: tail
and primaries dusky, edged with white: throat and breast white, spotted with
black: belly white.

Inhabits Unalascha. Latham, ii. 202. No 47. PLACE.


230. BLACK-CROWNED.
B. With a deep black crown, and a rich yellow spot on the fore part: feathers
on the back black, edged with rust-color: wings of the same color, crossed with
a double line of white: rump olive brown: throat and breast cinereous: belly
whitish: tail long, and of a deep brown: legs yellowish.

PLACE.
Inhabits Natka Sound. Latham, ii. 202.

231. RUSTY.
B. With head, neck, breast, and sides, rust-colored: belly white: wings
ferruginous, with two white, marks on the primaries: tail of the same color:
the two outmost feathers of the tail tipped with white.

PLACE.
New York. In Mrs. Blackburn's collection. Perhaps the same with Mr. Latham's
species, ii. 197 Emberiza Rutila Pallas Itin. iii. 698.
: if so, it is common to Russia and America. Latham, ii. 202.

232. UNALASCHA.
B. With head, upper part of the neck, back, wings, and tail, brown, tinged
with red: breast and sides dirty white, clouded: middle of the belly plain
dirty white.

PLACE.
Inhabits the western side of North America.

233. CINEREOUS.
Le Bruant de Canada? Brisson, iii. 296. Le Cul-rousset, De Buffon, iv. 368. --
Latham, ii. 204. -- LEV. MUS.
B. With a short bill: head, neck, back, breast, and coverts of the wings and
tail, of a pale reddish brown, edged with ash-color: on the neck and breast:
the ash-color predominates: belly white: primaries dusky, edged with white:
tail pale brown, with the ends sharp-pointed.

PLACE.
Inhabits Canada.

233. A VAR.
B. With a yellow bill: head, back, and wings, rust-colored; each feather
deeply and elegantly edged with pale gray; some of the greater coverts edged
with paler rust; the primaries and Black throated Bunting No. 228. Cinereous
Bunting No 333
tertials with white: throat, breast, and sides, white, fully spotted with
rust: middle of the belly white: middle feathers of the tail brown; exterior
feathers white; each feather truncated obliquely.

Inhabits New York. BL. MUS. PLACE.


234. BLUE.
Le Bruant bleu de Canada, Brisson, iii. 298. L'Azuroux, De Buffon, iv. 369. --
Latham, ii. 205.
B. With the crown of a dirty red: the upper part of the neck and body,
scapulars, and lesser coverts of the wings, of the same color, varied with
blue: the lower part of the neck, breast, and belly, of a lighter red, mixed
with blue: primaries and tail brown; with the exterior edges of a cinereous
blue.

Inhabits Canada. Breeds in New England; PLACE.
but does not winter there.

235. INDIGO.
Tanagra cyanea, Lin. Syst. 315. -- Latham, ii. 205. Blue Linnet, Catesby, i.
45. Le Tangara bleu de la Caroline, Brisson, iii. 13. Le Ministre, De Buffon,
iv. 86. -- BL. MUS. -- LEV. MUS.
B. With a dusky bill: plumage of a rich sky-blue color; lightest about the
belly and breast: across the coverts of the wings is a row of black spots:
primaries and tail dusky, edged with blue.

FEMALE brown above; of a dirty white beneath. In SIZE less than the English
Goldfinch.

Inhabits (according to Catesby) the interior parts of Carolina, PLACE.
a hundred and fifty miles from the sea. Has the note of a Linnet. It is found
as low as Mexico, where the Spaniards call it Azul Lexos, or the far-fetched
bird: and the Americans call it the Indigo bird. Notwithstanding Catesby, it
appears in the province of New York, in May. Makes its nest of dead yellow
grass, lined with the down of some plant; and places it between the fork of an
upright branch.

A. GOLDEN BUNTING. Emberiza Aureola, Pallas Itin. ii. 711. -- Latham, ii. 201.
B. With the crown, hind part of the neck, and back, of a deep bay: sides of
the head, throat, and space round the nostrils, black: under part of the neck,
breast, and belly, of a most beautiful citron-color: the middle of the neck
crossed by a bar of bay: vent white: wings dusky, marked with a great bed of
white: tail a little forked; two outmost feathers on each side crossed
obliquely with white: legs pale ash-colored.

PLACE.
Found only in Sibiria. Most frequent in the east part; where it extends even to
Kamtschatka. Is conversant in the islands, in rivers overgrown with reeds and
willows. Has the note of the Reed Sparrow.

B. COMMON B. Br. Zool. i. No 118. Kornlarka, Faun. Suec. No 228. Knotter
Norvigis, Brunnich, No 247. Le Proyer, De Buffon, iv. 355. -- Pl. Enl. 30. 1.
-- Latham, ii. 171. -- LEV. MUS.
B. With the head, and upper part of the body, light brown; lower part
yellowish white: all parts, except the belly, spotted with black: tail
subfurcated, dusky edged with white.

PLACE.
Inhabits Europe as high as Sondmor Strom. 240.
. Migrates into the south of Russia. Unknown in Sibiria.

C. YELLOW B. Br. Zool. i. No 119. Groaning. Goldspink. Faun. Suec. No 230. Le
Bruant de France, De Buffon, iv. 340. -- Pl. Enl. 30. 2. -- Latham, ii. 170. --
LEV. MUS.
B. With the crown of a fine light yellow: chin, throat, and belly, yellow:
breast marked with orange red: rump rust-colored: tail brown; two outmost
feathers marked, near the end, obliquely with white.

Found as high as Sondmor Strom. 230.
, in the Russian empire. In Russia, PLACE.
and the west of Sibiria: but none in the wilds of the east.

D. ORTOLAN, Will. Orn. 270. -- Raii Syn. Av. 94. Emberiza Hortulana, Lin. Syst.
309. -- Faun. Suec. No 229. L'Ortolan, De Buffon, iv. 305. -- Pl. Enl. 247. 1.
-- Latham, ii. 166. -- LEV. MUS.
B. With a cinereous crown: yellow throat: back pale brown, spotted with black:
rump dashed with yellow: belly rust-colored: tail dusky; inner ends of the
outmost feathers marked with a great spot of white.

These are a southern species; but sometimes wander into Sweden, PLACE.
in March. Breed, and quit the country in autumn Amoen. Acad. iv. 595.
. Are common in Russia and Sibiria, but not further than the Oby. Arrive in
France with the Swallows De Buffon, iv. 309.
. In Italy, about Padua, in May, and retire in September M. SCOPOLI'S List of
Italian birds, MS. with which he favored me.
. I cannot trace their winter residence. They come rather lean. Make an artless
nest: lay four or five greyish eggs: and usually lay twice in the summer. These
birds sing prettily, and in the night Kram. Austr. 371.
: but, by epicures, are valued more as a delicious morsel, than for their song.
They are taken and placed in a chamber lightened by lanthorns; so that, not
knowing the vicissitudes of day and night, they are not agitated by the change.
Are fed with oats and millet; and grow so fat, that they would certainly die,
if not killed in a critical minute. They are a mere lump of fat; of a most
exquisite taste; but apt soon to satiate.

These birds receive both their Greek and their Latin name from their food, the
millet. Aristotle calls them Cynchromi; and the Latins, Miliariae Arist. Hist.
An. lib. viii. c. 12: and Varro de re Rust. lib. iii. c. 5. -- Ficedulae et
miliariae dictae a cibo, quod alterae fico: alterae milio fiant pingues. Varro
de Ling. Lat. iv.
. The latter kept and fattened them in their ornithones, or fowl-yards, as the
Italians do at present; which the ancients constructed with the utmost
magnificence, as well as convenience See a plan in the Leipsic edition of Var.
de re Rust, lib. iii. v.
.

E. REED B. Br. Zool. i. No 120. Saf. Sparf. Faun. Suec. No 231. Ror-Spurv.
Brunnich, No 251. L'Ortolan de roseaux, De Buffon, iv. 315. -- Pl. Enl. 247. 2.
-- Latham, ii. 173. -- LEV. MUS.
B. With black head and throat: cheeks and head encircled with white: body
above rusty, spotted with black; beneath white. FEMALE has a rust-colored head,
spotted with black: wants the white ring.

PLACE.
Is found as far north as Denmark: and is rare in Sweden. Common in the south of
Russia and Sibiria. Its song nocturnal, and sweet. Makes a nest pendulous,
between four reeds.

XXV. TANAGER. Genesis Birds. XLVII.
236. SUMMER.
Summer Red-bird, Catesby, i. 56. -- Edw. 239. Muscicapa rubra, Lin. Syst. 326.
-- Brisson, ii. 432. Tangara du Missisipi, De Buffon, iv. 252. -- Pl. Enl. 741.
-- Latham, ii. ^20.
T. Wholly red, except the wings; the ends of which are brown: bill yellow:
legs reddish. FEMALE brown, with a tinge of yellow.

Inhabits the woods on the Missisipi. Sings agreeably. Collects, PLACE.
against winter, a vast magazine of maize, which it carefully conceals with dry
leaves, leaving only the hole by way of entrance; and is so jealous of it, as
never to quit its neighborhood, except to drink Du Pratz.
.

237. CANADA.
Scarlet Sparrow, Edw. 343. Tanagra rubra, Lin. Syst. 314. -- Latham, ii. 217.
No 3. A. Tangara de Canada, De Buffon, iv. 250. -- Pl. Enl. 156.
T. With a whitish bill: head, neck, and whole body, of a brilliant scarlet;
the bottoms of the feathers black: primaries dusky; lower part of their inner
webs white: tail and legs black; tips of the first white; but that circumstance
is sometimes wanted. The supposed FEMALE is of a green color, light and
yellowish beneath. SIZE of a Sparrow.

Inhabits from New York to the Brasils. PLACE.
In New York it appears in May, and retires in August. Is a very shy bird, and
lives in the deepest woods.

238. OLIVE.
T. With the head, whole upper part of the body, and coverts of the wings, of
an olive green, fading into cinereous toward the rump: wings and tail brown,
edged with white: throat and breast of a fine yellow: belly white: legs brown.
Wings and tail of the FEMALE dusky, edged with olive: under side of the body of
a very pale yellow.

PLACE.
Inhabits New York: and as far south as Cayenne L'Olivet, De Buffon, iv. 269.
. BL. MUS. -- Latham, ii. 218.

239. GRAY.
Le Gris-olive, De Buffon, 277. -- Pl. Enl. 714. -- Latham, ii. 236.
T. With a black bill: forehead, and space above the eyes, gray: back of an
olive gray: wings and tail dusky, edged with gray: under part of the body an
uniform gray.

PLACE.
Inhabits Guiana and Louisiana.

240. BISHOP.
Latham, ii. 226. Tanagra episcopus, Lin. Syst. 316. L'Eveque, Brisson, iii. Le
Bluet, De Buffon, iv. 265. -- Pl. Enl. 176. -- LEV. MUS.
T. With a black bill: whole plumage of a blueish gray; in some places
greenish: on the coverts of the wings the blue predominates: legs ash-colored.
Head, neck, and breast, of the FEMALE of a blueish green: back, and coverts of
the wings, brown; the last crossed obliquely with a greyish stroke: primaries
and tail black.

PLACE.
Inhabits Louisiana Du Pratz, ii.
; and as low as Cayenne. Haunts the skirts of forests, and feeds on the smaller
fruits. Is sometimes gregarious, but usually found in pairs. Roosts on the
palm trees. Has a very sharp and disagreeable note.

XXVI. FINCH. Genesis Birds. XLVIII.
241. COWPEN.
Cowpen-bird, Catesby, i. 34. -- Latham, ii. 269. Le Pincon de Virginie,
Brisson, iii. 165. Le Brunet, De Buffon, iv. 138. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
F. With the head and neck of a dusky brown: back, wings, and body, of a fine
black, glossed with green and blue: tail the same: legs black. Crown and upper
part of the FEMALE deep brown: throat white: breast and belly light cinereous
brown: wings and tail dusky, edged with brown. Bigger than the English Bulfinch.

Arrives in New York in May: lays five eggs in June: PLACE.
and migrates southward in August. Appears in flights in winter, in Virginia
and Carolina, and associates with the Redwing Orioles, and Purple Grakles. It
delights much to feed about the pens of cattle; which gave occasion to the name.

242. GOLDEN.
American Goldfinch, Catesby, i. 43. -- Edw. 274. -- Latham, ii. 289. Fringilla
Tristis, Lin. Syst. 320. Le Chardonneret jaune, De Buffon, iv. 212. -- Pl. Enl.
202. -- BL. MUS.
F. With a flesh-colored bill: fore part of the head black: rest of the head,
neck, and whole body, of a most beautiful gold color; whitening toward the
vent: wings black, with two lines of white: tail black: inner webs of the
exterior feathers white: legs brown. FEMALE wants the black mark on the head:
whole upper part of an olive green; lower part of a pale yellow: in other marks
the sexes agree: on coverts of wings two bars of yellow.

243. NEW YORK SISKIN.
Le Tarin de la Nouvelle York, De Buffon, iv. 231. -- Pl. Enl. 292. -- Latham,
ii. 291.
F. With a black crown: neck encircled with yellow: breast and rump of the same
color; the last fading into white: back olive brown: wings and tail black,
edged with white: belly and vent whitish. The crown of the FEMALE wants the
black: its colors also in general are less brilliant than those of the male.
Superior in size to the European kind; but seems only a variety.

PLACE.
Inhabits New York.

244. ORANGE.
Bahama Finch, Catesby, i. 42. -- Latham, ii. 276. Fringilla Zena, Lin. Syst.
320. -- Brisson, iii. 368. -- De Buffon, iv. 140?
F. With a yellow throat: head and neck black: above and beneath each eye a
long white line: breast orange-colored: belly white: back greenish: coverts of
the wings black; lowest order white: primaries and tail dusky, edged with
white: legs lead-color. Head of the FEMALE ash-color: FEMALE.
back of a dull green: belly of a dull yellow.

PLACE.
Inhabits the Bahama isles.

245. RED-BREASTED.
F. With a white bill: cheeks, throat, and under side of the neck and breast,
of a rich crimson: belly white: crown, upper part of the neck, back, wings, and
tail, black: coverts crossed with two lines of white: legs black.

Eight of these were driven, in a storm, on Sandy Hook, in April 1779. Latham,
ii. 272.

246. TREE.
Br. Zool. i. No 128. Mountain Sparrow, fern. Edw. 269. -- Latham, ii. 252,
265. Moineau de Canada, Brisson, iii. 102. -- Pl. Enl. 223. Le Soulciet, De
Buffon, iii. 500. -- BL. MUS. -- LEV. MUS.
F. With the end of the bill dusky; base of the lower mandible yellow: cheeks,
and under side of the neck, pale ash-color: from the base of the bill, on each
side, is a red line passing above the throat: crown, hind part of the neck, and
feathers on the ridge of the wings, bay: back ferruginous, spotted with black:
coverts of the wings black, edged with rust-color, and crossed with two bars of
white: belly and breast of a dirty white: tail dusky, edged with ash-color.
LENGTH six inches and a half: EXTENT ten.

Inhabits Hudson's Bay during summer. PLACE.
Comes to Severn settlement in May. Advances farther north to breed; and
returns in autumn, in its way southward. Found also in Pensylvania. Supposed,
by Mr. Edwards, to be the female of the Tree, or Mountain Sparrow, Br. Zool. i.
No 128; but as I have had opportunity of seeing specimens of this bird from
Hudson's Bay, Newfoundland, and New York BL. MUS.
, all of which agreed in marks and colors, I have no doubt but that it is a
distinct species.

247. BAHAMA.
Bahama Sparrow, Catesby, i. 37. -- Latham, ii. 300. Fringilla bicolor, Lin.
Syst. 324. Le Verdier de Bahama, Brisson, iii. 202. -- LEV. MUS.
F. With the head, neck, and breast, black: the remaining parts of a dirty
green color. SIZE of a Canary-bird.

Inhabits the woods of the Bahama islands. PLACE.
Sits perched on a bush, and sings, repeating one set tune.

248. WHITE-THROATED.
Edwards, 304. -- Latham, ii. 272. -- BL. MUS.
F. With a broad bar crossing from the bill, over each eye, toward the hind
part of the head; orange-colored near the bill; white beyond the eyes; and
bounded above and below with a dusky line: crown divided lengthways by a white
stroke: throat white: hind part of the neck, back, and coverts of the wings,
prettily spotted with black, ash-color, and ferruginous: primaries and tail
dusky, edged with white: ridge of the wing pale yellow: breast and belly of a
brownish white: legs yellowish.

PLACE.
Inhabits Pensylvania. Mr. Blackburne saw a small flock of them in the province
of New York, in January. I have likewise described them from Newfoundland,
where they are found during summer: one, which I suppose to be the female, had
the yellow spot at the base of the bill very obscure, nor had it the white spot
on the chin.

249. YELLOW-THROATED.
F. With head, and upper part of body, cinereous: primaries dusky, edged with
pale brown: chin white: on the throat a pale yellow spot: belly of a dirty
white: legs and bill of a blueish gray.

PLACE
Inhabits the province of New York,

250. STRIPED.
Latham, ii. 275.
F. With a lead-colored bill: forehead, and space between the beak and eyes,
yellow; on the crown are three black stripes on a white ground: behind each eye
is a black spot: cheeks and chin whitish: hind part of the neck and back brown,
spotted with dusky: coverts of the wings uniform brown: tail of the same color,
and subcuneiform: primaries dusky: breast light gray: belly still paler.

PLACE.
Shot in New York in May. In the cabinet of Major Davies, of the Artillery: a
gentleman to whom this Work is under great obligations.

251. FERRUGINOUS.
Little Sparrow, Edw. 354. -- Latham, ii. 272. -- BL. MUS.
F. With the head and back cinereous, edged with rust-color: coverts of the
wings and tail of a bright ferruginous: inner webs of the primaries, and the
tail, dusky; the exterior ferruginous: the cheeks, breast, and belly, white,
marked with large bright spots of ferruginous: legs yellowish. SIZE of a House
Sparrow.

Inhabits Newfoundland, and as low as Pensylvania. PLACE.
Called in New York, the Shepherd, from its note shep, shep: stays there only
the winter. Fond of scraping the ground.

A bird of a plain dusky rust-color above, and white beneath, spotted like the
former, shot at Unalascha, seems a variety.

252. FASCIATED.
F. With the crown, hind part of the neck, and back, rust-colored, spotted with
black; the spots on the back large: coverts of the wings of a plain
ferruginous: primaries dusky, edged with dirty white: whole under side white,
with black streaks pointing downwards: tail brown, crossed by numerous dusky
bars.

Inhabits New York. BL. MUS. -- Latham, ii. 273. PLACE.


253. GRASS.
F. With the head, upper part of the neck, and back, cinereous, rust-colored,
and black: cheeks brown: lesser coverts of the wings bright bay: the orders
below black, edged with white: primaries dusky, edged with white: lower part of
the neck and sides white, spotted with small white streaks: belly pure white:
tail dusky.

Inhabits New York. Lays five eggs in May, in the grass. PLACE.
Called the Gray Grass-bird. Continues the whole winter. BL. MUS. -- Latham,
ii. 273.

254. WINTER.
F. With the head, neck, and back, of a light brown, spotted with black: under
part of the neck, breast, and sides, white, with small brown spots: belly
white, and unspotted: primaries brown, edged with white; as are the coverts.

PLACE.
Inhabits New York. Seen and killed there, out of a small flock, in January. BL.
MUS. -- Latham, ii. 274.

255. BLACK-FACED.
Le Moineau de la Caroline, De Buffon, iii. 496. -- Pl. Enl. 181. fig. 2. --
Latham, ii. 253.
F. With the fore part of the head and chin black: hind part, neck, and rump,
crimson: back, tail, and wings, black, edged with rust-color: breast crossed
with a black band: belly brownish.

PLACE
Inhabits Carolina, according to the Count De Buffon, who supposes it to be the
female of a crested Finch, of a very different aspect Pl. Enl. 183. fig. 1.
.

256. NORTON.
F. With the head, upper part of the neck, and secondaries, black, edged with
bright bay: rump bright bay, edged with ash: lesser coverts of the wings bright
bay; middle order black, crossed with a white line; primaries dusky: throat
buff-colored; bounded on each side by a dusky line: belly and sides white:
sides and under part of the neck spotted with rust-color: tail dusky, edged
with dirty white: along the middle of the outmost feather is a pure white line,
ending at the tip.

PLACE.
Discovered in Norton Sound. -- Latham, ii. 274.

257. CRIMSON-HEAD.
F. With a crimson head and breast; the first faintly marked with dusky spots:
space behind each eye dusky: back, coverts of the wings, primaries, and tail,
black, edged with crimson: belly white, tinged with red.

Inhabits New York. Arrives there in April. PLACE.
Is very frequent among the Red Cedars, and shifts most nimbly around the
stems. BL. MUS. -- A bird of this species, or nearly related, is described by
Doctor Pallas, under the name of Fringilla rosea Travels, iii. 699.
; which, he says, frequents lake Baikal, and the country to the north of that
water. IN ASIA.


258. PURPLE.
Purple Finch, Catesby, i. 41. -- Latham, ii. 275. Le Bouvreuil violet de la
Caroline, Brisson, iii. 324.
F. With a purple head and body, with some dusky mixture, especially the inner
webs of the primaries, and the tail: belly white. FEMALE brown, with the breast
spotted like a Thrush.

Appears in Carolina, in November. Feeds on juniper berries. PLACE.
In February, destroys the swelling buds of fruit trees.

259. LAPLAND.
Fringilla Lapponica, Lin. Syst. 317. -- Faun. Suec. No 235. Fringilla
calcarata, Pallas Travels, ii. App. 710. tab. E. Le Grand Montain, De Buffon,
iv. 134. -- Latham, ii. 263.
F. With a yellow bill, with a dusky point: crown black: from the base of the
bill is a white line, passing under each eye, descending down the sides of the
neck, bending toward the breast: throat, and fore part of the breast, black:
its sides and belly white: hind part of the neck and back brown, mixed with
rust-color: tail forked; that, and the wings, dusky, edged with rust-color;
some of the exterior feathers of the tail marked, near their ends, with a white
spot: legs dark brown: hind claw long, like a Lark's, and almost strait. LENGTH
five inches: EXTENT seven: WEIGHT half an ounce.

A bird of a hardy constitution. PLACE.
Inhabits Hudson's Bay during winter. Appears in November, and lives among the
juniper bushes. Is called by the natives, Tecurmashish.

It also inhabits Greenland, but continues there only in the summer. Makes an
artless nest of moss and grass, lined with a few feathers; and lays in June
five or six eggs, of a clay-color, clouded: departs early Fauna Greenl. 119.
. Is found in Lapland, in the Feroe isles, the northern parts of Sibiria, and
near the Urallian chain, where it breeds. Arrives in flocks, from the south,
and frequent the fields at the first flowering of the Draba verna, or
Whitlow-grass. Has nearly the note of a Linnet; but its flight is higher, and
more lasting. It runs on the ground like a Lark: and feeds on seeds.

260. CINEREOUS.
F. With the head, upper part of the body, wings, and tail, deep cinereous
brown, edged with obscure rust-color: at the corner of the upper mandible is a
light gray line; another bounds the cheeks beneath; and a dusky line bounds
that: the throat is of a light gray: under side of the neck pale cinereous,
marked with great dusky black spots: middle of the belly whitish: bill long:
that and the legs dusky.

PLACE.
Inhabits Unalascha. Latham, ii. 274.

261. GREATER REDPOLL.
Greater Red-headed Linnet, Br. Zool. i. No 131. -- Latham, ii. 304. Hampling,
Faun. Suec. No 240. La Linotte, De Buffon, iv. 58. -- Pl. Enl. 485. -- LEV.
MUS. -- BL. MUS.
F. With a blood-red spot on the forehead: breast tinged with rose-color. In
the European species, a rust-color prevales in all the upper part of the body;
in this the greatest portion is white. LENGTH five inches and a half: EXTENT
nine.

PLACE.
Is found in the northern parts of North America. Is seen only in the south and
west of Russia: yet is met with in Scandinavia, as high as Drontheim. None in
Sibiria.

262. LESSER REDPOLL.
Br. Zool. i. No 132. -- Ph. Trans. lxii. 405. Grasiska, Faun. Suec. No 241. Le
Sizerin, De Buffon, iv. 216. -- Pl. Enl. 151. 2. -- Latham, ii. 305. -- LEV.
MUS. -- BL. MUS.
F. With a red spot on the forehead: breast of the same color: back dusky,
edged with rusty brown; coverts brown, with two transverse bars of white.

Inhabits Hudson's Bay, and probably other parts of America: PLACE.
also Greenland, where it arrives in April, and quits the country in autumn. Is
found in Sweden. Is seen in prodigious flocks all over Russia and Sibiria,
particularly in the spring, flying about the villages. Mr. Steller also saw it
in Kamtschatka, and the islands.

A. ARCTIC F. Fringilla flavirostris, Lin. Syst. 322. Riska, Faun. Suec. No
239. -- Latham, ii. 260.
F. With a yellow bill: body black and ash-color, lightest in front: wings and
tail black: tips of the feathers on the breast glossed with crimson. FEMALE of
a dusky ash.

Appears about the Jenesei, and in the eastern parts of Sibiria, PLACE.
even in the severest of winters: and returns to the north even before the Snow
Bunting Pallas's Travels, ii. 710.
. Is not seen in Russia, but inhabits Sweden.

B. LULEAN F. Fringilla Lulensis, Lin. Syst. 318. -- Faun. Suec. No 234. --
Latham, ii. 287. Le Chardonneret a quatre rays, De Buffon, iv. 210.
F. With body and tail dusky cinereous: chin white: breast and shoulders
ferruginous: belly whitish: primaries dusky: on part of the wings two black
lines, one rusty, and a fourth white.

PLACE.
Inhabits about Lulea, in West Bothnia.

C. TWITE, Br. Zool. i. No 133. La Linotte de Montagne, De Buffon, iv. 74. --
Latham, ii. 307.
F. With a short yellow bill: head cinereous, and black: above each eye a spot
of pale brown: back rusty, spotted with black: coverts of the tail rich
scarlet: tips of the greater coverts of the wings white: primaries dusky; inner
sides white: tail dusky; all but the two middle feathers edged with white.
About the SIZE of the greater Red-headed Linnet.

PLACE.
Is seen in northern Europe as high as Finmark Gran-Irisk, Leems: well
described, p. 256.
. I discover it only in the Fauna of that country, of Silesia Linaria
Saxatilis. Stein-henffling, Schwenckfelt. Av. Silesiae, 294.
, and of Great Britain. It flits in great numbers, in spring and fall, in the
neighborhood of London, to and from its breeding place.

D. FLAMING. Fringilla flammea, Lin. Syst. 322. -- Faun. Suec. No -- Latham,
ii. 259. LEV. MUS.
F. With a pale brown bill: crown of a deep crimson flame-color, slightly
crested: upper part of the body and wings brown: lower parts of a light
rose-color: legs pale brown. LENGTH four inches.

PLACE.
Inhabits Norland, in Sweden.

E. BRAMBLING, Br. Zool. i. No 126. Norquint, Faun. Suec. No 233. -- Latham,
ii. 261. Le Pinson d'Ardenne, De Buffon, iv. 123. -- Pl. Enl. 54. 2.
F. With head and back of a glossy black, edged with dull yellow: breast, and
lesser coverts of the wings, orange: inner coverts rich yellow: primaries
dusky; exterior sides edged with yellow: tail a little forked; black, with the
outmost webs of the outmost feather white.

Breeds in the woods of Nordland and Drontheim. PLACE.
In hard winters descends into East Gothland Amoen. Acad. iv. 596.
.

F. CHAFFINCH. Br. Zool. i. No 125. Finke. Bofinke, Faun. Suec. No 232. -- De
Buffon, iv. 109. -- Pl. Enl. 54. -- Latham, ii. 257. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
F. With the front black: crown blueish-grey: cheeks, throat, and breast,
reddish: upper part of the back tawny; lower, green: wings and tail black,
marked with white. FEMALE of duller colors: breast of a dirty white.

Is found as high as Drontheim. PLACE.
Both sexes continue in England the whole year. By admirable and unusual
instinct, in Sweden the females, to a bird, collect in vast flocks at the
latter end of September, desert their mates, and, passing through Schonen,
Denmark, Holstein, and Holland, visit several parts of Europe. They reach
Holland about a fortnight after Michaelmas, and at that time afford great
amusement to the gentry at their country houses, in taking them while they sit
at tea in their pavilions. They spread nets among their plantations, and strew
the ground with hemp seed, by way of bait. The birds arrive, and perch by
thousands in the trees: then alight on the ground, hungry, and inattentive to
the danger. The nets are closed by the pulling of a cord by the persons in the
pavilions; and multitudes are thus taken. Those which escape, continue their
route to Flanders, France, and Italy. The males continue in Sweden, and enliven
its rigorous winter with their cheerful twitter. Toward spring, they receive
additional spirits; perch on every tree, and animate with their notes every
spray, expecting the arrival of spring, and of their mates. The last return
invariably the beginning of April, in such numbers as almost to darken the
skies; join their consorts, perform their nuptials, retire to the woods,
increase and multiply Amoen. Acad. iv. 595.
.

France has its resident Chaffinches, as well as England: many also winter in
Italy: many come there in April, and migrate in October M. Scopoli, MS. List,
and Av. 148.
; perhaps into Minorca, where it arrives in October, and continues in that
island the whole winter Cleghorn, 56.
.

G. SPARROW, Br. Zool. i. No 127. -- Latham, ii. 248. Fatting. Grasparf, Faun.
Suec. No 242. Le Moineau, De Buffon, iii. 474. -- Pl. Enl. 6. 1. 55. 1.
PLACE.
INHABITS Europe in plenty as high as Drontheim Aves Nidr. Enum. MS.
; infests the corn, in the Orknies, by thousands: is native among the rocks
beyond lake Baikal; but it is said, that they were unknown in the greatest part
of Sibiria before the Russians attracted them by the cultivation of corn. By a
wonderful instinct, these and many other birds discover the effects of rural
economy, which draws various species, unknown before, from distant parts, to
share with mankind the several sorts of grain or seeds which are grateful to
them. Partridges keep pace with the spreading of corn over many parts of the
earth, and appear where they were never seen before: and RICE-BIRDS quickly
discovered the cultivation of rice in South Carolina, and come annually some
hundreds of miles to feed on it.

H. GOLDFINCH, Br. Zool. i. No 124. Stiglitza, Faun. Suec. No 236. Le
Chardoneret, De Buffon, iv. 187. -- Pl. Enl. 4. -- Latham, ii. 281. -- LEV.
MUS. BL. MUS.
F. With the base of the bill encircled with rich scarlet: cheeks white: crown
black: primaries dusky, marked with a rich yellow spot: tail black; tips white:
feathers round the bill of the FEMALE brown: other colors less brilliant.

This elegant bird is found as high as Sondmor Strom. 225.
: PLACE.
whether it goes farther north, is rather doubtful Gunner, in Leems, 256.
. In Italy, appears in April: breeds; and retires in October and November. Is
common in Russia, and the greatest part of Sibiria. None beyond the Lena, and
lake Baikal.

I. SISKIN, Br. Zool. i. No 129. Le Tarin, De Buffon, iv. 221. -- Pl. Enl. 485.
Siska, Grousiska, Faun. Suec. No 237. -- Latham, ii. 289.
F. With a black crown: body yellowish; green above: breast the same: wings
green, with a yellow spot in the middle: tail black; yellow at the base: head
and back of the FEMALE greenish ash, spotted with brown.

Found as high as Sweden, and perhaps Norway Siisgen? Pontoppidan, ii. 94.
. In Sweden, PLACE.
during summer, lives in woods, and among junipers: in winter, consorts with
Red-headed Linnets, and feeds on the buds of alders. Plenty in the south and
west of Russia, but none toward the Urallian chain, nor in Sibiria.

XXVII. FLY-CATCHER. Genesis Birds, XLIX.
263. TYRANT.
Tyrant, Catesby, i. 55. -- Brisson, ii. 391. Lanius Tyrannus, Lin. Syst. 136.
-- Latham, i. 186. Le Tyran de la Caroline, De Buffon, iv. 577. -- Pl. Enl.
676. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
FL. With a black bill and head; the crown divided lengthways by a stripe of
scarlet; in some, yellow: back ash-color: wings dusky, edged with white: tail
black, tipped with white: under side of the body white: legs black. SIZE of a
Redwing Thrush.

PLACE.
This species appears in New York in April: lays five white eggs, spotted with
rust-color: builds in low bushes: makes its nest with wool, and some moss, and
lines it with small fibers of roots: leaves the country in August: observes the
same time of migration in the southern provinces. Mr. Catesby gives so very
good an account of its manners, and singular spirit, that I beg leave to
express it in his own words: -- The courage of this little bird is singular. He
pursues and puts to flight all kinds of birds that come near his station, from
the smallest to the largest, none escaping his fury; nor did I ever see any
that dared to oppose him while flying, for he does not offer to attack them
when sitting. I have seen one of them fix on the back of an Eagle, and
persecute him so, that he has turned on his back into various postures in the
air, in order to get rid of him; and at last was forced to alight on the top of
the next tree, from whence he dared not to move, till the little Tyrant was
tired, or thought fit to leave him. This is the constant practice of the cock,
while the hen is brooding: he sits on the top of a bush, or small tree, not far
from her nest; near which, if any small birds approach, he drives them away;
but the great ones, as Crows, Hawks, and Eagles, he will not suffer to come within
a quarter of a mile of him without attacking them. They have only a chattering
note, which they utter with great vehemence all the time they are fighting.

When their young are flown, they are as peaceable as other birds. It has a
tender bill; and feeds on insects only. They are tame and harmless birds. They
build their nest in an open manner, on low trees and shrubs, and usually on the
sassafras-tree.

264. LOUISIANA TYRANT.
Le Tyran de la Louisiane, De Buffon, iv. 583. -- Latham, ii. 358.
FL. With a long flat beak, hooked at the end: head and back cinereous brown:
throat clear slate-colour: belly yellowish: primaries bright bay: on the
greater coverts some lines of white: tail long, of a cinereous brown. Rather
inferior in size to the last.

Inhabits Louisiana.

265. FORK-TAIL.
Muscicapa Tyrannus, Lin. Syst. 325. -- Latham ii. 355. Le Tyran a queue
fourchue, Brisson, ii. 395. Le Savana, De Buffon, iv. 557. -- Pl. Enl. 571. --
LEV. MUS.
FL. With head and cheeks black: feathers on the crown yellow at their bottoms:
upper part of the body ash-colored; lower white: tail greatly forked; the two
outmost feathers on each side five inches longer than the others; color black:
the lower half of the exterior feather white.

Inhabits Canada, and as low as Surinam. PLACE.


266. CHATTERING.
Yellow-breasted Chat, Catesby, i. 50. -- Latham, ii. 350. Le Merle verde de la
Caroline, Brisson, ii. 315. -- De Buffon, iii. 396. -- Pl. Enl. 627. -- BL.
MUS.
FL. With the crown, upper part of neck and back, and tail, of a cinereous
green: each eye encircled with yellow: from the throat to the thighs of a fine
yellow: belly white: tail dusky, edged with white: legs black. SIZE of a
Sky-Lark.

PLACE.
Inhabits the interior parts of Carolina, two or three hundred miles from the
sea. Is so very shy, as to be shot with the utmost difficulty. Lives by the
banks of great rivers; and makes so loud a chattering, as to reverberate from
rock to rock. Flies with its legs hanging down. Its musical note is good. Often
flies up perpendicular, and lights by jerks.

267. CRESTED.
Crested Fly-catcher, Catesby, i. 52. -- Latham, ii. 357. Muscicapa crinita,
Lin. Syst. 325. Le Gobe-Mouche hupe de Virginie, Brisson, ii. 412. Le
Moucherolle de Virginie a huppe verte, De Buffon, iv. 565. -- Pl. Enl. 569. --
BL. MUS.
FL. With an upright crest: head and back olive: the coverts of the same color,
crossed with two white lines: primaries dusky; the four first edged, on their
outmost sides, with ferruginous: tail dusky; two middle feathers plain; the
inner webs of the others orange: neck and breast of a lead-color: belly and
thighs yellow: legs black. I have seen one of a cinereous color on the upper
parts, and white belly: perhaps a young bird, or a hen. WEIGHT one ounce.

SIZE.
LENGTH eight inches. Sent from New York, with the name of the Large Wild Phoeby
Bird, or Bee-eater.

PLACE.
Breeds in New York and Carolina. Its note extremely brawling, as if at enmity
with all other birds. Makes its nest of snake-skins and hair, in holes of
trees. Retires in August.

268. LESSER-CRESTED.
FL. With a small backward crest: head, neck, and back, of a dirty light
cinereous green: breast and belly whitish, tinged with yellow: wings and tail
dusky; coverts crossed with two bars of white; secondaries edged with white:
legs black.

PLACE.
Inhabits Nova Scotia. Captain Davies.

269. BLACK-HEADED.
Black-cap Fly-catcher, Catesby, i. 53. -- Latham, ii. 353. Le Gobe-Mouche brun
de la Caroline, Brisson, ii. 367. Le Gobe-Mouche noiratre de la Caroline, De
Buffon, iv. 541.
FL. With a black crown: back brown, wings and tail dusky, edged with white:
whole under side white, tinged with yellowish green: legs black. Head of the
hen of not so full a black as that of the cock.

Breeds in Carolina. Is supposed to migrate in the winter. PLACE.


270. CINEREOUS.
Little brown Fly-catcher, Catesby, i. 54. fig. 1. Le Gobe-Mouche cendre de la
Caroline, Brisson, ii. 368. Muscicapa virens, Lin. Syst. 327. Le Gobe-Mouche
brun de la Caroline, De Buffon, iv. 543. -- Latham, ii. 350. -- BL. MUS.
FL. With the upper mandible black; the lower yellow: eyes red: head and back
of a deep ash-color: over each eye a faint white line: wings and tail brown:
secondaries edged with white: whole under side of the body dirty white, tinged
with yellow: legs black. WEIGHT nine pennyweights.

Inhabits Carolina, in the summer only. PLACE.


271. RED-EYED.
Red-eyed Fly-catcher, Catesby, i. 54. fig. 2. -- Edw. 253. Muscicapa Olivacea,
Lin. Syst. 327. -- Brown Jam. 476. Le Gobe-Mouche de la Jamaique, Brisson, ii.
410. Le Gobe-Mouche olive de la Caroline, De Buffon, iv. 539. -- Latham, li.
351, 352. -- LEV. MUS.
FL. With red irides: crown, and whole upper part of the body, wings, and tail,
of a cinereous brown: over each eye a white line: edges of the primaries and
tail whitish: under side of the body white, dashed with olive: legs black.
WEIGHT ten pennyweights and a half.

PLACE.
Inhabits Carolina, and as high as New York; and migrates at approach of winter:
probably into Jamaica; the same kind being found there, where, from its note,
it is called Whip Tom Kelly. Has great affinity with the preceding: perhaps
they differ only in sex. NEST.
Makes a pendulous nest, usually in apple trees, and hangs it between the
horizontal fork of some bough, beneath the leaves. It is most curiously formed
with cotton and wool, lined with hair and dead grass; and wonderfully bound to
the branches by a certain thread, like moss, twisted round them, and likewise
all about the outside of the nest. Lays five eggs, white, thinly spotted with
deep rust-color.

272. CAT.
Cat-bird, Catesby, i. 66. -- Lawson, 143. -- Latham, ii. 353. Le Gobe-Mouche
brun de Virginie, Brisson, ii. 365. Muscicapa Carolinensis, Lin. Syst. 328. Le
Moucherolle de Virginie, De Buffon, iv. 562. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
FL. With a black crown: upper part of the body, wings, and tail, blueish gray:
the tail cuneiform, marked with numerous dusky bars: under side of the body of
a pale gray: vent ferruginous: legs brown. Larger than a LARK.

PLACE.
Inhabits New York and Carolina. Mews like a kitten; from which arose its name.
Lives among bushes and thickets. Feeds on insects. Makes the outside of its
nest with leaves and matting rushes; the inside with fibers of roots. Lays a
blue egg. Has a great spirit, and will attack a Crow, or any large bird. Mr.
Latham saw one which was brought from Kamtschatka, which differed from this
only in having no rust-color on the vent.

273. CANADA.
Muscicapa Canadensis, Lin. Syst. 324. -- Latham, ii. 354. Gobe-Mouche cendre
de Canada, Brisson, ii. 406. tab. xxxix. -- De Buffon, iv. 538. -- Catesby, i.
60.
FL. With a cinereous head, spotted with black; a yellow spot between the bill
and the eyes; and beneath each eye a black one: the upper part of the body
cinereous; the lower, yellow, marked on the under side of the neck with small
black spots: the tail of a cinereous brown, with the exterior webs ash-colored.

Inhabits Canada. PLACE.


274. GREEN.
FL. With a yellow spot on each side of the bill: head a cinereous green: back
and coverts of the wings of a pale green; cross the last are two bars of white:
primaries and tail dusky, edged with green: throat of a pale ash-color: middle
of the belly white: sides of a fine yellow.

Sent from New York by Mr. Blackburne, PLACE.
under the name of the small Green Hanging Bird. It comes there in May, breeds,
and etires in August: and is a scarce species. BL. MUS.

275. DUSKY.
FL. With a dusky head: back of a dull cinereous olive: quil feathers and
secondaries dusky; the last edged with white: breast of a pale ash-color: belly
of a whitish yellow: tail dusky; exterior web of the exterior feather white:
legs black.

Sent from the same place, PLACE.
under the title of The Small or Common Phoeby Bird, or Bee-eater. Appears the
latter end of March, or beginning of April; lays five white small eggs:
disappears in August. Eats Bees. BL. MUS.

276. GOLDEN-THROAT.
FL. With the crown, upper part of the neck, and body, of a dirty olive: throat
and ridge of the wing of a very rich yellow: breast and belly white, tinged
with yellow: primaries and tail of a bright olive green.

Inhabits New York. BL. MUS. PLACE.


277. STRIPED.
Striped Fly-catcher, Forster, Ph. Tr. lxii. 406. Muscicapa striata, the same,
429. -- Latham, ii. 349. -- Miller's Plates, No 15.
FL. With a black crown; white cheeks: hind part of the head varied with black
and white: throat of a yellowish white, striped with brown: bread white,
striped on the sides with black: belly white: back of a cinereous green, marked
with black: wings dusky, mixed with white: tail dusky, with the three outmost
feathers marked with a white spot: legs yellow.

Head of the FEMALE of a yellowish green, with short streaks of black: a short
yellow line passes from the bill over each eye: throat, cheeks, and breast, of
a yellowish white, striped on the sides with black: in other respects like the
MALE, but greener. LENGTH five inches; Extent seven.

PLACE.
Arrives at Severn settlement, Hudson's Bay, in the summer. Feeds on grass-seeds.

A. DUN FL. Faun. Russ. -- Latham, ii. 351.
FL. Dusky above; ash-colored beneath: throat and vent spotted with white.

PLACE.
Found about lake Baikal, and in the eastern part of Sibiria: and observed by
Steller in Kamtschatka.

^. PIED FL. Br. Zool. i. No 135, Muscicapa Atricapilla, Faun. Suec. No 256,
tab. 1 The description refers to the Black-cap Warbler. The figure to this bird.
. Le Gobe-Mouche noir a Collier, De Buffon, iv. 520. -- Pl. Enl. 565. Motacilla
Leucomela, Muller, No 268. -- Latham, ii. 324. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
FL. With white front: bill, head, back, and legs, black: coverts of tail
spotted with white: coverts of wings dusky, crossed with a white bar: primaries
dusky: exterior sides of secondaries white; interior black: breast and belly
white: middle feathers of tail black; exterior black, marked with white: head
of the FEMALE wholly brown, as is the upper part of the body: white in the
wings obscure: breast and belly dirty white.

Found as far north as Sondmor. PLACE.
Inhabits that diocese the whole year; and, during winter, frequently takes
refuge in the very houses Act. Nidros, v. 543.
. Feeds on the buds of birch. Is met with in Russia only between the Kama and
the Samara.

XXVIII. LARK. Genesis Birds, L.
278. SHORE.
Alauda gutture flavo. The Lark, Catesby, i. 32. Alauda alpestris, Lin. Syst.
289. Gelbburtige Lerch, Klein, Av. 72. -- Latham, ii. 385. Le Hausse-col noir,
ou l' Alouette de Virginie, De Buffon, v. 55. -- Brisson, iii. 367. LEV. MUS.
-- BL. MUS.
L. With yellow cheeks and forehead: breast and belly white: head divided by a
line of black; another passes beneath each eye, bounding the throat, which is
yellow: across the upper part of the breast is a broad black mark; beneath that
is a tinge of red: upper part of the neck, and coverts of the wings and tail,
are ferruginous: back brown: primaries dusky: two middle feathers of the tail
brown; the rest black; those on the outside edged with white: legs dusky: head
of the FEMALE dusky. LARGER than the common Lark.

PLACE.
Inhabit the large plains of several provinces, and breed there. They appear on
our settlements in Hudson's Bay in May, and proceed farther north to breed.
Feed on grass-seeds, and the buds of the sprig birch. Run into small holes, and
keep close to the ground; whence the natives call them Chi-chup-pi-sue.

In winter they retire to the southern provinces in great flights; but it is
only in very severe weather that they reach Virginia and Carolina. They
frequent sand-hills on the seashore, and feed on the seaside oats, or uniola
panicula. They have a single note, like the Sky-lark in winter.

They are also found in Poland; in Russia and in Sibiria more frequent: in both
are very common during winter; but retire to the north on approach of spring,
except in the north-east parts, and near the high mountains.

279. RED.
Red Lark, Edw. 297. -- Br. Zool, i. No 140. -- Brisson, App. 94. -- Latham,
ii. 376. L'Alouette aux joues brunes de Pensylvanie, De Buffon, v. 58. -- LEV.
MUS.
L. With a white line above and beneath each eye: thickish bill: chin and
throat whitish: head, and whole upper part of the body, and coverts, pale
ferruginous, spotted with black: breast whitish, with dusky spots: belly of a
dirty white: side tinged with rust: tail dusky; outmost feathers white; the two
next edged with white: legs dusky. When the wing is closed, says Mr. Edwards,
the third quill from the body reaches to its tip; a constant characteristic of
the Wagtail genus.

Inhabits Pensylvania; appears there in March, PLACE.
in its passage northward. Found also near London.

280. CALANDRA.
Edw. 268. -- Latham, ii. 382. Alauda Calandra, Lin. Syst. 288. La Calandra on
gross Alouette, De Buffon, v. 49. -- Pl. Enl. 363. -- Brisson iii. 352.
L. With a bill thicker and stronger than usual to the genus: from the bill a
black line passes to and beyond the eye; above and beneath are two others of
white, faintly appearing: head, neck, back, and coverts of the wings, reddish
brown, spotted with black: primaries and tail dusky, edged with rust-color:
throat white: upper part of the breast crossed by a narrow black crescent;
beneath that the breast is of a pale brown, spotted with a darker: belly and
vent white: tail a little forked: legs of a pale flesh-color. In SIZE rather
superior to the Sky-Lark; but the body thicker. It is a species allied to the
common BUNTING.

Brought from North Carolina; PLACE.
and first described as an American bird by Mr. Edwards. Is common in many
parts of Europe, especially in the southern. In Asia it is found about Aleppo,
and is pretty frequent about the Tartarian deserts bordering on the Don and
Volga.

A. SKY-LARK, Br. Zool. i. No 136. L'Alouette, De Buffon, v. 1. Alauda
arvensis. Larka, Faun. Suec. No 209. -- Latham, ii. 368. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL.
MUS.
L. With the crown of a reddish brown, spotted with black: hind part of the
head cinereous: chin white: breast and belly pale dull yellow; the first
spotted with black: back and coverts of wings dusky, edged with pale reddish
brown: exterior web, and half the interior web of the outmost feather of the
tail, white: legs dusky. LENGTH seven inches one-fourth: SIZE.
EXTENT twelve and a half: WEIGHT an ounce and a half.

PLACE.
Inhabits all parts of Europe, even as high as Nordland in Norway, beneath the
Arctic circle. They migrate in Scandinavia. They are the first birds, in East
Gothland in Sweden, which give notice of the return of spring, singing with a
tremulous note, and flying in flocks near to the ground. Enlivened by the
warmth of summer, they soar and sing with full voices. In September they
collect in flocks, and retire south; probably into the province of Schonen,
where they are found in vast multitudes during winter Amoen. Acad. iv. 593.
. They are frequent in all parts of Russia and Sibiria, and reach even
Kamtschatka.

B. WOOD-LARK, Br. Zool. i. No 137. Alauda arborea, Faun. Suec. No 211. Le
Cujelier, De Buffon, v. 25. -- Pl. Enl. 660. -- Latham, ii. 371.
L. With crown and upper part of back reddish brown: head surrounded with a
whitish coronet from eye to eye: first feather of the wing shorter than the
second. In form shorter and thicker than the Sky-Lark.

Inhabits not farther north than Sweden. PLACE.
Found in the woods of Russia and Sibiria, as far east as Kamtschatka Mr.
Latham, ii. 372.
.

C. TIT-LARK, Br. Zool. i. No 138. Alauda pratensis, Faun. Suec. No 210. La
Farlouse, De Buffon, v. 31. -- Pl. Enl. 574. -- Latham, ii. 374.
L. With a black bill: olivaceous brown head and back, spotted with black:
breast yellow, with oblong streaks of black. Of a slender form.

Found not higher than Sweden. PLACE.


D. FIELD-LARK, Br. Zool. i. No 139. Alauda campestris, Faun. Suec. No 212. --
Raii Syn. Av. 70. La Spipolette, De Buffon, v. 43. -- Latham, ii. 375.
L. With head and neck pale brown, marked with dusky lines, faintest on the
neck: rump and back of a cinereous olive; the first spotted with black, the
last plain: legs pale brown: hind claw shorter than usual with Larks. Lesser
than the Sky-Lark.

Extends only to Sweden. PLACE.
These three species disappear in that kingdom in the height of winter. If the
weather softens, they return in February. The Comte De Buffon v. 38.
describes a variety of this, under the name of La Farlouzzane; which, he says,
came from Louisiana.

WAGTAIL. Genesis Birds. LI.
E. WHITE, Br. Zool. ii. No 142. M. Alba. Arla, Faun. Suec. No 252. -- Latham,
ii. 395. La Lavandiere, De Buffon, v. 151. -- Pl. Enl. 652. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL.
MUS.
W. T. With head, back, and neck, black: cheek, front, and chin, white: belly
white: primaries dusky: tail long, dusky, with part of the webs white.

PLACE.
Inhabits as high as Iceland, the Feroe Isles, and Drontheim Av. Nidr. Enum. MS.
. It is a bird of augury with the Swedish farmers; who have a proverb relative
to this and the WHEAT-EAR, which is another bird of direction: When you see the
WAGTAIL return, you may turn your sheep into the fields; and when you see the
WHEAT-EAR, you may sow your grain STILLINGFLEET'S Tracts, 2d ed. 265.
.

It is common in Russia, Sibiria, and Kamtschatka, but does not extend to the
arctic regions.

F. Yellow Wagtail, Br. Zool. i. No 143. M. Flava. Sadesarla, Faun. Suec. No
253. -- Latham, ii. 400. La Bergeronette grise, De Buffon, v. 261. -- Pl. Enl.
674. -- LEV. MUS.
W. T. With crown and upper part of the body of an olive-green: breast and
lower part of the body of a rich yellow: throat spotted with black. In the
FEMALE those black spots are wanting: the other colors are also much more
obscure.

PLACE.
Inhabits Sweden; but not higher. Migrates like the former. Common in all parts
of Russia, Sibiria, and even Kamtschatka.

G. Yellow-headed Wagtail. Motacilla cifreola, Pallas Itin. iii. 696. --
Latham, ii. 401.
W. T. with citron-colored head, neck, breast, and belly: the hind part of the
neck marked with a black crescent: the back blueish gray.

Common in Sibiria, as far as the Arctic circle: less so in Russia. PLACE.
Migrates with the last.

H. TCHUTSCHI, Latham, ii. 403.
W. T. With crown and back deep olive-brown: a spot of white between the upper
mandible and eye: coverts and primaries deep brown; the first crossed with two
bars of white: breast and belly white, dashed with rust: vent pale yellow: tail
very long; outward web, and half the inward web, of outmost feather, white; all
the rest dusky: legs black.

Taken off the Tchutschi coast, within the Streights of Bering, PLACE.
lat. 66, north.

XXIX. WARBLER. Genesis Birds, LII.
281. BLUE-BACKED RED-BREAST.
Blue-bird, Catesby, i. 47. Blue Red-breast, Edw. 24. -- Lawson. Motacilla
Sialis, Lin. Syst. 336. -- Latham, ii. 446. Le Rouge gorge bleu, De Buffon, v.
212. -- Pl. Enl. 390. -- Brisson, iii. 423. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
W. With bill and legs of a jetty blackness: head, hind part of the neck, back,
tail, and coverts of the wings, of a rich deep and glossy blue: primaries
dusky, tipped with brown: from the bill to the tail red. Head, and lower part of
the neck, in the FEMALE, cinereous blue: breast duller than that of the MALE.

PLACE.
Frequent in most parts of North America, from New York to the Bermuda islands.
Is the same in the new world as the Robin-red-breast is in the old. Are
harmless, familiar birds. Breed in holes of trees. Have long wings. Are swift
of flight, therefore elude the pursuit of the Hawk. Have a cry and a whistle.
Feed usually on insects; but, through deficiency of that food, come to the
farm-houses, to pick up grass-seeds, or any thing they can meet with.

282. BLACK-HEADED.
Redstart, Catesby, i. 67. -- Edw. 80. Muscicapa ruticilla, Lin. Syst. 326. --
Raii Syn. Av. 180. No 51. Le Gobe-Mouche d'Amerique, Brisson, iii. 383. -- De
Buffon, v. 178, 566. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
W. With the head, neck, breast, back, and wings, black: the primaries crossed
with a broad bar of orange: the sides and inner coverts of the wings, belly,
and vent, white, spotted with black on the upper sides: two middle feathers of
the tail dusky; the rest of the same color at their ends; the lower parts
orange: legs black. The FEMALE cinereous olive above; white beneath, bounded on
each side by yellow: the parts of the tail which are red in the male, are in
this sex yellow.

PLACE.
Inhabits the shady woods of New York, Virginia, Hudson's Bay, and Carolina,
during the summer. Retreat to Jamaica, and perhaps others of the Antilles,
during winter Sloane's Jamaica, ii. 312.
.

283. YELLOW-BREAST.
Maryland Yellow-throat, Edw. 237. Le figuier de Maryland, Brisson, iii. 506.
Le figuier a joues noires, De Buffon, v. 292. Turdus Trichas, Lin. Syst. 293.
-- Latham, ii. 438. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
W. With black forehead and cheeks: crown cinereous: hind part, whole upper
part of the neck, back, wings, and tail, of a deep olive green: primaries and
tail edged with yellow: under side of the neck, breast, and belly, of a rich
yellow.

Inhabits Pensylvania and Maryland. PLACE.
Frequents bushes and low grounds, near rills of water. Quits the country in
autumn.

284. ORANGE-THIGHED.
La Fauvette a poitrine jaune de la Louisiane, De Buffon, v. 162. -- Pl. Enl.
709. -- Latham, ii. 439.
W. With forehead and cheeks black: head crossed in the middle with a white
band, which divides the cheeks from its hind part: nape, back, wings, and tail,
deep olive: lower part of the neck, breast, and belly, fine yellow: thighs and
vent reddish orange: tail rounded.

Inhabits Louisiana; and is a most elegant species: differs from the last in
its rounded tail.

285. BLACK-THROAT.
Blue Fly-catcher, Edw. 252. Motacilla Canadensis, Lin. Syst. 336. Le petit
figuier cendre de Canade, Brisson, iii. 527. -- Latham, ii. 487. Le figuier
bleu, De Buffon, v. 304. -- Pl. Enl. 685. -- BL. MUS.
W. With the head, upper part of the neck, back, and coverts of the wings, of a
slaty blue: throat, under part, and sides of the neck, black: primaries dusky;
white at bottom: breast and belly white: tail dusky.

Inhabits, during summer, Canada and other parts of America, PLACE.
to the south. Arrives in Pensylvania in April. Migrates in winter to the
Antilles, and returns in spring.

286. YELLOW-THROAT.
Yellow-throated Creeper, Catesby, i. 62. -- Latham, ii. 437. La Mesange grise
a gorge jaune, De Buffon, v. 454. -- Brisson, iii. 563.
W. With a yellow spot on each side of the upper mandible: throat of a bright
yellow: from the bill, a black line extends across each eye, pointing down, and
bounding the sides of the neck: forehead black: crown, hind part of the neck,
and back, gray: wings dark cinereous; the coverts edged with white: middle of
the breast and belly of a pure white: side spotted with black: tail black and
white. The FEMALE wants both the yellow and black marks.

PLACE.
Inhabits Carolina; and is continually creeping about the trees in search of
insects.

287. HOODED.
Catesby, i. 60. -- Latham, ii. 462. Le Gobe-Mouche citrin, De Buffon, iv. 538.
-- Pl. Enl. 666. La Mesange a Collier, De Buffon, v. 452. -- BL. MUS.
W. With the forehead, cheeks, and chin, yellow, regularly encircled with black
like a hood. This black is the color of the head, breast, and each side of the
neck: back, wings, and tail, of a dusky green: inner webs of the exterior
feathers of the tail white: breast and belly bright yellow. SIZE of a
Gold-Finch.

PLACE.
Frequents the thickets and shady parts of the uninhabited places of Carolina.

288. YELLOW-RUMP.
Yellow-rumped Fly-catcher, Edw. 255. Le figuier tachete de la Pensylvanie,
Brisson, iii. 503. Le figuier a tete cendre, De Buffon, v. 291. -- Latham, ii.
481.
W. With cheeks and crown of the head cinereous: hind part of the neck and back
of an olive-green; the last spotted with black: rump of a bright yellow: throat
and breast of the same color; the breast spotted with black drops: rest of the
under side white: wings dark ash-color; the coverts crossed with two bars of
white: inner sides of the primaries edged with white: coverts of the tail
black; two middle feathers of the tail dusky; the middle part of the inner webs
of the rest white; the tops and bottoms black.

Inhabits Pensylvania. PLACE.


289. RED-HEAD.
Yellow Red-poll, Edw. 256. Motacilla petechia, Lin. Syst. 334. -- Latham, ii.
479. Le figuier a tete rouge de Pensylvanie, Brisson, iii. 488. -- De Buffon,
v. 286. -- BL. MUS.
W. With the crown scarlet: cheeks yellow: hind part of the neck, back, and
rump, of an olive-green: wings and tail dusky, edged with yellow: all the under
side of the body of a rich yellow, speckled with red, except the vent, which is
plain. A bird, which I suspect to be the FEMALE, shot in Newfoundland, had the
scarlet crown; but the upper part of the body was dusky, edged with pale brown:
coverts of the tail white: primaries and tail dusky: breast and belly of a
dirty white, and unspotted.

Visits Pensylvania in March. Is a lonely bird, PLACE.
keeping in thickets and low bushes. Does not breed there; but goes farther
north to breed; probably to Canada and Newfoundland. Feeds on insects.

290. BLACK-POLL.
W. With the crown black: cheeks white: upper part of the body ash-colored,
with long black strokes pointing to the tail: coverts of the wings and
primaries dusky; the first marked with two white bars: the secondaries edged
with white: tail dusky; ends of the two outmost feathers marked with a white
spot: throat white, streaked on each side with black: breast and belly of a
dirty white, streaked downwards with black: legs whitish.

Inhabits, during summer, Newfoundland and New York; PLACE.
called in the last, Sailor. Arrives there in May; breeds; and retires in
August. BL. MUS. -- Latham, ii. 460.

291. GREY-POLL.
W. With head, sides of the neck, and coverts of the wings and tail, of a fine
gray; the coverts of wings crossed with two white bars: primaries and tail
dusky, edged with gray: throat orange: chin and breast of a fine yellow: belly
whitish ash-color.

PLACE.
Sent from New York to Mrs. Blackburn. -- Latham, ii. 461.

292. YELLOW-POLL.
Le figuier tachete 1 Espece, De Buffon, v. 285. -- Pl. Enl. 58. -- Latham, ii.
514. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
W. With the forehead and whole under side of the body of a fine yellow; the
last streaked with red: the upper part, and coverts of wings, of an
olive-green: the primaries brown, bordered with green: tail brown, bordered
with rich yellow. FEMALE of a duller color.

PLACE.
Inhabits Canada; where it makes only a short stay, and does not breed there.
Found in New York; and even Hudson's Bay during summer. Retires into South
America, according to M. De Buffon. He suspects that No 1, plate 58, Pl. Enl.
is the female. Till that is ascertained, I beg leave to make a new species of
it, in the OLIVE, No

The nest is very elegant, composed of down, mixed with dead, grass; the inside
lined with fine fibers. The eggs spotted near the larger end. Sent from New
York, under the name of the Swamp Bird.

293. WHITE-POLL.
Black and white Creeper, Edw. 300. Le figuier vary, De Buffon, v. 305. --
Latham, ii. 488. -- de St. Domingue, Brisson, iii. 529. -- BL. MUS.
W. With the crown white, bounded by a black line passing from the corners of
the bill; beneath that is a stripe of white: below the eyes a broad bed of
black, bounded with white: chin and throat black: hind part of the neck, back,
and rump, white, marked with great black spots: coverts and primaries black;
the first crossed with two white bars; the last edged on their inner sides with
white: belly white: sides spotted with black: tail black, edged with gray;
inner webs of the outmost feathers spotted with white.

Arrives in Pensylvania in April; stays there the whole summer. PLACE.
Feeds on insects, caterpillars, etc. Probably winters in the Antilles, where
it is likewise found Sloane, i. 309.
.

294. GOLDEN-CROWNED.
Golden-crowned Fly-catcher, Edw. 298. Le figuier couronne d'or, De Buffon, v.
312. -- Latham, ii. 486.
W. With a golden crown, bounded on all sides with a blueish slate-color: above
each eye, a narrow white line: from the bill, across the eyes, a broad band of
black: throat and chin white: hind part of neck and back blueish, with dusky
oblong spots: rump yellow: breast black, edged with gray; sides of the breast
yellow: belly and vent white, spotted with black: wings dusky; coverts and
secondaries edged with white: tail black; three outmost feathers on each side
marked on their inner webs with white. FEMALE is brown on the back; wants the
black stroke through the eye, and mark on the breast: in other respects agrees
with the cock.

Arrives in Pensylvania in spring: PLACE.
stays there but three or four days, proceeding northward to breed. Appears
likewise in the same manner in Nova Scotia.

295. GOLD-WING.
Golden-wing Fly-catcher, Edw. 299. Le figuier, aux ailes dorees, De Buffon, v.
311. -- Brisson, App. 109. Motacilla chrysoptera, Lin. Syst. 333. -- Latham,
ii. 492.
W. With a golden crown: eyes enclosed in a bed of black, reaching from the
bill to the hind part of the head, and bounded above and below with a white
line: throat, and under side of neck, black: upper part, back, and lesser
coverts of wings, pale blueish gray: greater coverts rich yellow: primaries and
tail dark cinereous: belly white.

PLACE.
Like the preceding, transient in the spring through Pensylvania.

296. YELLOW-FRONTED.
W. With the forehead and crown of a bright yellow: from the bill extends
through the eyes a band of black, bounded on each side with white: chin,
throat, and lower side of the neck, black: breast and belly white: upper part
of the neck, back, rump, and lesser coverts of the wings, of a light blueish
gray; the greater coverts, and lower order of lesser, of a bright yellow,
forming a great spot in each wing: primaries and tail of a deep ash-color;
inner webs of the outmost feathers of the tail spotted with white.

PLACE.
A passenger, like the former, through Pensylvania. -- Latham, ii. 461.

297. GREEN.
Green black-throated Fly-catcher, Edw. 300. -- Latham, ii. 484. Le figuier a
cravate noire, De Buffon, v. 298. -- Brisson, App. 104.
W. With yellow cheeks and sides of the neck: black throat, under side of the
neck, and sides under the wings: upper part of the breast yellowish; lower, and
belly, white: head, and upper side of the body, of an olive-green: coverts of
the wings of the same color, marked with two bars of white: primaries and tail
dusky; the inner webs of the first edged with white; of the three outmost
feathers of the tail, spotted with white.

PLACE.
Appears and migrates in the same manner as the other.

298. BLOODY-SIDE.
Red-throated Fly-catcher, Edw. 301. La figuier a poitrine rouge, De Buffon, v.
308. -- Brisson, Add. 105. Motacilla Pensylvanica, Lin. Syst. 333. -- Latham,
ii. 489.
W. With a yellow crown: white cheeks: a small black mark passing under each
eye: throat, and whole under side of the body, white, except part of the
breast, which is of a blood-red, which color extends along the sides under the
wings: hind part of the head black: back and rump dusky, edged with yellowish
green: coverts of the wings, and primaries, dusky; the first marked with two
bars of white: tail dusky, with a white mark on the exterior feathers. FEMALE
wants the black spot on the hind part of the head, and those on the back; in
other respects agrees with the cock.

Attends the preceding species in their short passage through Pensylvania.
PLACE.


299. CAERULEAN.
Little blue-grey Fly-catcher, Edw. 302. La figuier gris de fer, De Buffon, v.
309. -- Brisson, App. 107. M. Caerulea, Lin. Syst. 337. -- Latham, ii. 490.
W. With the head and whole upper part of the body of a blueish slate-color:
wings brown; a few of the secondaries edged with white: over each eye a narrow
line of black: tail dusky; two outmost feathers white; the third on each side
tipped with white. FEMALE wants the black stripe over the eyes: and the colors of
the tail, and upper part of it, brownish.

Appears in Pensylvania in March. Builds its nest in April, PLACE.
with husks from the buds of trees, down of plants, etc. coating it with
lichens, and lining it with horse-hair. It continues in the country all summer,
and retires south at approach of winter; perhaps to Cayenne, where the same
species is found Pl. Enl. 704.
.

300. WORM-EATER.
Worm-eater, Edw. 305. -- Latham, ii. 499. Le Demi-fin. Mangeur de verse, De
Buffon, v. 325.
W. With the crown of a reddish yellow, bounded by a line of a lighter; beneath
that, another of black; and through the eye, from the bill, a third of yellow,
bounded beneath by a dusky stroke: cheeks, throat, and breast, of a yellowish
red, deepest on the breast, fading toward the belly, which is white: upper
part of the neck, back, wings, and tail, of a deep olive-green: legs
flesh-colored. BILL of this species is much thicker than others of the genus.

PLACE.
Does not appear in Pensylvania till July, in its passage northward. Does not
return the same way; but is supposed to go beyond the mountains which lie to
the west. This seems to be the case with all the transient vernal visitants of
Pensylvania.

301. YELLOW-TAIL.
Yellow-tail Fly-catcher, Edw. 257.
W. With an ash-colored crown: hind part of the neck, coverts of the wings, and
the back, of an olive-green: rump cinereous; sometimes that and the head of the
same color with the back: throat, under side of neck, breast, and belly, white;
the sides of the breast dashed with rust-color: sides, under the wings, yellow:
on the lower part of the primaries a large bed of yellow: two middle feathers
of the tail brown; the rest yellow, tipped with brown.

PLACE.
Taken on its passage, with other birds (before described) of this genus, off
Hispaniola, at sea, supposed to be on their way to their winter quarters in
Jamaica, and other islands.

302. SPOTTED.
Spotted yellow Fly-catcher, Edw. 257. -- Latham, ii. 482. La figuier brun de
Canada, (the male) Brisson, iii. 515. -- de St. Domingue (the female) 513. --
De Buffon, v. 293.
W. With the head, upper part of the body, and wings, of a dark olive green:
primaries and tail of a more dusky hue: the interior web of the outmost
feathers of the tail marked with a large white spot: lesser coverts of the
wings, near the ridge, crossed with white: rump yellowish: all the under side
of the body yellow: under side of the neck, breast, and sides, spotted with
black: middle of the belly and vent plain.

Taken with the preceding. Inhabits also Canada, PLACE.
which may be its place of summer residence and breeding. The FEMALE, which has
a white breast, and the colors of the upper part of the body more dull than
that of the cock, has been found in the isle of Hispaniola; which may be one of
the winter quarters of this and congenerous birds.

303. LOUISIANE.
Le figuier a gorge jaune, De Buffon, v. 288. Le figuier de le Louisiane,
Brisson, iii. 500. -- Latham, ii. 480.
W. With the head and whole upper part of the body of a clear olive-green:
cheeks inclining to cinereous: coverts of the wings of a blueish ash-color,
crossed with two white bars: primaries dusky, edged externally with olive,
internally with white: tail of a dusky brown, edged like the wings; and the
three outmost feathers marked near their ends with a white spot: lower side of
the neck and breast of a fine yellow; the last spotted with red: belly and vent
white, tinged with yellow. FEMALE wants the red spots on the breast.

Inhabits Louisiana and St. Domingo. PLACE.


304. ORANGE-THROAT.
Le figuier a gorge orangee, De Buffon, v. 290. Le grand figuier de Canada,
Brisson, iii. 508.
W. With the head, upper part of the neck and back, and lesser coverts of the
wings, of an olive-green: the lower part of the back, rump, and greater
coverts, ash-colored: primaries brown, edged on the outmost webs with dark
cinereous; on the inner with dirty white: throat and under side of the body
orange, except the vent, which is white. FEMALE differs from the male in having
its under side of a duller and paler color.

PLACE.
Inhabits Canada.

305. QUEBEC.
Le figuier a tete jaune, De Buffon, v. 298. -- Brisson, iii. 517. -- Pl. Enl.
731. Motacilla icterocephala, Lin. Syst. 334. -- Latham, ii. 484.
W. With a yellow crown: space between the bill and the eyes black: below the
eyes, and on the sides of the neck, white: hind part of the head, neck, back,
and rump, black, edged with yellowish olive: ridge coverts of the wings, and
tail, of the same color; other lesser coverts, and the greater coverts, black,
marked with two transverse bars of yellow: tail dusky, edged with olive; the
outmost feathers marked half the length of their inner webs with yellowish
white: all the lower part of the body of a dirty white.

PLACE.
Inhabits Canada.

306. BELTED.
Le figuier a ceinture, De Buffon, v. 503. Le figuier cendre, Brisson, iii,
524. Motacilla Canadensis, Lin. Syst. 334. -- Latham, ii. 486.
W. With an oblong yellow spot on the crown: rest of the head, upper side of
the body, and coverts of wings, of a deep blueish ash-color, almost black; the
last crossed with two white bars: from the bill, above each eye, passes a white
line: the under side of the neck, breast, and belly, are white; the two first
marked longitudinally with brown streaks: between the breast and belly is a
transverse belt of yellow: tail dusky, a little forked; the two outmost
feathers on each side white at their ends and inner sides: coverts of the tail
yellow. FEMALE is brown on the upper side: the coverts of the tail are not
yellow.

Inhabits Canada. PLACE.


307. OLIVE.
Le figuier de la Caroline, Pl. Enl. 58, No 1. -- De Buffon, v. 286.
W. With the head, upper part of the body, and coverts of the wings, of an
olive-green: primaries and tail brown; the first bordered with green, the last
with yellow: under side of the body of a pale yellow.

Inhabits Carolina. PLACE.


308. NEW YORK.
Le Fauvette tachetee de la Louisiane, De Buffon, v. 161. -- Pl. Enl. 752. --
Latham, ii. 436.
W. With a black bill, slightly bent at the end: over each eye a white line:
crown, and all the upper plumage, cinereous and deep brown: lower part of the
neck and body yellowish, streaked with black: legs reddish brown. LENGTH near
six inches.

Inhabits Louisiana, and the hedges about New York. PLACE.
Not gregarious.

309. DUSKY.
Fauvette ombree de la Louisiane, De Buffon, v. 162. -- Pl. Enl. 709. --
Latham, ii. 437.
W. With a black slender bill: upper part of the plumage greyish brown: back
marked faintly with black: wings, coverts of the tail, and the tail itself,
dusky; the last edged with white, thinly speckled with black: legs dusky.

PLACE.
Inhabits Louisiana.

310. PROTHONOTARY.
Le figuier protonotaire, De Buffon, v. 316. -- Pl. Enl. 704. -- Latham, ii.
494.
W. With the head, neck, throat, breast, and belly, of a fine jonquil yellow:
vent white: back olive: rump ash-color: wings and tail black and cinereous.

PLACE.
Inhabits Louisiana. Called there le Protonotaire; but the reason has not
reached us.

311. HALF-COLLARED.
Le figuier a demi collier, De Buffon, v. 316. -- Latham, ii. 494.
W. With a yellowish olive crown: an ash-colored band behind the eyes: coverts
of the wings brown, edged with yellow: primaries brown, edged with white:
throat and all the under side of the body of a clear ash-color: across the
breast is a half-collar of black: belly tinged with yellow: tail ash-color:
four feathers on each side edged with black on their inner sides.

312. ORANGE-BELLIED.
Le figuier a gorge jaune, De Buffon, v. 317. -- Latham, ii. 495.
W. With the head and upper part of the body of an olive-brown: coverts of the
wings yellow, varied with brown? primaries brown: secondaries and tail brown,
bordered with olive: throat, under side of the neck, and breast, yellow; part
of the latter tinged with brown: the rest of the lower part of the body
reddish, approaching to yellow.

313. OLIVE-BROWN.
Le figuier brun olive, De Buffon, v. 318. -- Latham, ii. 495.
W. With the upper part of the head and body of a brownish olive: the coverts
of the wings, and primaries, brown; the first edged and tipped with white; the
last edged with gray: throat and breast white, varied with teints of gray:
belly of a yellowish white: vent quite yellow: tail brown, bordered with clear
gray; those of the middle tinged with yellow; the two outmost on each side
bordered with white.

314. GRASSET.
Le figuier grasset, De Buffon, v. 319. -- Latham, ii. 496.
W. With the head and upper part of the body of a deep greyish green and deep
olive; the middle of the head marked with a yellow spot: back tinged with
black: wings brown or dusky: throat and under side of the neck reddish; the
rest of the lower part white: tail black, edged with gray; and the four outmost
feathers on each side marked near their ends with white.

315. GREY-THROAT.
Le figuier cendre, a gorge cendre, De Buffon, v. 319. -- Latham, ii. 496.
W. With the head, and upper part of the body and wings, ash-color; the last
edged with white: throat and under side of the body of a more clear ash-color:
tail black: first feather on each side almost white; the second half white; the
third tipped with the same.

These five species inhabit Louisiana, and are called there Grassets, PLACE.
from their exceeding fatness. They frequent the tulip-trees; in particular the
magnolia grandiflora, or the laurel-tree Catesby, ii. 61.
, whose evergreen leaves give ample shelter to the feathered tribe.

316. GUIRA.
Motacilla Guira, Lin. Syst. 336. -- Edw. 351. -- Latham, ii. 505. --
Marcgrave, 212. -- De Buffon, v. 343. -- BL. MUS.
W. With head, hind part of neck, and back, of an olive green; lower part
dashed with yellow: lesser coverts dusky, slightly edged with white; greater,
and primaries, dusky, with their edges deeply marked with white: throat, and
lower part of the neck, full black: breast and belly of a fine light yellow:
tail brown, edged with dull yellow. The crown of the FEMALE olive green,
spotted with black: hind part of the neck plain green: chin and fore part of
neck black: breast and belly yellow, spotted with red: wings and tail like
those of the male.

PLACE.
Inhabits New York. Makes its nest between the small branches of some tree. It
is open at top, shallow, and formed of broad dead grass, and some fibers. Its
eggs white, thinly spotted with black.

317. BLACK-BURNIAN.
W. With the crown intensely black, divided by a line of rich yellow: from each
corner of the upper mandible is another of the same color: through the eye
passes one of black, reaching beyond it, bounded beneath by a narrow yellow
line: sides of the neck, the throat, and middle of the breast, are of a
beautiful yellow: sides spotted with black: vent and thighs white: lesser
coverts black; greater white: back striped black and white: primaries dusky:
middle feathers of the tail dusky; three outmost on each side marked with
white. -- Latham, ii. 461.

PLACE.
Inhabits New York. -- BL. MUS.

318. PINE.
Pine-Creeper, Catesby, i. 61. -- Edw. 277. Le figuier de sapins, De Buffon, v.
296. -- Latham, ii. 483.
W. With the crown, cheeks, breast, belly, and thighs, of a bright yellow: from
the bill to the eyes is a dusky line: hind part of the neck, the back, and
rump, of a yellowish green, inclining to olive, brightest on the rump: wings
and tail of a blueish gray: coverts marked with two white lines: outmost
feathers of the tail with their inner webs white. FEMALES of a brownish color.

Appears in Pensylvania, from the south, in April. PLACE.
Feeds on insects and buds of trees. Continues there the whole summer. Inhabits
the softer climate of Carolina the whole winter; and is seen creeping about the
trees, especially the firs and pine, with other congenerous birds, which
associate during that season in small flights.

319. YELLOW.
Yellow Titmouse, Catesby, i. 63. Yellow Wren, Br. Zool. i. No 151. -- Edw.
278. Le figuier brun and jaune, De Buffon, v. 295. Le Pouillot, ou le Chantre,
Ib. 344. -- Brisson, iii. 479. Le figuier de Caroline, Ib. 486. -- Latham, ii.
512. M. Trochilus, Faun. Suec. No 264. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
W. With the head and upper part of the body, wings, and tail, of a deep olive:
cheeks yellow: through the eyes passes a dusky line, and beneath them another:
whole under side and inner coverts of the wings, of a fine yellow; but in some
much paler than others.

Inhabits North Carolina; breeds there, and disappears in winter, PLACE.
retiring to Jamaica and other islands. Is almost an universal bird. Found in
most parts of Europe. Bears all climates, from the East Indies to the rugged
Kamtschatka. Is one of the smallest birds of Europe. Feeds on insects.

320. RUBY-CROWNED.
Ruby-crowned Wren, Edw. 254. Le Roitelet rubis, De Buffon, v. 373. -- Latham,
ii. 511. -- LEV. MUS.
W. With a rich ruby-colored spot toward the hind part of the head: rest of
the head, upper part of the neck, body, and coverts of the wings, of an
olive-colour: coverts crossed by two white lines: primaries and tail dusky,
edged with yellow: from bill to tail a light yellow. SIZE.
LENGTH four inches: extent five: weight four drams.

PLACE.
Inhabits North America, from Hudson's Bay to Pensylvania; probably through the
whole continent. A most delicate bird, to be found in the rude climate of the
bay.

321. GOLDEN-CRESTED.
Br. Zool. i. No 153. -- Catesby, App. 13. M. Regulus. Kongsfogel, Faun. Suec.
No 262. -- Latham, ii. 508. Le Roitelet, De Buffon, v. 363. -- Pl. Enl. 651. 3.
-- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
W. With a black crown, divided lengthways with a rich scarlet line, which it
shows or conceals at pleasure. In other respects, the colors and marks resemble
the former. The least of all European birds. LENGTH only three inches and a
half.

PLACE.
Is found in New York; and inhabits the red cedars. Is met with in Europe as
high as Drontheim Av. Nidr. Catal. MS.
. Crosses annually from the Orknies to the Shetland isles; where it breeds, and
returns again before winter: along flight, of sixty miles, for so small a bird.
Rare in Russia. Frequent in Sibiria, about the Jenesei.

322. WREN.
Br. Zool. i. No 154. M. Troglodytes, Faun. Suec. No 261. -- Latham, ii. 506.
Le Troglodyte, De Buffon, v. 352. -- Pl. Enl. 651. 2. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
W. With head and back brown, obscurely barred with dusky: coverts of wings,
quil-feathers, and tail, elegantly barred with black and ferruginous: whole
under side of a dirty white, mottled with pale brown.

Twice the size of the European Wren; yet appears to be of the same kind. Is
one of the exceptions to the remark made, that the animals of the same species
in the new are lesser than those of the old world.

Appears in the province of New York in May, and lays in June. PLACE.
Builds its nest in holes of trees, with fibers of roots and sticks, lining it
with hairs and feathers. Lays from seven to nine eggs, white, thinly spotted
with red. Has the same actions with the European Wren: sings, but with a
different note. Retires south in August.

The European kind reaches to the Feroe isles; where it enters the cottages, to
peck the dried meat of the inhabitants Brunnich, No 284.
. Found also in Norway; but not far north. Rare in Sweden and Russia. Unknown
in Sibiria.

323. BUSH?
Little Sparrow? Catesby, i. 35. Hedge Sparrow, Lawson, 144. -- Latham, ii.
420.
W. With the body entirely brown.

Less than the European Hedge Sparrow. Mr. Catesby says, that it partakes much
of the nature of that species. Mr. Lawson says, that the Hedge Sparrow of
Carolina differs scarcely from the English; only that he never heard it sing.
They are not numerous; are usually seen single, hopping under bushes: feed on
insects: and are commonly seen near houses in Carolina and Virginia, PLACE.
where they continue the whole year.

A. NIGHTINGALE, Br. Zool. i. No 145. Nachtergani, Faun. Suec. No 545. --
Latham, ii. 410. Le Rossignol, De Buffon, v. 81. -- Pl. Enl. 615. -- LEV. MUS.
-- BL. MUS.
W. With head and neck tawny, dashed with olive: throat, breast, and belly,
glossy ash-color: tail deep tawny.

PLACE.
Inhabits the groves of Oland, Gothland, Upsal, and Schonen; but not farther
north. Appears about the middle of May: retires about the time of hay-harvest
Amoen. Acad. iv. 597.
. Found in the temperate parts of Russia; and in Sibiria, as far as Tomsk only;
not as yet in the eastern parts. None in Scotland. Extends over every temperate
part of Europe; to Syria Russell, as quoted by Mr. Latham.
, Persia Fryer's. Trav. 248.
, and the Holy Land Hasselquist.
; and to the banks of the Nile.

B. REDSTART, Br. Zool. i. No 146. M. Phoenicurus Rodstjert, Faun. Suec. No
257. -- Latham, ii. 421. Le Rossignol de muraille, De Buffon, v. 170. -- Pl.
Enl. 351. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
W. With white front: crown and back deep blueish gray: cheek and throat black:
breast, rump, and sides, red: two middle feathers of tail brown; the rest red.
FEMALE, head and back ash-color: chin white.

PLACE.
Inhabits Europe, as high as Drontheim. In all parts of Russia and Sibiria: in
the last, the colors are extremely vivid. Extends to Kamtschatka, and even to
the Arctic circle.

C. GRAY REDSTART. M. Erithacus, Faun. Suec. No 258. Le Rouge-queue, De Buffon,
v. 180. -- Latham, ii. 423.
W. With a hoary crown: back and wings cinereous: whole under side of the body
and tail ferruginous.

Inhabits Sweden. Lives in trees. Lays nine blueish gray eggs. PLACE.
Seen also near the Volga.

D. Red-breast, Br. Zool. i. No 147. Rotgel, Faun. Suec. 260. -- Latham, ii.
442. Le Rouge-gorge, De Buffon, v. 196. -- Pl. Enl. 361. -- LEV. MUS.
W. With front, chin, and breast, of a deep orange red: upper part of the body,
wings, and tail, olivaceous.

Inhabits Europe as far as Drontheim. Scarce in Russia. PLACE.
Is seen above the Kama; but never in Sibiria. Its familiarity with mankind has
occasioned it, in many countries, to receive a fond name: thus the Danes call
it Tommi-Liden; the Norwegians, Peter Ronsmad; the Germans, Thomas Gierdet; and
we, Robin Red-breast Mr. Latham.
.

^. BLUE-THROAT. M. Suecica, No 259. Bloukropfl, Kram. Aust. 375. -- Latham,
ii. 444. La Gorge-bleue, De Buffon, v. 206. -- Pl. Enl. 361. -- LEV. MUS.
W. With a tawny breast, marked with a sky-blue crescent: over each eye a white
line: head and back brown: tail dusky, ferruginous toward the base, and tipped
with yellow: belly whitish: the vent yellowish.

Inhabits West Bothnia and Lapland. PLACE.
Lives among the alders and willows, and is supposed not to migrate from that
severe climate Amoen. Acad, iv. 597.
. Is found in all the northern parts of Russia and Sibiria. Sings finely.

A bird, differing from this only by a blue line below each eye, is figured by
Mr. Edwards, tab. 28, and drawn from one shot on the rook of Gibraltar.

F. BLACK-CAP, Br. Zool. i. No 148. M. Atricapilla, Faun. Suec. No 256. --
Latham, ii. 415. La Fauvette a tete noire, De Buffon. v. 125. -- Pl. Enl. 580.
-- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
W. With a black crown: hind part of neck pale ash: back, and coverts of wings,
greyish olive: breast and belly light ash. Crown of the FEMALE dull rust-color.

PLACE.
Found in Sweden; chiefly in Schonen. Not in the Russian catalogue.

G. PETTY-CHAPS, Br. Zool. i. No 149. M. Hippolais, Faun. Suec. No 248. --
Latham, ii. 413. La Fauvette, De Buffon, v. 117. -- Pl. Enl. 579. -- LEV. MUS.
W. With inside of the mouth red: head, back, and wings, olivaceous ash: inner
coverts yellow: breast white, tinged with yellow: belly silvery: tail dusky.

PLACE.
Found as far as Sweden.

H. HEDGE, Br. Zool. i. No 150. M. Modularis Jarnsparf, Faun. Suec. No 245. --
Latham, ii. 419. Le Train Buisson, ou Mouchet, ou la Fauvette d'hiver, De
Buffon, v. 151. -- Pl. Enl. 615. -- LEV. MUS.
W. With a deep brown head, mixed with ash: throat and breast of a dull
slate-color: belly dirty white: sides, thighs, and vent, of a tawny brown: tail
dusky.

PLACE.
Inhabits Sweden, its farthest northern residence. Lays four or five fine pale
blue eggs.

I. BOG-RUSH. M. Schaenobaenus, Faun. Suec. No 246. -- Latham, ii. 418. La
Roussette, ou la Fauvette des bois, De Buffon, v. 139.
W. With head, back, and rump, of a testaceous brown; the two first spotted:
the wings testaceous on their outmost sides: throat and belly of the same
color: tail dusky. SIZE of a Wren.

Inhabits among the bog-rushes of Schonen in Sweden. PLACE.


K. FIG-EATER. M. Ficedula, Faun. Suec. No 251. -- Latham, ii. 432, Le
Bec-figue, De-Buffon, v. 187. -- Pl. Enl. 668.
W. With head and upper part of the body and wings dusky, mixed with chestnut:
breast of a cinereous white; that of the female white: tail of the male black;
of the female inclined to chestnut: legs of the male chestnut, of the female
black.

Inhabits (but rarely) the gardens and cultivated parts of Sweden. PLACE.


L. GRASSHOPPER, Br. Zool. i. No 382. Alanda trivialis, Lin. Syst. 288. --
Latham, ii. 429. -- LEV. MUS.
W. With head and upper part of the body of an olive brown, spotted with black:
primaries dusky, edged with olive brown: breast and belly dirty white: tail
very long, and cuneiform, composed of twelve sharp-pointed brown feathers.

Inhabits Sweden. Is frequent in Sibiria. Scarce in Russia. PLACE.
Has the note of a Grasshopper.

M. SEDGE, Br. Zool. i. No 155. M. Salicaria, Faun. Suec. No 249. -- Latham,
ii. 430. La Fauvette de roseaux, De Buffon, v. 142. -- LEV. MUS.
W. With a brown head, streaked with dusky: over each eye a line of white,
bounded above by another of black: throat white: breast and belly white, tinged
with yellow: back reddish brown, spotted with black: rump tawny: tail brown;
circular when spread.

PLACE.
Inhabits Sweden. Is frequent in Russia and Sibiria, in willow thickets near
rivers, even to the Arctic circle.

N. SCOTCH, Br. Zool. i. No 152. M. Acredula, Faun. Suec. No 263. -- Latham,
ii. 513.
W. With front and under side of the body of a fine pale yellow: back and wings
green, dashed with ash-color: tail forked and brown. SIZE of a Wren.

PLACE.
Inhabits Sweden, about Upsal. Found also in Russia and Sibiria.

O. LONG-BILLED.
W. With a very long slender bill: forehead, cheeks, and chin, pale rust-color:
upper part of body and tail brown, tinged with olive: under part of the body of
the same color, but lighter: middle of the belly white. Lesser than a Hedge
Sparrow.

PLACE.
Inhabits Kamtschatka.

* * WITH PARTICOLORED TAILS.
P. WHEAT-EAR, Br. Zool. i. No 157. M. Oenanthe. Stensquetta, Faun. Suec. No
254. -- Latham, ii. 465. Le Motteux, ou Cul blanc, De Buffon, v. 237. -- Pl.
Enl. 554. -- LEV. MUS.
W. With head and back gray, tinged with red: from the bill to the hind part of
the head, across each eye, is a broad bar of black; above that a line of
yellow: breast and belly white, tinged with yellow: rump and lower half of the
tail white; the end black. FEMALE wants the black bar across the eyes: less
white on the tail, and the colors in general are duller.

A species which extends from the sultry climate of Bengal Edw. Birds, i.
Preface, xii.
to the frozen region of Greenland, Is migratory, PLACE.
at lest in the temperate and frigid zones. Goes even in summer as high as
beyond the Arctic circle, in Europe and Asia, wherever the country is rocky. In
Greenland, is conversant among rills of water. Feeds, on insects and worms,
especially those of places of interment; is therefore detested by the natives
Faun. Groenl. No 84.
. Breeds in that country in June. Is found in Iceland and the Feroe islands. On
its first appearance in Sweden, the peasants expect to be freed from the severe
nocturnal, frosts Amoen. Acad. iv. 597.
. Its winter retreat unknown.

Q. STAPAZINA. M. Stapazina, Lin. Syst. 331. -- Latham, ii. 468. Le Motteux, ou
Cul blanc roussatre, De Buffon, v. 454. -- LEV. MUS.
W. With head, neck, and breast, of a reddish brown: throat and belly, white:
across the eyes a brown bar: rump white: tail like that of the former.

Is frequent, with the preceding, in Russia and Sibiria; PLACE.
and extends to Kamtschatka. Often found in the warmer parts of Europe.

R. WHIN-CHAT, Br. Zool. i. No 158. Le Tarier, De Buffon, v. 224. -- Pl. Enl.
678. M. Rubetra, Faun. Suec. No 255. -- Latham, ii. 245. -- LEV. MUS.
W. With head and back of rusty brown, spotted with black: over each eye a
white line; under that a broad bed of black: breast reddish yellow: two middle
feathers of the tail black; the rest white at their bottoms, black at their
ends. The FEMALE has on the cheeks a bed of brown instead of black, and the
other colors less vivid.

PLACE.
Found not farther north than Sweden. Is found in the temperate parts of Russia,
as far as the Urallian chain; but has not reached Sibiria.

S. WHITE-THROAT. M. Sylvia. Skogsneter mesar, Faun. Suec. No 250. -- Latham,
ii. 428. La Grisette, ou Fauvette grise, De Buffon, v. 132. -- Pl. Enl. 579. 3.
-- LEV. MUS.
W. With head of a brownish ash: back tinged with red: lesser coverts of wings
pale brown; greater dusky, edged with tawny brown: wings and tail dusky, with
reddish brown margins: exterior side, and part of the interior sides, of the
outmost feather of the tail white.

PLACE.
Not farther north than Sweden. Scattered over all Russia and Sibiria.

T. AWATCHA.
W. With crown, upper part of neck and body, deep brown: primaries edged with
white: lower part of the five outmost feathers of the tail deep orange; ends
brown; two middle feathers wholly brown: throat and breast white; the sides of
the first, and all the last, spotted with black: from upper mandible to each
eye, an oblique white line: sides pale rust-color: middle of the belly white.

PLACE.
Inhabits Kamtschatka.

U. KRUKA. M. Curruca. Kruka, Faun. Suec. No. 247. -- Latham, ii. 417.
W. With head, wings, and upper part of body, brownish ash; lower part white:
tail dusky; but each outmost feather striped down with a line of white.

PLACE.
Inhabits Sweden, and all parts of Russia; but not Sibiria. Its eggs
ash-colored, spotted with rust. Not our Hedge Sparrow, which Linnaeus makes
synonymous with it.

XXX. TITMOUSE. Genesis Birds LIVE.
324. TOUPET.
Crested Titmouse, Catesby, i. 57. -- Latham, ii. 544. La Mesange huppee de Ja
Caroline, De Buffon, v. 451. -- Brisson, iii. 561. Parus bicolor, Lin. Syst.
340. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
T. With the forehead, head, and upper part of the neck and body, of a deep
gray: under side white, tinged with red; deepest: under the wings: feathers on
the head long, which it erects occasionally into a pointed crest, like a
toupet: legs of a lead-color. FEMALE differs not in color.

Inhabits the forests of Virginia and Carolina the whole year, PLACE.
and feed on insects. Shuns houses. Found also in Greenland Faun. Groenl. 123.
. Flies swift; and emits a weak note.

325. VIRGINIAN.
Yellow-rump, Catesby, i. 58. -- Latham, ii. 546. La Mesange a croupion jaune,
De Buffon, v. 453. Parus Virginianus, Lin. Syst. 342. -- Brisson, iii. 575.
T. With the head, whole body, wings, and tail, brown, tinged with green: rump
yellow.

Inhabits Carolina. Frequents trees, and feeds on insects. PLACE.


326. CREEPING.
Finch Creeper, Catesby, i. 64. -- Latham, ii. 558. Parus Americanus, Lin.
Syst. 341. -- BL. MUS.
T. With a blueish head: white spot above, and another beneath each eye: upper
part of the back of a yellowish green; rest of the back, tail, and wings, of a
dusky blue; the last crossed with two bars of white: throat yellow, bounded
beneath by a black band, extending to the hind part of the neck; which is of
the same color: breast yellow: belly white: sides tinged with red: legs dull
yellow. FEMALE dusky.

PLACE.
Inhabits Carolina all the year. Creeps up and down the bodies of trees, and
picks insects out of the bark.

327. COLEMOUSE.
Br. Zool. i. No 164. Parus ater, Faun. Suec. 268. -- Latham, ii. 540. La
petite Charbonniere, De Buffon, v. 400. -- LEV. MUS.
T. With a black head, marked on the hind part with a white spot: back and rump
of a cinereous green; brightest on the last: coverts of the, wings of a dusky
green; the lowest order tipped with white.

PLACE.
Shot during summer in Newfoundland. Is found in Sibiria, even beyond the Lena;
and winters in that climate.

328. CANADA.
Mesange a tete noire du Canada, De Buffon, v. 408. -- Brisson, iii. 553. Parus
Atricapillus, Lin. Syst. 341. -- Latham, ii. 542.
T. With the head and chin black: sides of the neck, cheeks, and all the under
part of the body, white: upper side of the neck, back, and rump, of a deep
ash-color: coverts of the wings, and primaries, brown; the first edged with
gray; the exterior sides of the last with a lighter gray; the inner with white:
the two middle feathers of the tail cinereous; the others brown on the inner
side, and ash-colored on the outmost, edged with light gray.

PLACE.
Inhabits Canada and Hudson's Bay, and as high as lat. 64. 30, on the western
side of North America. Is a most hardy bird; and continues about Albany Fort
the whole year; but most numerous in cold weather, probably compelled by want
of food. Feeds on worms and insects: makes a twittering noise; from which the
natives call it Kiss-kiss-keshish Phil. Trans. lxii. 407.
.

I cannot add a bird of this kind from Louisiana as a new species, as it
differs in nothing, except having the black spot on the chin larger, and the
colors deeper. The FEMALE has a tinge of red amongst the cinereous, and on the
head De Buffon, v. 407. -- Pl. Enl. 502.
.

329. HUDSON'S BAY.
Parus Hudsonicus, Forster. -- Ph. Trans. lxii. 408. 430. -- Latham, ii. 557.
T. With the head of a rusty brown: a white line beneath each eye: black
throat: feathers on the back long, brown tipped with olive: feathers on the
breast and belly black, tipped with white: sides under the wings ferruginous:
wings brown: edges of the primaries cinereous: tail rounded; brown, edged with
cinereous: legs black. Male and Female resemble each other. LENGTH five inches
and an eighth. EXTENT seven. WEIGHT half an ounce.

Continues, even about Severn river, the whole year. PLACE.
Frequents the juniper-bushes, on buds of which it feeds. Lays five eggs. In
winter collects in small flocks, flying from tree to tree. The natives call
them Peche-ke-ke-shish.

A. GREAT TITMOUSE, Br. Zool. i. No 162. -- Latham, ii. 536. Le Charbonniere,
ou gross Mesange, De Buffon, v. 392. -- Pl. Enl. 3. Talg-oxe, Faun. Suec. 265.
-- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
T. With white cheeks: bill, head, and throat, black: belly yellowish green,
divided lengthways with a bed of black: rump blueish gray: coverts of wings
blue: primaries edged with blue: tail dusky; exterior sides of the outmost
feathers white; of the others blueish: legs lead-color. SIZE of a Chaffinch.

PLACE.
Inhabits Norway, Sweden, Russia, and Sibiria, even in the winter.

B. STROMIAN, Strom. Sond. i. 240. -- Brunnich, p. 73. -- Latham, ii. 537.
T. With bill black above, yellow below: neck and upper part of the body,
yellowish green: throat yellow: breast yellow, spotted with bay: belly blue,
yellowish near the vent: tail bifurcated, of the same color with the back; the
two middle feathers greenish; the two outmost edged with white: legs black.

PLACE.
Discovered by Mr. Strom, in Sondmor.

C. AZURE TITMOUSE. Parus Cyaneis, Nov. Com. Petrop. xiv. 498. tab. xiii. fig.
1. -- 588. tab. xxiii. fig. 1. Parus Indicus, Aldr. -- Raii. Syn. Av. 74. --
Latham, i. 538.
T. With a very short and thick bill: crown and hind part of the neck of a
hoary whiteness; the lower part of the last bounded by a transverse band of
dark blue: cheeks white, crossed by a deep blue line, extending beyond the
eyes: back light blue: rump whitish: under side of the neck, breast, and belly,
of a snowy whiteness, with a single dusky spot on the breast: wings varied with
rich blue, dusky, and white: tail rather long; of a dusky blue, tipped with
white: legs dusky blue.

SIZE of the English Blue Titmouse. The plumage of this elegant species is
extremely loose, soft, and of most exquisitely fine texture, and so liable to
be raised, that when the bird is sitting, but especially when it is asleep, it
appears like a ball of feathers.

PLACE.
It inhabits, in great abundance, the northern woods of Sibiria and Russia, and
about Synbirsk, in the government of Kasan. It is a migratory bird, and appears
in winter conversant about the houses in Petersburgh. It twitters like the
common Sparrow, but with a softer and sweeter note.

D. BLUE, Br. Zool. i. No 163. Blamees, Faun. Suec. No 267. -- Latham, ii. 543.
La Mesange bleue, De Buffon, v. 413. -- Pl. Enl. 3. 2. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
T. With a rich blue crown, wings, and tail: a black line over each eye: cheeks
and forehead white: back yellowish green: breast and belly yellow.

Inhabits as high as Sondmor Strom. 239.
. Found in southern Russia, PLACE.
but not in Sibiria.

E. MARSH, Br. Zool. i. No 165. Entita, Tomlinge, Faun. Suec. No 269. --
Latham, ii. 541. La Nonuette cendree, De Buffon, v. 403. -- Pl. Enl. 3. 3. --
LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
T. With head wholly black: under side of the body white: back cinereous. Like
the Colemouse, No (...) it wants the white spot on the hind part of the head:
its tail is longer, and the bulk larger.

Is found as far as Sondmor Ibid.
. PLACE.
Inhabits all parts of Russia and Sibiria, even as far as Kamtschatka; and
endures the hardest frosts.

F. CRESTED. Parus cristatus. Tofsmyssa. Tofstita, Faun. Suec. No 266. La
Mesange huppee, De Buffon, v. 447. -- Pl. Enl. 502. -- Latham, ii. 545.
T. With a large upright crest: chin black: rest of the plumage a mixture of
black, ash-color, and white.

Is found in Sweden, and in the west and temperate parts of Russia; PLACE.
but does not reach Sibiria.

G. LONG-TAILED, Br. Zool. i. No 166. Lanius caudatus Ahltita, Faun. Suec. No
83. -- Latham, ii. 551. La Mesange a longue queue, De Buffon, v. 436. -- Pl.
Enl, 502. 3. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
T. With crown white, mixed with dark gray: head surrounded by a bed of black,
beginning at the base of the bill: from the hind part of the head to the rump a
line of black; feathers on each side of that line, and those on the breast, a
fine purplish red: tail very long and cuneiform; black, with the interior edges
of the three outmost feathers white.

PLACE.
Inhabits Sweden. Frequent, even in winter, in thickets and woods, all over
Russia and Sibiria. Its elegant nest described in the Br. Zool. i. p. 395.

H. BEARDED, Br. Zool. 1. No 167. -- Latham, ii. 552. La Moustache, De Buffon,
v. 418. -- Pl. Enl. 618. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
T. With a fine gray head: beneath each eye a deep black triangular tuft of
feathers: back, sides, and thighs, orange-colored: secondaries black, edged
with orange: middle of the breast bloom-colored: tail long, cuneiform, and
ferruginous. FEMALE wants the black tufts: crown of a dirty brown: outmost
feathers of the tail black; the ends white.

PLACE.
Found but rarely in Schonen in Sweden. Is very common about the Caspian and
Palus Maeotis, and among the rushes of the rivers which fall into them; but in
no high latitudes in Asia. None in Sibiria.

XXXI. SWALLOW. Genesis Birds, LV.
330. CHIMNEY.
Br. Zool. No 168. -- Latham, ii. 560. Hirundo rustica. Ladu Swala, Faun. Suec.
No 270. L'Hirondelle de cheminee, De Buffon, vi. 591. -- Pl. Enl. 543. -- LEV.
MUS -- BL. MUS.
SW. With the head, upper part of the body, and coverts of the wings, black,
glossed with rich purplish blue: forehead red: under side ferruginous. That of
Europe white; in the MALE tinged with red: tail black; every feather, unless
the two middle, marked with a white spot near the end.

Differs in nothing from the English chimney Swallow, but in the redness of the
under side.

These birds inhabit, during summer, Newfoundland, PLACE.
and other parts of North America. Build on lofty rocks and precipices,
especially such as yield shelter by overhanging their base. Others, since the
arrival of the Europeans, affect the haunts of mankind, and make their nests in
barns, stables, and outhouses: in some parts they are, on that account, called
Barn Swallows. The Swedes give them the same name, Ladu Swala, because in their
country they also nestle in barns.

They appear in the Jersies the beginning of April, wet, says Mr. Kalm, from
the sea or lakes, at the bottom of which they had passed torpid the whole
winter -- I should rather imagine, from the casual showers they met with in
their long flight from their winter quarters: and that they do take such, Mr.
Kalm himself is witness to, by meeting with them on their passage at sea, nine
hundred and twenty miles from any land Voy. i. 24. -- See also Br. Zool. i. p.
344, etc.
.

In the province of New York they appear in May. Make the same sort of nest
with the European. Lay in June. Disappear in August, or early in September.

Is found in Europe as far north as Drontheim, and sometimes frequents the
Feroe isles.

IN SIBIRIA.
This species is very common all over Sibiria; but those which are found beyond
the Jenesei, and in all the north-east part of that country, have their lower
part rust-colored, like the American variety; for they cannot be deemed a
distinct species.

331. MARTIN.
Br. Zool. i. No 169. -- Latham, ii. 564. Hirundo urbica. Hus-Swala, Faun.
Suec. No 271. L'Hirondelle au Croupion blanc, ou de Fenetre, De Buffon, vi.
614. -- Pl. Enl. 542. -- BL. MUS.
SW. With a white rump, breast, and belly: head and back black, glossed with
blue: wings and tail black: feet covered with white down.

PLACE.
In Europe is seen as high as Drontheim.

Inhabits, during summer, Newfoundland and New York. It was also found by the
navigators on the western coast in the month of October: it was inferior in
size to those found in Europe. A specimen, with a black rump, was sent from
Hudson's Bay Ph. Trans. lxii. 408.
; doubtful whether a variety or distinct species. They build there under the
windows of the few houses, or against the steep banks of rivers.

IN SIBIRIA.
Is very common in Sibiria and Kamtschatka.

332. SAND.
Br. Zool. i. No 170. -- Latham, ii. 568. Hirundo riparia. Strand-Swala.
Back-Swala, Faun. Suec. No 273* L'Hirondelle de rivage, De Buffon, vi. 632. --
Pl. Enl. 543. 2. -- BL. MUS.
SW. With the head and upper part of the body of a mouse-color: wings and tail
dusky: under side white: throat crossed by a mouse-colored ring: feet smooth
and black.

Arrives in June in New York. Builds in deep holes of banks, PLACE.
over lakes and rivers; and departs in August or the beginning of September. It
is frequent in Sibiria and Kamtschatka. Is found in Europe as far north as
Sondmor Strom. 249.
.

333. PURPLE SWIFT.
Purple Martin, Catesby, i. 51, Great American Martin (fem?) Edw. 120. Hirundo
purpurea. H. Subis, Lin. Syst. 344. -- Latham, ii. 574. No 21. -- 575. Nos 23*
24. Le Martinet coleur de pourpre, De Buffon, vi. 676. L'Hirondelle de la Baie
de Hudson, Ib. 677. L'Hirondelle de la Louisiane, Ib. 674. -- Pl. Enl. 722. --
LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
SW. With its whole plumage black, glossed most richly with variable blue and
deep purple: wings and tail of a duller color: legs and feet naked, large, and
strong; three toes only standing forward, not all four, as in the European
kind. In SIZE far superior to the English Swift; but the wings in proportion
shorter.

The colors of the FEMALE are less glossy on the upper part of the body; below
of a dirty white: in some, the ridge of the wings is white, and the breast
gray. Such is the specimen engraven by Mr. Edwards; which I suspect to be a
young bird, and not to differ in species, although it may in sex, from that of
Mr. Catesby; for I have had opportunity of examining both male and female from
New York. I must also unite the Louisiane of the Count De Buffon, to this
species.

Inhabits North America, PLACE.
from Hudson's Bay to South Carolina and Louisiana. Appears in New York in
April. Leaves the province the latter end of August. By the self-interest of
mankind, they are welcome guests, and provided with lodgings, in form of
earthen pots or boxes, placed on the outsides of the houses, against their
arrival, and sometimes with empty calabashes hung on the tops of poles Lawson,
144.
. In these they make their nests, and lay four or five eggs. In return for
these benefits, they are the guardian of the poultry; driving away, and
pursuing with great noise, Crows, Hawks, and all kinds of vermin. On the
approach of any thing noxious, they set up a loud note; which the chickens
consider as an alarm, and instantly run under shelter.

334. SWIFT.
Br. Zool. i. No 171. -- Latham, ii. 584. Swift, or Diveling, Lawson, 145.
Hirundo apus. Ring-Swala, Faun. Suec. 272. Le Martinet noir, De Buffon, 643. --
Pl. Enl. 542. -- BL. MUS.
SW. With a very small bill: white chin: all the plumage besides dusky: all the
toes standing forward.

PLACE.
According to Mr. Lawson, inhabits Carolina. Found in vast abundance beyond lake
Baikal, on the loftiest rocks; chiefly about the river Onon, where a variety
with a white rump is very common. Extends in Europe as high as Drontheim.

335. ACULEATED.
American Swallow, Catesby, i. 8. Chimney Swallow, Kalm. ii. 146. Hirundo
pelasgia, Lin. Syst. 345. -- Latham, ii. 583. Le Hirondelle brune acutipenne,
De Buffon, vi. 699. -- Pl. Enl. 726. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
SW. With the bill short, broad, and black: head, upper part of the neck, and
wings, dusky: breast cinereous: back, tail, and belly brown: tail even at the
end; extremities of each shaft naked and sharp-pointed: wings extend far beyond
the tail: legs longer than common to this tribe, and naked a little below the
knee. LENGTH five inches and a half.

PLACE.
Inhabits many parts of North America. Arrives in New York and Pensylvania in
May; sometimes early, sometimes late in the month. Builds in chimnies, forming a
most curious nest, with bits of small sticks, cemented by peach-tree gum. It is
open at top, and forms about a third of a circle. Lays four or five eggs in
June, and quits the country in August. They often stick close to the
chimney-wall by their feet, and support themselves by applying their sharp tail
to the sides. They make all day a great thundering noise, by flying up and down
the funnel.

It is remarkable, that three species of the American Swallows, in general seek
the protection of houses for their places of building their nests, ovation, and
nutrition; yet it is very certain, that before the arrival of the Europeans
they must have had recourse to rocks or hollow trees for those purposes; for
the miserable hovels of the Indians had neither eaves for the uses of the 331st
and 330th species, nor chimnies for that of the bird in question. The two first
must therefore have fixed their nest against the face of some precipice, as
some of the House Swallows do at present in America, and this species does
about the steep rocks about Irkutsk in Sibiria. IN SIBIRIA.
The instinct that directs part of this genus to fly to the protection of
mankind, as soon as opportunity, unknown to preceding broods, offered, is as
wonderful as it is inexplicable.

The Comte De Buffon mentions another of this species vi. 700.
, LOUISIANE. A VARIETY.
which is found in Louisiana. It differs only in the superior length of the
wings, from the bird I describe: I therefore can consider it but as a mere
variety.

XXXII. GOATSUCKER. Genesis Birds, LVI.
336. SHORT-WINGED.
Goatsucker of Carolina, Catesby, i. 8. East India Bat, or Musqueto Hawk,
Lawson, 144. L'Engoulevent dela Caroline, De Buffon, vi. 532. -- Latham, ii.
592.
G. With the head, back, breast, and coverts of the wings, elegantly mottled
with black and bright rust-color, and spotted with large ragged black marks:
the scapulars of the same color, here and there spotted with white: on the
lower part of the back is a mixture of ash-color: primaries and secondaries
most beautifully varied with narrow bars of black and ferruginous; the four
middle feathers of the tail barred and mottled with the same colors; as are the
external webs of the three outmost on each side; but the inner webs of a snowy
whiteness. Wings, when closed, reach little farther than half the length of the
tail. SIZE.
LENGTH twelve inches: EXTENT twenty-four.

PLACE.
I received this species from Doctor GARDEN of Charlestown, South Carolina;
where it is called, from one of its notes, Chuck, Chuck Will's widow; and in
the northern provinces, Whip poor Will, from the resemblance which another of
its notes bears to those words. This, Mr. Kalm says, is the fancy of the
Europeans; for the real sound is likest to Whipperiwhip, with a strong accent
on the first and last syllable Kalm, ii. 152.
. It begins its note about the time that the cherry-trees begin to blossom, or
near the 22d of April, in the Jersies; probably sooner in the southern
provinces. Mr. Blackburne observed them first, EGGS.
in the province of New York, in May. Adds, that they lay two eggs on the bare
ground; and that they will scarcely quit them on the nearest approach. They
disappear in August.

FOOD.
Their food is entirely insects, which they catch night and morning, at the time
in which they emit their song. They never settle on high trees; but on bushes,
rails, or the steps of houses, which they frequent, as insects swarm more, near
to habitations, than other places. They give their note sitting: if they see an
insect pass, they fly up, catch it, and then settle again, and renew their
song. Oft-times numbers perch near one another, make a vast noise, repeating
their song as if in emulation. They continue their call till it is quite dark:
their note ceases during night; but commences at the dawn, and is continued
till the sun rises, when they again desist for the whole day Kalm, ii. 153.
. I must add, that, besides these notes, it has that strange sound resembling
the turning of a great spinning-wheel; probably common to the whole genus Br.
Zool. i. p. 352, 4to -- 417, 8vo.
.

They are extremely rare toward the seaside; but swarm toward the mountains.
Doctor Garden never got but this one. Mr. Clayton confirms their scarcity in
the maritime parts of the provinces; and favors us with the following account
of them.

I never heard but one in the maritime parts; though my abode has been always
there; but near the mountains, within a few minutes after sunset, they begin,
and make so shrill and loud a noise, which the echoes from the rocks and sides
of the mountains increase to such a degree, that the first time I lodged there
I could hardly get any sleep. The shooting them in the night is very difficult;
they never appearing in the day. Their cry is pretty much like the sound of the
pronunciation of the words Whip poor Will, with a kind of a chucking between
every other, or every two or three cries; and they lay the accent upon the last
word Will, and lest of all upon the middle one.

The Indians say, these birds were never known till a great massacre was made
of their country folks by the English, and that they are the departed spirits
of the massacred Indians. Abundance of people here look upon them as birds of
ill omen, and are very melancholy if one lights on their house or near their
door, and sets up its cry (as they will sometimes upon the very threshold); for
they verily believe one of the family will die very soon after Catesby, App. 16.
.

337. LONG-WINGED.
Whip poor Will, or lesser Goatsucker, Edw. 63. -- Catesby, App. 16. -- Latham,
ii. 595. Caprimulgus minor Americanus, Lin. Syst. 346. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
G. With the head and body dusky, mottled with white and pale rust-color:
primaries black, marked near the middle with a white bar: under the throat is a
white crescent, with the ends pointing upwards; breast barred with dirty white
and dusky: tail black, marked regularly on each web with spots, mottled with
black and white: near the ends of each feather is a large white spot, the ends
quite black: wings, when closed, extend beyond the end of the tail. LENGTH nine
inches and a half: EXTENT about twenty-three.

PLACE.
Inhabits the same provinces with the former, and seems to have the same manners
and notes; for, according to Doctor Garden, each are known in different places,
by the name of Whip poor Will. It is found as far north as Henly House, a
settlement for about a hundred miles up Albany river in Hudson's Bay, where it
is called the Muskets Hawk.

(...) Swallow No. 335. (...)


A. EUROPEAN. Caprimulgus Europeus. Nattskafwa. Quallknarran, Faun. Suec. No
274. -- Latham, ii. 593. L'Engoulevent, De Buffon, vi. 512. -- Br. Zool. i. No
-- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
G. With head and back elegantly streaked with narrow lines of black and gray,
and with a few long oblong strokes of black and rust: belly barred with black
and gray: wings black; each web finely marked with rusty spots: near the ends
of the three first primaries, a large oval white spot: tail dusky, with regular
spots, mottled with rust and black; ends of the two first feathers white.
FEMALE wants the spots on the wings and tail.

It is found in Europe as far north as Sondmor, PLACE.
and is common all over Sibiria and Kamtschatka; and lives not only in forests,
IN KAMTSCHATKA.
but in open countries, where it finds rocks or high banks for shelter.

DIV. II. WATER FOWLS. SECT. I. CLOVEN-FOOTED.
DIV. II. Water-Fowls.
SECT. I. CLOVEN-FOOTED.
XXXIII. SPOON-BILL. Genesis Birds, LIX.
338. ROSEATE.
Ajaja, Marcgrave, 204. -- Will. Orn. -- Raii Av. -- Platalea ajaja, Lin. Sjst.
231. -- Latham, iii. La Spatule d'Amerique, De Buffon, vii. 456. -- Pl. Enl.
165. -- Du Pratz, ii. 84.
SP. B. With the fore part of the head and throat naked and whitish: the whole
plumage white, tinged with a beautiful rose-color, deepest about the wings and
coverts of the tail, where it nearly approaches crimson. SIZE of a Goose. Is an
eatable fowl. Is conversant in Louisiana, PLACE.
about the shores and rivers; and lives on water-insects and small fish. Is
found also in Mexico Fernandez, 49.
, Guiana Barrere, 125.
, Brasil, and in Jamaica, and the greater Antilles. The plumage acquires its
beauty in proportion to the age of the bird The same.
; so probably is whitish when young. It soon grows tame.

A. SPOON-BILL, Br. Zool. ii. App. No ix. -- La Spatule, De Buffon, vii. 448.
tab. xxiv. -- Pl. Enl. 405. -- Latham, iii. Platalea Leucorodia, Pelekan, Faun.
Suec. No 160. -- LEV. MUS.
SP. B. Wholly white, with a pendent crest: legs and bill black: at the angles
of the bill, on each cheek, a bright orange spot. From the end of the bill to
end of the claws, forty inches. EXTENT fifty-two.

Inhabits the Feroe isles Worm. Mus. 310.
; PLACE.
and on the continent is sometimes found in summer as high as West Bothnia and
Lapland Faun. Suec. No 160.
. Inhabits also the temperate parts of Russia and Sibiria, both in flocks and
solitary, frequenting the vast lakes of the country. Is seen even beyond lake
Baikal. Winters in the south. Builds its nest on high trees, and is very
clamorous in the breeding season. Lays four eggs. Feeds on fish, which it is
said to take from the diving tribe of birds, frightening them from their prey
by clattering its bill Worm. Mus. 310.
. It devours frogs and snakes; and will even feed on vegetables.

XXXIV. HERON. Genesis Birds, LXIII.
339. HOOPING CRANE.
Hooping Crane, Catesby, i. 75. -- Edw. 132. -- Latham, iii. Ardea Americana,
Lin. Syst. 234. La Grue blanch, De Buffon, vii. 308. -- Pl. Enl. 889.
H. With a yellowish brown bill, serrated near the end: crown covered with a
red skin, thinly beset with black bristles: from the bill, beneath each eye,
extends a similar stripe: on the hind part of the head a triangular black spot:
quil feathers, and a few of the greater coverts, black: secondaries, and the
whole plumage, of a pure white: webs of the tertials elegantly loose and
unconnected, and, falling over the primaries, almost conceal them: legs and
feet black and scaly. LENGTH from the bill to the tip of the claws five feet
seven inches.

PLACE.
Inhabits all parts of North America, from Florida to Hudson's Bay. Is
migratory: appears early in the spring about the Alatamaha, and other rivers
near St. Augustine, and then quits the country in great numbers, and flies
north in order to breed in security. They appear in summer in Hudson's Bay, and
return southward with their young on approach of winter. They make a remarkable
hooping noise: this makes me imagine these to have been the birds, whose clamor
Captain Philip Amidas (the first Englishman who ever set foot on North America)
so graphically describes, on his landing on the isle of Wokokou, off the coast
of North Carolina: "WHEN," says he, such a flock of Cranes (the most part
white) arose under us, with such a cry, redoubled by many echoes, as if an
army of men had showted all together. This was in the month of July Smith's
Hist. Virgin. etc. 2.
; which proves, that in those early days this species bred in the then desert
parts of the southern provinces, till driven away by population, as was the
case with the common Crane in England; which abounded in our undrained fens,
till cultivation forced them entirely to quit our kingdom.

340. BROWN CRANE.
Brown and ash-colored Crane, Edw. 133. -- Grus Canadensis, Lin. Syst. 234. --
Toquil Coyotl, Fernandez, 44 -- Latham, iii. La Grue brune, De Buffon, vii.
310. -- LEV. MUS.
H. With a dusky bill, near four inches long: crown red and naked: cheeks and
throat white: hind part of the head and whole neck cinereous; rest of the
plumage of the same color, tinged with pale rust: primaries black, shafts
white; the row of feathers incumbent on them light ash: tertials brown with
elegant loose webs, incurvated, and extending beyond the ends of the primaries:
tail cinereous: legs black. LENGTH three feet three. EXTENT three, SIZE.
five. WEIGHT seven pounds and a half.

This species is found in Mexico; PLACE.
but migrates into the north to breed. About the middle of February they are
seen in their flight over the Jersies, steering northerly; and in the spring
some make a short halt there Kalm, ii. 72.
. They arrive in May about Severn river in Hudson's Bay. Frequent lakes and
ponds. Feed on fish and insects. Hatch two young; and retire southward in
autumn Ph. Trans. lxii. 409.
. I must observe, that they formerly made a halt in the Hurons country, at the
season in which the Indians set their maiz; and again on their return from the
north, when the harvest was ready, in order to feed on the grain. The Indians,
at those times, were used to shoot them with arrows headed with stone; for
Theodat As quoted by De Buffon.
, my authority, made his remarks in that country in the beginning of the last
century.

341. GREAT.
Largest crested Heron, Catesby, App. 10. -- Ardea Herodias, Lin. Syst. Le
grand Heron d'Amerique, De Buffon, vii. 385. -- Latham, iii.
H. With a bill eight inches long: on the hind part of the neck a long crest of
slender herring-bone feathers, of a brown color, to be erected at pleasure: the
head, neck, and whole of the body, brown, palest on the under part, and
spotted: primaries black: legs brown. HEIGHT, when erect, four feet and a half.

PLACE.
Inhabits Virginia. Feeds on fish, frogs, and lizards.

342. RED-SHOULDERED.
Ash-colored Heron, Edw. 135. -- Ardea Hudsonias, Lin. Syst. 238. -- Latham,
iii. Le Heron de la Baie d'Hudson, De Buffon, vii. 386. -- LEV. MUS.
H. With a white forehead: black crest: hind part of the neck of a reddish
brown; fore part white, spotted with black: feathers on the breast long and
narrow: belly black and white, bounded with black: sides gray: primaries and
tail dusky: coverts and secondaries cinereous: shoulders and thighs of an
orange red: bill yellowish: legs dusky. In SIZE superior to the English Heron.

PLACE.
Inhabits Hudson's Bay, frequenting, during summer, the inland lakes.

FEMALE?
Head smooth, deep cinereous: neck paler: throat white: breast and belly white,
striped downwards with black: back, tail, and coverts of wings, light ash:
primaries black: shoulders and thighs of a dirty yellow: legs dusky.

PLACE.
Sent to Mrs. Blackburn from New York, under the name of the Hen Heron. It
probably is the female of the last. Its LENGTH was three feet to the tail: to
the end of the toes four feet nine.

343. COMMOM HERON.
Br. Zool. ii. No 173 -- Ardea cinerea. Hagen, Faun. Suec. No 165. -- Latham,
iii. Le Heron commun, De Buffon, vii. 34. -- Pl. Enl. 787. 755. -- LEV. MUS. --
BL. MUS.
H. With a white crown: long pendent black crest: white neck, streaked before
with black: coverts of the wings, scapulars, and tail, gray: belly white:
primaries dusky. Crest on the FEMALE very short. LENGTH three feet three.

PLACE.
Is frequent in Carolina Catesby, App. xxxvi. -- Lawson, Hist. Carol. 148.
; and I think a specimen was sent to Mrs. Blackburn from New York, where they
breed in flocks as they do in England. If I mistake not the kind, they come to
New York in May, and retire in October. They are found in Russia, and Sibiria,
but not very far north. Crantz says, that they have been seen in the south of
Greenland; but were never observed by Fabricius Faun. Greenl. 106.
: but it certainly inhabits Romsdal and Nordmer Leems, 242.
, in the severe climate of the diocese of Drontheim.

It may be here remarked, that this, and the whole tribe of what Linnaeus calls
Grallae, or the Cloven-footed Water Fowl, quit Sweden; and of course the more
northern countries, at approach of winter; nor is a single species seen till
the return of spring Amoen. Acad. iv. 588.
.

344. GREAT WHITE.
White Heron, Br. Zool. i. No 175. -- Ardea Alba, Lin. Syst. 239. -- Faun.
Suec. No 166. -- Latham, iii. Le Heron blanc, De Buffon, vii. 365. -- Pl. Enl.
886. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
H. With a very slender yellow bill: plumage entirely of a milk white: legs
black. LENGTH to the toes four feet and a half.

Inhabits America, from Jamaica and Mexico, PLACE.
to New England. It migrates, being seen in New York from June to October only.
Is found, but rarely, in Sweden. Inhabits the Russian dominions, about the
Caspian and Black Seas, the lakes of Great Tartary, and the river Irtish, and
sometimes extends north as high as lat. 53. Captain Cook observed this species
in New Zealand Voy. toward S. Pole, i. 87.
.

345. LITTLE WHITE.
Garzetta, Aldr. Av. lib. iii. 161. -- Will. Orn. 280. -- Raii Syn. Av. 99. --
Catesby, i. 77. -- Latham, iii. La Garzette blanch, De Buffon, vii. 371. --
LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
H. With the bill and legs black: whole plumage white: on the head a short
crest. LENGTH two feet.

This species is found in New York. PLACE.
Is met with again in New Zealand and Otaheite.

The little white Carolina Heron of Catesby, with a red bill and green legs,
seems only a variety of this.

346. GREAT EGRET.
La grande Aigrette, De Buffon, vii. 377. -- Pl. Enl. 925. -- Latham, iii.
H. With a long slender crest: bill and legs black: whole plumage of a silvery
whiteness: the feathers on the back inexpressibly elegant, long, silky, narrow,
and with unwebbed plumes, hanging over the wings and tail; the same kind are
pendent from the breast. Of double the SIZE of the European species. LENGTH of
which, from bill to the tip of the tail, is two feet Br. Zool. ii. App. No vii.
.

PLACE.
Inhabits Louisiana and Guiana. Does not frequent the shores; but the vast
morasses and overflown tracts, where it nestles on the little isles formed by
the inundations. The Guiritinga of the Brasilians Marcgrave, 209.
is probably the same species. It extends to the Falkland isles; for
Bougainville observed these Egrets, which he first thought were common Herons.
They fed toward night, and made a barking noise Voy. round the World, Engl.
ed. 67.
.

The feathers of the Great Egret would prove a valuable article of commerce,
being very much sought after for the ornamental part of dress.

347. LITTLE EGRET.
Br. Zool. ii. App. No vii. -- Ardea Garzetta, Lin. Syst. 237. -- Latham, iii.
L'Aigrette, De Buffon, vii. 372. tab. xx. -- Pl. Enl. 901. -- LEV. MUS.
H. With yellow irides: a crest with some short and two long pendent feathers:
whole plumage of a delicate silvery white: feathers on the breast and scapulars
very delicate, loose, and unwebbed: legs a blackish green. WEIGHT about one
pound. LENGTH to the tip of the tail two feet.

Is frequent in New York and Long Island: PLACE.
about the Black and Caspian seas; but seldom farther north. Are found in
France, and the south of Europe. Migrates into Austria in spring and autumn
Kram. Austr. 346.
. Is frequent in Senegal, Madagascar, Isle de Bourbon, and Siam De Buffon, Ois.
vii. 375. 376.
.

348. REDDISH EGRET.
L'Aigrette rousse, De Buffon, vii. 378. -- Pl. Enl. 902. -- Latham iii.
H. With the body of a blackish gray: the silky long feathers of the neck and
back of a rusty red. LENGTH about two feet.

Inhabits Louisiana. PLACE.


349. GREEN.
Small Bittern, Catesby, i. 80. -- Ardea virescens, Lin. Syst. 238. -- Latham,
iii. Le Crabier vert, De Buffon, vii. 404. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
H. With a green head, and large green crest: bill dusky above, yellow beneath:
throat white: neck a bright bay, streaked before with white: coverts of the
wings dusky green, edged with white: tail and primaries dusky: feathers on the
back cinereous, long, narrow, and silky: belly of a cinereous red: legs
yellowish. The colors of the FEMALE less brilliant: wings spotted with
rust-color. It wants the long silky feathers. LENGTH eighteen inches.

Inhabits from New York to South Carolina. Usually sits, PLACE.
with its long neck contracted, on trees hanging over rivers. Feeds on small
fish, frogs, and crabs. From the last, the French call several of these Herons
Crabiers.

They are supposed to migrate, even from Carolina, at approach of winter.

350. LOUISIANE.
Le Crabier roux a tete and queue vertes, De Buffon, vii. 407. -- Pl. Enl. 909.
-- Latham, iii.
H. With the crown and tail of a dull green: the neck and belly red, tinged
with brown: coverts of the wings dusky green, edged with tawny: the back
covered with long slender feathers, faintly dashed with purple.

PLACE.
Inhabits Louisiana.

351. BLUE.
Blue Bittern, Catesby, i. 76. -- Le Crabier bleu, De Buffon, vii. 398. --
Ardea Caerulea, Lin. Syst. 238. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
H. With a blue bill, dusky at the point: head and neck of a changeable purple;
the first adorned with a beautiful crest of long slender feathers: the
remainder of the plumage entirely of a fine deep blue: from the breast depend
several long feathers: the back is covered with others a foot in length,
hanging four inches beyond the tail; they are silky, and of the same fine
texture with those of the crest: the legs are green. WEIGHT fifteen ounces.

PLACE.
It appears, but not in numbers, in Carolina, and that only in the spring of the
year. Its winter residence seems to be Jamaica Sloane's Hist. Jamaica, ii. 315.
.

352. YELLOW-CROWNED.
Crested Bittern, Catesby, i. 79 -- Ardea Violacea, Lin. Syst. 238. -- Latham,
iii. Le Crabier gris de fer, De Buffon, vii. 399.
H. With a black, strong, and thick bill: crown of a pale yellow: from the hind
part issue three or four long slender white feathers, erigible at pleasure;
some are six inches long: a broad white stripe runs from the corner of the
lower mandible as far as the ears: the rest of the cheeks and head are of a
blueish black: head, breast, belly, and coverts of wings, of a dusky blue: the
primaries brown, tinged with blue: the back striped with black, mixed with
white: from the upper part arise tufts of elegant slender silky feathers,
falling beyond the tail: the legs and feet yellow. WEIGHT one pound and a half.

This species appears in Carolina in the rainy seasons: PLACE.
but their native places are the Bahama islands, where they breed in amazing
numbers, amidst the bushes in the rocks. They are called by the islanders
Crab-catchers, as they chiefly live on those crustaceous animals. They are of
great use to the inhabitants; who take the young birds before they can fly, and
find them delicious eating. They swarm so on some of the rocky isles, that two
men, in a few hours, will fill a small boat with them, taking them when perched
on the rocks or bushes; for they will make no attempt to escape,
notwithstanding they are full grown.

353. ASH-COLORED.
H. With a black strong bill: crown dusky: cheeks and chin whitish: neck of a
pale cinereous brown, streaked before with white: back, wings, and tail,
cinereous, clouded round each feather with dusky: feathers on the sides of the
back long and broad, hanging over the ends of the wings: belly white: legs
yellowish. LENGTH two feet one inch.

Inhabits New York. Arrives there in May: breeds, PLACE.
and leaves the country in October. -- BL. MUS. -- Latham, iii.

354. STREAKED.
H. With a bill about two inches long: crown, back, and tail, of an uniform
dusky color: hind part of the neck and cheeks rusty and black: chin and throat
white: fore part of the neck marked with streaks of white and black: coverts of
the wings, with streaks of black and yellowish white: ridge of the wing white:
primaries dusky. -- LEV. MUS. -- Latham, iii.

Another, in the same Museum and same case (probably differing only in sex)
has, from the lower mandible, a white line bounding the lower part of each
cheek: the greater coverts of the wings and scapulars dusky, each feather tipped
with white. In other respects it agrees with the former: the legs of each are
greenish: the form of their bodies slender and elegant. LENGTH, from bill to
the tip of the tail, about seventeen inches.

PLACE.
Sent to Sir Ashton Lever from North America.

355. GARDENIAN.
Le Pouacre de Cayenne? Pl. Enl. 939. -- Latham, iii.
H. With a dusky strong bill: head, neck, breast, and belly, whitish, elegantly
streaked downwards with short fine lines of black; the crown and hind part the
darkest: upper part of the back streaked with white; the lower dusky and plain:
the whole wing of the same color: the lesser coverts marked with small
yellowish spots; the greater coverts marked with a white spot at the end of
each feather, forming, across the wings, two rows: the primaries edged with
dull white; the ends tipped with the same: tail dusky: legs of a deep dirty
yellow. LENGTH about twenty-two inches.

PLACE.
Doctor GARDEN, of South Carolina, favored me with this bird. From the
characteristic lines of white spots in the wings, I do not doubt but that the
Brown Bittern of Catesby, i. 78, is the same Also l'Etoile of De Buffon, vii.
428.
with this: notwithstanding, it would hardly be known, had he not preserved the
spots in his very bad figure of it. He says it frequents ponds and rivers in
the interior part of the country remote from the sea. -- LEV. MUS.

356. NIGHT.
Ardea Nycticorax, Lin. Syst. 135. -- Will. Orn. 279. -- Latham, iii. Le
Bihoreau. Le B. de Cayenne, De Buffon, vii. 435. 439. tab. xxii. -- Pl. Enl.
758. 759. 899. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
H. With a black bill, crown, back, and scapulars; the last broad and long:
forehead, cheeks, neck, and under side of the body, white: wings and tail of a
very pale ash-color: the hind part of the head is most specifically
distinguished by three very slender white feathers, five inches long, forming a
pendent crest: legs of a yellowish green. The LENGTH, to the tip of the tail,
one foot seven inches.

Inhabits New York; and a variety is found as low as Cayenne. PLACE.
Is common to Europe. Is frequent in the southern parts of the Russian
dominions; but does not extend farther than lat. 53. It must not at this time
be sought for in the wood near Sevenhuys in Holland, so noted in the days of
Mr. Willughby for the vast rendezvous of Shags, Herons, Spoon-bills, and these
birds, besides Ravens, Woodpigeons, and Turtles Ray's Travels, i. 33.
, it being now cut down. When Mr. Willughby visited the place it was rented,
for the birds and grass, for three thousand gilders a year.

This bird is not the Nycticorax of the Ancients; which was some rapacious
fowl, probably of the Owl kind. It is the Nacht-rab, or Night-Raven of the
Germans; so called from its nocturnal cry, resembling the straining of a person
to vomit.

357. BITTERN.
Br. Zool. ii. No 174. -- Ardea Stellaris. Rordrum, Faun. Suec. No 164. --
Latham, iii. Bittern from Hudson's Bay, Edw. 136. -- Le Butor, De Buffon, vii.
411. 430. -- Pl. Enl. 789. -- LEV. MUS -- BL. MUS.
H. With the upper mandible dusky; lower yellow: feathers on the crown black
and long; on the cheeks tawny; on the throat white: hind part of the neck
brownish red; fore part white, beautifully marked with short stripes of red,
bounded on each side with one of black: feathers on the breast very long: the
belly of the colors of the fore part of the neck: back, coverts of wings, and
the tail, are ferruginous, traversed with dusky lines: primaries black: legs
yellowish green. Rather inferior in SIZE to the European Bittern; but so like,
as not to merit separation.

PLACE.
It inhabits from Hudson's Bay to Carolina Lawson, 148.
. In the former, it appears the latter end of May: lives among swamps and
willows: lays two eggs. Like the European species, is very indolent; and, when
disturbed, takes but a short flight Ph. Trans. lxii. 410.
.

That of the old continent is found in Russia; and, in Asia, in Sibiria, as far
north as the river Lena, and is continued considerably to the north. Inhabits
Sweden Faun. Suec. No 164.
; but, with all the other Herons, disappears at approach of winter Amoen. Acad.
iv. 588.
.

The second species of Bittern, mentioned by Lawson, p. 148. as being lesser
than the former, with a great topping, of a deep brown color, and a yellowish
white throat and breast, is at present unknown to us.

358. RUSTY-CROWNED.
H. With yellow irides: very small crest: the bill seven inches long, slender,
and of the same color with the former: forehead dusky: throat white: crest and
hind part of the neck of a deep ferruginous color: the fore part of the neck
marked with four rows of black spots: the feathers toward the breast long: a
dark line passes from the breast upwards to the back of the neck: the upper
part of the body, and coverts of the wings, deep ferruginous, marked with a few
large black spots: primaries dusky: tail short, and of a lead color: belly and
breast of a dirty white, striped with black: legs of a dirty yellow. The crest
on the head is very small, and the feathers lie universally smooth. SIZE of the
European Bittern.

PLACE.
Inhabits North America; the province unknown. Described from a live bird at
Amsterdam. -- LEV. MUS? -- Latham, iii.

359. LITTLE.
Little Bittern, Br. Zool. ii. App. No x. tab. viii. -- Pl. Enl. 323. --
Latham, iii. Ardea Minuta, Lin. Syst. 240. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
H. With a smooth head: crown black: hind part of the neck and cheeks
ferruginous: coverts on the ridge of the wing, and ends of the greater, of a
bright bay; the rest of the coverts of a very pale clay color: primaries and
secondaries dusky, with ferruginous tips: lower side of the neck and belly of a
yellowish white: breast crossed with a band of black: tail black: legs of a
dusky green. LENGTH, to the end of the tail, fifteen inches. The body narrow:
neck very long.

Inhabits from New York to South Carolina, PLACE.
and many parts of Europe. Extends to, and perhaps winters in Jamaica. Its eggs
are of a seagreen color.

A. COMMON CRANE, Br. Zool. ii. App. No vi. -- Ardea Grus, Trana, Faun. Suec.
No 161. -- Latham, iii. -- La Grue, De Buffon, vii. 286. tab. xiv. -- Pl. Enl.
769. -- LEV. MUS.
H. With a bald crown: fore part of the neck black: primaries black: a large
tuft of elegant unwebbed curling feathers springing from one pinion of each
wing: those, and all the rest of the plumage, cinereous. LENGTH six feet.
WEIGHT about ten pounds.

Cranes arrive in Sweden in great flocks in the spring season; pair, PLACE.
and disperse over the whole country; and usually resort to breed to the very
same places which they had used for many years past Amoen, Acad. iv. 588.
. No augural attention is paid to them there; yet Hesiod directs the Grecian
farmer to think of ploughing whenever he hears the annual clamor of the Cranes
in the clouds (...). II. v. 66.
.

PLACE.
Inhabits all Russia and Sibiria, even as far east as the river Anadyr; and
migrates even to the Arctic circle. None seen in Kamtschatka, except on the
very southern promontory, which they probably make a resting place, on their
re-migration; Kamtschatka being destitute of serpents and frogs, on which they
feed in countries where corn is unknown. They lay two blueish eggs on the rushy
ground: the young are hatched late; and as soon as they can fly attend their
parents in their southern migration: Poturae te, Nile, GRUES. For Egypt is
generally supposed to be the great winter quarters of these birds. Previous to
their retreat, they assemble in amazing numbers, choose their leader, soar to a
considerable height, and then, with continued clamor, proceed to their designed
place. Milton, when he touches on this wonderful instinct of nature, describes
their progress with equal truth and elegance.

Part loosely wing the region: part more wise,
In common, ranged in figure () wedge their way,
Intelligent of seasons, and set forth
Their aerie caravan, high over seas
Flying, and over lands with mutual wing
Easing their flight. So steers the prudent CRANE
Her annual voyage, borne on winds;
The air flotes as they pass, fanned with unnumber'd plumes.
B. SIBIRIAN CRANE. Grus Leucogeranos, Pallas Itin. ii. 714. -- Latham, iii.
H. With a red bill like the former, serrated near the end: face naked beyond
the eyes: coverts and primaries black: all the rest of the bird of a snowy
whiteness: legs red. Its HEIGHT is four feet and a half.

Inhabits the vast morasses of Sibiria, PLACE.
and every part where lakes abound; and penetrates far north into the boggy
forests about the Ischim, Irtish, and Oby. Makes its nest among the
inaccessible reeds, with layers of plants. Lays two great gray eggs, streaked
with numerous dusky lines. Makes a clamorous noise, and that frequently,
especially during its flight. Feeds on small fish, frogs, and lizards. Winters
usually about the Caspian sea. Observed to migrate in spring northward along
the course of the Wolga, always in pairs Extracts, ii. 146.
.

C. WHITE STORK. Ardea Ciconia. Storck, Faun. Suec. No 162. -- La Cigogne, De
Buffon, vii. 253. -- Pl. Enl. 866. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
H. With red bill and legs: primaries black: the rest of the plumage white:
skin of the color of blood. Larger than the common Heron.

Inhabits most parts of Europe, except England. PLACE.
In the west of Russia, is not found beyond 50 degrees north, nor to the east
of Moscow. It appears in Sweden in April; retires in August Amoen. Acad. iv.
588.
: does not reach Norway, unless tempest-driven.

This species is semi-domestic: haunts towns and cities; and in many places
stalks unconcerned about the streets, in search of offals and other food.
Removes the noxious filth, and clears the fields of serpents and reptiles. They
are, on that account, protected in Holland; held in high veneration by the
Mahomedans; and so greatly respected were they in old times by the Thessalians,
that to kill one of these birds was a crime expiable only by death Pliny, lib.
x. c. 23.
.

The Storks observe great exactness in the time of their autumnal departure
from Europe to more favorable climates. They pass a second summer in Egypt, and
the marshes of Barbary Shaw's Trav. 428.
: in the first they pair, and lay again, and educate a second brood Belon Oys.
201.
. Before each of their migrations they rendezvous in amazing numbers; are for a
while much in motion among themselves; and after making several short flights,
as if to try their wings, all of a sudden take flight with great silence, and
with such speed, as in a moment to attain so great a height as to be
instantaneously out of sight. The beautiful and faithful description which the
NATURALIST'S POET THOMSON.
gives of this annual event, ought not by any means to be omitted.

Where the Rhine loses his majestic force
In Belgian plains, won from the raging deep
By diligence amazing, and the strong
Unconquerable hand of Liberty,
THE STORK-ASSEMBLY meets; for many a day
Consulting deep and various, ere they take
Their arduous voyage through the liquid sky.
And now, their route designed, their leaders chose,
Their tribes adjusted, cleaned their vigorous wings;
And many a circle, many a short essay,
Wheeled round and round, in congregation full
The figured flight ascends, and riding high
The aerial billows, mixes with the clouds.
D. BLACK STORK. Ardea nigra. Odenswala, Faun. Suec. No 163. -- Latham, iii. La
Cigogne noire, De Buffon, vii. 271. -- Pl. Enl. 399.
H. With the bill, legs, and skin, red: head, neck, body, and wings, black,
glossed with blue: breast and belly white. About the SIZE of the former.

Inhabits many parts of Europe. PLACE.
It is not uncommon in the temperate parts of Russia and Sibiria, as far as the
Lena, where lakes and morasses abound. Migrates to warmer countries in autumn.
Is a solitary species. Preys on fish, which it not only wades for, but, after
hovering over the waters, will suddenly plunge on its prey. It also eats
beetles and other insects. Perches on trees: and builds its nest in the depths
of forests.

These birds pass over Sweden in the spring in vast flocks, flying toward the
extreme north. They sometimes rest in the moors at night; but it is reckoned a
wonder, if any one is found to make its nest in the country. They return
southward in autumn; but, in both their passages, soar so high as to appear
small as sparrows Amoen. Acad. iv. 589.
.

XXXV. IBIS. Genesis Birds, LXV.
360. WOOD.
Wood Pelecan, Catesby, i. 81. -- Latham, iii. Curicaca, Marcgrave, 191. -- De
Buffon, vii. 276. -- Pl. Enl. 868. -- Brisson, v. 335. Tantalus Loculator, Lin.
Syst. 240.
I. With a bill near ten inches long; near seven in girth at the base; strait
till near the end, where it bends downwards: fore part of the head and face
covered with a bare dusky blue skin: hind part of the head, and the whole neck,
of a pale yellowish brown: under the chin is a pouch capable of containing half
a pint: the greater primaries, and some of the greater coverts, are black
glossed with green; the rest of the wing, back, and belly, white: tail square,
short, and black: legs very long, black, and semi-palmated. The body of the
SIZE of a Goose.

PLACE.
Appears in Carolina, at the latter end of summer, during the great rains, when
they frequent the overflown savannas in vast flocks; but retire in November.
They perch erect on tall cypress and other trees, and rest their monstrous
bills on their breasts for their greater ease. They are very stupid and void of
fear, and easily shot. Fly slowly. Their food is herbs, fruits and seeds, fish,
and water insects; notwithstanding which they are excellent eating.

The residence of these birds, the rest of the year, is Brasil, Guiana Des
Marchais, iii. 326.
, and perhaps other parts of South America.

361. SCARLET.
Guara, Marcgrave, 203. -- De Buffon, vii. 35. -- Pl. Enl. 81. Red Curlew,
Catesby, i. 84. -- Latham, iii. Tantalus Ruber, Lin. Syst. 241. -- LEV. MUS. --
BL. MUS.
I. With a slender incurvated bill, and naked skin on the face, both of a pale
red color: the whole plumage of the richest scarlet, only the ends of the wings
are black: legs pale red. In SIZE somewhat larger than the English CURLEW.

Frequent the coasts of the Bahama islands. PLACE.
Are common in East Florida: in Georgia are frequent in the months of July and
August, after which they retire southward. A few are seen in the south of
Carolina, and the parts of America within the tropics, and very seldom to the
north. These birds perch, like the former, upon trees, and make a most
resplendent appearance. They lay their eggs in the tall grass. When first
hatched, the young are of a dusky color: their first change is to ash-color;
then to white; and, in their second year, to columbine; and with age acquire
their brilliant red. In Guiana it is often domesticated, so as never to leave
the poultry yard. It shows great courage in attacking the fowls, and will even
oppose itself to the cat. The flesh is esteemed excellent. Its rich plumage is
used by the Brasilians for various ornaments.

362. BROWN.
Brown Curlew, Catesby, i. 83. -- De Buffon, vii. 42. -- Latham, iii. Tantalus
Fuscus, Lin. Syst. 242.
I. With the bill six inches and a half long, resembling the former: bill,
face, and legs, red: neck, upper part of the back, and tail, of a cinereous
brown: lower part of the back, breast, and belly, white.

363. WHITE.
White Curlew, Catesby, i. 82. -- De Buffon, vii. 41. -- Pl. Enl. 915. --
Latham, iii. Tantalus Albus, Lin. Syst. 242.
I. With the face, bill, and legs, like the former: the whole plumage of a
snowy whiteness, except the ends of the four first primaries, which are green.
The flesh and fat is of saffron-color.

These birds arrive in South Carolina, PLACE.
with the Wood Ibis and the Brown Curlew, in great numbers, in September, and
frequent the low watery tracts: continue there about six weeks, and then retire
south to breed. This species goes away with egg. There was a suspicion, that
the BROWN and the WHITE differed only in sex; but experiment proved the
contrary. The white kind are twenty times more numerous than the others; the
flesh of the latter also differs, being of a dark color.

All these species frequent the sides of rivers, and feed on small fish,
crustaceous animals, and insects.

A. BAY IBIS. Tantalus Falcinellus, Lin. Syst. 241. -- Muller, No 178. --
Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
I. With a black face: violet-colored wings and tail: blue legs.

Inserted here on the authority of Mr. Muller; but this species has hitherto
been known only to southern Europe, and about the Caspian and Black Seas.

XXXVI. CURLEW. Genesis Birds, LXVI.
364. ESKIMAUX.
Br. Zool. ii. No 177. -- Eskimaux Curlew, Faun. Am. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV.
MUS.
C. With a dusky bill, near three inches long: crown of a deep brown, divided
lengthways by a white stripe: cheeks, neck, and breast, of a very pale brown,
marked with small dusky streaks, pointing down the back: scapulars and coverts
spotted with black and pale reddish brown: primaries dusky; shafts white; inner
webs marked with red oval spots: tail barred with black and light brown: legs
blue. Larger than the English WHIMBREL, of which it is a variety; and differs
only in having its back brown instead of white.

Were seen in flocks innumerable, on the hills about Chateaux Bay, PLACE.
on the Labrador coast, from August the 9th to September 6th, when they all
disappeared, being on the way from their northern breeding-place. They kept on
the open grounds, fed on the empetrum nigrum, and were very fat and delicious.
They arrive in Hudson's Bay in April or the beginning of May: pair and breed to
the north of Albany Fort, among the woods: return in August to the marshes; and
all disappear in September Ph. Trans. lxii. 411. where it is called the
Eskimaux Curlew.
.

A. CURLEW, Br. Zool. ii. No 176. -- Scolopax arquata, Faun. Suec. No 168. --
Latham, iii. Le Courlis, De Buffon, viii. 19. -- Pl. Enl. 818. -- LEV. MUS. --
BL. MUS.
C. With an incurvated bill, seven inches long: head, and upper part of the
wings, pale brown, spotted with black: back white: tail white, barred with
black: legs blueish. WEIGHT from twenty-two to thirty-seven ounces.

PLACE.
Inhabits Europe, as high as Lapmark Leems, 249.
and Iceland Brunnich, p. 49.
; and is found on the vast plains of Russia and Sibiria, quite to Kamtschatka.

B. WHIMBREL, Br. Zool. ii. No 177. -- Scolopax Phaeopus. Windspole. Spof.
Faun. Suec. No 169. -- Latham, iii. Le Courlieu, ou petit Courlis, De Buffon,
viii. 27. -- Pl. Enl. 842. -- LEV. MUS.
C. With a bill near three inches long: head marked lengthways by a whitish
line, bounded on each side by one of black: neck, coverts of wings, and upper
part of the back, pale brown, spotted with black: lower part of the back and
the belly white: tail light brown, barred with black: legs blueish gray. WEIGHT
twelve ounces.

PLACE.
Inhabits the same places with the former.

Eskimaux Curlew No. 364. Little Woodcock No ^


XXXVII. SNIPE. Genesis Birds, LXVII.
365. LITTLE WOODCOCK.
SN. With the upper mandible of the bill two inches and a half long; the lower
much shorter: forehead cinereous; hind part black, with four transverse
yellowish bars: from bill to the eye a dusky line: chin white: under side of
the neck, breast, belly, and thighs, of a dull yellow, palest on the belly:
hind part of the neck black, edged with yellowish red: back, and lesser
coverts, of the same colors; rest of the coverts marked with zigzags of black
and dull red: primaries dusky: inner coverts rust-colored: tail black, tipped
with brown: legs short, pale brown. LENGTH, from tip of the bill to the end of
the tail, eleven inches and a half.

This species has entirely the form of the European Woodcock; PLACE.
but differs in size and color. They appear in the province of New York in the
latter end of April, or beginning of May. They lay, the latter end of the last
month or beginning of June, from eight to ten eggs? and usually in swampy
places. Mr. Lawson P. 44.
found them in Carolina in September. He prefers them, in point of delicacy, to
the European kind. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.

366. COMMON SNIPE.
Br. Zool. ii. No 187. -- Scolopax gallinago, Horsgjok, Faun. Suec. No 173. --
Latham, iii. La Becassine, De Buffon, vii. 483. -- Pl. Enl. 883. -- LEV. MUS.
-- BL. MUS.
SN. With head divided lengthways with two black lines, and three of reddish
brown: throat white: neck mottled with brown and testaceous: ridge of the wing
dusky: greater coverts and primaries dusky, tipped with white: belly white: lower
half of the tail black; upper orange, with two dusky stripes: toes divided to
the origin. The American is lesser than the British.

PLACE.
Inhabits Europe as far as Iceland: extends even to Greenland Faun. Greenl. No
71.
; and common in all parts of Russia and Sibiria. Is found all over North
America, and swarms in South Carolina. The lines on the head are less distinct
in the American kind: the bill is also shorter than that of the English.

367. JACK.
Br. Zool. ii. No 189. -- Petite Becassine, ou le Sourde, De Buffon, vii. 490.
-- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
SN. With crown of the head black, tinged with rust: a yellow stroke over each
eye: neck mottled with white, brown, and testaceous: rump of a glossy purplish
blue: tail brown, edged with tawny. WEIGHT under two ounces.

PLACE.
These two inhabit Europe, North America, and Sibiria.

368. RED-BREASTED SNIPE.
SN. With a bill like the common kind, two inches one-eighth long: head, neck,
and scapulars, varied with black, ash-color, and red: under side of the neck
and breast ferruginous, thinly spotted with black: coverts and secondaries dark
cinereous; the last tipped with white: back and rump white, concealed by the
scapulars: tail barred with dusky and white: legs dark green: middle and
outmost toe connected by a small web. SIZE of the English Snipe.

PLACE.
Inhabits the coast of New York. -- Latham, iii. -- BL. MUS.

369. BROWN.
SN. With a bill like the former: from that to each eye a white bar: head,
neck, and scapulars, of a fine uniform cinereous brown, in a very few places
marked with black: coverts and primaries dark brown; shaft of the first primary
white: secondaries light brown, edged with white: back white: rump and tail
barred with black and white: breast mottled with brown and white: belly white:
legs and toes like the former. Its SIZE the same. -- BL. MUS.

Inhabits the same place. PLACE.


370. NODDING.
SN. With the bill very slender, long, and black: the crown, and upper part of
the back, dusky, streaked with red: cheeks cinereous, streaked with black: neck
and breast cinereous, mixed with rust-color, and marked obscurely with dark
spots: belly white: thighs spotted with black: lesser coverts of wings
ash-colored; greater dusky, edged with brown: primaries and secondaries dusky;
the last tipped with white: lower part of the back white, spotted with black:
tail barred with black and white; tips reddish: legs greenish: the toes
bordered by a narrow plain membrane. SIZE of the English Snipe.

Observed in Chateaux Bay, on the coast of Labrador, in September. PLACE.
Are perpetually nodding their heads. -- Latham, iii.

371. GREAT GODWIT.
Edw. 137. -- Scolopax Fedo^, Lin. Syst. 244. -- La Barge rousse de Baie de
Hudson, De Buffon, vii. 507. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
SN. With bill six inches long: throat white: from the bill to the eye extends
a dusky line: head and neck mottled with dusky and light brown: breast barred
with black: belly plain brown: back and coverts varied with rusty brown and
dusky: the primaries and secondaries ferruginous on their exterior webs: tail
barred with light brown and black: legs very long, black, and naked very high
above the knees.

Inhabits Hudson's Bay and Connecticut. -- BL. MUS. PLACE.


372. RED.
Red Godwit, Br. Zool. ii. No 181. -- Edw. 138. -- Scolopax Lapponica, Faun.
Suec. No 174. -- Ph. Trans. lxii. 411. -- Latham, iii. La Barge rousse, De
Buffon, vii. 304. -- Pl. Enl. 900. -- LEV. MUS.
SN. With a bill three inches three quarters long, reflecting a little upward;
yellow near the base; dusky toward the end: head, neck, breast, and upper part
of the back, ferruginous, and streaked with black, excepting the neck, which is
plain: lower part of the back white: lesser coverts of the wings cinereous
brown: exterior webs of the primaries black; the lower parts white: the lower
part of the tail white; the upper black; the tips white: the legs dusky.
LENGTH, to the tip of the tail, one foot six inches. EXTENT two feet four.
WEIGHT twelve ounces. Varies much in colors, according to age.

PLACE.
Is common to the north of Europe and of America. Very numerous, in summer time,
in the fens of Hudson's Bay; where they breed, and then retire. Appear about
the Caspian sea in the spring; but never in Sibiria, nor in the north of Asia.

373. COMMON.
Godwit, Br. Zool. ii. No 179. -- Catesby, App. -- Latham, iii. La Barge
Aboyeuse, De Buffon, vii. 501. -- Pl. Enl. 876. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
SN. With the bill turning a little up; four inches long; pale purple at the
base; dusky at the end: head, neck, back, and coverts of the wings, of a very
light brown, with a brown spot in the middle of each feather: primaries dusky;
inner webs of a reddish brown: tail barred with black and white: belly and vent
white: legs dusky; in some of a greyish blue. In SIZE somewhat inferior to the
last.

PLACE.
Common to the north of Europe, Asia, and America.

374. SPOTTED.
Br. Zool. ii. No 186. -- Phil. Trans. lxii. 410. -- Latham, iii. -- BL. MUS.
SN. With a very slender bill, a little more than two inches long: orbits,
chin, and throat, white: from bill to eye a line of white: cheeks and under
side of the neck white, with short streaks of a dusky color: crown and upper
part of the neck brown, with white streaks: coverts of the wings, primaries,
secondaries, and scapulars, black, with elegant triangular spots of white: tail
barred with black and white: breast and belly white: legs long; and in the live
bird of a rich yellow; sometimes red. LENGTH, to the tip of the tail, near
sixteen inches.

Arrives in Hudson's Bay in spring. PLACE.
Feeds on small shellfish and worms; and frequents the banks of rivers. Called
there, by the natives, from its noise, Sa-sa-shew; by the English, Yellow legs.
Retires in autumn. Makes a stop in the province of New York, on its return, but
does not winter there. This, and several other species of Snipes and
Sandpipers, are called, in North America, Humilities.

375. JADREKA.
Lesser Godwit, Br. Zool. ii. No 188. -- La Barge commune, De Buffon, vii. 500.
-- Pl. Enl. 874. -- Latham, iii. Scolopax Limosa, Faun. Suec. No 172. Jadreka,
Olaf. Iceland, ii. 201. tab. xlviii.
SN. With a bill near four inches long: head and neck cinereous: cheek and chin
white: back of an uniform brown: wings marked with a white line: rump and vent
feathers white: middle feathers of the tail black; in the rest the white
predominates more and more, to the outmost: legs dusky. WEIGHT nine ounces.
LENGTH, to the tail, seventeen inches.

Inhabits Iceland, Greenland Faun. Groenl. No 72.
, and Sweden. PLACE.
Migrates in flocks in the south of Russia.

376. STONE.
SN. With a black bill: head, neck, and breast, spotted with black and white:
back, scapulars, and greater coverts, of the same colors: primaries dusky: rump
and tail barred with black and white: belly white: legs long and yellow. Double
the SIZE of a Snipe.

PLACE.
Observed in autumn feeding on the sands on the lower part of Chateaux Bay,
continually nodding their heads. Are called there Stone Curlews.

377. REDSHANK.
Br. Zool. ii. No 184. -- Scolopax Totanus, Faun. Suec. No 167. -- Latham, iii.
Le Chevalier aux pieds rouges, De Buffon, vii. 513. -- Pl. Enl. 845. -- LEV.
MUS. -- BL. MUS.
SN. With bill red at the base, black at the end: head, hind part of neck, and
scapulars, of a dusky ash-color, faintly marked with black: back white,
sprinkled with black: under side of neck white, streaked with dusky: breast and
belly white: tail barred with black and white: legs of a bright orange-color.

PLACE.
Inhabits North America, in common with the north of Europe, as high as Finmark
Leems, 253.
; and is found in Sibiria. Grows less common toward the north of that country.
Is sometimes found, in Hudson's Bay, quite white Edw. 139.
.

378. YELLOW-SHANKS.
SN. With a slender black bill, an inch and a half long, a little bent at the
end: head, hind part of the neck, back, and greater coverts of the wings, dirty
white, spotted with black: lesser coverts plain brown: primaries dusky: breast
and fore part of the neck spotted with black and white: belly and coverts of
the tail pure white: tail barred with brown and white: legs yellow. LENGTH,
from tip of the bill to the tail, eleven inches.

PLACE.
Appears in the province of New York in autumn. -- BL. MUS.

379. GREEN-SHANK.
Br. Zool. ii. No 183. -- La Barge vary, De Buffon, vii. 503. -- Latham, iii.
Scolopax Glottis, Faun. Suec. No 171. -- LEV. MUS.
SN. With a bill two inches and a half long, very slender, and a little
recurvated: head, and upper part of neck, cinereous, with dusky lines: over
each eye a white line: coverts of wings, scapulars, and upper part of the back,
of a brownish ash-color: breast, belly, and lower part of the back, white:
primaries dusky: tail white, finely marked with waved dusky bars: legs green.
LENGTH fourteen inches. WEIGHT only six ounces.

Inhabits the province of New York; PLACE.
and in every latitude of Russia and Sibiria, in plenty. Is found in Europe as
high as Sondmor Strom. 235.
.

380. SEMIPALMATED.
SN. With a bill two inches long, and dusky: head and neck streaked with black
and white: breast white, with round brown spots: belly and sides white; the
last marked with transverse bars of brown: back and coverts of the wings
cinereous, with great sagittal spots of black: primaries dusky, with a
transverse white bar: secondaries white: the middle feathers of the tail
cinereous, barred with black; outmost white: legs dusky: toes semipalmated.
LENGTH fourteen inches.

Inhabits New York. -- BL. MUS. PLACE.


381. BLACK.
SN. With red bill and legs: the plumage most intensely black.

Observed by Steller in the islands toward America. PLACE.


A. EUROPEAN WOODCOCK, Br. Zool. ii. No 178. -- Le Becasse, De Buffon, vii.
462. -- Pl. Enl. 885. -- Latham, iii. Scolopax rusticola. Morkulla, Faun. Suec.
No 170. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
SN. With a reddish cinereous front: hind part of the head barred with reddish
brown: upper part of the body and wings barred with rust-color, black, and
gray: breast and belly dirty white, barred with dusky lines. WEIGHT twelve
ounces.

PLACE.
Inhabits, during summer, Scandinavia, Lapland, and Iceland. Migrates southerly
at approach of winter. Common in Russia and Sibiria, but only in the time of
migration; and breeds in the northern marshes and Arctic flats.

B. GREAT SNIPE, Br. Zool. ii. No 188. -- Latham, iii. Scolopax Media, Frisch.
tab. 228. -- LEV. MUS.
SN. With head divided lengthways by a testaceous line, bounded on each side by
one of black; above and beneath each eye another: neck and breast yellowish
white, marked with semicircular spots of black: sides undulated with black:
back and coverts testaceous, spotted with black, and edged with white:
primaries dusky: tail rust-color; external feathers barred with black. WEIGHT
eight ounces.

PLACE.
Inhabits the Arctic regions of Sibiria. Found in England and Germany. The link
between the Woodcock and Snipe.

C. DUSKY SNIPE. Scolopax Fusca, Lin. Syst. 243. -- Brisson, v. 276. tab.
xxiii. La Barge brun, De Buffon, vii. 508. -- Pl. Enl. 875. -- Latham, iii.
SN. With the upper part dusky black, with the edges of the feathers whitish:
lower part of the body dark cinereous: two middle feathers of the tail dusky,
streaked crossways with white: the side feathers brown, streaked in the same
manner: legs black. LENGTH twelve inches; of the bill two and a quarter.

Breeds within the Arctic circle. Migrates into Russia and Sibiria. PLACE.


FINMARK SNIPE. Scolopax Gallinaria, Muller, No 183. -- Latham, iii.
SN. With the bill tuberculated like that of the common Snipe: head entirely
gray: legs yellow. In other respects, has great agreement with the common sort.

Inhabits Finmark. PLACE.


XXXVIII. SANDPIPER. Genesis Birds, LXVIII.
382. HEBRIDAL.
Br. Zool. ii. No 200. -- Tringa interpres, Tolk, Faun. Suec. No 178.
Turnstone, Catesby, i. 72. -- Tringa Morinellus, Lin. Syst. 249. -- Latham,
iii. Le Tourne-pierre, De Buffon, viii. 130. -- Pl. Enl. 130. -- LEV. MUS. --
BL. MUS.
S. With black bill, red at the base: white forehead, throat, belly, and vent:
crown white, spotted with black: sides of the head white: a black line passes
above the forehead; is continued under each eye to the corner of the mouth;
drops on each side of the neck to the middle, which is surrounded with a black
collar: breast black: coverts cinereous: upper part of the back, scapulars, and
tertials, ferruginous, spotted with black: lower part of back white, traversed
with a black bar: tail black, tipped with white: legs short; of a bright
orange. WEIGHT three ounces and a half. LENGTH eight inches and a half.

PLACE.
Inhabits Hudson's Bay, Greenland Faun. Groenl. No 74.
, and the Arctic flats of Sibiria, where it breeds; wandering southerly in
autumn. It lays four eggs. It migrates in America as low as Florida. In spring
it possesses itself of the isles of the Baltic, till it quits them in autumn
Amoen. Acad. iv. 590.
.

383. STRIATED.
Tringa Striata, Lin. Syst. 248. -- Faun. Groenl. No 71. -- Faun. Dan. No 194.
-- Latham, iii.
S. With the base of the bill and legs yellow: upper part of the body undulated
with dusky and cinereous: front of the neck dusky: breast and belly white:
primaries and secondaries black; the last tipped with white: tertials white, with
a stripe of black: tail black: the feathers on the side cinereous, edged with
white. SIZE of a Stare.

PLACE.
Inhabits Sweden, Norway, and Iceland. Is found, but not frequently, in Russia
and Sibiria; and is conversant, even during winter, in the frosty climate of
Greenland; but retires to breed into the bottom of the bays: flies very swiftly
along the surface of the water, catching the insects on the surface. Never
touches the water with its feet or body; but dexterously avoids the rising of
the highest waves. Twitters with the note of the Swallow Faun. Groenl. No 73.
.

384. KNOT.
Br. Zool. ii. No 193. -- Le Canut, De Buffon, viii. 142. -- Latham, iii.
Tringa Canutus, Faun. Suec. No 183. -- LEV. MUS.
S. With a black bill: between the base and eyes a white line: crown and upper
part of the body of a dusky brown: wings of the same color, crossed with a line
of white: the breast and under side of the neck white, spotted with black: rump
white, with large black spots: legs short, of a blueish gray: toes divided to
the origin.

I have seen this species from the province of New York. PLACE.
Observed by Dr. Pallas only about lake Baikal.

385. SPOTTED.
Br. Zool. ii. No 196. -- Tringa Macularia, Lin. Syst. 249. -- Edw. 277. --
Latham, iii. La Grive d'eau, De Buffon, viii. 140. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
S. With a white line above each eye: crown, upper part of neck and body, and
coverts of the wings, olive brown, with triangular black spots: under side,
from neck to tail, white, with brown spots: middle feathers of the tail brown;
those on the side white, with dusky lines: legs of a dirty flesh-color. FEMALE
has no spots on the lower part of the body. SIZE of the Striated.

Inhabits North America. Arrives in Pensylvania in April, PLACE.
and stays there all the summer. Visits Hudson's Bay in May: breeds there, and
retires in September.

386. ASH-COLORED.
Br. Zool. ii. No 194. -- Tringa Cinerea, Brunnich, No 179. -- Latham, iii. --
BL. MUS.
S. With a dusky cinereous head, spotted with black: neck cinereous, marked
with dusky streaks: back and coverts of wings finely varied with concentric
semicircles of black, ash-color, and white: coverts of the tail barred with
black and white: tail cinereous, edged with white: breast and belly pure white;
the first spotted with black: legs dusky green: toes bordered with a narrow
membrane, finely scolloped. LENGTH ten inches. WEIGHT five ounces.

PLACE.
Seen in great numbers on Seal Islands near Chateaux Bay. Continues the whole
summer in Hudson's Bay, and breeds there. Breeds in Denmark? Has been shot on
the Flintshire shores in the winter season.

387. NEW YORK.
S. With the under side of neck and body white: the breast spotted with brown:
lesser coverts dusky, edged with white: back and greater coverts dusky in the
middle; the edges cinereous: the secondaries of the same colors: coverts of the
tail barred with black and white: sides beneath the wings streaked with brown:
tail cinereous.

PLACE.
Inhabits the province of New York. -- BL. MUS.

388. COMMON.
Br. Zool. ii. No 204. -- La Guignette, De Buffon, vii. 540. -- Pl. Enl. 850.
-- Latham, iii. Tringa Hypoleucus Snappa, Faun. Suec. No 182. -- LEV. MUS.
S. Above of a deep brown, spotted with rugged marks of black: the plumage most
glossy and silky: fore part of the neck and breast white, with a few black
spots: belly white: primaries and secondaries dusky; the last with their
bottoms and ends white: the outmost feathers of the tail spotted with white and
brown; the middle brown, tipped with white: legs yellowish. WEIGHT about two
ounces. Differs little from the European kind, but in the colors of the legs.

PLACE.
Inhabits Chateaux Bay, and the northern latitudes of Sibiria, as far as
Kamtschatka.

389. GREEN.
Br. Zool. ii. No 201. -- Le Becasseau, De Buffon, vii. 535. -- Pl. Enl. 843.
Tringa Ocrophus, Faun. Suec. No 180. -- Tr. Littorea? Faun. Suec. No 185. --
Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
S. With head and upper part of the neck cinereous brown, streaked with white:
lower part of neck mottled with brown and white: back, scapulars, and coverts
of wings, of a dusky green, glossy as silk, and elegantly speckled with white:
primaries dusky: rump, breast, and belly, white: tail white, the feathers
marked with different numbers of spots: legs a cinereous green. About a third
larger than the COMMON.

I have seen this species in Mr. Kuckan's collection, PLACE.
which he made in North America. It is also found in Iceland; and is very
common in all the watery places of Russia and Sibiria. The Tringa Littorea is
said to migrate from Sweden to England, at approach of winter Amoen. Acad. iv.
590.
.

390. PURRE.
Br. Zool. ii. No 206. -- Tringa Cinclus, Lin. Syst. 251. -- Latham, iii.
L'Alouette de mer, De Buffon, vii. 548. -- Pl. Enl. 851. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL.
MUS.
S. With a slender black bill: head and upper part of neck ash-colored,
streaked with black: from bill to eyes a white line: under side of the neck
white, mottled with brown: back and coverts of wings a brownish ash-color:
greater coverts dusky, tipped with white: breast and belly white: two middle
feathers of the tail dusky; the others ash-color, edged with white: legs of a
dusky green. WEIGHT an ounce and a half. LENGTH seven inches and a half.

Inhabits the coast of New York, PLACE.
and extends as low as Jamaica and Cayenne. Not mentioned among the
Scandinavian birds. Common in all latitudes of Russia and Sibiria.

391. DUNLIN.
Br. Zool ii. No 205. -- La Brunnette, De Buffon, vii. 493. -- Latham, iii.
Tringa Alpina, Faun. Suec. No 181. -- Faun. Groenl. No 77. Loar Thraell, Olaf.
Iceland. i. No 677. tab. xli. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
S. With head, hind part of the neck, and back, ferruginous, marked with great
black spots: lower part of neck white, streaked with black: coverts of the
wings ash-colored: breast and belly white, marked with a black crescent: tail
ash-colored; the two middle feathers longest and darkest: legs black. In SIZE
somewhat larger than the last.

PLACE.
Inhabits Greenland, Iceland, Scandinavia, the alps of Sibiria, and, in its
migration, the coasts of the Caspian sea.

392. RED.
Br. Zool. ii. No 202. -- Aberdeen Sandpiper, No 203. -- Latham, iii. Tringa
Icelandica, Lin. Syst. Add.
S. With the bill black and slender, a little bending: head, upper part of the
neck, and beginning of the back, dusky, marked with red: lower side of the neck
and breast cinereous, mixed with rust-color, and obscurely spotted with black:
lesser coverts of the wing cinereous; primaries dusky; secondaries tipped with
white: two middle feathers of the tail are dusky, and extend a little beyond
the others; the rest are cinereous: legs long and black.

PLACE.
The birds which I have seen of this kind came from the coasts of New York,
Labrador, and Natka Sound. They are also found in Iceland Brunnich, No 180.
. Probably are the same with the Scolopax Subarquata, which, during summer,
frequent the shores of the Caspian sea, lake Baikal, and especially the mouth
of the Don Nov. Com. Petrop. xix. 471. tab. xix. -- The Tringa Ruficollis,
PALLAS Iter. iii. 700, is another red-necked species, found about the same salt
lakes.
. I believe them to be the young, or the females, of that which is described in
the Br. Zool. under the name of the Red. The last differs in nothing, but in
having the whole under side of a full ferruginous color. SIZE.
LENGTH from eight to ten inches. Varies greatly in size.

393. GRAY.
Br. Zool. ii. No 191. -- Gray Plover, Will. Orn. 309. -- Latham, iii. Tringa
Squatarola, Faun. Suec. No 186. Le Vanneau Pluvier, De Buffon, viii. 68. -- Pl.
Enl. 854. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
S. With a strong black, bill: head, back, and coverts of wings, black, edged
with gray, tinged with green, and some white: cheeks and throat white, streaked
with black: primaries dusky, white on their interior lower sides: belly and
thighs white: rump white: tail barred with black and white: legs of a dirty
green: back toe very small. WEIGHT seven ounces. LENGTH, to the end of the
tail, twelve inches.

According to Lawson, PLACE.
frequents the valleys near the mountains of Carolina. Are seen flying in great
flocks; but seldom alight Hist. Carol. 140. Catesby, App.
. Very common in Sibiria; and appear in autumn in flocks, after breeding in the
extreme north.

394. GAMBET.
Br. Zool. ii. No 198. -- Latham, iii. Tringa Gambetta, Faun. Suec. No 177. --
Tr. Variegata, Brunnich, No 181.
S. With head, back, and breast, of a cinereous brown, spotted with dull
yellow: coverts of the wings, and scapulars, cinereous, edged with yellow:
primaries dusky: belly white: tail dusky, bordered with yellow: legs yellow.
SIZE of the Greenshank.

Taken in the frozen sea, between Asia and America, lat. 69, PLACE.
long. 191. Inhabits also Scandinavia and Iceland Paulsen's List.
; in the last it is called Stelkr, from its note.

395. ARMED.
Le Vanneau arm de la Louisiane, Brisson, iv. 114. tab. viii. -- De Buffon,
viii. 65. -- Pl. Enl. 835. -- Latham. iii.
S. With an orange bill, depressed in the middle: on each side of the base is a
thin naked skin of a light orange-color, which rises above the forehead,
extends beyond each eye, and falls, in form of a pointed wattle, far below the
chin: crown dusky: hind part of the neck, back, rump, scapulars, and coverts of
the wings, of a dusky gray: from the chin to the vent white, tinged with tawny:
primaries mostly black: the fore part of the wing is armed with a sharp spur, a
most offensive weapon: the tail short, whitish, crossed near the end with a
black bar, and tipped with white: legs long, and of a deep red. LENGTH, from bill
to tail, above ten inches. EXTENT about two feet two.

PLACE.
Inhabits Louisiana.

396. SWISS.
Tringa Helvetica, Lin. Syst. 250. -- Le Vanneau Suisse, De Buffon, viii. 60.
-- Pl. Enl. 853. Vanellus Helveticus, Brisson, v. 106. tab. x. -- Latham, iii.
-- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
S. With a strong bill an inch long, depressed in the middle: front and sides
of the head white; hind part spotted with black and white: cheeks, under side
of the neck, breast, and belly, black: thighs and vent white: primaries black:
back, coverts of wings, and the tail, white, barred with black: legs black:
back toe very small. SIZE of a Lapwing.

PLACE.
Inhabits the coast of Connecticut and Hudson's Bay. Visits the last in the
spring. Feeds on berries, insects, and worms. Retires in September. Breeds also
in the Arctic flats of Sibiria; and, in the time of migration, appears in all
parts of the south of Russia and Sibiria. Is found in France and Swisserland.

397. LITTLE.
Br. Zool. ii. No 207. -- Tringa pusilla, Lin. Syst. 252. -- Oddinstiane
Islandis, Latham, iii.
S. With crown black: upper part of the plumage brown, edged with black and
pale rusty brown: belly and breast white: tail dusky: legs black. SIZE of a
Hedge Sparrow.

Inhabits the north of Europe, Iceland, and Newfoundland. PLACE.
Observed also in Natka Sound. It is met with as far south as St. Domingo
Brisson, v. 222.
. Probably migrates there in the winter.

A. RUFF, Br. Zool. ii. No 192. -- Le Combattant, ou Paon de mer, De Buffon,
vii. 521. -- Pl. Enl. 305, 306. -- Latham, iii. Tringa pugnax, Brushane, Faun.
Suec. No 175. -- Leems Lapm. 246. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
S. With a long ruff of feathers on the fore part and sides of the neck; and a
long tuft on the hind part of the head: legs yellow. REEVES, or the females,
are of a pale brown: back slightly spotted with black: breast and belly white:
neck smooth.

Inhabits the north of Europe in summer, as far as Iceland, PLACE.
and is very common in the northern marshes of Russia and Sibiria.

B. FRECKLED. -- Calidris naevia, Brisson, v. 229. tab. xxi. fig. i. -- Latham,
iii.
S. Above of a dusky cinereous, spotted with red and black; the last glossed
with violet: lower part of the body of a reddish white, varied with dusky and
chesnut-colored spots: two middle feathers of the tail ash-colored, edged with
white; the rest dark cinereous: the outmost feather on each side marked
lengthways, on the exterior side, with a white line: legs greenish. LENGTH near
nine inches.

PLACE.
Is found in the north of Russia and Sibiria; and also in France.

C. SELNINGER, Muller, No 206. -- Tringa Maritima, Brunnich, 182. -- Leems,
254. -- Latham, iii.
S. Above varied with gray and black: the middle of the back tinged with
violet: fore part of the neck dusky: lower part of the body white: tail dusky;
four outmost feathers on each side shorter than the rest, and edged with white:
legs yellow. SIZE of a Stare.

PLACE.
Inhabits Norway and Iceland. Lives about the sea-shores, and is always emitting
a piping note.

D. LAPWING, Br. Zool. ii. No 190. -- Le Vanneau, De Buffon, viii. 48. -- Pl.
Enl. 242. -- Latham iii. Tringa Vanellus Wipa, Cowipa, Blaecka, Faun. Suec. No
176. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
S. With a black bill: crown and breast black: head adorned with a very long
slender crest, horizontal, but turning up at the end: cheeks and sides of the
neck, and belly, white: back and scapulars glossy green; the last: varied with
purple: primaries and secondaries black, marked with white: coverts of tail,
and vent, orange: outmost feathers of the tail white, marked with one dusky
spot: the upper half of the rest black; the lower of a pure white. WEIGHT eight
ounces. LENGTH thirteen inches and a half. EXTENT two feet and a half.

The Lapwing is common in most parts of Europe. PLACE.
Extends to the Feroe isles, and even to Iceland Brunnich.
. Is very frequent in Russia; but becomes very rare beyond the Urallian chain;
yet a few have been observed about the rivers Ob and Angara, and beyond lake
Baikal; but never farther to the east. They extend southward as far as Persia
and Egypt Hasselquist, 288.
, where they winter; but, unable to bear the vast heats of the summer, migrate
to the countries about Woronesch and Astracan Extracts, i. 107. ii. 147.
. Appears in Lombardy, in April; retires in September. Continues in England,
and I believe in France, the whole year; but constantly shifts its quarters in
search of food, worms and insects. In France, multitudes are taken for the
table in clap-nets, into which they are allured by the playing of a mirror.

E. WAVED. Tringa Undata, Brunnich, No 188. -- Latham, iii.
S. Of a dusky color, marked with undulated lines of white and yellowish
clay-color: shaft of the first primary white: tips of the secondaries, and
their coverts, white: tail ash-colored, tipped with black.

Inhabits Denmark and Norway. PLACE.


F. SHORE. Tringa Littorea, Faun. Suec. No 183. -- Brunnich, No 177. -- Latham,
iii. Le Chevalier vary, De Buffon, vii. 517. -- Pl. Enl. 300.
S. With a dusky neck, striped obliquely with white: back and coverts of the
wings dusky, with small rusty spots, lightest on the last: primaries and
secondaries dusky, the last tipped with white; shaft of first primary white:
breast and belly white: tail crossed with waved bars of dusky and white: legs
dusky. SIZE of a Turtle Dove.

Inhabits the marshes of Sweden; and is found in Denmark. PLACE.


G. WOOD. Tringa Glareola, Faun. Suec. No 184. -- Latham, iii.
S. With the back dusky, speckled with white: primaries and secondaries dusky;
the last tipped with white: breast and belly whitish: tail barred with black and
white; the outmost feathers lightest: rump white: legs of a dirty green. SIZE
of a Stare.

PLACE.
Inhabits the moist woods of Sweden.

H. UNIFORM. Keildu-suin, Islandis, Muller, No 205. -- Latham, iii.
S. With a short black bill, and of an uniform light ash-color on all its
plumage.

PLACE.
Inhabits Iceland.

XXXIX. PLOVER. Genesis Birds, LXIX.
398. ALWARGRIM.
Spotted Plover, Edw. 140. -- Le Pluvier door a gorge noire, De Buffon, viii.
85. Charadrius Apricarius. Alwargrim, Faun. Suec. No 189. -- Latham, iii. --
LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
PL. With a short bill, like that of the Swiss Sandpiper: the forehead white,
from which a white line falls from each corner, along the sides of the neck,
and unites at the breast; the whole intervening space black, as are the breast,
belly, thighs, and vent; only on the last are a few white spots: crown, hind
part of neck, back, and coverts of wings and tail, dusky, most elegantly
spotted with bright orange: the primaries dusky, edged with ash-color:
secondaries and tail barred with dusky and brown: legs black. SIZE of a Golden
Plover.

Inhabits all the north of Europe, Iceland, Greenland, PLACE.
and Hudson's Bay, and all the Arctic part of Sibiria; and descends southward
in its migrations. Is called in Hudson's Bay, the Hawk's eye, on account of its
brilliancy. It appears in Greenland in the spring, about the southern lakes,
and feeds on worms and berries of the Heath Faun. Groenl. No 79.
. Arrives in New York in May: breeds there, and disappears in the latter end of
October, after collecting in vast flocks. Is reckoned most delicious eating.

399. GOLDEN.
Br. Zool. ii. No 208. -- Le Pluvier door, De Buffon, viii. 81. -- Pl. Enl.
904. Charadrius Pluvialis, Akerhoua, Faun. Suec. No 190. -- Latham iii. -- LEV.
MUS. -- BL. MUS.
PL. With head, upper part of the neck, back, and coverts of wings, dusky,
elegantly spotted with yellowish green: breast brown, streaked with greenish
lines: belly white: middle feathers of the tail barred with black and yellowish
green; the others with black and brown: legs black. LENGTH, to the tip of the
tail, eleven inches.

PLACE.
Inhabits North America, as low as Carolina Lawson, 140. -- Catesby, App.
. Migrates to the Labrador coast, about a week after the Eskimaux WHIMBRELS, in
its way to New York; but not in such numbers. Found in Iceland and the north of
Europe; but are scarcely seen in Russia. Very frequent in Sibiria, where they
breed in the north. They extend also to Kamtschatka, and as far south as the
Sandwich isles: in the last it is very small. I have seen, which I suppose to
be young, a variety with black breasts: and sometimes a very minute back toe.

400. NOISY.
Chattering Plover, Catesby, i. 71. -- Le Kildir, De Buffon, viii. 96. --
Latham, iii. Charadrius Vociferus, Lin. Syst. 253. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
PL. With a broad black bar, extending from the bill, beneath each eye, to the
hind part of the head: orbits red: forehead, and space before and beyond the
eyes, white: fore part of the crown black; the rest brown: a white ring
encircles the throat and neck; beneath that another of black; under that
succeeds, on the breast, two semicircles, one of white, another of black; all
below is white: back and coverts of wings brown: primaries dusky: the feathers
on the rump are orange, and extend over three parts of the tail; the lower part
of which is black. SIZE of a large Snipe.

PLACE.
Inhabits New York, Virginia, and Carolina; where they reside the whole year.
Are the plague of the sportsmen, by alarming the game by their screams. They
are called in Virginia, Kill-deer, from the resemblance their note bears to
that word. Migrate to New York in the spring: lay three or four eggs: stay late.

401. RINGED.
Br. Zool. ii. No 211. -- Le Pluvier a collier, De Buffon, viii. 90. -- Pl.
Enl. 921. Charadrius Hiaticula, Strandpipare, Faun. Suec. No 187. -- Latham,
iii. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
PL. With a short bill; upper half orange-color; the end black: crown light
brown: forehead, and a small space behind each eye, white: from the bill,
beneath each eye, extends a broad bar of black: the neck is encircled with a
white ring; and beneath that is another of black: coverts of wings of a pale
brown: primaries dusky: tail brown, tipped with lighter: legs yellow.

Almost all which I have seen from the northern parts of North America, have
had the black marks extremely faint, and almost lost. VARIES.
The climate had almost destroyed the specific marks; yet, in the bill and
habit, preserved sufficient to make the kind very easily ascertained. The
predominant colors were white, and very light ash-color. WEIGHT near two
ounces. LENGTH, to tip of the tail, SIZE.
seven inches and a half. Those of the western coasts of North America are much
smaller.

Inhabits America, down to Jamaica Sloane.
and the Brasils; PLACE.
in the last it is called Matuitui Marcgrave, 199.
, where it frequents sea-shores and estuaries. Is found in summer in Greenland:
migrates from thence in autumn. Is common in every part of Russia and Sibiria.
Was found by the navigators as low as Owyhe, one of the Sandwich isles, and as
light-colored as those of the highest latitudes.

402. BLACK-CROWNED.
PL. With the bill an inch long; black toward the end; red toward the base:
forehead black: crown black, surrounded with a circle of white: throat white:
neck and breast of a very light ash-colored brown, divided from the belly by a
dusky transverse stroke: belly and vent white: back, scapulars, and coverts of
the wings, cinereous brown: primaries dusky; white toward their bottoms: tail
white toward the base; black toward the end; and tipped with white: legs very
long, naked an inch above the knees, and of a blood-red: toes very short.
LENGTH, to the end of the tail, about ten inches.

PLACE.
Inhabits the province of New York. Has much the habit of the European DOTTREL.
-- LEV. MUS.

403. SANDERLING.
Br. Zool. ii. No 212. -- Le Sanderling, De Buffon, vii. 532. Charadrius
Calidris, Lin. Syst. 255. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
PL. With a slender, black, weak bill, bending a little at the end: head and
hind part of the neck cinereous, streaked with dusky lines: back and scapulars
of a brownish gray, edged with dirty white: coverts and primaries dusky: belly
white: feathers of the tail sharp-pointed and cinereous: legs black. WEIGHT
near an ounce and three quarters. LENGTH eight inches.

PLACE.
Inhabits North America. Abounds about Seal Islands, on the Labrador coast. I do
not find it among the birds of northern Europe; nor in Asia, nearer than lake
Baikal.

404. RUDDY.
PL. With a black strait bill, an inch long: head, neck, breast, scapulars, and
coverts of wings and tail, of a ruddy color, spotted with black, and powdered
with white; in the scapulars and coverts of wings the black prevails: the
outmost web of the four first quil feathers brown; the internal white, tipped
with brown: the upper part of the others white; the lower brown: the two middle
feathers of the tail brown, edged with rust; the others of a dirty white: legs
black: toes divided to their origin.

PLACE.
Inhabits Hudson's Bay. -- Mr. Hutchins.

405. LONG-LEGGED.
Br. Zool. ii. No 209. -- Fl. Scot. i. No 157. -- Latham, iii. Charadrius
Himantopus, Lin. Syst. 255. -- Hasselquist, 253. L'Echasse, De Buffon, viii.
114. -- Pl. Enl. 878. -- LEV. MUS.
PL. With the crown, upper part of the neck, back, and wings, dusky; the last
crossed with a white line: tail of a greyish white: forehead and whole under
side of the neck and body white: legs the most disproportionably long and weak
of any known bird; the French, for that reason, call it, very justly,
l'Echasse, or the bird that goes upon stilts; they are of a blood-red, four
inches and a half long, and the part above the knees three and a half. LENGTH,
to the end of the tail, thirteen inches.

Inhabits from Connecticut to the islands of the West Indies Sloane.
. PLACE.
Is not a bird of northern Europe. Frequent in the southern desert of
independent Tartary: very common about the salt lakes; and often on the shores
of the Caspian sea. Is again found on the Indian shores near Madras Raii Syn.
Av. 193.
.

A. DOTTREL, Br. Zool. ii. No 210. -- Charadrius Morinellus Lahul, Lappis,
Faun. Suec. No 188. -- Leems Lapmark, 260. -- Latham, iii. Le Guignard, De
Buffon, viii. 87. -- Pl. Enl. 832. -- LEV. MUS.
PL. With bill and crown black: from the bill, over each eye, a white line:
breast and belly dull orange; the first crossed with a white line: vent white:
back, coverts of wings, and tail, olivaceous, edged with dull yellow: tail
dusky olive; ends of the outmost feathers white. Colors of the female duller.
WEIGHT four ounces. LENGTH ten inches.

PLACE.
Inhabits Europe, even as high as Lapmark. First appears in Drontheim; then
seeks the Lapland alps. Returns in smaller numbers. Appears in May at Upsal, in
its passage northward. Breeds in all the north of Russia and Sibiria; but
appears in the temperate latitudes only in their migrations.

B. ALEXANDRINE. -- Charadrius Alexandrinus, Lin. Syst. 253. -- Brunnich, App.
p. 77. -- Hasselquist Itin. 256. -- Latham, iii.
PL. With a black bill: a white line over each eye, and collar round the neck:
head, upper part of body, and coverts of wings, light cinereous brown:
primaries dusky; from the fifth to eighth marked with an oblong white spot on
the exterior margin: secondaries dusky, tipped with white: middle feathers of the
tail black; outmost white: under side of the body white: legs dusky blue. SIZE
between a Lark and a Thrush.

PLACE.
Found in the diocese of Drontheim, Norway. Common about the salt lakes between
the rivers Argun and Onon; but not observed in any other part of Russia or
Sibiria. Inhabits also the canal which conveys water from the Nile to
Alexandria Hasselquist Itin. 256.
.

XL. OYSTER-CATCHER. Genesis Birds.
406. PIED.
Br. Zool. ii. No 213. -- Catesby, i. 85. -- L'Huitrier. La pie de mer, De
Buffon, viii. 119. -- Pl. Enl. 929. -- Latham, iii. Haematopus ostralegus
Strandskjura, Faun. Suec. No 192. -- Brunnich, No 189. -- -- LEV. MUS. -- BL.
MUS.
O. With a long depressed bill, cuneated at the end, and of a rich
orange-color: beneath the throat sometimes a white bar: the whole neck besides,
with head, back, and coverts of wings, of a fine black: wings dusky, crossed
with a bar of white: under side of the body white: lower part of the tail
white; end black: legs strong and thick, of a dirty flesh-color. WEIGHT sixteen
ounces. LENGTH seventeen inches.

Inhabits North America, from New York to the Bahama Islands; PLACE.
and again is found in Sharks Bay, on the west coast of New Holland Dampier,
iii. 85.
, with some variation of color. It is met with about Curacoa in the West Indies
Feuillee, Observe. ed. 1725. p. 289.
, and wholly black, with a red bill and cinereous legs.

Found as far as Lapmark Leems Lapmark, 252.
. Inhabits all Russia and Sibiria. Breeds on the great Arctic flats: and
extends to Kamtschatka.

XLI. RAIL. Genesis Birds. LXXIII.
407. CLAPPER.
R. With the crown, and whole upper part of neck, back, and wings, of an olive
brown, edged with pale ash-color: primaries dark, edged with tawny: tail of the
same color: cheeks cinereous: throat white: under side of the neck and breast
brown, tinged with yellow: space beyond the thighs barred with dark cinereous
and white: legs brown. LENGTH fourteen inches; of the bill two.

PLACE.
Inhabits New York. Called there the Meadow Clapper. It arrives there in May,
lays in June, and disappears in October. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.

408. VIRGINIAN.
Rallus Virginianus, Lin. Syst. 263. -- Latham, iii. American Water Rail, Edw.
279. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
R. With a dusky bill, red at the base of the lower mandible: crown dusky:
cheeks cinereous: from the bill to each eye a white line: throat whitish: upper
part of the neck and back dusky, bordered with brown: ridge of the wing white:
coverts, ferruginous: primaries and tail dusky: under side of the neck and
breast of a brownish orange: lower belly, sides, and thighs, dusky, barred with
white: vent black, white, and orange: legs of a dirty flesh-color. In size and
shape like the English Rail Le Rale d'Eau, De Buffon, viii. 154. -- Pl. Enl.
749.
, A VARIETY OF THE ENGLISH RAIL.
of which it seems a mere variety; ours having a deep ash-colored breast
instead of a red one.

PLACE.
Inhabits Pensylvania. The common kind is found in the Feroe islands, Norway, as
far as Sondmor, Sweden, Russia, and the west of Sibiria.

Clapper Rail* No. 407. Semipalmated Snipe. No. 380.


XLII. GALLINULE. Genesis Birds. LXXV.
409. SOREE.
Little American Water Hen, Edw. 144. -- Latham, iii. Soree, Catesby, i. 70. --
Le Rale de Virginie, De Buffon, viii. 165. -- LEV. MUS.
G. With a yellow bill: crown, hind part of the neck, back, tail, and wings, of
a rusty brown, spotted with black: coverts of the wing alone plain and more
ferruginous: forehead, throat, and great part of the front of the neck, of a
deep black: cheeks, sides of the neck, and breast, of a fine blueish
ash color: belly and sides of a dirty white; the last barred downwards with
black: legs of a dull green. Rather larger than a Lark.

These birds migrate in great numbers into Virginia the latter end of
September, and continue there about six weeks. PLACE.
During that space they are found in vast multitudes in the marshes, feeding on
wild oats. On their first arrival they are exceedingly lean; but soon grow so
fat as to be unable to fly. In that state they lie upon the reeds; and the
Indians go in canoes and kill them with their paddles, or run them down. It is
said that they have taken a hundred dozen in a morning. They are most delicious
eating; and, during the season, are found on the tables of most of the
planters, for breakfast, dinner, and supper Burnaby's Travels, octavo ed. 42.
.

410. YELLOW-BRRASTRD.
G. With the crown and hind part of the neck dark olivaceous brown, spotted
with white: back plain brown: scapulars edged with yellowish white: breast
dirty yellow: belly white: legs brown. In SIZE lesser than an English Quail.

Inhabits the province of New York. -- BL. MUS. PLACE.


411. COMMON.
Br. Zool. ii. No 217. -- Brunnich, No 191. -- La Poule d'Eau, De Buffon, viii.
171. -- Pl. Enl. 877. -- Latham, iii. Fulica chloropus, Lin. Syst. 258. -- LEV.
MUS. -- BL. MUS.
G. With the head and upper part of the neck, body, and coverts of the wings,
of a fine deep olive green: primaries and tail dusky: breast and belly
cinereous: vent white: legs green. WEIGHT of the male fifteen ounces: length
fourteen inches.

Inhabits New York, and as low as Carolina: does not cross the Baltic: rare in
Denmark: inhabits Russia, and the west of Sibiria, but not the east.

A. CRAKE, Br. Zool. i. No 216. -- Rallus crex. Angsnarpa; Kornkraka, Faun.
Suec. No 194. Le Rale de Terre, Genet, ou Roi des Cailles, De Buffon, viii.
146. -- Pl. Enl. 750. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
G. With the crown, hind part of the neck, and back, black, edged with bay:
coverts of wings plain bay: tail of a deep bay: belly dirty white: legs
cinereous. When lean weighs six, when fat eight ounces.

PLACE.
Inhabits Europe, even as far north as Drontheim. Notwithstanding it is so
short-winged a bird, and a bad flier, yet it is found in summer in the
Schetland isles; not uncommon in the temperate parts of Russia and Sibiria, but
none in the north, or toward the shores. Where Quails are common, in those
countries this bird abounds; and the contrary where Quails are scarce. The
Crakes depart at the same time with the Cranes. The Tartars observe how ill
adapted the first are for a long flight; therefore believe that every Crane
takes a Crake on its back, and so assists the migration Gmelin.
.

DIV. II. SECT. II. PINNATED FEET.
DIV. II. SECT. II. PINNATED FEET.
XLIII. PHALAROPE. Genesis Birds, LXXVI.
412. GRAY.
Br. Zool. ii. No 218. -- Edw. 308. -- Latham, iii. Tringa lobata, Faun. Suec.
No 179. -- Muller, No 195. -- Brunnich, No 171. Le Phalarope a festons
denteles, De Buffon, viii. 226. -- Pl. Enl. 766. -- LEV. MUS.
PH. With a black bill, flatted and dilated near the extremity: eyes placed far
back: white forehead: crown dusky: upper part of the neck light gray: back,
rump, and scapulars, deep dove-color, marked with dusky spots: edges of the
scapulars yellow: coverts and primaries dusky; the first edged with white:
breast and belly white: tail dusky, edged with ash-color: legs black: toes
scolloped; the margins of the membranes finely serrated. SIZE of a Purre.

PLACE.
Inhabits Scandinavia, Iceland, and Greenland: in the last, lives on the frozen
side, near the great lakes: quits the country before winter: is seen on the
full seas in April and September, in the course of its migration. Swims slowly:
cannot dive. Twitters like a Swallow. The feathers being very soft, the
Greenlanders use it to wipe their rheumy eyes. Is not found in Russia, but is
frequent in all Sibiria, about the lakes and rivers, especially in autumn;
probably in its migration from the Arctic flats: it was also met with among the
ice, between Asia and America.

413. RED.
Br. Zool. ii. No 219. -- Edw. 142, 143. -- Latham, iii. Tringa fulicaria,
Faun. Suec. No 179. -- Brunnich, No 172. -- Muller, No 196. -- Faun. Groenl. No
76. Le Phalarope rouge, De Buffon, viii. 225.
PH. With bill in form of the last: crown, hind part of the neck, and upper
part of the breast, of a dusky ash-color: sides of the neck ferruginous:
throat, belly, and vent, white: wings black: greater coverts and secondaries
tipped with white: back and scapulars dusky; the last edged with bright
ferruginous; rump white, barred with cinereous: tail dusky: toes like the
former. The whole under side of the neck, the breast, and belly, of the
supposed FEMALE are ferruginous. Linnaeus calls the male Tringa Hyperborea, and
separates them Syst. Not. 249.
.

Found in Hudson's Bay and Scandinavia; common about the Caspian sea, and lakes
and rivers adjacent, during spring; but does not extend to the farther part of
Sibiria; yet was found by the navigators between Asia and America. They go in
pairs. Swim in the ponds of the fens; and are perpetually dipping their bills
in the water in search of insects.

414. BROWN.
Edw. 46. -- Latham, iii.
PH. With a slender black bill, a little bending at the end: crown black:
cheeks and neck of a light ash-color, tinged with bloom-color: breast and belly
white: back, wings, and tail, dusky: greater primaries and greater coverts tipped
with white: legs like the preceding.

Taken on board a ship off the coast of Maryland, PLACE.
the wind blowing from land. The form of the bill is a specific distinction
from the last.

415. PLAIN.
PH. With a slender black bill, dilated at the end: crown dusky and dull
yellow: across each eye a black line: cheeks and fore part of the neck a pale
clay-color: breast and belly white: back and tertials dusky, edged with dull
yellow: coverts, primaries, and tail, cinereous; the last edged like the
tertials: legs yellowish: toes bordered with a plain or unscolloped membrane.

Taken in the frozen sea, about Lat. 69. Long. 191. PLACE.


XLIV. COOT. Genesis Birds. LXXVII.
416. COMMON.
Br. Zool. i. No 220. -- La Foulque, De Buffon, viii. 211. -- Pl. Enl. 197. --
Latham, iii. Fulica atra, Faun. Suec. No 193. -- Brunnich, No 196. -- LEV. MUS.
-- BL. MUS.
C. With a white bill: head, neck, body, wings, and tail, of a full black: legs
yellowish green. WEIGHT from twenty-four to twenty-eight ounces.

PLACE.
Inhabits the shores of Sweden and Norway: appears in spring, and very rarely
visits the lakes or moors Amoen. Acad. iv. 591.
. Frequent in Russia, and even to the east of Sibiria. I found it among the
birds sent to Mrs. Blackburn from North America. The Indians about Niagara
dress their skins, and use them for pouches. They are frequent in the rivers of
Carolina, where they are called Flusterers Lawson, 149.
; I suppose, from the noise they make in flying along the surface of the water.

XLV. GREBE. Genesis Birds, LXXVIII.
417. HORNED.
Eared or horned Dobchick, Edw. 49. -- Latham, iii.
GR. with the head very full of feathers, and of a mallard green color: from
each eye issues a long tuft of yellowish orange-colored feathers, almost
meeting at the hind part of the head; beneath them is a large ruff of black
feathers: fore part of the neck and breast of an orange red; the hind part and
back dusky: coverts of the wings cinereous: primaries and tertials black:
secondaries white: belly glossy and silvery: legs of a bluish ash-color before;
flesh-colored behind. Of the SIZE of a Teal. Not the male of my Eared Dobchick,
as Mr. Edwards supposes See tab. 96. Edw. and my account of that species, Br.
Zool. ii. No 224.
; there being in that species no external difference of sexes, as I have had
frequent opportunities of observing.

Inhabits Hudson's Bay: appears there in the fresh waters in June: PLACE.
lays its eggs among the aquatic plants. Retires toward the south in autumn:
is called by the natives, Sekeep. It appears in New York in that season, and
continues there till spring, when it returns to the north. For its vast
quickness in diving is called, in New York, the Water Witch.

418. PIED-BILL.
Colymbus podiceps, Lin. Syst. 223. -- Latham, iii. Pied-bill Dobchick,
Catesby, i. 91. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
GR. with a strong arched bill, not unlike that of the common poultry; of an
olive-color, crossed through the middle of both mandibles with a black bar:
nostrils very wide: chin and throat of a glossy black, bounded with white:
upper part of the neck and back dusky: cheeks and under part of the neck pale
brown: breast silvery, mottled with ash-color: belly silvery: wings brown: ends
of the secondaries white: toes furnished with broad membranes. The female wants
the black bar on the bill. LENGTH fourteen inches.

PLACE.
Inhabits from New York to South Carolina: is called in the first, the
Hen-beaked Wigeon, or Water Witch. Arrives there late in the autumn, and goes
away in April.

419. LOUISIANE.
Le Grebe de la Louisiane, De Buffon, viii. 240. -- Pl. Enl. No 943. -- Latham,
iii.
GR. The end of the bill slightly bent: middle of the breast white, tinged with
dusky: sides of the neck and body, quite to the rump, rust-colored: from the
base of the neck to the thighs marked with large transverse black spots: upper
part of the body and wings deep brown: legs dusky. In SIZE rather less than the
common Grebe.

PLACE.
Inhabits Louisiana.

420. DUSKY.
Br. Zool. ii. No 225. -- Edw. 96. fig. 1. -- Le petit Grebe, De Buffon, viii.
232. -- Pl. Enl. 942. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
GR. With the crown, neck, back, and primaries, dusky: ridge of the wings and
secondaries white: rest of the wings dusky: breast and belly silvery, but
clouded. SIZE of a Teal.

PLACE.
Sent from New York with the Horned Grebe, as its female; but is certainly a
distinct species.

A. GREAT CRESTED GREBE, Br. Zool. ii. No 223. -- Le Grebe cornu, De Buffon,
viii. 235. -- Faun. Suec. No 151. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
GR. With the cheeks and throat surrounded with a long pendent ruff, of a
bright tawny color: on the head a great dusky crest: hind part of the neck and
back dusky: primaries of the same color: secondaries white: breast and belly of
a glossy silvery white: outside of the legs dusky; inside greenish. WEIGHT two
pounds and a half. LENGTH twenty-one inches. EXTENT thirty.

Inhabits Iceland, northern Europe, PLACE.
and the temperate and northern parts of Sibiria, in every reedy lake.

B. EARED, Br. Zool. ii. No 225. -- Edw. 96. fig. 2. -- Latham, iii. Colymbus
Auritus. Fiorna. Skraenlom, Faun. Suec. No 152. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
GR. With crimson irides: behind each eye a large tuft of ferruginous feathers:
the head, upper part of the body, and primaries, dusky: secondaries white:
whole under side white: feathers above the thighs ferruginous. LENGTH, to the
rump, twelve inches.

Inhabits Iceland Olaffen.
, Norway, and Sweden, PLACE.
and also the lakes of Lapland, where it makes a floating nest: quits those
countries in winter. Common in Sibiria and Russia, in all latitudes. Inhabits
England the whole year. I have seen numbers shot in Lincolnshire. Could observe
no external sexual differences; so am certain they are not of the same species
with the Horned Grebe, No 417.

C. RED-NECKED GREBE.
GR. With the crown, hind part of the neck, back, and wings, dusky brown:
secondaries white? cheeks and throat white; the first marked with a few brown
streaks: under side of the neck bright ferruginous: belly white: legs dusky.

This species was sent to me by the late Mr. Fleischer of Copenhagen, PLACE.
from either Denmark or Norway. The same species is found, but very rarely,
toward the Caspian sea Doctor PALLAS.
.

DIV. II. SECT. III. WEB-FOOTED.
DIV. II. SECT. III. WEB-FOOTED.
* WITH LONG LEGS.
XLVI. AVOSET. Genesis Birds, LXXIX.
421. AMERICAN.
AV. With a slender black bill, slightly turning up: head, neck, and upper part
of the breast, of a pale buff-color: rest of the lower part of the body white:
back and primaries black: lesser coverts white; greater black; beneath which is
a long transverse bar of white: legs very long, and dusky: feet semipalmated;
the webs bordering the sides of the toes for a considerable way. Larger than
the English AVOSET.

PLACE.
This species is preserved in the LEVERIAN MUSEUM. It is a native of North
America. I imagine that it sometimes is found entirely white; for the bird
called by Mr. Edwards (tab. 139.) the White Godwit from Hudson's Bay, seems to
be the same with this.

A. TEREK. Scolopax cinerea, Nov. Com. Petrop, xix. 473. tab. xix. -- Latham,
iii.
AV. With a bill one inch ten lines long, slightly recurvated: whole upper part
of the plumage cinereous: the middle of each feather marked with dusky; on the
rump in form of bars: lower part American Avoset. No. 421.
of body white: tail cinereous; outmost feather on each side varied with white
and ash-color: legs short, semipalmated. SIZE of the Red Sandpiper.

Frequents and breeds in the north Doctor PALLAS.
; and haunts, PLACE.
during the summer, the Caspian sea. Migrates through Russia and Sibiria.

B. SCOOPING, Br. Zool. ii. No 228. -- Skarflacka. Alfit, Faun. Suec. No 191.
-- Amoen. Acad. iv. 591. -- L'Avocette, De Buffon, viii. 466. -- Pl. Enl. 353.
-- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
AV. With a black, thin, flexible bill, three inches and a half long, bending
upwards half its length: head, hind part of the neck, and part of the wings and
scapulars, black: rest of the neck, breast, belly, and tail, white. WEIGHT
thirteen ounces. LENGTH, to the end of the tail, eighteen inches. EXTENT thirty.

Inhabits, in Scandinavia, only the isle of Oeland, off Sweden; PLACE.
where it rarely appears in the spring. Is properly a southern bird. Very
frequent, in the breeding season, about Fossdike Wash, in Lincolnshire: are
then very easily shot, flying about one's head like the Lapwing, repeating
shrilly, twit, twit. Lay two eggs, white, tinged with green, and spotted with
black. Are frequent about the salt lakes of the Tartarian desert, and about the
Caspian sea.

XLVII. FLAMMANT. Genesis Birds, LXXXI.
422. RED.
Flamingo, Catesby, i. 73. -- Phaenicopterus ruber, Lin. Syst. 230. -- Le
Flammant, ou le Phenicoptere, De Buffon, viii. 475. -- Pl. Enl. 63. -- Latham,
iii. -- LEV. MUS.
FL. With the upper mandible extremely unequal, ridged, and sloping to a point;
the under very deep, and unequal on the upper part; the edges of both furnished
with numerous teeth: space between it and the eyes naked: neck very long: tail
short: primaries black: all the rest of the plumage of a fine crimson color;
but the European birds, which are the only I have seen, are roseate: legs very
long: toes webbed: hind toe very small. The attitude is erect: and its HEIGHT
usually five feet.

PLACES IN AMERICA.
These birds inhabit Louisiana Du Pratz, ii. 81.
, the Bahama islands, and those of the West Indies; and frequent only salt
waters. They live in flocks, and are uncommonly tame, or rather stupid. A
person who can stand concealed may shoot as many as he pleases; for they will
not arise at the report of the gun; but the survivors will stand as if
astonished: nor will they take warning at the sight of the slain; but continue
on the spot till most of them are killed. Such is Catesby's account. But the
honest and intelligent Dampier gives a very different one; and says that they
are extremely shy, and very difficult to be shot.

NESTS.
They build their nests in shallow ponds; and form, for that purpose, with mud,
hillocks with a broad base, which appear about a foot and a half above the
water: these taper to the top, in which the birds make a hollow for the eggs.
They lay two, and cover them with their rump, their legs resting beneath the
water. As soon as the young are hatched they run very fast, but cannot fly till
they are full grown Voyages, i. 71.
. They are for a long time of a gray color, nor do they attain that of red till
near two years.

They stand upright, and in a row; so at a distance look like a file of
soldiers. They feed on the seeds of water-plants: not fish. Their flesh is
good, notwithstanding it is lean, and looks black. Dampier also bears witness
to the delicacy of the tongues; which, says he, are large, and furnished with a
knob of fat at the root, the so much boasted morsel. Apicius, a Roman, probably
cotemporary with Tiberius, had the honor of first introducing them to table:
the same person whom Pliny so forcibly stigmatizes with the title of Nepotum
altissimus gurges Lib. x. c. 48.
.

The FLAMMANT inhabits several parts of the old world: PLACES IN EUROPE AND
ASIA.
such as some of the coasts of the Mediterranean sea; the Cape De Verd islands;
and the Cape of Good Hope. They are common on the shores of the Caspian sea, on
the Persian and Turcomannian coasts: repairing in flocks to the mouth of the
river Yemba; and sometimes to that of the Yaik; and also to that of the Volga,
below Astracan.

* WITH SHORT LEGS.
XLVIII. ALBATROSS. Genesis Birds, LXXXII.
423. WANDERING.
Diomedea Exulans, Lin. Syst. 214. -- Pl. Enl. 237. -- Latham, iii. Albatross,
Edw. 88. -- Pallas, Spicil. Zool. Fasc. v. 28. Tschaiki of the Kamtschatkans,
LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
ALB. With a strong bill, sinking a little in the middle; hooked at the end of
the upper mandible, abrupt at that of the lower; nostrils covered with a strong
guard, and opening forward; color red; tip dusky: the plumage, in some, wholly
dusky, with the color most intense on the upper part; others again have their
under side entirely white: the tail is rounded: legs and feet of a dusky red:
the webs dusky.

SIZE.
ALBATROSSES differ greatly in size. Whether they differ in species I cannot
determine. They weigh from twelve to twenty-eight pounds: and vary in extent of
wings, from seven feet seven inches to ten feet seven.

PLACE.
The white and the brown variety or species appear annually in flocks of
thousands, about the end of June, and spread over the whole Ochotschan sea, the
gulf of Penschinshi, and the Kurile islands; but very rarely on the eastern
coast of Kamtschatka. They also arrived in great numbers about Bering's Island,
at the time when Steller was preparing to depart from his long confinement,
after the shipwreck of his illustrious commander. He sailed from thence on the
10th of August. This coincides with the re-migration of these birds, who retire
from the former places about the end of July or the middle of August. Their
arrival is the certain forerunner of fish. It is probable that they pursue
their prey northward, as they do not return the same way. They spread to the
coasts of America Seen the 4th of July, in lat. 56. 30, off the western coast
of America. -- Ellis's Voy. i. 292.
, and tend from each continent to their breeding-places in the southern
hemisphere, which they may arrive at by the season of summer in that adverse
part of the globe.

They seek the northern shores, MANNERS.
in pursuit of the vast shoals of salmon which frequent those distant places.
They are the most voracious of birds; and will so fill themselves with fish,
that sometimes a large one will hang half out of their mouths till those in
their stomach are digested. They will be at times so laden with food as to
become incapable of flying; and even so stupefied, as to be readily hunted down
by boats, or transfixed in the water by darts: neither can they arise till they
have vomited up their prey, which they strive to do with all their might.

The Kamtschatkans are very solicitous about the capture of these birds,
CAPTURE.
not so much for the sake of their flesh (which is very tough and dry, and
never eaten unless hunger compels) but on account of the intestines, which they
blow into bladders, in order to form floats for their nets. They angle for the
Albatrosses as they do for the scaly race, baiting with a whole fish, a large
hook fixed to a long cord. This they fling into the water, when there is an
instant contest among these greedy birds, which shall first lay hold of it
Hist. Kamtschatka, Engl. edit. 155.
.

They have only the vestige of a tongue; which is one of the characters of the
Gannet, Corvorants, and other voracious birds. Their voice, like that of the
Pelecan, resembles the braying of an ass.

The voyage which these birds undertake, MIGRATIONS.
from perhaps almost the extremity of the southern hemisphere to that of the
northern, urged by instinct, to attend the migration of certain fishes, is very
amazing. They are, indeed, seen in April and May off the Cape of Good Hope
Dampier, i. 531. -- Osbeck, i. 109.
, sometimes soaring in the air with the gentle motion of a Kite, at a
stupendous height; at others, nearer the water, watching the motions of the
Flying Fish, which they catch while those miserable beings spring out of their
element to shun the jaws of the Coryphenes. I have not authority to say that
some of them do not reside about the Cape the whole year: but I am acquainted
with only two places in which they breed; one is the Falkland islands, the
other the coast of Patagonia This account is given by a distinguished officer
in our navy, who had visited these islands.
. In the first, they begin to lay their eggs in October, the spring of those
regions, and continue that function about a month. NESTS AND EGG.
They build their nests with sedges, in form of a haycock, about three feet
high, leaving a hollow in the summit for the egg; for they lay but one, which
is four inches and a half long, white, with some small obscure spots at the
thicker end. They are constantly watched while on their nests by multitudes of
Hawks, who no sooner see the Albatross quit its nest, but they instantly dart
down and carry off the egg. This obliges them to lay another, and prolong the
season of incubation.

The remaining part of the summer they wander over all parts of the Antarctic
seas; and were seen as low as lat. 67. 20. in the middle of our January Cook's
Voy. S. Pole, i. 256.
; and have been seen in several successive months to the northward, shunning
the winter of their native hemisphere, and seeking warmth and food in the
remote climate of Kamtschatka.

STELLER takes notice of some birds which the Russians rank under the name of
Gloughpichi. He says they are found in great numbers on the isles between Asia
and America; that they were of the size between an Eagle and a Goose, had a
yellow crooked bill, and their plumage of the color of umber, spotted with
white. He also saw numbers feeding on a dead whale. And in crossing the
Penchian sea, he observed several flying: some white, others black Descr. de la
Kamtschatka, 492.
. All these I suspect to have been different sorts of ALBATROSSES, which may
have wandered here; for the Antarctic voyagers observed at lest three species
in their approaches toward the southern pole Cook's Voy. toward the S. Pole,
i. 43, 256, 258.
.

XLIX. AUK. Genesis Birds, LXXXIII.
424. GREAT.
Br. Zool. ii. No 229. -- Edw. No 147. -- Latham, iii. Alca Impennis, Faun.
Suec. No 140. -- Brunnich, No 105. -- Muller, No 139. -- LEV. MUS.
A. With a strong bill, bending at the end; black, and furrowed transversely:
between that and the eyes, a bean-shaped white spot: above, the whole plumage
is of a glossy black; the secondaries alone tipped with white: breast and belly
white: wings very short, and useless for flight, covered with very short
feathers: legs black. To the end of the toes, three feet.

Inhabits (but not very frequently, PLACE.
the coasts of Norway) the Feroe islands (in a certain number of years, St.
Kilda) Iceland, Greenland, and Newfoundland. It lives chiefly on the sea; but
never wanders beyond the soundings. Feeds much on the Lump-fish, Br. Zool. ii.
No 57. and Father Lasher, Br. Zool. iii. No 99. and other fish of that size.
Builds on rocks remote from shore. Lays one egg, six inches long, irregularly
marked with purplish lines on a white ground, or blotched near the thicker end
with black or ferruginous spots. Hatches late. The young, in August, are only
covered with gray down. Their food, at that period, is vegetable, the Rhodiola
Rosea, and other plants, having been found in their stomachs. The Greenlanders
use the gullet as a bladder to support their darts Faun. Groenl. p. 82.
: and I think I have seen some habits of the Eskimaux made of the skins.

425. RAZOR-BILL.
Br. Zool. ii. No 230. -- Le Pingoin, Pl. Enl. 1004, 1005. -- Latham, iii. Alca
Torda, Faun. Suec. No 139. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
A. With a white line from the bill to the eyes: bill thick, bent at the end,
crossed with transverse groves; the largest white, and passing over each
mandible: head, back, wings, and tail black: secondaries tipped with white:
breast and belly white: legs black. WEIGHT near twenty-three ounces. LENGTH
eighteen inches. EXTENT twenty-seven.

PLACE.
Inhabits the north of Europe, Iceland, Greenland, and the coast of Labrador
Doctor PALLAS; to whom it was sent by a Moravian missionary.
. Extends in Europe, along the White sea, into the Arctic Asiatic shores; and
from thence to Kamtschatka and the gulf of Ochotsk, wherever there are lofty
rocks In the British Zoology, ii. No 230, I made matter of wonder, the manner
in which this bird placed its egg on the naked rock, with so secure a balance
that it would not roll off. Mr. Aikin referred me to the following passage in
HARVEY de Generatione Anim. which most clearly expalins the cause: "In the same
island" (the Basi), says he, una mihi monstratur avis, quae ovum duntaxat
singular, sive unicum, parit, idemque super cujusdam lapidis acuti fastigium
collocat (nullo nido, aut conquisita strue supposita), idque tam firmiter, ut
matter abire and redire, salvo ovo, possit. Hoc autem si quis loco dimoveat,
nulla art postea stabiliri potest; quin inde devolutum praeceps in mare ruat.
Locus nempe (ut dixi) caemento albo incrustatur; ovumque, cum nascitur, lenta
and viscosa madet humiditate, qua cito concrescente, tanquam ferrumine quodam
substrato saxo agglutinatur.
. It is the only one of this species which reaches the inland Baltic. It is
found there on the Carls-Ozar isles, near Gothland, and the isle of Bondon off
Angermanland.

426. BLACK-BILLED.
Br. Zool. ii. No 231. -- Alca Pica, Lin. Syst. 210. -- Latham; iii. Alca
Unisuleata, Brunnich, No 102. -- Muller, No 138.
A. With a black bill, marked with one furrow: whole upper side of the body
black; the under, from chin to tail, white. WEIGHT only eighteen ounces. LENGTH
fifteen inches and a half. EXTENT twenty-five.

PLACE.
Inhabits the north of Europe, and the same countries with the former. It
extends farther south than any of the genus; being found on the coasts of
Candia, the ancient Crete; where it is called Vuthamaria, and Calicatczu Belon.
Obs. 12.
. In Greenland neither of them frequent the bays till the intense cold sets in;
but live in the sea, resorting, in the breeding season, to the cliffs in
flocks, where each knows its station. Feed on the cancer pedatus, and other
marine insects; and grow very fat. In winter, resort to the bays to feed; but
at night return to sea. Vie with the Eider-duck, in point of utility to the
Greenlanders. The skins are used for clothing: the raw fat is sucked as broth:
the flesh, half putrid, is much admired: and the whole fowl, dressed with the
intestines in it, esteemed a high delicacy.

They are taken in the sea with darts; or, chaced in canoes, are driven on
shore, and killed by the persons who wait for them; or are taken in nets made
of split whalebone. They are the chief food of the natives during February and
March Crantz, i. 48.
.

The Alca Balthica of Brunnich, No 115, is a variety of these birds, only wants
the white line from the bill to the eyes.

427. PUFFIN.
Br. Zool. ii. No 232. -- Edw. 358. -- Le Macareux, Pl. Enl. 275. -- Latham,
iii. Alca Arctica, Faun. Suec. No 141. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
A. With a short bill, deep at the base, ridged, triangular, ending in a sharp
point; base strongly rimmed; upper part blueish gray; lower red; both furrowed
transversely: crown, and upper part of the body, wings, and tail, black: cheeks
white, bounded by gray: breast and belly white: legs orange-colored. WEIGHT
twelve ounces. LENGTH twelve inches. EXTENT twenty-one.

Inhabits all the coasts of northern Europe, the icy sea, PLACE.
and all the way to Kamtschatka; where they are larger and blacker than usual,
and their crown cinereous. Found in the Feroe isles, where they are called
Lunda; extends to Iceland, Greenland, and Spitzbergen. Catesby enumerates this
species, and says that the GREAT AUK, and RAZOR-BILL, frequent the coasts of
Carolina during winter Catesby, App. xxxvi.
. In the same season, numbers of these birds, and the RAZOR-BILLS, frequent the
coast of Andalusia; but disappear in the spring. It is supposed that they
continue swimming from the northern parts in search of food; the fish of the
softer latitudes not retiring to the great deeps out of their reach, as is the
case with the fish of more rigorous climates.

428. LABRADOR.
A. With a bill about an inch and a quarter long, much carinated at top, not
very deep, a little unequal; upper mandible dusky, lower whitish, marked with a
black spot, and angulated like that of a Gull: crown, and upper part of the
body, wings, and tail, dusky: lower part white: legs red. SIZE of the former.

PLACE.
Inhabits the Labrador coast? -- BR. MUS.

429. LITTLE.
Br. Zool. ii. No 233. -- Edw. 91. -- Latham, iii. Alca All, Faun. Suec. No
142. -- Brunnich, No 106. -- Rot-ges, or Rottet, Marten's Spitzb. 85. -- LEV.
MUS.
A. With a short, black, unequal, and thick bill: whole upper part black: cheeks
and lower parts white: scapulars streaked downwards with white: legs dirty
greenish white: webs black: throat of the male is black. In SIZE not superior
to that of a Blackbird.

PLACE.
Inhabits the north of Europe, as far as Spitzbergen; but I believe does not
extend to Asia. Frequent in Greenland. Dives well. Is always putting its bill
to the water as if drinking. Grows very fat in stormy weather, when the waves
bring small Crabs and little fish near the surface. Is called in Newfoundland
the Ice-bird, being the harbinger of ice Crantz, i. 85.
. Varies to quite white; and sometimes is found with a reddish breast. Is
called by the Dutch, Rottet, from its note.

430. ANCIENT.
A. With a black bill, crown, and throat: on each side of the head a short
whitish crest: on the hind part of the neck are numbers of white, long, loose,
and very narrow feathers, which give it an aged look: wings, back, and tail,
sooty: breast and belly white. SIZE of the former.

PLACE.
Inhabits from the west of North America to Kamtschatka and the Kurile islands.
-- PALLAS, MS. -- LEV. MUS.

431. PYGMY.
A. With the bill black and ridged: crown, upper part of the neck, back, wings,
and tail, dusky: under side of the neck and breast of a deep iron gray: belly
of a dirty white: legs dusky. SIZE of the Water Ouzel.

Seen in vast multitudes about Bird Island, PLACE.
between Asia and America.

432. TUFTED.
Alca Cirrhata, Pallas, Spicil. Zool. fasc. v. 7. tab. i. -- Latham, iii. --
LEV. MUS.
A. With a strong thick bill, of a sub-triangular form, arched, hooked near the
end; the lower mandible truncated; the upper mandible, near the base, rising
into a distinct prominence: the bill of the male marked with three furrows; of
the female with two: its colors a fine red, yellow, and corneous: from the
sides of the head are two long silky tufts of a yellow color, falling down the
sides of the neck to the back: cheeks white: the rest of the plumage entirely
black; lightest beneath: legs of a bright red. In SIZE superior to the Puffin
Auk.

Inhabits only the shores of Kamtschatka, the Kurile islands, PLACE.
and those intervening between Kamtschatka and America.

In manners this species greatly resembles the Puffin. MANNERS.
Lives all day at sea, but at no great distance from the rocks: comes on shore
at night: burrows a yard deep under ground, and makes there a nest, with
feathers and sea plants: is monogamous, and lodges there the whole night with
its mate. Lays one white egg, in the latter end of May or beginning of June.
Bites fiercely when taken. Feeds on Crabs, Shrimps, and shellfish, which it
forces from the rocks with its strong bill.

The females of Kamtschatka copy from this bird the fashion of hanging, from
behind each ear, tufts made of slips of the white part of the skins of the
Glutton. These are reckoned the most valuable present a lover can give his
mistress, or a husband to his wife, and the strongest proof of affection.

Their magicians formerly used to recommend the bills of this bird, mixed with
those of the Puffin, and the parti-colored hairs of Seals, as a powerful
amulet. The distant islanders still bear the bills in their helmets and caps,
and make their garments of the skins; but the Kamtschatkans at present make no
use of any part but the eggs, which are a common food; the flesh being hard and
insipid.

433. PERROQUET.
Alca Psittacula, Pallas, Spicil. Zool. fasc. v. 15. tab. ii. -- Latham, iii.
A. With an oval bill, or the upper and lower parts unequal, and of a bright red
color: from the remote corner of each eye is a very slender tuft of fine white
feathers, hanging down the neck: the head and upper part of the body dusky; the
lower whitish, varied with black edges: legs dirty yellow: webs dusky. About
the SIZE of the Little Auk.

PLACE.
Inhabits Kamtschatka, the isles toward Japan, those toward America, and the
western shores of America, in great abundance. They swim in flocks; but never,
unless tempest-driven, go far from the rocks, to which they resort toward
night, and shelter themselves in the fissures or holes, without keeping any
certain nest. Are the most stupid of all birds, and caught by the natives in
this ridiculous manner: -- toward evening they put on their garment with great
sleeves, pull out their arms, and leave the sleeves distended, which the birds
will creep into by flocks, and thus become an easy prey.

The stupidity of this species has often been the salvation of mariners sailing
by night in these dangerous parts; being often warned of the neighborhood of a
dreadful rock, by these birds flying on board their vessel, mistaking it for
their designed lodging. They lay one egg, uncommonly great for their size; it
is of a whitish color, speckled with brown, dusky, or yellow; and is esteemed
for its delicacy.

434. CRESTED.
Alca Cristatella, Pallas Spicil. Zool. fasc. v. 18. tab. iii. -- Latham, iii.
A. With a scarlet bill: upper mandible unequal, and end hooked; and near the
angle of the mouth a scarlet heart-shaped substance: on the forehead rise some
upright feathers; and above that a fine crest of longer feathers, curling
forwards: head and neck black: behind each eye hang a few narrow feathers: back
black, marked with dusky ferruginous strokes: rump hoary: wings sooty: under
side of the body of a dusky cinereous cast: legs livid: webs dusky. SIZE of the
Missel Thrush.

Frequent on Bird Island, between Asia and America. PLACE.


435. DUSKY.
Alca Tetracula, Pallas Spicil. Zool. fasc. v. 23. tab. iv. -- Latham, iii.
A. With a small arched bill, dusky and yellow: above the base, on the
forehead, the feathers divide into two points: beyond each eye is a whitish
descending line, in which are a few setaceous feathers: general color of the
bird dusky: belly hoary: on the hind part of the head and neck, and near the
tail, a few rusty marks: tail very short, dusky, and some of the feathers tipped
with ferruginous: legs livid: webs intensely black. LENGTH eleven inches.
EXTENT eighteen.

Frequent about Kamtschatka, the Kurile isles, PLACE.
and those situated toward America. Live in flocks on the rocks; but appear at
sea solitary: most stupid, and clumsy. Can scarcely fly; or stand, except they
rest against the rocks, where they lodge in the fissures the whole night, or in
burrows, which they make with great facility. They swim and dive admirably
well. Are exceedingly bad food; but are eaten by the almost-famished natives.

L. GUILLEMOT. Genesis Birds, LXXXIV.
436. FOOLISH.
Br. Zool. ii. No 234. -- Colymbus Troille, Faun. Suec. No 149. -- Latham, iii.
-- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
G. With the bill three inches long: head, neck, back, wings, and tail, of a
deep mouse-color: secondaries tipped with white: breast and belly pure white:
legs dusky. WEIGHT twenty ounces, LENGTH seventeen inches. EXTENT twenty-seven
and a half.

PLACE.
Inhabits all parts of the north of Europe, to Spitzbergen; the coast of
Lapmark, and along the white and icy sea, quite to Kamtschatka and North
America. Found in Newfoundland. Not mentioned among the birds of Greenland. Is
a species that winters on the coast of Italy MS. List, of Birds of Italy, sent
to me by that eminent Ornithologist, M. SCOPOLI, from Pavia.
; possibly those which quit England before that season.

437. BLACK.
Br. Zool. ii. No 236 -- Colymbus Grylle, Faun. Suec. No 148. -- Latham, iii.
-- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
G. With the bill an inch and a half long: inside of the mouth of a fine red:
bill, head, neck, back, tail, and under side of the body, black: wings dusky;
the coverts marked with a bed of white; secondaries tipped with white: legs
scarlet. LENGTH fourteen inches. EXTENT twenty-two.

PLACE.
Found in all the same places with the former, except Italy; doubtful as to
Newfoundland. Inhabits Hudson's Bay the whole year. The young are mottled with
black and white, and sometimes are quite white Mr. Hutchins assures me, that
the old birds do not vary, as has been imagined.
. Are excellent diverse; therefore called sometimes Diving Pigeons. Make a
twittering noise. The Greenlanders eat the flesh, use the skin for clothing,
and the legs as lures for fish.

(...) billed Grebe No ^^8. Marbled Guillemot (...)


In Kamtschatka is a variety, with a white oblique line issuing from the white
spot on the wings.

438. MARBLED.
G. With a black bill: crown dusky: throat, breast, and belly, mottled with
black and white: back and sides very glossy, and marbled with black and
rust-color: wings dusky; greater coverts edged with white: tail black: legs
yellow: webs black. LENGTH nine inches.

Inhabits Prince William's Sound, PLACE.
on the western coast of North America, and probably Kamtschatka. -- LEV. MUS.

LI. DIVER. Genesis Birds, LXXXV.
439. NORTHERN.
Br. Zool. ii. No 237. -- L'Imbrim, ou grand Plongeon de la Mer de Nord, De
Buffon, viii. 258. -- Pl. Enl. 952. Colymbus Glacialis, Lin. Syst. 221. --
Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
D. With head and neck black: throat, and hind part of the neck, marked with a
semilunar spot of white, and with white streaks pointing downwards: upper part
of the body and wings black, varied with white spots: tail dusky: breast and
belly white: legs black. LENGTH three feet five inches. EXTENT four feet eight.
WEIGHT sixteen pounds.

PLACE.
Inhabits the north of Europe, and spreads along the Arctic coasts, as far as
the mouth of the Ob only. Is found about Spitzbergen, Iceland, Hudson's Bay,
and as low as New York. Makes its nest, in the more northern regions, on the
little isles of fresh water lakes. Every pair keeps a lake to itself. Sees
well: flies very high, and, darting obliquely, falls secure into its nest.
Tries to save itself by diving, not flying. The young defend themselves stoutly
with their bills. Appears in Greenland in April or the beginning of May. Goes
away in September or October, on the first fall of snow. The natives use the
skins for clothing; and the Indians about Hudson's Bay adorn their heads with
circlets of their feathers.

440. IMBER.
Br. Zool. ii. No 238. -- Le Grand Plongeon, De Buffon, viii. 251. -- Pl. Enl.
251. Colymbus Immer, Lin. Syst. 222. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
D. With a dusky head: back, coverts of wings, and tail, dusky, elegantly edged
with greyish white: primaries and tail black: breast and belly silvery: legs
black: webs marked with white stripes. Larger than the last.

PLACE.
Inhabits New York during winter. Extends to Kamtschatka; but in no part of
Sibiria or Russia. Found in Iceland, and most parts of northern Europe.

441. SPECKLED.
Br. Zool. ii. No 239. -- Le petit Plongeon, De Buffon, viii. 254. -- Pl. Enl.
992. Colymbus Stellatus, Soehane, Brunnich, No 130. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV.
MUS. -- BL. MUS.
D. With the bill turning a little upwards: head dark gray, spotted with white:
hind part of the neck of an uniform gray: back, coverts of wings, primaries,
and tail, dusky; the two first spotted with white: from chin to tail a fine
silvery white. WEIGHT two pounds and a half. LENGTH two feet three. EXTENT
three feet nine.

These three species visit New York in the winter, PLACE.
and return very far north to breed. This is common about the Baltic and White
Sea; but not observed in other parts of Russia; yet is a native of Kamtschatka
Steller, in Nov. Com. Petrop. iv. 424.
. It lays two eggs in the grass, on the borders of the lakes, not far from the
sea. The eggs are exactly oval, of the size of those of a Goose, dusky, marked
with a few black spots.

442. STRIPED.
D. With a strong black bill, three inches long: head and neck light gray,
striped regularly downwards with long narrow black lines: back and scapulars
dusky and plain: primaries, tail, and legs, dusky: cheeks, and whole under side
of the body, of a glossy white. WEIGHT between two and three pounds.

Inhabits the inland lakes of Hudson's Bay, PLACE.
about a hundred miles southward of York Fort. Lays, in June, two eggs. Flies
high, and passes backwards and forwards, making a great noise; which is said to
portend rain. Detested by the natives, who look on this note as supernatural.
-- Mr. Hutchins.

443. RED-THROATED.
Br. Zool. ii. No 240 -- Le Lumme, ou petit Plongeon de Mer de Nord, De Buffon,
viii. 261. -- Pl. Enl. 308. Colymbus Septentrionalis, Lin. Syst. 220. --
Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
D. With head and chin of an uniform gray: throat, and lower side of the neck,
of a dull red: upper part gray, streaked with black: upper part of body, wings,
and tail, dusky: back and coverts of wings spotted with white: breast and belly
white: legs dusky. WEIGHT three pounds. EXTENT three feet five. LENGTH, to the
tip of the tail, two feet.

PLACE.
Found in the north of Europe and Iceland, along the northern coast of Russia,
Sibiria, and Kamtschatka; but does not haunt the inland lakes. Inhabits the
rivers of Hudson's Bay during summer. Prey much on the fish entangled in the
nets; but are often caught themselves in their rapid pursuit of the fish. Mr.
Hutchins took fourteen out of a single net in one tide. Numbers of every
species of Diver are frequently taken in this manner about Hudson's Bay.

444. BLACK-THROATED.
Br. Zool. ii. No 241. -- Colymbus Arcticus, Lomm. Faun. Suec. No 150. Le
Lumme, etc. De Buffon, viii. 261. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
D. With bill, forehead, and cheeks, black: hind part of the neck cinereous:
sides of the neck streaked downwards with black: fore part varying with black,
purple, and green: back and coverts of wings dusky; the first marked with
square, the last with round white spots: breast and belly white: tail black:
legs partly red, partly dusky.

PLACE.
This, and the preceding, inhabit Hudson's Bay Edwards, 147.
, the north of Europe, and Iceland. Few in Russia: but frequent in the inland
lakes of Sibiria, especially those of the Arctic regions; but in the wandering
season spread over all latitudes.

The Norwegians remark the sagacity of these birds, in presaging the change of
weather. When the skies are big with rain, they fly wildly about, and make the
most horrible hoarse noise, fearing that the swelled waters should invade their
nest; on the contrary, in fine weather, their note is different, and seemingly
in an exulting strain. The Norwegians think it impious, to destroy, or even to
disturb, this species Worm. Mus. 304.
.

The Swedes have less superstition: they dress the skins; which, when prepared,
show in the clearest manner, on the inside, the quincuncial disposition of
feathers. They are exceedingly tough, and are used for gun-cases and facings
for winter-caps Faun. Suec.
.

LII. SKIMMER. Genesis Birds, LXXXVI.
445. CUT-WATER.
Cut-water, Catesby, i. 90. -- Le Bec en Ciseaux, De Buffon, viii. 454. tab.
36. -- Pl. Enl. 357. Rynchops nigra, Lin. Syst. 229. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV.
MUs. -- BL. MUS.
SK. With the bill greatly compressed, the edges sharp; lower mandible four
inches and a half long; upper only three; base red; the rest black: forehead,
chin, front of neck, breast, and belly, white: head, and whole upper part of
the body, black: wings of the same color: lower part of the inner webs of the
primaries white: tail short, and a little forked; middle feathers dusky; the
others white on their sides: legs weak and red. LENGTH one foot eight inches.
EXTENT three feet seven.

PLACE.
Inhabits America, from New York to Guiana Barrera France Equin. 135.
. Skims nimbly along the water, with its under mandible just beneath the
surface, feeding on the insects and small fish as it proceeds. Frequents also
oyster-banks; its bill being partly, like that of the Oyster-catcher, adapted
for preying on those shellfish. In Mr. Ray's Synopsis 194. No 5. tab. i. No 5.
is a sketch, sent from Madras, of one of this species.

LIII. TERN. Genesis Birds, LXXXVII.
446. NODDY.
Catesby, i. 88. -- Le Noddi, De Buffon, viii. 461. -- Pl. Enl. 461. Sterna
Stolida, Lin. Syst. 227. -- LEV. MUS.
T. With a black long bill: crown white, gradually darkening to the hind part:
whole plumage brown: wings and tail almost dusky. WEIGHT four ounces.

Inhabit, in vast numbers, the Bahama islands, PLACE.
where they breed on the bare rocks. In the breeding season they, and numbers
of other birds, are seen in great flights, flying near the surface of the
water, continually dropping on the small fish which are driven to the top, to
shun the persecution of the greater. The whole air resounds with the noise of
the birds, who seem in full exultation on their success; which is expressed in
vast variety of notes. A rippling and whiteness in the water marks the course
of the shoals of fish; and above them the air is animated with their feathered
enemies. Where the strongest rippling is, there appear the thickest swarms of
fowls. As soon as the time of nutrition is over, these birds disperse over the
ocean separately; and are seen at the distance of hundreds of leagues from
land; but very seldom on the outside of the tropics. Their stupidity is
notorious; for they will suffer themselves to be taken by the hand, when they
settle, as they often do, on the yards of ships.

447. SOOTY.
T. With a black bill, two inches long: forehead white: crown, hind part of the
head and neck, back, and wings, of a sooty blackness: cheeks, fore part of the
neck, breast, belly, and ridge of the wings, white: tail greatly forked; tip of
the exterior feathers white; the rest of the tail dusky. Nearly the SIZE, of
the Common Gull.

Sent from NEW YORK to Sir Ashton Lever. PLACE.
These birds are found in very remote climates. They swarm in the isle of
Ascension, 8 south latitude. Emit a most sharp and shrill cry: are quite
fearless; and fly so close to the few men who visit that distant isle, as
almost to touch them. They lay only two or three eggs, which are of a
surprising size, yellowish, spotted with brown and pale violet. The flocks
which possess the different parts of the isle, lay at different times. In some
quarters the young were found very large; in others only a single egg was found
just then laid. Mr. Osbeck and Doctor Forster, who were here in April and May,
are silent about this species: possibly it was then on its migrations. It is to
the Comte de Buffon Ois. viii. 345.
we owe this account; who received it from that observant nobleman the Marquis
de Querhoent.

448. GREAT.
Br. Zool. ii. No 254. -- Sterna Hirundo, Tarna, Faun. Suec. No 158. Le Pierre
garin, ou grande Hirondelle de mer, De Buffon, viii. 331. -- Pl. Enl. 987. --
Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
T. With bill and feet of a fine crimson color: forehead, throat, and whole
under side, of a pure white: crown black: upper part of the body, and coverts
of the wings, an elegant pale gray: tail much forked, white, with the exterior
edges of the three outmost gray. WEIGHT four ounces one quarter. LENGTH
fourteen inches. EXTENT thirty.

PLACE.
Inhabits Europe, as high as Spitzbergen; and also the northern parts of North
America, as far as Hudson's Bay. It appears in New England in May, and goes
away in autumn: called there the Mackerel Gull. It is found on the Arctic
coasts of Sibiria and Kamtschatka. Retires even from England at approach of
winter.

449. LESSER.
Br. Zool. ii. No 255. -- Sterna minuta, Lin. Syst. 228. La petite Hirondelle
de mer, De Buffon, viii. 337. -- Pl. Enl. 996. -- Latham, iii. LEV. MUS. -- BL.
MUS.
T. With a yellow bill and legs; the first tipped with black: forehead and cheeks
white: from the back to the eyes is a black line: crown black: breast and belly
of the most exquisite and glossy whiteness, unequalled by the finest satin:
back and wings of a pale gray: tail white; less forked than that of the
preceding. WEIGHT two ounces eight grains: LENGTH eight inches and a half:
EXTENT nineteen and a half.

This species is too tender to endure the high northern latitudes, PLACE.
nor even beyond the Baltic. Is met with in the south of Russia, and about the
Black and Caspian sea; and in Sibiria about the Irtish. In America is seen,
during summer, about New York.

450. BLACK.
Br. Zool. ii. No 256. -- Sterna fissipes, Lin. Syst. 228. Le Guifette noire,
ou l'Epouvantail, De Buffon, viii. 341. -- Pl. Enl. 333. -- Latham, iii. --
LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
T. With the bill, head, neck, breast, and belly, black: vent white: wings and
back of a deep ash-color: tail short; exterior feathers white; the others
cinereous: legs a dirty red: webs deeply hollowed in the middle, so as to form
a crescent.

This is the species which I apprehend was sent to the Royal Society from
Hudson's Bay; and was seen in vast flocks beyond lat. 41 north, PLACE.
long. 47 west from London, by Mr. Kalm Voyage, i. 23.
, somewhat south of the bank of Newfoundland. Is found in Europe, as far as
Iceland. Very numerous in Sibiria, and about the salt lakes of the deserts of
Tartary, which they animate by their note and active flight and motions.

A. KAMTSCHATKAN. PALLAS, MS. La Guiffette? De Buffon, viii. 339. -- Pl. Enl.
924.
T. With the bill and crown black: forehead and space over the eyes white.

Observed by Steller about Kamtschatka. PLACE.
A bird seemingly of this species was shot on the Severn a few miles below
Shrewsbury; and is among the elegant drawings of my friend, Joseph Plymley, Esquire
of Longnor.

B. CASPIAN T. Terna Caspia, Mr. Lepechin, in Nov. Com. Petrop. xiv. 500. tab.
xiii. -- PALLAS, 483. tab. xxii. -- Latham, iii.
T. With a scarlet bill, three inches long: crown and hind part of the head of
an intense black, hoared with white: space round the eyes black; under each a
white crescent: cheeks, lower side of the neck, and whole under side of the
body, of a snowy whiteness: upper part cinereous and hoary: six first primaries
darker, edged and tipped with black: tall deeply forked, and of a pure white:
legs black. The specimen described by Doctor PALLAS was of darker colors;
perhaps differed in age and sex. LENGTH near two feet. EXTENT three feet two
inches. Seems, in the air, as big as a KITE.

PLACE.
Inhabits the Caspian sea, about the mouth of the Yaik. Makes a laughing noise.
Fishes both in the sea and rivers. Remains long suspended in the air, then
dashes on its prey; and skims the surface of the water like a Swallow. Lays, on
the back of desert isles, two eggs marked with dusky spots. Wanders up the
great river Oby, even, toward the frozen ocean PALLAS MS. Catalog.
.

LIVE. GULL. Genesis Birds, LXXXVIII.
451. BLACK-BACKED.
Br. Zool. ii. No 242. -- Larus marinus, Faun. Suec. No 155. Le Goeland a
manteau noir, De Buffon, viii. 405. -- Pl. Enl. 990. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV.
MUS. -- BL. MUS.
G. With a strong pale yellow bill; the lower mandible marked with a black
spot, encircled with red: upper part of the back and wings black; primaries
tipped with white: the rest of the plumage of a snowy whiteness: legs pale
flesh-color. SIZE.
WEIGHT sometimes five pounds. LENGTH twenty-nine inches. EXTENT five feet nine.

Inhabits northern Europe, as high as Iceland, Lapmark, PLACE.
and the White Sea; Greenland, and the coast of North America down to New York
and South Carolina, where they are called Old Wives. Is observed, in Greenland,
to attack other birds, especially the Eider Duck. The Eskimaux and Greenlanders
make their garments of the skins of these, as well as other water fowl. This
was a practice, in early times, with every people to whom manufactures were
unknown. Non avium plumae in usum vestis conseruntur Senecae Epist. Ep. xc.
?

452. HERRING.
Br. Zool. ii. No 246. -- Larus fuscus, Faun. Suec. No 154. Le Goeland a
manteau gris brun, De Buffon, viii. 410. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
G. With a yellow bill; lower mandible marked with a red spot: irides
straw-colored: head, neck, and tail, white: back and coverts of wings
ash-color: primaries dusky, with a white spot near their ends: legs of a pale
flesh-color; vary to yellow. WEIGHT about thirty ounces. LENGTH twenty-three
inches. EXTENT four feet four.

Inhabits the north of Europe, Iceland, and Greenland: PLACE.
even in the last country a common species; and continues there the whole year.
Breeds among broken rocks: much upon wing: is caught in snares, or by a baited
hook. The flesh and eggs eaten; and the skin used, like that of most other
Gulls, for garments. Is found in Hudson's Bay during summer: breeds there, and
retires at approach of winter. It breeds likewise on the islands on the coast
of South Carolina. Is frequent about the Caspian and Black seas, and their
great rivers: also about the greatest lakes of Sibiria.

453. WAGEL.
Br. Zool. ii. No 247. -- Larus naevius, Lin. Syst. 225. Le Goeland vary, ou
le Grisard, De Buffon, viii. 413. -- Pl. Enl. 266. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
-- BL. MUS.
G. With a black bill: irides dusky: whole plumage, above and below, varied
with brown, white, and cinereous: primaries dusky: tail mottled with dusky and
white; near the end a black bar; tips whitish; legs of a dirty white. WEIGHT
thirty-two ounces. LENGTH near two feet. EXTENT four feet eight.

PLACE.
Inhabits the north of Europe, Iceland, Hudson's Bay, and Newfoundland. Frequent
about the lakes of Russia, and the west of Sibiria.

454. LAUGHING.
Catesby, i. 89. -- Will. Orn. 346. No iv. -- La Mouette rieuse, De Buffon,
viii. 433. -- Pl. Enl. 970. Larus Atricilla, Lin. Syst. 225. -- Latham, iii. --
LEV. MUS.
G. With a red bill: black head: the ends of the primaries black: back and
coverts of the wings cinereous: all the rest of the plumage white: legs black
and long. LENGTH about eighteen inches. EXTENT three feet.

PLACE.
Inhabits the Bahama islands. Their note resembles a coarse laugh.

455. BLACK-HEADED.
Br. Zool. ii. No 252. -- Latus ridibundus, Lin. Syst. 225. -- La Mouette
rieuse, De Buffon, viii. 433. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
G. With a red bill and legs: head and throat black: neck, belly, and tail,
white: back and wings ash-colored: ends of the primaries marked with black.
LENGTH about fifteen inches. EXTENT thirty-seven. WEIGHT ten ounces.

Inhabits New England: comes in May, leaves the country in August. PLACE.
In Europe, not farther north than England. In all parts of Russia and Sibiria,
and even Kamtschatka. Has the laughing notes of the former, of which it seems a
variety.

456. KITTIWAKE.
Br. Zool. ii. No 250. -- Phipps, 187. -- Larus Rissa, Lin. Syst. 224.
Kutge-gehef, Marten's Spitzbergen, 82. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS?
G. With a yellow bill: inside of the mouth orange: head, neck, under side of
the body, and tail, white: behind each ear is a black spot: the back and
coverts pale gray: primaries dusky, with a white spot near the ends: legs
dusky: no back toe. LENGTH fourteen inches. EXTENT three feet two.

Is found about Newfoundland. Inhabits Spitzbergen, Greenland, PLACE.
Iceland, and the north of Europe, the arctic coast of Asia, and Kamtschatka.

457. IVORY.
Larus eburneus, Phipps's Voy. 187. -- Larus candidus, Faun. Groenl. No 67.
Rathsher, Marten's Spitzb. 77. -- La Mouette blanch, De Buffon, viii. 422. --
Pl. Enl. 994. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
G. With the bill and legs of a lead-color: whole plumage of a snowy whiteness.
LENGTH, to the end of the tail, sixteen inches. EXTENT thirty-seven.

PLACE.
Inhabits Spitzbergen and Greenland: also very frequent in the frozen sea
between Asia and America; and off cape Denbigh, a little to the south of
Bering's Streights. Keeps usually far at sea; but when it does alight, is very
stupid, and easily killed. The young are spotted with black, and their bills
are black.

458. COMMON.
Br. Zool. ii. No 249. -- Larus canus. Homaka. Mave. Lappis Straule, Faun.
Suec. No 153. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
G. With a yellow bill: head, neck, tail, and all the under side of the body,
white: back and coverts of wings light gray: primaries dusky; near their
extremities a white spot: legs dull white, tinged with green. LENGTH seventeen
inches. EXTENT three feet. WEIGHT twelve ounces and a half.

PLACE.
Inhabits as high as Iceland; and is common about the Russian lakes. Is frequent
on the coast of Newfoundland.

459. ARCTIC.
Br. Zool. ii. No 245. -- Phipps, 187. -- Le Labbe a longue queue, De Buffon,
viii. 445. -- Pl. Enl. 762. -- Ph. Trans. lxii. 421. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV.
MUS.
G. With a dusky bill, much hooked at the end: upper part covered with a thin
cere: crown black; back, wings, and tail, dusky: neck, breast, and belly,
white: tail cuneiform; two middle feathers near four inches longer than the
rest. FEMALE wholly brown; under side lightest. LENGTH twenty-one inches.

PLACE.
Inhabits, in America, Hudson's Bay Ph. Trans. lxii.
; all the north of Europe to Spitzbergen; frequent in Greenland. Feeds almost
entirely on fish caught by other birds, which it persecutes till they drop
their prey, or vomit for fear; when it catches their droppings before it falls
into the water. The Dutch call it, from a now exploded notion, that it lives on
the dung of fowl, the Stront-jagger. Extends along the arctic coast to
Kamtschatka. Ascends the great rivers, the Ob, Jenesei, and Lena, above a
hundred leagues inland.

460. BLACK-TOED.
Br. Zool. ii. No 244. -- Catharacta cepphus. Strandhoeg, Brunnich, No 126. --
Le Labbe, ou Stercoraire, De Buffon, viii. 441. tab. 34. -- Pl. Enl. 991. --
Latham iii. -- LEV. MUS.
G. With a bill resembling the former: head and neck of a dirty white, marked
with dusky spots: back, scapulars, coverts of wings, and tail, black, prettily
edged with pale rust: bread and belly white, crossed with numerous dusky and
yellowish lines: the sides and vent barred crossways with black and white: tail
black, tipped with white; the exterior webs of the outmost, spotted with rust;
the two middle, feathers are near an inch longer than the others. These birds
vary into lighter and darker colors; but the color of the toes are specific
marks: the legs are of a blueish lead-color: the toes and webs have their lower
parts of a deep black. WEIGHT eleven ounces. LENGTH fifteen inches. EXTENT
thirty-nine.

Inhabits, in America, the coast of Newfoundland and Hudson's Bay: PLACE.
is hated by the natives, who have a notion that the birds are companions to
the detested Eskimaux. I cannot, in Europe, trace it higher than Great Britain
and Denmark; yet it has been shot, in the Atlantic ocean, as near to the line
as north lat. 8, west long. 22. 12.

A. SKUA, Br. Zool. ii. No 243. -- Catharacta Skua, Brunnich, No 125. --
Muller, No 167. Le Goeland brun, De Buffon, viii. 408. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV.
MUS.
G. With a strong sharp black bill and cere: head, back, and coverts of the
wings, brown and rust-colored: primaries and secondaries dusky; the shafts of
the primaries white: on the secondaries a great white spot: breast and belly of
a rusty ash: tail brown, white at the base: legs black and scaly: claws black,
sharp, strong, and hooked like those of a KITE. LENGTH two feet. EXTENT four
and a half. WEIGHT three pounds.

PLACE.
Inhabits Europe very locally; only from Foula and Unst, two of the Schetland
isles, to the Feroe isles, Norway, and as far as Iceland. Its manners, such as
its great courage, and fierceness in defending its young, in driving away the
eagle from its haunts, and, as is firmly asserted by Mr. Schroter, a surgeon in
the Feroe isles, its preying on the lesser water fowl, like a rapacious land
bird, are fully described in the British Zoology. They abound about Port
Egmont, in the Falkland islands, and are therefore styled by navigators, Port
Egmont Hens. They have been observed in many parts of the Pacific ocean, as low
as lat. 36. 56 south, to the east Cook's Voy. Hawksworth's Coll. ii. 283.
of New Zeland; and as high, in the same hemisphere, as lat. 67. 15 Forster's
Voy. i. 109.
. The navigators found them in great plenty, in their breeding season, in the
latter end of December, about Christmas Sound, in Terra del Fuego, making their
nests in the dry grass. They have not been remarked in other parts of the
globe, nearer than the Schetlands.

B. GLAUCOUS, Larus Glaucus, Brunnich, No 148. -- Muller, No 169. -- Faun.
Groenl. No 64. -- Latham, iii.
G. With a yellow bill, and orange spot near the end: head and lower part of
the body white: back and wings of a fine hoary gray; primaries darkest, and
tipped with white: legs of a pale fulvous hue. In SIZE superior to the Herring
Gull.

PLACE.
Inhabits Norway, Lapmark, Iceland, Greenland, and Spitzbergen. Is called by the
Dutch, Burgermeister, being the master of all other sea fowl. It builds its
nest high on the cliffs: preys on dead whales: attends the Walruses, in order
to feed on their dung; and, as Frederic Martens asserts, will even destroy and
eat the young of the Razor-bills. It also feeds on fish; and does not despise
the berries of the Empetrum Nigrum. It is almost continually on wing; and makes
a hoarse noise, like the Raven.

C. SILVERY. Larus argentatus, Brunnich, No 149. -- Latham, iii.
G. With a white head and neck, streaked downwards with cinereous lines: back
and under part of the body like the former species: lower part of the primaries
greyish; upper black; the tips white: bill yellow, with an orange spot. SIZE of
the Herring Gull. This and the former seem nearly.

Inhabits Norway. PLACE.


D. TARROCK, Br. Zool. ii. No 251. -- Larus tridactylus, Faun. Suec. No 157. --
La Mouette tachetee, De Buffon, viii. 424. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
G. With a strong, thick, black, bill: with white head, neck, breast, and
belly: behind each ear a black spot: on the hind part of the neck a black
crescent: back and scapulars blueish gray: ten middle feathers of the tail
white, tipped with black; outmost quite white: a protuberance instead of the back
toe. SIZE of the former.

Inhabits Europe quite to Iceland and Spitzbergen; PLACE.
the Baltic and White sea; and again in Kamtschatka.

E. RED-LEGGED.
G. With blood-red bill and legs: head and neck white, mottled about the
former: back and coverts of wings fine gray: lesser coverts mottled: under side
of body and the tail white; the last tipped with black. SIZE of the Black-cap
Gull.

A bird of this species was brought from Kamtschatka. PLACE.
Another of the same kind has been shot in Anglesey.

LV. PETREL. Genesis Birds, LXXXIX.
461. FULMAR.
Br. Zool. ii. No 257. -- Procellaria glacialis, Faun. Suec. No 144. -- Petrel
de l'isle de St. Kilda, Pl. Enl. 59. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
P. With a strong yellow bill: head, neck, tail, and under side of the body,
white: back and coverts of wings cinereous: primaries dusky: legs of a pale
yellow. Rather larger than the Common Gull.

PLACE.
Abound in the seas of Spitzbergen and Greenland, and common in those between
Kamtschatka and America: the latter are darker colored than the former. They
are equally abundant in the southern hemisphere. Captain Cook found them among
the ice, in his voyage toward the south pole, in lat. 64. 55 Cook's Voy. S.
Pole, i. 252.
; in lat. 59, to the south of the isle of New Georgia Forster's Voy. ii. 534.
; and even in the moderate climate of lat. 34. 45, not remote from the Cape of
Good Hope Forster, i. 52.
. They keep chiefly in the high seas, and feed on dead whales, or any thing
that offers on the surface; but will, with their strong bills, pick the fat out
of the backs of living whales, especially of the wounded; whose bloody track
they will follow by hundreds, to watch its rising. Their flight resembles
running on the top of the water; for which reason the Norwegians call it
Hav-hest, or Seahorse; and Storm-fugl, or Storm-fowl, as being supposed to be
a presage of tempests. The Dutch call it Mallmucke, or the Foolish Fly, from
their multitudes, and their stupidity. They very seldom. come, to land, unless
they chance to lose their way in the mists, which are so frequent on the coast
of Greenland during the month of August. They breed on the broken rocks about
Disco, and remote from the main land.

They are, by reason of their food, excessively fetid; yet the flesh is used as
a food by the Greenlanders, both raw and dressed. The fat is also eaten, and
serves to supply their lamps with oil. The prey of these birds being chiefly
the blubber of cetaceous fish, it is quickly converted into oil, which serves
the Fulmars for a double end; as a sustenance for the young, and a defense
against. their assailants; for they spurt it, on being seized, out of their
mouths and nostrils, into the faces of the persons who lay hold of them. The
Greenlanders take them by darting them in the water.

462. SHEAR-WATER.
Br. Zool. ii. No 258. -- Edw. Av. 359. -- Procellaria Puffinus, Lin. Syst.
213. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
P. With a dusky bill, more slender than that of the former: head, wings, and
whole upper part of the body, of a sooty blackness: lower part, from chin to
tail, and the inner coverts of the wings, white: legs weak, compressed; whitish
before, dusky behind. LENGTH fifteen inches. EXTENT thirty-one. WEIGHT
seventeen ounces.

Inhabits the northern parts of Europe, Iceland, and Greenland. PLACE.
Consort with the last in Greenland: and, in misty weather, quite cover the
sea. It extends, in the Atlantic ocean, to America, and again almost to the
Cape of Good Hope Cook's Voy. to S. Pole, 12. 13.
; and is also found in the southern hemisphere, having been seen in south lat.
13. 13, in Captain Cook's passage from Easter island to Otaheite Ibid.
: and again, in numbers, as low as cape Deseada, in south latitude 53 Ibid.
.

463. FORK-TAIL.
P. With the whole upper and under parts of a cinerous gray: bill much hooked,
and black: lesser coverts of wings dusky; greater, deep gray: exterior webs of
primaries dusky; interior, light gray: tail forked, and of a light gray. LENGTH
nine inches.

Taken among the ice between Asia and America. PLACE.


464. STORMY.
Br. Zool. ii. No 259. -- Procellaria pelagica, Stormwaders Fogel, Faun. Suec.
No 143. Le Petrel, ou l'Oiseau tempete, Pl. Enl. 993. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV.
MUS.
P. With a black bill, much hooked, at the end: rump and feathers of the vent,
and each side of the tail, white; all the rest black: secondaries tipped with
white: tail short: wings very long. LENGTH six inches. EXTENT thirteen.

PLACE.
This species inhabits the north of Europe: is common about Kamtschatka, where
it is larger than in other places; but does not extend to the Arctic circle, at
lest is unmentioned by the Faunists of that region. Is, with the preceding,
found at all distances from land, in all parts of the Atlantic, from Great
Britain to the coast of North America Kalm, i. 22, 23.
: flocks attend the ships the whole way, and usually keep in the wake, where
they pick up every thing that drops. They never are off wing; yet seem to
settle. They are silent during day; clamorous in the dark. Are hated by the
sailors, who call them Witches, imagining they forebode a storm. The Norwegians
style them Sondenvinds Fugl; the Swedes, Stormwaders Fogel; and the inhabitants
of Feroe, Strunkvit.

A. KURIL. Black Petrol, Edw. 89. -- Latham, iii.
P. With a strong yellow bill: whole plumage of an unvaried rusty black: legs
the same, dashed with red. SIZE of a Raven.

Sent to Doctor Pallas from the Kuril isles.

LVI. MERGANSER. Genesis Birds, XC.
465. GOOSANDER.
Br. Zool. ii. No 260. -- Mergus Merganser, Wrakfagel, Kjorfagel, Skraka, Faun.
Suec. No 135. -- Le Harle, De Buffon, viii. 267. -- Pl. Enl. 951, 953. --
Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
M. With a red bill: head full of feathers, loose behind, and of a mallard
green: lower part of the neck and belly of a fine straw-color: upper part of
the back, and scapulars next to it, black: lower part of the back, and the
tail, cinereous: primaries dusky; secondaries white, edged with black: coverts
on the ridge of the wing black; the others white: legs a full orange. WEIGHT
four pounds. LENGTH two feet four. EXTENT three feet two. Head and upper part
of the neck of the FEMALE, or DUN DIVER, ferruginous: behind is a pendent
crest: throat white: back, coverts of wings, and the tail, cinereous: primaries
dusky: breast and middle of the belly white.

Inhabits the province of New York in winter: retires in April, PLACE.
probably to Hudson's Bay, and other northern countries. It is also found as
low as South Carolina The birds like a Duck, with a narrow bill, with sets of
teeth, called in Carolina, Fishermen, and described as having a fishy taste,
are of this species. See Lawson, 150.
. Breeds in every latitude in the Russian empire; but mostly in the north. Is
common in Kamtschatka. Extends through northern Europe to Iceland and Greenland
Olaffen Iceland -- and Faun. Groenl. No 49.
. Continues the whole year in the Orknies; but visits South Britain only in
severe winters. Swims with its body very deep in the water: dives admirably;
and is a great devourer of fish.

466. RED-BREASTED.
Br. Zool. ii. No 261. -- Mergus serrator, Ptacka, Faun. Suec. No 136. -- Le
Harle huppe, De Buffon, viii. 273. -- Pl. Enl. 207. -- Faun. Groenl. No 48. --
Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
M. With a crested head; and part of the neck a mallard green: rest: of the
neck, and whole belly, white: breast ferruginous, spotted with black: upper
part of the back black: exterior scapulars black; interior white: coverts of
the wings black and white: primaries dusky: lower part of the back, and sides
under the wings, cinereous, barred with small lines of black: tail brown: legs
orange. In the FEMALE the head and upper part of the neck are dull ferruginous:
throat white: fore part of the neck, and the breast, marbled with deep
ash-color: back, scapulars, and tail, cinereous: primaries dusky. WEIGHT of the
male two pounds. LENGTH one foot nine. EXTENT two feet seven.

PLACE.
Frequent Newfoundland and Greenland during summer; and appear, in the same
season, in Hudson's Bay in great flocks. Is found in Europe, as high as
Iceland, where it is called Vatus-ond. In the Russian dominions is gregarious,
about the great rivers of Sibiria and lake Baikal.

467. HOODED.
Round-crested Duck, Catesby, i. 94. -- Edw. 360. -- Latham, iii. Mergus
cucullatus, Lin. Syst. 207. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
M. With a large, upright, circular crest, beginning at the base of the bill,
and ending at the hind part of the head; flabelliform, edged with black; the
rest white; and on each side, above the eyes, streaked with a shorter set of
black feathers: forehead, cheeks, neck, back, and tail, black: breast and belly
white: sides yellowish rust, crossed by slender dusky lines. Head and neck of
the FEMALE dark ash, mottled with black: crest short, and rust-colored: back,
wings, and tail, dusky; the wings crossed with a white line: breast and belly
white. In SIZE between a Wigeon and a Teal.

PLACE.
This species breeds in some unknown parts of the north. Appears in New York,
and other parts of North America, as low as Virginia and Carolina, in November;
and frequents fresh waters: retires in March.

468. SMEW.
Br. Zool. No 262. -- La Piette, De Buffon, viii. 275. -- Pl. Enl. 449, 450. Le
Harle couronne, De Buffon, viii. 280. -- Pl. Enl. 935, 936. -- Latham, iii. --
LEV. MUS.
M. With a lead-colored bill: horizontal crest, white above, black beneath:
eyes included in a large oval spot, black, glossed with green, which extends to
the base of the bill: neck, and whole under side of the body, pure white: wings
and scapulars parti-colored with black and white: tail deep ash-color: legs
blueish gray. LENGTH eighteen inches. EXTENT twenty-six. WEIGHT thirty-four
ounces. Head of the FEMALE Confiding in other writers, I made, in my British
Zoology, another species of the female of the Smew, under the name of the
Red-headed, No 263. The bird I thought to be the female, and call the Lough
Diver, is a distinct kind. Mr. Plymley informs me that he dissected several,
and found males and females without any distinction of plumage in either sex.
rust-colored, and slightly crested: around the eyes a spot of the same color
and form as in the male: neck gray, darkest behind: in the other marks
resembles the male except the legs, which are gray.

This species was sent to Mrs. Blackburn from New York, PLACE.
I think as a winter bird. In Europe it extends to Iceland: visits Britain in
the severe season. In the Russian empire frequents the same places with the
GOOSANDER. Each of these retire southward at approach of winter; and are
observed returning up the Volga in February, tending toward the north.
Migrates, during summer, even as low as Tinos in the Archipelago Extracts, ii.
146. -- Hasselquist, 269.
.

A. MINUTE Lough Diver, Br. Zool. ii. p. 560. -- Mergus minutus, Faun. Suec. No
138. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
M. With head and hind part of the neck rust-colored; the head slightly
crested: back, scapulars, and tail, dusky: fore part of the neck white: breast
clouded with gray: on the lesser coverts of the wings a great bed of white; on
the primaries and greater coverts two transverse lines of white: legs dusky.

PLACE.
Inhabits the shores of Sweden: found also, during winter, in Great Britain; at
which season the whole genus quits Sweden, expelled by the ice.

LVII. DUCK. Genesis Birds, XCI.
469. WHISTLING SWAN.
Br. Zool. ii. No 264. -- Anas Cygnus ferus. Swan, Faun. Suec. No 107. --
Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
D. With the lower part of the bill black; upper part, and space between that
and the eyes, covered with a naked yellow skin: eyelids naked and yellow:
whole plumage pure white: legs black. LENGTH, to the tip of the tail, four feet
ten. EXTENT seven feet three. WEIGHT from thirteen to sixteen pounds.

These birds inhabit the northern world, as high as Iceland, PLACE.
and as low as the soft climate of Greece, or of Lydia, the modern Anatolia, in
Asia Minor: it even descends as low as Egypt Catesby, App. xxxvi. -- Lawson,
146. -- Du Pratz, ii. 78.
. They swarm, during summer, in the great lakes and marshes of the Tartarian
and Sibirian deserts; and resort in great numbers to winter about the Caspian
and Euxine seas. Those of the eastern parts of Sibiria retire beyond
Kamtschatka, either to the coasts of America, or to the isles north of Japan.
In Sibiria, they spread far north, but not to the Arctic circle. They arrive in
Hudson's Bay about the end of May: breed in great numbers on the shores, in the
islands, and in the inland lakes; but all retire to the southern parts of North
America in autumn, even as low as Carolina and Louisiana. Mr. Lawson, who was
no inaccurate observer, says, that there were two sorts in Carolina: the larger
is called, from its note, the Trumpeter. These arrive in great flocks to the
fresh rivers in winter; and, in February, retire to the great lakes to breed:
the lesser are called Hoopers, and frequent mostly the salt water. The Cygnets
are esteemed a delicate dish. The Indians of Louisiana make diadems for their
chieftains with the large feathers: the lesser are woven into garments for the
women of rank. The young of both sexes make tippets of the unplucked skin. They
breed in great multitudes in the lakes of Lapland; and resort toward the more
southern parts of Europe, during the severe season. Breed even in the Orkney
isles.

HOW TAKEN IN ICELAND.
In Iceland they are an object of chase. In August they lose their feathers to
such a degree as not to be able to fly. The natives, at that season, resort in
great numbers to the places where they most abound; and come provided with
dogs, and active and strong horses, trained to the sport, and capable of
passing nimbly over the boggy soil and marshes. The swans will run as fast as a
tolerable horse. The greater numbers are taken by the dogs, which are taught to
catch them by the neck, which causes them to lose their balance, and become an
easy prey. Great use is made of the plumage: the flesh is eaten; and the skin
of the legs and feet, taken off entire, looks like shagreen, and is used for
purses. The eggs are collected in the spring for food Olaffen, i. 118.
. IN KAMTSCHATKA.
In Kamtschatka, where they abound both in winter and summer, they are also
taken with dogs, in the moulting season; or killed with clubs. During winter
they are taken in the unfrozen rivers, and form a constant dish at the tables
of the natives Descr. Kamtschatka, 495.
. This species has several distinctions from the species which we, SPECIFIC
DISTINCTIONS.
in England, call the Tame Swan. In Russia this species more fitly clames the
name, it being the kind most commonly tamed in that empire. The Whistling Swan
carries its neck quite erect: the other swims with it arched. This is far
inferior in size. This has twelve ribs on a side; the MUTE We change the name
of the Tame Swan into MUTE, as the former name is equivocal, and this species
emits-no sound.
only eleven. But the most remarkable is the strange figure of the windpipe,
which falls into the chest, then turns back like a trumpet, and afterward
makes a second bend to join the lungs. Thus it is enabled to utter a loud and
shrill note. The other Swan, on the contrary, is the most silent of birds; it
can do nothing more than hiss, which it does on receiving any provocation. The
vocal kind emits its loud notes only when flying, or calling: its sound is,
whoogh, whoogh, very loud and shrill, but not disagreeable, when heard far
above one's head, and modulated by the winds. The natives of Iceland compare it
to the notes of a violin: in fact they hear it at the end of their long and
gloomy winter, when the return of the Swans announces the return of summer:
every note must be therefore melodious which presages the speedy thaw, and the
release from their tedious confinement.

It is from this species alone that the ancients have given the fable of the
Swan being endued with the powers of melody: VOCAL SWAN OF THE POETS.
embracing the Pythagorean doctrine, they made the body of this bird the
mansion of the souls of departed poets: and after that, attributed to the birds
the same faculty of harmony which their inmates possessed in a pre-existent
state. The vulgar, not distinguishing between sweetness of numbers and melody
of voice, thought that real which was only intended figuratively. The MUTE Swan
never frequents the Padus; and I am almost equally certain that it never is
seen on the Cayster, in Lydia; each of them streams celebrated by the poets,
for the great resort of Swans. The Padus was styled Oloriferus, from the
numbers which frequented its waters; and there are few of the poets, Greek or
Latin, who do not truly make them its inhabitants. I shall give one reference
only, out of respect to the extreme beauty of the imagery.

Haud secus Eridani stagnis ripave Caystri
Innatat albus Olor, pronoque immobile corpus
Dat fluvio: and pedibus tacitis emigrat in undas.
Silius Italicus, lib. 14. 470. MUTE SWAN.
Tame Swan, Br. Zool. ii. No 265. -- Anser Cygnus, No 107. b. -- Latham, iii.
-- LEV. MUS.
D. With a deep red bill, and black incurvated nail at the end: a triangular
naked black skin between the bill and the eyes: at the base of the upper
mandible a large black rounded protuberance: legs black: whole plumage of a
snowy whiteness. WEIGHT sometimes twenty-five pounds.

PLACE.
The Mute Swan, or that which we call Tame, is found in a wild state in some
parts of Russia; but far more plentiful in Sibiria. It arrives, in summer,
later from the south, and does not spread so far north Doctor PALLAS.
. Those which frequent the provinces of Ghilan and Masenderan, on the south of
the Caspian sea, grow to a vast size, and are esteemed great delicacies. The
Mahometans hold them in high veneration Extracts, iii. 78.
.

471. CANADA GOOSE.
Edw. 151. -- Catesby, i. 91. -- Anas Canadensis, Lin. Syst. 198. -- Phil.
Trans. lxii. 412. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
D. With an elevated black bill: head, neck, primaries, and tail, black: from
the throat passes, along the cheeks to the hind part of each side of the head,
a triangular white spot: bottom of the neck, vent feathers, lower belly, and
coverts of the tail, white: breast, upper belly, back, and wings (except
primaries) of a dusky brown: legs of a deep lead-color.

PLACE.
Inhabit the northern parts of North America. Immense flocks appear annually in
the spring in Hudson's Bay, and pass far to the north to breed; and return
southward in the autumn. Numbers also breed about Hudson's Bay, and lay six or
seven eggs. The young are easily made tame. M. Fabricius suspects that they are
found, during summer, in Greenland Faun. Groenl. p. 66.
. They proceed, in their southern migration, as low as South Carolina, where
they winter in the rice-grounds. The English of Hudson's Bay depend greatly on
Geese, of these and other kinds, for their support; and, in favorable years,
kill three or four thousand, which they salt and barrel. Their arrival is
impatiently attended; it is the harbinger of the spring, and the month named by
the Indians the Goose moon. They appear usually at our settlements in numbers,
about St. George's day, O. S. and fly northward to nestle in security. They
prefer islands to the continent, as further from the haunts of men. Thus Marble
Island was found, in August, to swarm with Swans, Geese, and Ducks; the old
ones moulting, and the young at that time incapable of flying Drage, i. 93.
.

The English send out their servants, as well as Indians, to shoot these birds
on their passage. It is in vain to pursue them: they therefore form a row of
huts made of boughs, at musket shot distance from each other, and place them
in a line across the vast marshes of the country. Each hovel, or, as they are
called, stand, is occupied by only a single person. These attend the flight of
the birds, and on their approach mimic their cackle so well, that the Geese
will answer, and wheel and come nearer the stand. The sportsman keeps
motionless, and on his knees, with his gun cocked, the whole time; and never
fires till he has seen the eyes of the Geese. He fires as they are going from
him, then picks up another gun that lies by him, and discharges that. The Geese
which he has killed, he sets up on sticks as if alive, to decoy others; he also
makes artificial birds for the same purpose. In a good day (for they fly in
very uncertain and unequal numbers) a single Indian will kill two hundred.
Notwithstanding every species of Goose has a different call, yet the Indians
are admirable in their imitation of every one.

The vernal flight of the Geese lasts from the middle of April until the middle
of May. Their first appearance coincides with the thawing of the swamps, when
they are very lean. The autumnal, or the season of their return with their
young, is from the middle of August to the middle of October Dobbs's Hudson's
Bay, 52.
. Those which are taken in this latter season, when the frosts usually begin,
are preserved in their feathers, and left to be frozen for the fresh provisions
of the winter stock. The feathers constitute an article of commerce, and are
sent into England.

472. BEAN GOOSE.
Br. Zool. ii. No 267. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
D. With a small bill, much compressed near the end; base and nail black;
middle of a pale red: head and neck cinereous brown, tinged with rust: breast
and belly dirty white, clouded with ash-color: lesser coverts of the wings very
light gray: back plain ash-color: scapulars darker, edged with white: primaries
and secondaries gray, edged with black: tail edged with white: legs
saffron-color: claws white. LENGTH two feet seven. WEIGHT six pounds and a half.

PLACE.
Observed by Mr. Hearne, in Hudson's Bay. Is in Europe a northern bird. Breeds
in great numbers in Lewis, one of the Hebrides, and is most destructive to the
green corn. Migrates at the latter end of August, in flocks innumerable, into
the wolds of Yorkshire, and into Lincolnshire; and among them are some white
Lister, in Ph. Tr. Abridg. ii. 852. I cannot but suspect, that some of the SNOW
GEESE, No 477, may mix with them, as none of this genus vary in color in the
wild state.
. They all disappear in the spring. The appearance and disappearance of this
kind in Austria is similar Kramer Anim. Austr. 339.
. Wild Geese are seen flying over, but very rarely alight in the Orknies.

473. GRAY LAG GOOSE.
Br. Zool. ii. No 266. -- Anas Anser. Willgas, Faun. Suec. No 114. -- Wild
Goose of all authors. -- Latham, iii. L'Oye Sauvage, Pl. Enl. 995. -- LEV. MUS.
-- BL. MUS.
D. With an elevated bill, flesh-colored, tinged with yellow, and with a white
nail: head and neck cinereous, mixed with dirty yellow: neck striated
downwards: back and primaries dusky; the last tipped with black; shafts white:
secondaries black, edged with white: lesser coverts dusky, edged with white:
breast and belly whitish, clouded with ash-color: rump and vent white: middle
feathers of the tail dusky, tipped and edged with white; the outmost almost
entirely white: legs flesh-colored: claws black. LENGTH two feet nine. EXTENT
five feet. WEIGHT sometimes ten pounds.

Inhabits the north of Europe, Asia, and America, PLACE.
and migrates into Hudson's Bay. Frequents, during winter, South Carolina, and
particularly the rice grounds, where it gleans the droppings of the harvest.
This species breeds in the fens of Lincolnshire, and never migrates from that
county. They are seen, early in the spring, flying over Sweden, to the Lapland
moors, and to the eastern and southern parts of Iceland; in which quarters of
that island alone they breed Paulson.
. Return in autumn: make a short stay along the shores; but never winter in
Sweden Amoen. Acad. iv. 585.
. Abound in Russia, Sibiria, and Kamtschatka; but breed chiefly in the north.

474. BLUE-WINGED GOOSE.
Edw. 152. -- Anser Caerulescens, Lin. Syst. 196. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
D. With a red elevated bill: crown yellowish; rest of the head and neck white;
the hind part of the last spotted with black; in some the spots are wanting:
base of the neck, breast, sides under the wings, and back, of a deep brown:
coverts of the wings and tail of a light blueish ash-color: belly and vent
white: primaries dusky: scapulars and tail white and gray, disposed in stripes:
legs red. In SIZE rather lesser than the common Tame Goose.

Migrates into Hudson's Bay, and re-migrates like the former. PLACE.
The Indians have a notion, that to avoid the cold, it flies toward the sun,
till it singes its pate against that luminary. Few go very far north; but are
most numerous about Albany Fort; where, on the contrary, the SNOW GEESE are
very scarce.

475. BERING.
D. With a yellow excrescence at the base of the bill, radiated in the middle
with blueish black feathers: round the ears a space of greenish white: eyes
black, encircled with yellow, and rayed with black: back, fore part of the
neck, and belly, white: wings black: hind part of the neck blueish. SIZE of a
common Wild Goose. -- STELLER'S Descr. See Descr. Kamtschatka, 496, 7.


PLACE.
Observed by Mr. Steller, in July, on the isle of Bering. They probably came
from America. It is the remark of that great naturalist, during his stay on
that island, that Geese of various kinds migrated this way to and from America
to Asia, in vast flocks. In the spring they came from the west, in autumn from
the east; which proves, that the Waterfowl of these latitudes prefer, for
breeding-places, the Asiatic wastes to those of America.

476. WHITE-FRONTED GOOSE.
Br. Zool. ii. No 268. -- Anas Erythropus Fiaelgas, Faun. Suec. No 116. --
Latham, iii. Laughing Goose, Edw. 153. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
D. With a pale yellow elevated bill: forehead white: head and neck of a
cinereous brown, darkest on the crown: coverts of the wings gray, edged with
brown: breast of an ash-color, clouded with a deeper: belly white, marked with
large black spots: coverts of the tail and the vent white: tail dusky, edged
with white: legs orange. SIZE.
LENGTH two feet four. EXTENT four feet six. WEIGHT five pounds and a half.

PLACE.
Inhabits, during summer, Hudson's Bay, and the north of Europe. Breeds also in
the extreme north of Asia; and in its migration is very frequently scattered
over Sibiria. Migrates over only the east of Russia; and is very scarce in the
west. Mr. Fabricius suspects that they are found in Greenland Faun. Groenl. p.
66.
.

477. SNOW.
Anser Grandinis. Schnee Gans. Schwenckfelt Siles. 213. -- Phil. Trans. lxii.
413. Anser Hyperboreus, Pallas Spicil. Zool. fasc. vi. 26. -- Latham, iii.
White Brant, Lawson, 147.
D. With an elevated bill; upper mandible scarlet; lower whitish: forehead
yellowish: head, neck, and body, of a snowy whiteness: primaries white at the
bottoms, black to the tips: lesser coverts usually cinereous, with dusky tips:
legs and feet deep red. The young Geese are blue, and do not attain their
proper colors in less than a year. LENGTH two feet eight inches. SIZE.
EXTENT three feet and a half. WEIGHT between five and six pounds.

This species is common to the north of Asia, PLACE.
and to North America. They appear in flights about Severn river in Hudson's
Bay, in the middle of May, on their way northward; return in the beginning of
September with their young, and stay about the settlement a fortnight; and
proceed, about the tenth of October, flying very high, southward to pass the
winter. They come in flocks of thousands; quite cover the country; rise in
clouds, and with an amazing noise. They visit Carolina Lawson, 147. -- Quere,
The sort of whitish fowl mentioned by Mr. Lawson, p. 150, which he calls
Bull-necks, of the size of a Brant, which come to Carolina after Christmas, and
frequent the rivers: are excellent meat; but are very shy, and such good
diverse, as not to be shot without difficulty?
in vast flocks; FOOD.
and feed on the roots of sedge and grass, which they tear up like hogs. It
used to be a common practice in that country, to burn a piece of a marsh, which
enticed the Geese to come there, as they could then more readily get at the
roots; which gave the sportsman opportunity of killing as many as he pleased.
In Hudson's Bay thousands are annually shot by the Indians for the use of the
settlement; and are esteemed excellent meat.

They arrive in the earliest spring, MIGRATIONS.
before any other species of Waterfowl, in immense flights, first about the
river Kolyma. Their course is from the east, tending to the frozen ocean; and
spreading to the estuaries of the Jana and Lena before the ice is broken up.
Finding the want of subsistence, they bend their journey a little southward, in
search of the insects and plants which abound in the inland lakes and moors. In
this manner they penetrate as low as Jakut, and very rarely farther, except in
very small detachments, which stray toward the Olecma, and sometimes by
accident to the junction of the Witim with the Lena. They make very little stay
in those parts; but again tend directly to the Arctic coasts of Sibiria, where
they breed; but they do not take the same route, keeping more easterly, toward
the Jana and Indigirka. It is observable, that they never migrate westward
beyond long. 130, a little beyond the mouth of the Lena; neither is their
migration by so high a latitude as Kamtschatka, where they are extremely rare
Descr. Kamtsch. 496.
; or their flight over that country may be so lofty as to render their course
imperceptible. In the beginning of winter they are seen flying at a great
height over Silesia; but it does not appear that they continue there, being
only on their passage to some other country Schwenkfelt An. Silesiae, 215.
.

The general winter quarters of this species seems to be the temperate and warm
part of North America.

STUPIDITY.
They are the most numerous and the most stupid of all the Goose race. They seem
to want the instinct of others, by their arriving at the mouths of the Arctic
Asiatic rivers before the season in which they can possibly subsist. They are
annually guilty of the same mistake, and annually compelled to make a new
migration to the south in quest of food, where they pass their time till the
northern estuaries are freed from the bonds of ice.

MANNER OF TAKING.
They have so little of the shyness of other Geese, that they are taken in the
most ridiculous manner imaginable, about Jakut, and the other parts of Sibiria
which they frequent. The inhabitants first place, near the banks of the rivers,
a great net, in a strait line, or else form a hovel of skins sewed together.
This done, one of the company dresses himself in the skin of a white reindeer,
advances toward the flock of Geese, and then turns back toward the net or the
hovel; and his companions go behind the flock, and, by making a noise, drive
them forward. The simple birds mistake the man in white for their leader, and
follow him within reach of the net, which is suddenly pulled down, and
captivates the whole. When he chooses to conduct them to the hovel, they follow
in the same manner; he creeps in at a hole left for that purpose, and out at
another on the opposite side, which he closes up. The Geese follow him through
the first; and as soon as they are got in, he passes round, and secures every
one The Kamtschatkans use the same method in taking Geese. Descr. Kamtschatka,
496.
. In that frozen clime, they afford great subsistence to the natives; and the
feathers are an article of commerce. Each family will kill thousands in a
season. These they pluck and gut; then fling them in heaps into holes dug for
that purpose, and cover them with nothing more than the earth. This freezes,
and forms over them an arch; and whenever the family has occasion to open one
of these magazines, they find their provision sweet and good.

478. BRENT.
Br. Zool. ii. No 270. -- Anas Hrota, Muller, No 115. -- Anas Bernicla. Belgis
Rotgans. Calmariens Prutgas, Faun. Suec. No 115. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
D. With a short, black, elevated bill: head, neck, and upper part of the
breast, black: a white spot marks each side of the neck near its junction with
the head: primaries and tail black: belly, scapulars, and coverts of the wings,
cinereous, clouded with a deeper: coverts of tail and the vent white: legs
black.

Is frequent in Hudson's Bay. Breed in the islands, PLACE.
and along the coasts; but never fly inland. Feed about high water mark. Return
toward the south in vast flocks in autumn. Probably they winter in Carolina;
for Lawson mentions a Gray Brent frequent in that season Lawson, 147.
. During winter, they swarm in Holland and in Ireland: in the first, every
eating-house is full of them: in the last, they are taken in flight-time, in
nets placed across the rivers; are fattened, and reckoned great delicacies.
They appear in small flocks in Hoy Sound, in the Orknies; but do not continue
there: on the contrary, they winter in Horra Sound, in Schetland, in flocks of
two hundred, and are called Horra Geese Reverend Mr. Low.
. They retire from Europe to breed in the extreme north. A few, after flying
over Sweden, stop on the borders of Lapland; but the great bodies of them
continue their flight even to the most northern isles of Greenland Faun.
Groenl. No 41.
, and to Spitzbergen. Fly in the shape of a wedge, and with great clamor. Feed
on grass, water-plants, berries, and worms. Cannot dive. Barentz found
multitudes sitting on their eggs, about the 21st of June 1595, in the great bay
called Wibe Janz Water; and, to his amazement, discovered them to be the
Rotgansen, which his countrymen, the Dutch, supposed to have been generated
from some trees in Scotland, the fruit of which, when ripe, fell into the sea,
and were converted into Gossings Navigation par la Nord, Amstelredam, 1606,
folio, p. 14. -- The English fabled the same of the Bernacle. See Gerard's
Herbal.
. These birds arrive every year in the east part of Sibiria, in order to breed;
but are not seen to the west of the Lena, nor yet in Russia.

479. BERNACLE.
Br. Zool. ii. No 269. -- Anas Erythropus (mas.) W. Both. -- Fiaelgas Faun.
Suec. No 116. -- Anas Helfingen, Olaffen Iceland, ii. tab. 33. -- Latham, iii.
La Bernache, Pl. Enl. 855. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
D. With white cheeks and forehead: from bill to the eyes runs a dusky line;
the rest of the head, neck, and part of the breast, black: belly, vent, and
coverts of tail, white: back, scapulars, and coverts of wings, barred with
black, gray, and white: tail and legs black. LENGTH two feet one inch. EXTENT
four feet five. WEIGHT about five pounds.

These birds are seen, but extremely rarely, in Hudson's Bay. PLACE.
It is found, and I believe breeds, in the north of Russia and Lapland, in
Norway, and in Iceland Not in Greenland or Spitzbergen, as I once conjectured.
See Br. Zool. ii. p. 578.
; but not in Sibiria. They appear on the British shores and marshes, in vast
flocks, during winter; but retire in February. Linnaeus unaccountably makes the
White-fronted Goose, No 476, the female of this.

480. EIDER.
Br. Zool. ii. No 271. -- Anas Mollissima, Ada, Eider, Gudunge, Faun. Suec. No
117. -- Latham, iii. Great Black and White Duck, Edw. 98. -- Pl. Enl. 208, 209.
-- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
D. With a black bill, somewhat elevated: forehead of a velvet black: a broad
black bar, glossed with purple, extends from thence beyond each eye: middle of
the head, whole neck, upper part of the back, scapulars, and coverts of the
wings, white: below the hind part of the head is a stain of pea-green: lower
part of the back, tail, breast, and whole under side of the body, black: legs
greenish. The FEMALE is almost entirely of a dull rust-color, barred with
black: primaries and tail dusky. WEIGHT of the female is about three pounds and
a half. The MALE is double the size of the common Tame Duck.

Inhabits the seas near New York, in the spring season; PLACE.
and breeds on the desert isles of New England, and from thence as far as the
extreme coasts of the northern world, in America, Europe, and Asia; but never
comes within land. Common in Kamtschatka. The most southern of its
breeding-places are the Fern isles, on the coast of Northumberland. Lays seldom
more than five eggs; those large, and of a pale green color. These birds afford
the most luxurious of down, which forms, in many of the regions, a considerable
article of commerce. Most Ducks pluck off a certain down to form its nest:
these have the greatest quantity, and the finest and most elastic. It is
customary in some places to take away the first eggs, which occasions a second
laying, and a second deplumation. In Greenland they lay among the grass; in
Sweden among the juniper bushes. Nature has furnished them with so warm a
clothing, that they brave the severest winter, even of the Arctic regions. In
Greenland, they are seen in that season by hundreds, or even thousands, in the
sheltered southern bays: their breeding-places are in the most northern. They
take their young on their backs instantly to sea, then dive, to shake them off
and teach them to shift for themselves. It is said, that the males are five
years old before they come to their full color? that they live to a great age;
and will at length grow quite gray. They are constant to their breeding-places:
a pair has been observed to occupy the same nest twenty years. They dive to
great depths for their food, which is shells of all kinds. The Greenlanders
kill them with darts; pursue them in their little boats; watch their course
(when they dive) by the air-bubbles; and strike them when they arise wearied.
The flesh is valued as a food. The skin of this and the next species is the
most valuable of all, as a garment placed next to the skin.

481. KING.
Grey-headed Duck, Edw. 154. -- Anas Spectabilis, Faun. Suec. No 112. --
Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
D. With a red bill, extending high up the forehead on each side, in form of a
broad bean-shaped plate: head, and part of the hind part of the neck, light
gray, bounded by a line of black dots: cheeks and neck, as low as the gray
color, pea-green: a narrow black line from the bar of the bill bounds the lower
part of the cheeks: throat, neck, and breast, white: back, belly, and tail,
black: lesser coverts of the wings, and primaries, dusky brown: secondaries
black, glossed with rich purple; coverts above them form a great bed of white:
legs dirty red. SIZE near double of the MALLARD. The FEMALE differs greatly in
color, being mostly black and brown: the belly dusky: the plate on the bill
slightly eminent.

This species is found in Hudson's Bay; and, in winter, PLACE.
as low as New York. Is as common in Greenland as the Eider. Yields almost as
much down, and is as useful to the natives: has the same haunts, and is taken
in the same manner. Inhabits the coast of Norway, and even has been killed in
the Orknies. Is frequent on the Arctic shores of Sibiria, and extends to
Kamtschatka.

482. VELVET.
Br. Zool. ii. No 272. -- Anas Fusca, Swarta, Faun. Suec. No 109. La grande
Macreuse, Pl. Enl. 956. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
D. With a broad bill, elevated near the base; black in the middle; yellow on
the sides; the nail red: behind each eye Read eye, in the Br. Zool. instead of
ear.
is a white spot: a bar of the same color crosses each wing: all the plumage
besides is of a rich velvet black: legs red. The FEMALE is of a deep brown; but
marked, like the male, with white.

Frequents the seas about New York. PLACE.
Is very common in the great lakes and rivers of the north and east of Sibiria,
and on the shores. Extends to Kamtschatka. Is less common in Russia. Lays from
eight to ten white eggs. Notwithstanding they are Ducks which at all other
times frequent the sea, yet, in the laying season, go far inland, and make
their nests: as soon as that task is over, the males fly away; but as soon as
the young can fly, they are rejoined by their mates; followed by the brood
Steller, in Nov. Com. Petrop. iv. 421. -- Strom. p. 230.
.

483. BLACK.
Edw. 155. -- Ph. Trans. lxii. 417. -- Canard du Nord, ou le Marchand, Pl. Enl.
995. -- Latham, iii. Anas Perspicillata, Lin. Syst. 201. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL.
MUS.
D. With a compressed bill, rising into a knob at the base, each side of which
is marked with a patch of black; middle white; sides of a deep orange; the
edges black; nail red: fore part of the head white: crown and cheeks black:
just beneath the hind part of the head, the neck is marked with a large white
spot: rest of the plumage of a dull black: legs and toes bright red; webs
black. WEIGHT two pounds two ounces. LENGTH twenty-one inches. EXTENT
thirty-five. The FEMALE is twenty inches long: of a sooty color: has no white
on the hind part of the head; but the cheeks are marked with two dull white
spots.

PLACE.
Appears in Hudson's Bay as soon as the rivers are free from ice. Breed along
the shores: make their nests with grass, and line them with feathers. Lay from
four to six white eggs: hatch in the end of July. Feed on grass. Extends to New
York, and even to South Carolina Catesby, App.
.

484. SCOTER.
Br. Zool. ii. No 273. -- Anas Nigra, Faun. Suec. No 110. -- Latham; iii. La
Macreuse, Pl. Enl. 278. -- LEV. MUS.
D. With a bill black; of a rich yellow in the middle; on the base a green
knob, divided longways with a furrow; no nail: whole plumage black: head and
neck glossed with purple: tail cuneiform: legs black. WEIGHT two pounds two
ounces. LENGTH twenty-two inches. EXTENT thirty-four.

PLACE.
Sent to Mrs. Blackburn, from New York. Abounds on the great lakes and rivers of
the north and east of Sibiria, and on the shores; but is less frequent in
Russia. Inhabits Sweden and Norway Lawson, 151.
. Lives much at sea. Is of a very fishy taste.

485. SHOVELER.
Br. Zool. ii. No 280. -- Le Souchet, Pl. Enl. 971. -- Anas Clypeata, Faun.
Suec. No 119. -- Latham, iii. Blue-wing Shoveler, Catesby, i. 96. (fem.) --
LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
D. With a very large black bill, expanding greatly toward the end: head, and
greatest part of the neck, of a mallard green; lower part of the neck, breast,
and scapulars, white: belly bay: back brown: coverts of wings of a fine
sky-blue: primaries dusky: speculum green: outmost feathers of the tail white;
rest dusky, edged with white: legs red. Plumage of the FEMALE like that of the
common Wild Duck; only the coverts of the wings are of the same colors with
those of the Drake. LENGTH twenty-one inches. WEIGHT twenty-two ounces.

Found about New York, and even as low as Carolina, PLACE.
during winter. Is common in Kamtschatka; and breeds in every latitude of the
Russian dominions; but chiefly in the north. Inhabits Sweden and Norway. We are
to seek for the Swaddle Bill, an ash-colored Duck of Carolina, with an
extraordinary broad bill, said not to be very common there, but to be very good
food; we must therefore join it, for the present, to this species.

486. GOLDEN-EYE.
Br. Zool. ii. No 276. -- Anas Clangula, Knipa. Dopping, Faun. Suec. No 722. Le
Garrot, Pl. Enl. 802. -- Ph. Trans. lxii. 417. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS. --
BL. MUS.
D. With a short broad black bill: large head, black, glossed with green: at
each corner of the mouth a great white spot: breast and belly white: back,
lesser coverts of the wings, and tail, black: scapulars black and white:
greater coverts white: primaries dusky: legs orange. Head of the FEMALE rusty
brown: neck gray: breast and belly white: coverts and scapulars dusky and
cinereous: primaries and tail black: legs dusky. LENGTH nineteen inches. EXTENT
thirty-one. WEIGHT two pounds.

PLACE.
Inhabits from New York to Greenland: in the last is very rare; and arrives in
the bay on the breaking up of the ice: disappears on the return of frost.
Frequents fresh water lakes: makes a regular nest of grass, and feathers from
its own breast. Lays from seven to ten white eggs. Is expelled Sweden by the
frost, except a few which haunt the unfrozen parts of rivers near the
cataracts: there they live, diving continually for shells. Extends to Norway.

487. SPIRIT.
Little Black and White Duck, Edw. 100. -- Ph. Trans. lxii. 416. Anas Albeola,
Lin. Syst. 199. -- Latham, iii. FEM. Little Brown Duck, Catesby, i. 98.
Sarcelle de la Louisiane, dite la Religieuse, Pl. Enl. 948. -- LEV. MUS.
^ With a black bill: crown and fore part of the head of a glossy black,
varying with green and purple: throat and upper part of the neck encircled with
the same: cheeks and hind part of the head white: lower half of the neck,
breast, belly, and scapulars, white: primaries, secondaries, and tertials,
dusky; upper ends of the secondaries white; coverts incumbent on them white; on
the others dusky: back and tail dusky: legs orange. In the FEMALE the head and
upper part of the neck dusky: a large white oblong spot marks the sides of the
head, beginning behind each eye: back, tail, primaries, and lesser coverts,
dusky: great coverts and secondaries white: breast and belly dirty white: legs
orange. SIZE of a Wigeon.

PLACE.
Inhabits North America, from Hudson's Bay to Carolina. Called sometimes the
Spirit, as is supposed, from its suddenly appearing again at a distance, after
diving. Visits Severn river, in Hudson's Bay, in June: and makes its nest in
trees, among the woods near fresh waters.

488. PIED.
D. With the lower part of the bill black, the upper yellow: on the summit of
the head is an oblong black spot: forehead, cheeks, rest of the head, and neck,
white; the lower part encircled with black: scapulars and coverts of wings
white: back, breast, belly, and primaries, black: tail cuneiform, and dusky:
legs black. The bill of the supposed FEMALE? resembles that of the male: head
and neck mottled with cinereous brown and dirty white: primaries dusky:
speculum white: back, breast, and belly, clouded with different shades of
ash-color: tail dusky and cuneiform: legs black. SIZE of a common Wild Duck.

Sent from Connecticut, to Mrs. Blackburn. PLACE.
Possibly the great flocks of pretty Pied Ducks, which whistled as they flew,
or as they fed, seen by Mr. Lawson Hist. Carolina, 148.
in the western branch of Cape Fear inlet, were of this kind.

489. BUFFEL.
Buffel's-head Duck, Catesby, i. 95. -- Anas bucephala, Lin. Syst. 200. --
Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
D. With a short blue bill: head vastly increased in size by the fullness of
the feathers; black, richly glossed with green and purple: neck white all
round: upper part of the breast pure white; lower, and belly, clouded with pale
brown: back, primaries, and secondaries, black: the coverts on the ridge of the
wings mottled, bounding the others, which form a great bed of white: tail
cinereous: legs orange.

Is found frequently in the fresh waters of Carolina, during winter. PLACE.


490. HARLEQUIN.
Dusky and Spotted Duck, Edw. 99; and the Female, Edw. 157. -- Catesby, i. 98.
Anas Histrionica, Lin. Syst. 204. -- Ph. Trans. lxii. 419. -- Latham, iii. Anas
Brimond, Olaffen Iceland. ii. tab. xxxiv. -- Pl. Enl. 798. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL.
MUS.
D. With a small black bill: between the base and the eyes a great white patch:
crown black, bounded by a light rusty line: cheeks, chin, and neck, black;
beneath each a white spot; below that a short line of white, pointing down the
neck: bottom of the neck, on each side, bounded by a transverse line of white;
beneath which is another of black: breast, back, scapulars, and part of the
belly, of a pleasant slate-color: breast on each side marked with semilunar
stripes of white, beginning at the shoulders, and bounded on each side with a
stripe of black: wings and tail deep ash: rump, above and below, of a full
black* legs black. The FEMALE is almost wholly dusky, and is marked at the base
of the bill with a white spot, and another behind each ear. SIZE of a Wigeon.

PLACE.
Inhabits from Carolina to Greenland: in the last frequents, during summer, the
rapid rivers, and the most shady parts. Nestles on the banks, among the low
shrubs. Swims and dives admirably. In winter seeks the open sea. Flies high and
swiftly, and is very clamorous. Feeds on shellfish, spawn, and the larvae of
gnats. Is found in Iceland, and as low as Sondmor Strom. 243.
. Is common from the lake Baikal to Kamtschatka: breeds there, as well as every
where else, about the most rocky and rapid torrents.

491. POCHARD.
Br. Zool. ii. No 284. -- Anas Ferina, Faun. Suec. No 127. -- Latham, iii. Le
Millouin, Pl. Enl. 303. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
D. With a lead-colored bill: head and neck bright bay: breast and upper part
of the back black: rest of the back, scapulars, and coverts of wings, pale
gray, streaked tranversely with lines of black: primaries dusky: belly gray and
brown: tail deep gray: legs lead-colored. In the FEMALE the head rusty brown:
FEMALE.
breast rather darker: belly and coverts of wings cinereous: back like that of
the male: legs lead-colored. LENGTH nineteen inches. EXTENT two feet and a
half. WEIGHT one pound twelve ounces.

Inhabits North America, in winter, as low as Carolina Catesby, App.
; and, PLACE.
I believe, is the Red-headed Duck of Lawson. Is found, in Europe, as high as
Drontheim. Is met with in the great rivers and lakes in all latitudes of the
Russian empire. A fresh water Duck, and of excellent taste.

492. WHISTLING.
Black-billed Whistling Duck, Edw. 193 Probably not the female of Edwards's
Duck, 194.
. -- Latham, iii. Anas Arborea, Lin. Syst. 207. -- Whistlers, Catesby, App.
xxxvii. -- Lawson Carolina, 149. -- LEV. MUS.
D. With a black bill, and crown slightly crested: cheeks brown: hind part of
the neck dusky; fore part white, spotted with black: back and wings brown;
coverts spotted with black: tail and its coverts black: breast of a dark
reddish color, spotted with black: belly white, mixed on the sides with black:
legs long, and of a lead-color; hind claw placed high up the leg. Lesser than a
Tame Duck. Described from Mr. Edwards.

Inhabits South Carolina and Jamaica. Is, from its voice, PLACE.
called the Whistling Duck: perches on trees. Placed here merely on the
authority of the name given it by Lawson and Catesby. The last says, that it
frequents the coasts of Carolina during winter; which makes me doubt, whether
Mr. Edwards's bird, a native of Jamaica, is the same: for it may be held as a
rule, that the waterfowl of hot climates never retire in winter to colder; and
that those of Arctic climates almost generally retire from them into warmer.
Clouds of birds annually quit Hudson's Bay, and other severe climates, at
approach of winter; stock the different latitudes of North America; and return
in spring to increase and multiply. To the constitutions of the SUMMER DUCK, a
very few other waterfowl, and to many land-birds, the warm temperature of the
Carolinas is climate sufficiently north. They are driven, by the excessive heat
and arid soil of the Antilles and Guiana, to the moist savannas and woods of
these provinces, there to discharge the first great command.

493. SUMMER.
Summer Duck, Catesby, i. 97. -- Edw. 101. -- Anas Sponsa, Lin. Syst. 207. Le
beau Canard hupe de la Caroline, Pl: Enl. 980. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS. --
BL. MUS.
D. With the ridge and nail of the upper mandible black; lower part scarlet: on
the head a beautiful crest, hanging half down the neck, and beginning at the
base of the bill; upper part shining purple; beneath that a line of white; then
succeeds purple; and that again is bounded by white: cheeks purplish and green:
throat, and part of the neck, pure white: from the hind part of the neck a bead
of purple divides the white, and points toward the throat: rest of the neck
and breast ferruginous, spotted with white triangular spots: belly white:
feathers of the sides, which hide part of the wings, elegantly marked downwards
with incurvated lines of black and white: back deep brown, glossed with copper
and green: primaries dusky: secondaries resplendent blue: coverts of the tail,
and tail itself, dusky, glossed with green: legs dirty orange. Head of the
FEMALE of a deep brown; crested, but not so much as the Drake: back deep brown:
cheeks brown: behind each eye a white spot: throat white: neck and breast
reddish brown, with white sagittal spots: belly white. LENGTH, from the bill to
the tip of the tail, near nineteen inches. EXTENT about thirty.

PLACE.
This most elegant species is found from New York to the Antilles, and also in
Mexico. It passes the summer in Carolina; and in a singular manner makes its
nest in the holes made by Woodpeckers in the loftiest trees, which grow near
the water, especially the deciduous cypress. When the young are hatched, they
are conveyed down on the backs of the old ones, to whom the Ducklings adhere
closely with their bills. It often nestles on the bodies or boughs of trees
which have fallen over the streams which run up the woods. It appears in New
York, in the latter end of February or beginning of March, and retires toward
the south at approach of winter. They are very delicate eating. The Mexicans
call it Yztactzonyayauhqui, or the bird of the various-colored head. It is
there migratory. The natives feign that, from the situation of its legs, it
cannot stand.

494. MALLARD.
Br. Zool. ii. No 279. -- Anas Boschas. Gra^s-and, Bla^nacke, Faun. Suec. No
131. -- Ph. Trans. lxii. 419. -- Pl. Enl. 776, 777. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV.
MUS. -- BL. MUS.
D. With a bill of a yellowish green: head and neck of a shining changeable
green: on the front of the lower part of the neck is a semicircle of white:
breast of a purplish red: lower part of the back, and belly, gray, crossed with
speckled lines of black: speculum purple: four middle feathers of the tail
curled upwards: legs saffron-colored. FEMALE is of a pale reddish brown,
spotted with black. LENGTH twenty-three inches. EXTENT thirty-five. WEIGHT
about two pounds and a half.

Inhabits the northern parts of North America, PLACE.
from Hudson's Bay to Carolina Catesby, App.
: is frequent in Greenland, and continues there the whole year. Arrives in
Hudson's Bay in May: retires in October. Is common in all latitudes of the
Russian empire: and was observed by Steller in the Aleutian islands. In Sweden
retires in winter to the shores of Schonen; but in severe seasons passes over
to Denmark and Germany, possibly to England; for this island can hardly supply
the vast wintery flocks.

495. ILATHERA.
Ilathera Duck, Catesby, i. 93. -- Anas Baliamensis, Lin. Syst. 199. -- Latham,
iii.
D. With a large dusky blue bill; on the base of the upper mandible a great
triangular orange-colored spot: head, as far as the eyes, hind part of the
neck, and back, of a mixed gray, inclining to yellow: fore part and sides of
the neck white: belly of the same color, spotted with darker: lesser coverts of
the wings, and primaries, dusky; great coverts green, tipped with black:
secondaries dull yellow: legs lead-colored. In SIZE somewhat less than the
common Tame Duck.

PLACE.
Inhabits the Bahama islands; but is very rare: extends to the Brasils, where
the Indians call it Marecu Marcgrave, 214.
. This species, the Summer Duck, and the Whistling Duck, Edw. 193, perch and
roost on trees; and are among the few of this class which do not migrate
northward to breed.

496. DUSKY.
D. With a long and narrow dusky bill, tinged with blue: crown dusky: chin
white: neck pale brown, streaked downwards with dusky lines: back, and coverts
of the wings, deep brown: breast and belly of the same color, edged with dirty
yellow: primaries dusky: speculum of a fine blue, bounded above with a black
bar: tail cuneiform; dusky, edged with white: legs in one specimen dusky, in
another yellow. LENGTH near two feet.

PLACE.
From the province of New York. -- BL. MUS.

497. WESTERN.
Anas Stelleri, PALLAS Spicil. Zool. fasc. v. p. 35. tab. v. -- Latham, iii. --
LEV. MUS.
D. With the head, cheeks, and upper part of the neck, white: between the bill
and the eyes a mallard-green spot; another across the hind part of the head:
chin and throat of a full black: around the neck a black glossy color: back of
the same color: coverts of the wings white: primaries dusky: secondaries black,
tipped with white: breast and sides of a light yellowish brown: belly, vent, and
tail, black. SIZE of a Wigeon.

Brought by the late navigators from the western side of America; PLACE.
but had been before discovered by Steller to breed among the inaccessible
rocks about Kamtschatka; to flyin flocks, and never to enter the mouths of
rivers.

498. SCAUP.
Br. Zool. ii. No 275. -- Anas marila, Faun. Suec. No 111. -- Ph. Trans. lxii.
413. -- Le Millouinan, Pl. Enl. 1002. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
D. With a broad, flat, and blueish gray bill: irides yellow: head and neck
black, glossed with green: breast black: back, coverts of the wings, and
scapulars, marked with numbers of transverse lines of black and gray: primaries
dusky: secondaries white, tipped with black: belly white: tail, coverts, and vent
feathers, black: legs dusky. Male WEIGHS a pound and a half: female two ounces
more. LENGTH sixteen inches and a half. EXTENT twenty inches.

Inhabits America, as high as Hudson's Bay: comes there in May; PLACE.
retires in October. Is found in Iceland, and most part of the north of Europe.
Are common on the northern shores of Russia and Sibiria; and are most frequent
about the great river Ob: migrate southward: dive much: and feed on shellfish.

499. BROWN.
D. With a large blueish bill: head and neck of a very pale brown: lower part
of the last, and breast, of the same color, edged with rust-color: wings
cinereous gray: speculum blue, tipped with white: tail and legs dusky.

Inhabits Newfoundland.

500. PINTAIL.
Br. Zool. ii. No 282. -- Anas acuta, Aler, Ahlfogel, Faun. Suec. No 126. Le
Canard a longue queue, Pl. Enl. 959. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
D. With bill black on the middle; blueish on the sides: head and half the neck
rusty brown: from the ears, half way of each side of the neck, a white line,
bounded by black, points downwards: lower hind part of the neck, back, and
sides, marked with white and dusky waved lines: fore part of the neck, breast,
and belly, white: coverts of the wings cinereous; lowest tipped with dull orange:
secondaries marked with green, black, and white: exterior feathers of the tail
ash-colored; middle black, and three inches longer than the rest: legs
ash-colored. FEMALE brown, spotted with black. WEIGHT twenty-four ounces.
LENGTH two feet four. EXTENT three feet two inches.

PLACE.
Appears about New York in winter: breeds in the north: in Europe, about the
White Sea. Migrates southward at approach of the frost. Is seen in Sweden about
fourteen days in the spring, on its passage northward: and in autumn repasses
the same way to the south. Visit the Orknies in great flocks in the winter. In
the Russian empire, extends to Kamtschatka.

501. LONG-TAILED.
Br. Zool. ii. No 283. -- Anas hyemalis. Winter-and, Faun. Suec. No 125. Anas
Glacialis, Lin. Syst. 203. -- Ph. Trans. lxii. 418. -- Male, Edw. 280. Female,
156. -- Latham, iii. Le Canard de Miclon, Pl. Enl. 954. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL.
MUS.
D. With bill black, orange in the middle: forehead, sides of the head, and
neck, pale brown, dashed with rose-color: beneath each ear a large dusky spot
points downwards: hind part of the head and neck, throat, and breast, white:
back and belly black: sides and vent feathers white: scapulars long and white:
coverts of the wings glossy black: primaries dusky: secondaries dark rusty
brown: two middle feathers of the tail black, and four inches longer than the
others, which are white: legs red. FEMALE; crown dusky: cheeks white: rest of
the head, neck, back, and breast, coverts of the wings, and primaries, deep
brown: scapulars and secondaries rusty: belly white: tail and legs like those
of the MALE.

Inhabits to the extreme north. PLACE.
Breeds in Hudson's Bay and Greenland, among the stones and grass: makes its
nest, like the Eider, with the down of its own breast; which is equal in value
to that of the Eider, if it could be got in equal quantity; but the species is
scareer. It lays five eggs: swims and dives admirably: and feeds on shellfish,
which it gets in very deep water. Flies irregularly, sometimes showing its
back, sometimes its belly. Continues in Greenland the whole year, in unfrozen
places Faun. Groenl. p. 73.
: but there are seasons so very severe, as at times to force them toward the
south. Those which breed between Lapland and the polar circle, are often driven
into Sweden, and the neighborhood of Petersburg: those from the coast of the
Icy sea, as low as lat. 55; but on the setting in of frost, retire still
further south, unless where some open spots remain in the rivers. Visit the
fresh water lakes in the Orknies, in October, and continue there till April. At
sunset they are seen, in great flocks, returning to and from the bays, where
they frequently pass the night, and make such a noise as to be heard some miles
in frosty weather. Their sound is like Aan-gitche, and is said not to be
disagreeable. Steller, who observed them in Kamtschatka Descr. du Kamtschatka,
498.
, says, that their larynx has three openings, covered with a thin (I supose
valvular) membrane, which forms the singularity of the voice. La Sarcelle de
Feroe, or the Feroe Teal, of M. Brisson vi. 466. tab. xl. -- Pl. Enl. 999.
, is probably conjectured, by M. Brunnich, to be only a variety of this
species: seemingly a female.

502. AMERICAN WIGEON.
Le Canard Jensen de la Louisiane, Pl. Enl. 955. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
D. With a lead-colored bill, tipped with black: crown and forehead yellowish
white: hind part of the head, and whole neck, prettily speckled with black and
white: behind each eye is a large black spot, glossed with green: back and
scapulars pale rust and black, elegantly disposed in narrow transverse waving
lines: coverts of the wings white: primaries, coverts of the tail, and vent,
black: tail cuneiform; middle feathers black; the rest cinereous: legs dusky.
In SIZE superior to the English WIGEON; with which it seems to agree in colors
and marks, except those on the head.

PLACE.
Sent from New York, under the name of the Pheasant Duck: is a rare bird there.
Found as low as Louisiana. -- BL. MUS.

503. WHITE-FACED.
White-faced Teal, Catesby, i. 100. Male. -- Blue-wing Teal, Catesby, i. 99.
Fem. -- Anas Discors, Lin. Syst. 205. Sarcelle male de Cayenne, ditte le
Soucrourou, Pl. Enl. 966. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
D. With bill and crown black; base of the bill bounded by black: between the
last and the eyes a white stripe, ending on each side of the chin: cheeks, hind
part of head, and whole neck, purplish green: breast yellow, spotted elegantly
with black: back brown, waved with a lighter color; on the lower part several
long, narrow, light brown feathers: coverts of the wings fine caerulean:
primaries dusky: speculum green: vent black: tail brown: legs yellow. The
FEMALE is almost entirely brown; in parts marked with dusky spots: the blue on
the wings duller than that of the DRAKE. In SIZE a little larger than a Teal.

PLACE.
This species is found as high as New York. Arrives in Carolina in great plenty,
in August, to feed on the rice; and continues till October, when the rice is
got in. In Virginia, where there is no rice, it feeds on wild oats. Is reckoned
most delicious meat. Extends as far south as Guiana.

A VARIETY?
D. With crown and upper part of the neck dusky brown: cheeks, under part, and
sides of the neck, whitish brown, mottled with darker: back, breast, and belly,
marked with great dusky spots, edged with dirty white: coverts of the wings
pale sky-blue; lower order white: speculum rich purple, with a white edge:
primaries and tail dusky. Size of the last, with the female of which it has
great affinity; but in the purple speculum resembles the GADWALL.

Brought from Newfoundland by Sir Joseph Banks. PLACE.


504. AMERICAN TEAL.
Ph. Trans. lxii. 419. -- Anas circia? Faun. Suec. No 130. -- Latham, iii.
Krik-and Danis, Brunnich, No 130.
D. With head and upper part of the neck of a fine deep bay: from each eye to
the hind part of the head is a broad bar of rich changeable green: wants the
white line, which the European kind has above each eye, having only one below:
lower part of the neck and breast dirty white, beautifully spotted with black:
has over each shoulder a lunated bar, another distinction from our species:
coverts of wings brown: upper part of the back marked with waved lines of white
and black; lower part brown: tail dusky: speculum green: legs dusky. Plumage of
the FEMALE of a brownish ash, tinged with red, and spotted with black: wings
resemble those of the male.

Inhabits America, as high as Hudson's Bay, and as low as Carolina. PLACE.
Is found plentifully about Severn river, in the woods and plains near the
fresh waters; and has from five to seven young at a time. Disappears in autumn:
and is found, during winter, as low as Carolina, and perhaps Jamaica. We seem
here to have recovered the SUMMER TEAL of Mr. Willughby Ornith. 378.
, to which the American kind has great affinity. He calls it the lest of Ducks:
and must be the same with the second kind described by Lawson Hist. Carol. 149.
as frequenting fresh waters; being lesser than the common sort, and always
nodding their heads.

A. GREAT GOOSE. With a black bill, tawny at the base: a dusky body; white
beneath: scarlet legs. Of a vast SIZE, weighing near twenty-five or thirty
Russian pounds.

PLACE.
This species is found in the east of Sibiria, from the Lena to Kamtschatka: and
is taken in great numbers, together with the RED-NECKED GOOSE, TAKEN IN GLADES.
in glades, as we do Woodcocks in England. The Geese in the daytime repair to
the cornfieldsd and meadows: in the evening resort to the lakes, to wash
themselves and pass the night. The Sibirians generally fix on a place where
there are two or three lakes near each other, and out between each an avenue
through the thick birch woods of the country. If there is not the advantage of
adjacent lakes, the avenue is made through the woods which border the sides of
any which the birds frequent. At the entrance of the glades, on each side, a
tall birch-tree is left standing, and all their branches stripped away: from
the tops of these naked trees is placed a strong net, which fills the breadth
of the avenue: this net is capable of being dropped or raised at pleasure, by
means of certain long cords which run along the top; and the ends of which are
held by a man who conceals himself in the high grass. The Geese commonly leave
the lakes an hour before sunrise; and, as they do not choose to fly high at
that season, prefer going through the avenues; and with their long extended
necks strike into the nets, which are suddenly dropped; and twenty, and often
more, of the Geese are taken at a time. All sorts of Ducks, and other
waterfowl, are taken in the same manner PALLAS 's Travels, ii. 325, 326.
.

B. CHINESE GOOSE. Anser Cygnoides, Lin. Syst. 194. b. -- Swan Goose, Will. Orn.
360. -- Raii. Syn. av. 138. -- Brisson, vi. 280. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
D. With a black bill, and a large protuberance at the base, biggest in the
males: on the chin is a naked, pendulous, black skin: from the crown to the
back a black line runs down the hind part of the neck: the rest of the neck and
breast is of a cream-color, often dashed with tawny: belly white: between the
base of the bill and the eyes is a white line: the back and wings deep gray:
tail of the same color, with whitish tips: legs red: in some the bill is of the
same color. In LENGTH often reaches to three feet three.

This species is found wild about lake Baikal; in the east of Sibiria; PLACE.
and in Kamtschatka. They are very cemmonly kept tame in most parts of the
Russian empire. Will produce, with the Common Goose, a breed which preserves an
exact medium between both species. As an exception to the remark that a mulish
race will not breed, these frequently couple with one another, and with the
genuine kind Doctor PALLAS.
. They are frequent in China: are very stately birds, therefore are dignified
with the title Swan Goose.

C. RED-BREASTED GOOSE. Anser ruficollis, Pallas Spicil. Zool. fasc. vi. 21.
tab. iv. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
D. With a short black bill; a great patch of white between the base and the
eyes, bounded by black: crown, chin, hind part of the head and neck, back,
wings, and tail, of an intense black: sides marked with a few white spots:
greater coverts tipped with the same color: coverts of the tail white: lower part
and sides of the neck of a bright bay, bounded by a narrow line of white: the
breast and lower part of the neck divided from the belly and back by a circle
of black and another of white: legs black. LENGTH one foot ten inches. EXTENT
three feet ten. WEIGHT three pounds Troy.

PLACE.
This most elegant of Geese is found to breed from the mouth of the Ob, along
the coasts of the Icy sea, to that of the Lena. The winter quarters of these
birds is not certainly known. They are observed in the spring, flying from the
Caspian sea, along the Volga, northward, in small flocks; and are seen about
Zarizyn, between the sixth and tenth of April. They rest a little time on the
banks of the Sarpa, but soon resume their Arctic course Extracts, ii. 20.
. Their winter retreat is probably in Persia. They are highly esteemed for the
table, being quite free from any fishy taste.

D. SHIELDRAKE, Br. Zool. ii. No 278. -- Tadorne, Pl. Enl. 53. -- Latham, iii.
Anas Tadorna. Jugas Gotlandis, Faun. Suec. No 113. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
D. With a scarlet bill: on the base of that of the male a large protuberance:
head, and part of the neck, of a mallard-green: rest of the neck and belly
white: the breast crossed with a large band of orange bay: coverts of wings,
and the back, white: scapulars pied: tail white; tips of the outmost feathers
black: legs flesh-color. WEIGHT of the male two pounds ten ounces. LENGTH two
feet. EXTENT three and a half.

PLACE.
Inhabits northern Europe, as high as Iceland. Visits Sweden and the Orknies in
winter: returns in the spring. Continues in England the whole year. Is found in
Asia about the Caspian sea, and all the salt lakes of the Tartarian and
Sibirian deserts; and extends even to Kamtschatka.

E. GULAUND.
D. With a narrowed bill: head of a mallard-green: breast and belly white. SIZE
between the Goose and Duck kind.

Inhabits the morasses of Iceland. Lays from seven to nine eggs. PLACE.
Is a scarce species. The account of it was communicated to me by M. Brunnich,
from the catalogue of Doctor Biorno Paulsen. The Icelanders call it Gulaund.

F. MORILLON, Br. Zool. ii. No 277. -- Anas Glaueion. Brunnaeke, Faun. Suec. No
123. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
D. With dusky rust-colored head: irides gold-colored: neck with a white
collar; and beneath that another, broader, of gray: back and coverts of wings
dusky, marked with a few white stripes: greater coverts dusky, with a few great
white spots: primaries and tail black: secondaries white: breast and belly
white: above the thighs black: legs yellow. Rather less than the GOLDEN EYE.

Inhabits as high as Sweden: is found; but rarely, even in Greenland Faun.
Groenl. No
: PLACE.
or may be supposed to be seen in the intermediate parts. Is frequent in every
place in Russia and Sibiria, and even in Kamtschatka.

G. TUFTED, Br. Zool. ii. No 274. -- Anas fuligula, Wigge, Faun. Suec. No 132.
-- Le Morillon, Pl. Enl. 1001. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
D. With a thick, short, pendent crest: belly and under coverts of the wings
pure white: primaries dusky; part of their inner webs white: secondaries white,
tipped with black: all the rest of the plumage black; about the head glossed with
violet: legs blueish gray. WEIGHT two pounds. LENGTH fifteen inches.

Inhabits Europe, as high as Norway. PLACE.
Common in all latitudes of the Russian empire; but commonly travels northward
to breed. Frequent in Kamtschatka.

H. Hrafn-ond, Olaffen Iceland, sect. 688. -- Muller, No 161. -- Latham, iii.
D. With a crested head, black above: under side of the neck, breast, and
belly, white: legs saffron-colored.

PLACE.
Inhabits Iceland. Whether a variety of the former? for the Icelanders style
that species Hrafas-aund Biorne's List.
.

I. FALCATED. Anas Falcaria, Pallas Itin. iii. 701. -- Latham, iii.
D. With a small dusky bill: feathers above the base of the upper mandible
white: middle of the head pale rust: rest of the head silky green, variable,
and changing, on the sides of the neck, to resplendent copper: from the head to
the hind part of the neck is a crest closely compressed, and ending in an
angle: throat and half the fore part of the neck white; which color encircles
the neck, and is bounded above by another of variable black and green; the rest
of the neck, and the breast, elegantly marked with semicircles of gray and
black: the back and wings undulated with the same colors: the speculum of the
color of polished steel, edged with white: five last secondaries long and
falcated, of a violet-color edged with white: vent white, crossed with a black
bar: legs dusky. SIZE of a Wigeon.

PLACE.
Found, but rarely, in Kamtschatka. Frequent in the east of Sibiria, from the
Jenesei to the Lena, and beyond lake Baikal. None in the west. Probably winters
in China and the Mongalian deserts.

K. WIGEON, Br. Zool. ii. No 286. -- Anas Penelope, Wriand, Faun. Suec. No 124.
-- Le Canard siffleur, Pl. Enl. 825. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
D. With forehead whitish: head and upper part of the neck of a bright light
bay: hind part of the head, and breast, vinaceous: in other respects like the
AMERICAN kind. FEMALE colored like a Falcated Duck I. p. 574. Western Duck No.
497.
Wild Duck. LENGTH twenty inches. EXTENT two feet three. WEIGHT near
twenty-three ounces.

Inhabits Europe, perhaps not higher than Sweden. PLACE.
Is not uncommon about the Caspian sea, and ascends its rivers, but not far up.
Is sometimes seen in the great lakes on the east side of the Urallian chain;
but not in the rest of Sibiria. Is found in plenty about Aleppo, during winter
Russell's Aleppo.
: and taken in great numbers in the Nile, in nets, just before the waters have
quite subsided Hasselquist, 288.
. These probably retire north to breed. The Germans call this species
Pfeiff-ent, or the Fifing Duck, from its acute note. The French, for the same
reason, call it le Canard siffleur: and the English, the Whewer. My Bimaculated
Duck, Br. Zool. ii. No 287, has been discovered, by Doctor PALLAS, along the
Lena, and about lake Baikal; and a description sent by him to the Royal Academy
at Stockholm, under the title of Anas Glocitans, or the Clucking Duck; from its
singular note.

L. GADWALL, Br. Zool. ii. No 288. -- Anas strepera, Faun. Suec. No 121. -- Le
Chipeau, Pl. Enl. 958. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
D. With a black flat bill: head and upper part of the neck reddish, spotted
with black: breast, upper part of the back, and scapulars, elegantly marked
with black and white lines: belly dirty white: coverts on the ridge of the
wings reddish brown; the next purplish red, with a border of black: primaries
dusky: speculum white: tail cinereous: legs orange. Breast of the female
reddish brown, spotted with black: other colors similar, but more dull. Rather
less than a WIGEON.

This species does not seem to advance higher in Europe than Sweden. PLACE.
In the Russian empire extends over most of the latitudes of the European and
Sibirian part, except the east of Sibiria, and Kamtschatka.

M. LAPMARK. Skoaara, Leems Lapmark, 266. -- Anas latirostra, Brunnich, No 91.
-- Le Canard brun? Pl. Enl. 1007. -- Latham, iii.
D. With a broad black bill and legs; the last reaching far beyond the tail:
head, neck, and upper part of the body, dusky, thick set with small spots: on
each side of the base of the bill a great white spot: neck and breast clouded:
on the wings an oblique white mark: belly dusky: feathers on the sides
ferruginous. SIZE of a Wild Duck.

PLACE.
Inhabits Lapmark, and frequents both sea and fresh water. Is also found in
Denmark.

N. RED. Anas rutila, Faun. Suec. No 134. -- Ferruginous Duck, Br. Zool. ii. No
285. -- Latham, iii.
D. With a long pale blue bill, much flatted: head, neck, and upper part of the
body, a fine reddish brown: throat, breast, and belly, paler: belly white: legs
pale blue: webs black. WEIGHT twenty ounces.

PLACE.
Found, but rarely, in the Swedish rivers. Sent to me from Denmark, by the late
Mr. Fleischer. Has been shot in England.

O. GARGANEY. Br. Zool. ii. No 289. -- Anas Querquedula, Faun. Suec. No 128. La
Sarcelle, Pl. Enl. 946. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
D. With a white line from the further corner of each eye, pointing to the
nape: crown dusky, streaked lengthways: cheeks and neck very pale purple,
streaked with white: chin black: breast light brown, marked with semicircular
bars of black: speculum green: scapulars long and narrow, hanging over the
wings, and striped with white, ash, and black: tail dusky. LENGTH seventeen
inches. EXTENT twenty-eight. The FEMALE has an obscure whitish mark over the
eyes: rest of the plumage brownish ash, spotted. Wants the speculum.

This elegant species seems not to inhabit Europe higher than Sweden; but is
found in all latitudes of the Russian empire, PLACE.
even to Kamtschatka.

P. EUROPEAN TEAL, Br. Zool. ii. No 290. -- Anas Crecia. Arta. Kraecka, Faun.
Suec. No 129. La petite Sarcelle, Pl. Enl. 947. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS. --
BL. MUS. --
OUR species in all respects resembles the American, except in having a white
line above and beneath each eye, and in wanting the humeral stripe of white,
which the latter has.

In Europe it is found as high as Iceland; PLACE.
and even in that severe climate lays from thirteen to nineteen eggs Biornc's
List.
. The American species appears to be far less prolific. Found in the Russian
empire, in the same places with the GARGANEY.

LVIII. PELECAN This genus, in the Br. Zool. is called by the more familiar
name of Corvorant, there being none of the Pelecan species in Britain.
. Genesis Birds, XCIII.
505. GREAT.
Pelecanus Onocratolus, Lin. Syst. 215. -- Edw. 92. -- Ph. Trans. lxii. 419. Le
Pelican, De Buffon, viii. 282. -- Pl. Enl. 87. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS.
P. With a bill fifteen inches long, flat, dilated near the point, with a hook
at the end, and a ridge from that to the base running along the middle; on the
midway of the ridge rises a bony process, an inch and seven tenths high, three
inches broad at the base, and only two tenths of an inch thick. In some are
several lesser processes between this and the point: a vast naked membranaceous
pouch extends from the point of the lower mandible, widening gradually, and
extending ten inches down the front of the neck: on the hind part of the head
is a tuft of very narrow delicate feathers, not very discernible, as they
usually lie flat: the rest of the head and neck is covered with most
exquisitely fine down, and very thick set: the rest of the plumage white,
except the primaries and bastard wings, which are black: legs flesh-color. The
largest of web-footed Waterfowl. Some are superior in SIZE to a SWAN. One was
killed off Majorca, which weighed twenty-five pounds. Their extent of wings
from eleven to fifteen feet. Notwithstanding their great bulk, they soar to a
most surprising height. This is owing to the amazing lightness of the bones,
which, all together, do not weigh a pound and a half. Add to this, the quantity
of air with which its body is filled, which gives it a wonderful specific
lightness.

PLACE.
One of the birds from which this description was taken, was shot at Augusta in
South Carolina, a hundred and fifty miles from the sea. It agrees entirely with
the Pelecan of the old continent, except in the bony processes on the bill. The
other was sent, with other birds, from Hudson's Bay, to the Royal Society.
Instead of the bony processes on the bill, was a tuft or fibrous fringe,
sufficient to identify the species. This species extends over most parts of the
torrid zone, and many parts of the warmer temperate. Is found in Europe on the
lower parts of the Danube, and in all parts of the Mediterranean sea, almost
all Africa, and Asia Minor. Are seen in incredible numbers about the Black and
Caspian seas; and come far up the rivers, and into the inland lakes of the
Asiatic Russian empire; but grow scarcer eastward, and are seldom met with so
far north as the Sibirian lakes; yet are not unknown about that of Baikal. They
are common on the coast of New Holland, where they grow to an enormous size
Cook's First Voy. iii. 627.
. They feed upon fish; which they take sometimes by plunging from a great
height in the air, and seizing, like the GANNET: at other times, they fish in
concert, swimming in flocks, and forming a large circle in the great rivers,
which they gradually contract, beating the water with their wings and feet, in
order to drive the fish into the center; which when they approach, they open
their vast mouths, and fill their pouches with their prey, then incline their
bills, to empty the bag of the water; after which they swim to shore, and eat
their booty in quiet. As the pouch is capable of holding a dozen quarts of
water, a guess may be made of the quantity of fishes it can contain. The French
very properly call them Grand-gosiers, or Great-throats. It is said that when
they make their nests in the dry deserts, they carry the water to their young
in their vast pouches, and that the lions and beasts of prey come there to
quench their thirst, sparing the young, the cause of this salutary provision.
Possibly, on this account, the Egyptians style this bird the Camel of the
River; the Persians, Tacab, or the Water-carrier.

506. DUSKY.
Pelecanus Onocrotalus occidentalis, Lin. Syst. 215. -- Edw. 93. Le Pelican
Brun, De Buffon, viii. 306. -- Pl. Enl. 957. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS. --
BL. MUS.
P. With a red bill and black hook: the pouch extending half way down the neck:
between the bill and eyes naked and red: head mottled with ash-color and white:
the nape slightly crested: hind part of the neck covered with soft cinereous
feathers: back, scapulars, primaries, and coverts, dusky, edged with dirty
white: tail deep ash: legs dusky green. In SIZE scarcely equal to a SWAN.

PLACE.
Inhabits, during summer, Hudson's Bay. One was sent to Mrs. Blackburn, shot
near New York, I think in the winter. Extends to Louisiana Du Pratz, ii. 79.
; to Jamaica, the bay of Campechy Dampier's Voy. Campechy, 70.
, and as low as Carthagena. They sit on rocks in the sea in a sluggish manner,
with their bills resting on their breasts.

507. CHARLESTOWN.
P. Dusky above: white on the breast and belly, with a pouch, beginning at the
chin, and reaching to the breast bone, capable of containing numbers of gallons
of liquids. SIZE of a Canada Goose.

PLACE.
Abound in the bay of Charlestown, where they are continually fishing. --
Doctor GARDEN The same Gentleman informed me, that the SNOWY OWL, No (...) is
frequent near the shores of South Carolina, among the Palmetto trees.
.

508. SHAG.
Will. Orn. 330. -- Pelecanus Graculus, Faun. Suec. No 146. -- Latham, iii. --
LEV. MUS.
P. With head and neck black, glossed like silk with green: the back and
coverts of wings of the same color, edged with purplish black: belly dusky and
dull; the middle cinereous: tail consists of twelve feathers, dusky, glossed
with green: legs black: middle claw serrated. LENGTH two feet six. EXTENT three
feet eight. WEIGHT four pounds.

Frequent in many parts of Great Britain. Found in Sweden, PLACE.
Norway, and Iceland.

509. CORVORANT.
Br. Zool. No 293. -- Pelecanus Carvo, Haffs-tjader, Faun. Suec. No 145. --
Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
P. With a narrow bill, hooked at the end: a small dilatable pouch under the
chin; feathers at its base white, in the male: head and neck of a sooty
blackness, sometimes streaked with white: coverts of wings, back, and
scapulars, deep green, edged with black, glossed with blue: breast and belly
black: on the thighs of the male a tuft of white: tail consists of fourteen
feathers, and is rounded. WEIGHT seven pounds. LENGTH three feet four. EXTENT
four feet two.

Extends over all parts of the northern hemisphere, PLACE.
even to Greenland, where it continues all the year. The natives use the
jugular pouch as a bladder to float their darts after they are flung. The skins
are used in clothing; the flesh is eaten; GREENLAND.
but the eggs are so fetid as to be rejected, even by the very Greenlanders.
These birds are taken either by darts on the water; by snares dropped down the
precipices, and placed before their haunts; or, in winter, they are taken while
asleep upon the ice. Are found in all the temperate latitudes of the Russian
empire, RUSSIAN EMPIRE.
and in immense numbers on the shores of the Caspian sea Extracts. i. 164. --
ii. 405.
. Reach even to Kamtschatka. I believe this to be the the kind which the
Chinese train for fishing. They keep numbers, which sit on the edge of their
boats; and, on a signal given, plunge under water, and bring up their prey,
which they are unable to swallow, by reason of a ring placed by their masters
round their necks Du Halde, i. 316.
.

Mrs. Blackburn received this species from New York. There are great flocks in
Carolina, especially in March and April, when the herrings run up the creeks;
at which time they sit fishing on the logs of wood which have fallen into the
water Lawson, 150.
.

510. GANNET.
Br. Zool. ii. No 293. -- Pelecanus Bassanus. Nautis, Jaen Von Gent. Faun.
Suec. No 147. -- Latham, iii. -- LEV. MUS. -- BL. MUS.
P. With a strait dirty white bill, jagged at the edges: beneath the chin a
naked black skin, dilatable so as to contain five or six herrings: hind part of
the head buff-colored: bastard wings and primaries dusky: all the rest of the
plumage pure white: toes black, marked before with a pea-green stripe: feathers
of the tail sharp-pointed. WEIGHT seven pounds. LENGTH three feet one inch.
EXTENT six feet two.

PLACE.
Inhabits the coast of Newfoundland; where it breeds, and migrates southward as
far as South Carolina. The head of the bird which Catesby has engraven, and
called the GREATER BOOBY, i. tab. lxxxvi. is of one in its young state. At that
period it is deep ash-colored, spotted with white. In Europe it is common on
the coast of Norway and Iceland Olaf. Iceland.
; but as it never voluntarily flies over land, is not seen in the Baltic.
Wanders for food as for as the coast of Lisbon, and Gibraltar, where it has
been seen in December, plunging for Sardinae. Straggles as high as Greenland
Faun. Groenl. p. 92.
. In northern Asia, it has been once seen by Steller off Bering's isle; but has
been frequently met with in the southern hemisphere, in the Pacific ocean;
particularly, in numbers about New Zealand and New Holland Cook's First Voy.
ii. 382. -- iii. 439, 627.
. Captain Cook also saw them in his passage from England to the Cape of Good
Hope Cook's Voy. toward the South Pole, i. 10, 11.
, and remoter from land than they had been seen elsewhere. Among those observed
in the South Sea, is the variety called Sula Will. Orn. 331.
, with a few black feathers in the tail and among the secondaries. Found not
only on the Feroe islands, but on our coasts, one having been brought to me a
few years ago, which had fallen down wearied with its flight. A most ample
account of the manners of the GANNET is given in the Br. Zool.

A. CRESTED CORVORANT. SHAG, Br. Zool. ii. No 292. -- Latham, iii. Pelecanus
Cristatus. Top-skarv. Brunnich, No 123. -- Faun. Groenl. No 58. -- LEV. MUS. --
BL. MUS.
P. With a narrow dusky bill, hooked at the end: irides fine green: on each
side of the head is a long tuft of dusky feathers reaching beyond the crown:
head, neck, and lower part of the back, of a fine and glossy green: the upper
part of the back, and coverts of the wings, of the same color, edged with
purplish black: belly dusky: tail consists of twelve feathers, dusky tinged
with green. LENGTH two feet three. EXTENT three feet six. WEIGHT three pounds
three quarters.

Inhabits, in Great Britain, the vast precipices about Holyhead; PLACE.
and is found in Norway, Iceland Olaffen. ii. tab. xxxix.
, and in the south of Greenland Faun. Groenl. No 58.
; but in the latter is scarce. The places which it inhabits are covered with
its filthy excrements. The Greenlanders therefore call it Tingmingkpot, or the
bird afflicted with a looseness. It differs from the Shag in having a crest,
and in being letter. The Norwegians are well acquainted with both species, and
distinguish them by different names Brunnich, No 121, 123.
. I have seen several of the Shags shot among the Hebrides, but not one was
crested. On the authority of the northern naturalists, I therefore separate
them.

B. VIOLET CORVORANT. Pelecanus Violaceus, PALLAS MS. List. -- Latham, iii.
P. With the body wholly black, glossed with violet color.

PLACE.
Found about Kamtschatka and the isles.

C. RED-FACED CORVORANT. Ouril of the Kamtschatkans, Descr. de la Kamtschatka,
493. -- Latham, iii.
P. With a slender bill; upper mandible black; lower red: from the bill to the
eyes is a space covered with a blueish red naked skin: round each eye a white
cutaneous circle: head crested: head, neck, and middle of the back, of a deep
glossy green: on the fore part of the neck a few white slender feathers: sides
of the back and scapulars glossed with purple: wings dusky: belly glossed with
green: tail, consisting of twelve feathers only, is dusky: over each thigh is a
tuft of white feathers: legs black. LENGTH of one I measured thirty-one inches.
Steller compares its size to that of a Goose.

PLACE.
Inhabits the high precipices on the coasts of Kamtschatka. Is very slow in
rising; but when on wing, flies most rapidly. Feeds on fish. During night they
sit in rows on the cliffs, and often in their sleep fall off, and become the
prey of Arctic Foxes; who lie in wait for these birds, which are a favorite
food of those animals. They lay in June. Their eggs are green, and of the size
of those of a Hen. They are very bad tasted, and are not easily dressed; yet
are so acceptable to the Kamtschatkans, that, at the hazard of their necks,
they will climb to the most dangerous places in search of them, and often fall
and lose their lives. They catch these birds with nets, in which they are
entangled in the places where they rest. They are also caught in snares, with a
running noose hung to the end of a pole, with which the fowlers creep quietly
toward the birds, and fling it round their necks, and draw them up the rock.
The rest of the flock are so stupid, that, notwithstanding they see the fate of
their companions, they remain, shaking their heads, on the same spot, till they
are all taken. The flesh is excessively hard and sinewy. The Kamtschatkans cook
it after their fashion, by putting the bird, without plucking or gutting, into
a hole filled with fire: and when it is done enough, draw off the skin, and
make on it a savory repast.

HAVING gone through the class of birds, let me remark, that there is the
greatest probability, that numbers of those of Kamtschatka are common to North
America; and that they pass there the seasons of migration; but not having
actual proof of their being found on the new continent, I am obliged to place
them in these appendages to each genus. The time may come, when it will be
found necessary to remove them into the American sections. It is also likely,
that numbers may seek a more southern retreat, and stock Japan and China with
their periodical flocks. I have done as much as the lights of my days have
furnished me with. In some remote age, when the British offspring will have
pervaded the whole of their vast continent, or the descendants of the hardy
Russians colonized the western parts from their distant Kamtschatka, the road
in future time to new conquests: after, perhaps, bloody contests between the
progeny of Britons and Russians, about countries to which neither have any
right; after the deaths of thousands of clamants, and the extirpation of the
poor natives by the sword, and new-imported diseases, a quiet settlement may
take place, civilization ensue, and the arts of peace be cultivated: learning,
the luxury of the soul, diffuse itself through the nation, and some naturalist
arise, who, with spirit and abilities, may explore each boundary of the ocean
which separates the Asiatic and American continents; may render certain what I
can only suspect; and, by his observations on the feathered tribe, their
flights and migrations, give utility to mankind, in naval and oeconomical
operations, by auguries which the ancients knew well to apply to the benefit of
their fellow creatures. He may, perhaps, smile on the labors of the Arctic
Zoologist (if by that time they are not quite obsolete); and, as the animate
creation never changes her course, he may find much right; and, if he is
endowed with a good heart, will heartily attribute the errors to
misinformation, or the common infirmity of human nature.

INDEX.
A.
AMERICA originally destitute of domestic animals Page 6 ALBATROSS, wandering
506 its vast migrations 507
Amulets of bills and claws of the Eagle 215 of the feathers of the Kingfisher
280 singular, of a species of mushroom ib.
Ape, Sea, extraordinary animal 181 Argali, or Wild Sheep 12 AVOSET, American
502 Terek ib. scooping 503
AUK, great 509 razor-bill ib. black-billed 510 puffin 511 Labrador 512 little
ib. ancient ib. pygmy 513 tufted ib. Perroquet 514 crested 515 dusky ib.

B.
Badger, 71 sometimes white ib.
Bear, polar page 53 their skins anciently offered to the church 57 black ib.
not carnivorous 58
brown 61 carnivorous and granivorous 62 chase of the Bear by the Indians ib.
Laplanders 65

Finnish song on the death of 66
Beaver, its wondrous economy 99 Musk Beaver 106 forms houses like the Castor
Beaver 107
Beaver. See Otter. Bats 184 Beluga, a species of Porpess 182 Bison, its limits
2, 3 chase of by the Indians
Bison or Ox, musk 8 its excellent wool 9
Boars, wild, their most northern residence 35 Buck 33 Buzzard, common 207
honey 224 moor 225
Butcher-bird. See Shrike Bustard, Norton Sound 321 great ib. little ib.
BUNTING, white crowned page 355 snow ib. its migrations 356 change of colors
ib.
black 359 Towhee ib. rice 360 singular migration of the males 361 painted 362
Louisiane ib. black-throated ib. Unalaschka ib. black-crowned 364 rusty ib.
second Unalaschka A wrong repetition of name: the Reader is therefore desired
to distinguish by the addition of Second.
ib. cinereous ib. blue 365 indigo ib. golden 366 common ib. yellow 367 Ortolan
ib. reed 368
Birds, their skins used for clothing 511, 127 Bimaculated Duck 575
C.
CAT, domestic 52 wild, none in the Russian empire ib. Mountain, Cat a 50
Castor. See Beaver. Camels, their highest latitude 35 Calumet, account of 197
CROW, Raven 245 carrion 246 Magpie 247 blue 249 STELLER'S ib. Rook page 250
hooded 251 Jackdaw ib. Nutcracker 252 Jay ib. rock ib. Roller genus 253
garrulous ib.
Cuckoo genus 265 Carolina ib. European 266
Creeper genus 285 European ib. Bahama ib.

CHATTERER, prib 346 CURLEW, Eskimaux 461 common 462 Whimbrel ib.
COOT, common 496 Corvorant 581 Cranes, America 442, 443 European 453

D.
DEER, Moose 17 its chase by the savages 19 superstitions relative to 20 its
size exaggerated 21 Rein Deer. See Rein. Virginian 28
Dogs, what the original Dog of America 39 of Kamtschatka, Greenland, etc. ib.
beasts of draught in many places 40 no mad Dogs in Greenland 41
DORMOUSE, striped page 126 English? 128
DIVER, northern 518 Imber ib. speckled 519 striped ib. red-throated 520
black-throated ib.
Dunlin 476 DUCK, whistling Swan 541 mute Swan 543 Canada Goose 544 bean Goose
546 grey-leg Goose ib. blue-wing Goose 547 Bering's Isle Goose 548
white-fronted Goose ib. snow Goose 549 brent Goose 551 bernacle Goose 552 eider
Duck 553 king 554 velvet 555 black 556 scoter ib. Shoveler 557 golden-eye ib.
spirit 558 pied 559 Buffel ib. Harlequin 560 Pochard ib. whistling 561 summer
562 Mallard 563 Ilathera 564 dusky ib. western ib. scaup 565 brown ib. pintail
566 long-tail ib. American Wigeon 567 white-faced 568 American Teal 569 great
Goose 570 Chinese Goose page 571 red-breasted Goose ib. Shieldrake 572 Gulaund
ib. Morillon 573 tufted ib. Hrafn-ond 574 falcated ib. Wigeon ib. Gadwall 575
Lapmark 576 red ib. Garganey ib. European Teal 577
Duck, bimaculated 575
E.
Elk, the same with the Moose 17 or wild Swan
Ermine 75 Echoueries, what 148 Eagle, sea 194 black 195 black-cheeked 196
white-headed ib. its singular manner of preying ib.
white 197 its feathers much used in the Calumet ib.
Osprey 199 how robbed by the white-headed Eagle ib.
golden 214 cinereous ib. crying 215
Eider Duck 553 Eggs of the Auk tribe, Doctor Harvey's curious remarks on 510
F.
Fisher Weesel 82 Fox, common 45 its varieties 49, 47 Arctic page 42 are
migratory 43
gray and silvery 48
Fallow Deer 33 Furs, multitudes imported from America 77, 105 Furs unknown to
the ancient Romans as luxuries 81 when first introduced into Rome ib. long used
in Tartary ib.
FALCON, rough-footed 200 St. John's ib. chocolate-colored 201 Newfoundland ib.
sacre 202 peregrine ib. gentil 203 Goshawk 204 sometimes white ib.
red-tailed 205 Leverian 206 red-shouldered ib. Buzzard 207 plain 208 marsh ib.
ringtail 209 swallow-tailed 210 Buzzardet 211 little ib. Pigeon 212 dubious 213
dusky ib. Iceland 216 Greenland By inadvertency the word DUSKY is applied to
this species, a trivial before given to another Falcon: the Reader is therefore
requested to alter this with his pen.
220 Gyrfalcon 221 collared 222 Kite 223 Honey Buzzard 224 Lunner 225 Moor
Buzzard ib. Kestril 226 Sparrow Hawk ib. Hobby 227
Falconry, earliest account of page 219 very ancient in Tartary 220 great state
in which the Chinese emperors hawk 204
Falcons, manner of taking in Iceland 217 FINCH, Cowpen 371 golden ib. New York
Siskin 372 orange ib. red-breasted ib. tree 373 Bahama ib. white-throated ib.
yellow-throated 374 striped ib. ferruginous 375 fasciated ib. grass ib. winter
376 black-faced ib. Norton ib. crimson-head ib. purple 377 Lapland ib.
cinereous 378 greater Red-poll ib. lesser Red-poll 379 Arctic ib. Lulean 380
Twite ib. flaming ib. brambling 381 Chaffinch ib. Sparrow 382 Goldfinch 383
Siskin ib.
FLYCATCHER, tyrant, its courage 384 Louisiana 385 fork-tail ib. chattering ib.
crested 386 lesser crested ib. black-headed page 387 cinereous ib. red-eyed ib.
Cat 388 Canada ib. green 389 dusky ib. golden throat ib. striped 390 dun ib.
pied 391
FLAMANT, red 504 Fulmar 534 Fieldfare 340
G.
Goat, wild 16 tame, inhabits far north ib.
Gyrfalcon 216 Goshawk 204 Gentil Falcon 203 Grakle genus 263 purple ib. most
destructive to mayz 256 yet rashly proscribed ib.
boat-tail 264
Gambet 476 Glades in Sibiria for Wild Geese, etc. 570 GROUS, ruffed 301
singular noise made by 302
pinnated 305 sharp-tailed 306 spotted 307 white 308 amazing numbers taken 311
rock 312 wood ib. spurious 314 black ib. how taken in Sibiria 315
Ptarmigan ib. Rehusak page 316 hazel 317
GROSBEAK, crossbill 347 pine 348 cardinal 349 pope 350 red-breasted ib.
spotted ib. fan-tail 351 yellow-bellied ib. dusky ib. blue ib. purple 352 gray
ib. Bullfinch 353 green ib. haw 354
GOATSUCKER, short-winged 434 long-winged 436 European 437
GALLINULE, soree 491 yellow-breasted ib. common 492 Crake ib.
GREBE, horned 497 pied-bill ib. Louisiana 498 dusky ib. great crested ib.
eared 499 red-necked ib.
GUILLEMOT, foolish 516 black ib. marbled 517
GULL, black-backed 527 herring ib. Wagel 528 laughing page 528 black-headed
529 Kittiwake ib. ivory ib. common 530 Arctic ib. black-toed 581 Skua ib.
glaucous 532 silvery 533 Tarrock ib. red-legged ib.
Gannet 582
H.
HARE, varying 94 American 95 Alpine 97
HOG. See Boar. HUDGE-HOG 142 Hobby 227 HOOPOE, its filthy nest 284
HONEYSUCKER, genus 286 red-throated ib. its curious manners 277 ruffed 290
HERON, hooping Crane 442 brown 443 great ib. red-shouldered Heron 444 common
ib. great white 445 little white ib. great Egret 446 little Egret ib. reddish
Egret 447 green ib. Louisiane 448 blue ib. yellow-crowned ib. ash-colored 449
streaked ib. GARDENEAN 450 night page 450 Bittern 451 rusty-crowned 452 little
453 common Crane ib. Sibirian Crane 455 white Stork ib. black Stork 456

I.
IBIS, wood 458 scarlet ib. brown 459 white ib. bay 460
Imber 518
K.
KINGFISHER, belted 279 European? 280
Knot 472 Kamtschatkans had no domestic animals before the arrival of the
Russians 7 their chase of the Argali or Wild Sheep 13 use the Rein Deer in
sledges 25 their chase of the Bear 64 of the Seal 158
superstitions about its chase 157 their chase of the Ursine Seal 170 their
noblest chase of Leonine Seal 175
Kite, a kind of oracle with the Greeks p. 224 Kestril 226
L.
Lemmus 136 Lynx 50 bay 51
Lanner 225 LARK, shore 392 red 393 calandra ib. sky 394 wood 395 tit ib. field
ib.
Lapwing 480
M.
Martin, pine 76 Minx 87 Manati 177 its conjugal affection 180
MARMOT, Quebec 111 Maryland ib. hoary 112 tail-less ib. earless 113 Bobak 115
Morse. See Walrus. Mouse, common 131 field ib. meadow 133
Musk, Tibet 34 a solitary animal ib.
MERGANSER, Goosander 537 red-breasted ib. hooded 538 small 539 minute 540
Massagetae, clothed themselves in Seal-skins page 158
N.
Norway Rat. See Brown. NUTHATCH, Canada 281 black-headed ib. lest 282

O.
OPOSSUM, singular asylum for its young 73 very tenacious of life ib.
OTTER, common 86 minx or lesser 87 sea 88 its singular manners 89 its fur
exquisite, and of high value 90

Ox. See Bison. musk 8
Octher, in the time of Alfred, first mentions the Walrus 146 OWL, Eagle 228 a
bird of ill omen with the savages ib. long-eared 229 short-eared ib. red 230
mottled 231 Wapacuthu ib. sooty 232 snowy 233, 580 barred 234 Hawk ib. white
235 brown 236 little ib. Scandinavian 237 tawny ib.
ORIOLE genus 255 red-wing ib. white-backed page 256 Baltimore 257 its curious
nest 258
bastard ib. black 259 brown-headed ib. white-headed 260 olive ib.
yellow-throated 261 Unalaschka ib. sharp-tailed ib.
Oyster-catcher, pied 489 black? INTRODUCTION.
Ouzel, water 332 ring 344 rose-colored ib.

P.
PETREL, Fulmar 534 Sheerwater 535 fork-tail ib. stormy 536 Kuril ib.
PELECAN, great 578 dusky 580 Charlestown ib. Shag 581 Corvorant ib. Gannet 582
crested Corvorant 583 violet 584 red-faced ib.
Panther, brown. See Puma. PORCUPINE 109 its manners 110
Pekan Weesel 78 Peregrine Falcon 202 PARROT, Carolina 242 Illinois 243
Philtre, singular in Lapland 280 among the Ostiacs ib.
PARTRIDGE, Maryland page 318 common 319 Quail 320
PIGEON, passenger 322 their amazing numbers 323
Carolina 326 Canada 327 white-crowned ib. ground 328 Stork 329 ring ib.
PLOVER, alwargrim 483 golden ib. noisy 484 ringed 485 black-crowned ib.
sanderling 486 ruddy ib. long-legged 487 Dottrel ib. Alexandrine 488
PHALAROPE, gray 494 red ib. brown 495 plain ib.
Purre 475 Puma 49 Puffin 511
Q.
Quickhatch. See Wolverene.
R.
RAT, black 129 brown 130 American page 130 water ib. common Mouse 131 field
ib. Virginian 132 Labrador ib. Hudson's ib. meadow? 133 hare-tailed ib.
oeconomic 134 its wonderful management 135
red 136 Lemmus ib. Lena 137 ringed ib. Tchelag 138
Rabbet. See American Hare. RACCOON 60 its great cunning 70
Rein Deer 22 its great utility in northern countries 24, etc.
Roebuck 33 tail-less ib.
Ringtail Hawk 209 ROLLER genus 253 garrulous ib.
RAIL, clapper 490 Virginian ib.
Razor-bill 509 Rice-birds, their wonderful migration 360 Rice, how introduced
into North America 361
S.
Sable 79 how taken 80
Seals, common 51 the flocks of the Arctic regions ib. their chase by the
Greenlanders ib. by the Kamtschatkans 156
great Seal 159 rou^^ page 160 Lep^^ine 161 hooded 162 harp 163 rubbon 165
Ursine ib. its curious history 167
Leonine 172 its history 173 chase by the Kamtschatkans 175

Sheep, wild 12 chase of 13
tame of Iceland ib. tame as high as Finmark 14
Shrew, foetid 139 Squirrel 116 Hudson's Bay ib. gray ib. most destructive to
the mayz 117 Americans once unable to pay their proscription money! 118
black 119 flying 120 hooded flying 121 Severn river flying 122 common European
ib. European flying 124
Stag 27 Stoat 75 Skunk 85 Sacre 202 Sparrow Hawk 226 SKIMMER, Cutwater 522
Stork, white 455 black 456
SHRIKE, great 238 black-crowned ib. crested 239 Natka ib. red-backed 240 gray
ib. lesser gray 241
Skua 581 STARE genus page 330 crescent ib. Louisiane 331 common ib. water
Ouzel 332
SWALLOW, chimney 429 Martin 430 sand ib. purple swift 431 swift 432 aculeated
ib. Unalaschka. See INTROD.
SPOON-BILL, roseate 440 European 441
SNIPE, little Woodcock 463 common Snipe ib. Jack 464 red-breasted ib. brown
ib. nodding 465 great Godwit ib. red G. 466 common G. ib. spotted 467 Jadreka
ib. stone 468 redshank ib. yellow-shank ib. green-shank 469 semipalmated ib.
black ib. European Woodcock 470 great Snipe ib. dusky 471 Finmark ib.
Sandpiper, Hebridal 472 striated ib. knot 473 spotted ib. ash-colored 474 New
York page 474 common ib. green 475 Purre ib. Dunlin 476 red ib. gray 477 gambet
ib. armed 478 Swiss ib. little 479 ruff ib. freckled 480 selninger ib. Lapwing
ib. waved 481 shore ib. wood 482 uniform ib.

T.
TODY genus 283 dusky ib.
TURKEY 291 manners 292 not a bird of the old continent 296
THRUSH, mimic 333 its wondrous power of note 334
ferruginous 335 red-breasted ib. varied 337 tawny ib. red-legged ib. little
338 Unalaschka ib. golden-crowned 339 Hudsonian ib. New York ib. Labrador 340
Fieldfare ib. missel 341 Throstle page 342 red-wing ib. Kamtschatkan 343
rose-colored 344 ring ib. Blackbird 345
TANAGER, summer 369 Canada ib. olive ib. gray 370 bishop ib.
TITMOUSE, Toupet 423 Virginian ib. creeping ib. Colemouse 424 Canada ib.
Hudson's Bay 425 great ib. Stromian 426 azure ib. blue 427 marsh ib. crested
ib. long-tailed 428 bearded ib.
TERN, Noddy 523 great 524 lesser ib. black 525 Kamtschatkan ib. Caspian 526
Tyrant Flycatcher, its great spirit 384
V.
VULTURE, carrion 191 its great utility 192
Vision 78
W.
Woodcock, American 463 European 470
Walrus page 144 its uses and chase 147, 148
WEESEL, common 75 Stoat or Ermine ib. Pine Martin 76 Pekan 78 Vison ib. Sable
79 Fisher 82 striated 83 Skunk 85
Wolf 38 the Dog of America 39
Wolverene 66 WAGTAIL, white 396 yellow ib. yellow-headed 397 Tcshutschi ib.
WRYNECK 267 WOODPECKER, white-billed 268 pileated 269 golden-wing 270
ferruginous 271 red-headed ib. Carolina 272 spotted ib. Canada, spotted 273
hairy ib. downy 274 yellow-bellied 275 yellow-legged ib. three-coed ib. black
276 green 277 grey-headed ib. middle spotted 278 lest spotted ib.
WARBLER, blue-backed 398 black-headed ib. yellow-breast 399 orange-thighed ib.
black-throat ib. yellow-throat 400 hooded ib. yellow-rump ib. red-head 401
black-poll page 401 grey-poll 402 yellow-poll ib. white-poll ib. golden crowned
403 gold-wing ib. yellow-throat 404 green ib. bloody-side 405 caerulean ib.
Worm-eater 406 yellow-tail ib. spotted 407 Louisiane ib. orange-throat 408
Quebec ib. belted ib. olive 409 New York 410 dusky ib. prothonotary ib.
half-collared ib. orange-bellied ib. olive-brown 411 Grasset ib. grey-throat
ib. Guira 412 Blackburnian ib. pine ib. yellow page 413 ruby-crowned ib.
golden-crested 414 Wren ib. bush 415 Nightingale 416 Redstart ib. gray Redstart
417 Redbreast, Robin ib. blue-throat ib. black-cap 418 pettychaps ib. hedge ib.
bogrush 419 Fig-eater ib. Grasshopper ib. sedge ib. Scotch 420 long-billed ib.
Wheat-ear ib. Stapazina 421 Whinchat ib. white-throat 422 Awatcha ib. Kruka ib.

FINIS.
ERRATA AND CORRECTIONS.
VOL. I.

Page IV, line 13, for but, read yet -- P. XXVI, l. 31, similiarity, read
similarity -- P. XXXII, l. 23, Moura, read Mousa -- P. XXXVII, l. 2,
maen-hirion, read meini-hirion -- P. XLII, l. 14, circumgirations, read
circumgyrations -- P. XLIII, last line, for Same, p. 7. Same, p. 8. Torfaeus,
etc.; read Torfaeus Hist. Norveg. ii. p. 96. The same, p. 97 -- P. XLVI, l. 11,
the last to 1766, read the last period it remained quiescent to 1766. l. 16,
overflown, read overflowed -- P. LVII, l. 16, amata. Donec; read amata donec.
l. 19, vidit, read vident -- P. LXII, l. 31, is, read are -- P. LXIII, l. 18,
as low as that of 60, read and that of 60 -- P. LXXVI, l. 14, Plearonectes,
read Pleuronectes -- P. LXXXII, l. 29, insert, after the word places, the mark
of reference, and blot it out of line 31 -- P. LXXXVI, l. 13, 14, small and
hard, read hard and small -- P. XCI, l. 26, Lapes, read Lepas; l. 28,
carinotum, read carinatum. l. 36, see p. LV -- P. XCIX, l. 5, dele is -- P.
CIII, l. 10, Salmon, read Salmo -- P. CVI, l. 6, yet is, read which yet is --
P. CVII, last line, after baccata, add Pallas Itin. iii. 105. Fl. Ross. 23.
tab. X -- P. CVIII, note *, read COOK'S Voyage -- P. CXIV, l. 22, Virg. those,
read Virg. are distinguished those -- P. CXVI, l. 23, hieraciodes, read
hieracioides -- P. CXVIII, l. 30, finally, of those, read finally, those -- P.
CXX. l. 10, is, read are -- P. CXXIII, last line, 261, read 201 -- P. CXXXII,
l. 28, dele either -- P. CXLIV, l. 18, shall, read should -- P. CLXVI, l. 24,
had in the, read had been in the. l. 31, dele from -- P. CLXXIV, after No 73,
add 74; after No 75, add 76; after No 77, add 78 -- P. CXCI, l. 1, oetus, read
foetus. l. 18, ovaria, read ova, l. 20, northernly, read northern -- P. CC, l.
penult. for; read,

P. 3, l. 24, Mivera, read Quivera -- P. 24, l. 9, Kungus, read Kungur -- P.
33, l. 11, is, read are -- P. 34. note, for 9, 44 or 45, read 20, read lat. 60
to 20 -- P. 43, l. 23, latter, read others -- P. 50, l. 22, add The Lynx also
inhabits the vast forests of the north of Europe and Asia; in the first, as
high as Lapland, in the last, in most parts of Sibiria, and even in the north
of India, amidst the lofty mountains which bound that country -- P. 58, l. 26,
carnivorous, read animal -- P. 76, l. 16, dele in great plenty -- P. 89, l. 10,
lat. 44, read 49 -- P. 90, l. 27, L. 25. read L. 20. -- P. 98, l. 15, all
round, read in all parts of -- P. 99, l. 3, Konyma, read Kowyma -- P. 112, l.
23, Hist. Quad. No 265 -- P. 116, note *, Hist. Quad. 283. a. -- P. 142, l. 16,
Sweden, in the, read Sweden. In the

VOL. II.

P. 220, l. 26, E DUSKY, read E GREENLAND -- P. 223, l. 21, Sea Eagle, read
Osprey -- P. 244, l. 7, for north, read south -- P. 368, l. 5, cychromi, read
cychrami -- P. 407, l. 18, le, read la -- P. 527, l. 18, Non, read Nam: and
dele?

OMITTED at p. 285, VOL. II.

L'Oiseau pourpre a bec de grimpereau, De Buffon, v. 526. -- Latham, ii. 723.
175. A. PURPLE CREEPER.


CR. wholly of a purple color. Length four inches and a half.

According to Seba, it inhabits Virginia; and is said to sing well.


