VOL. VI.

A COLLECTION OF POEMS IN SIX VOLUMES.

BY SEVERAL HANDS.

LONDON: Printed by J. HUGHS, For R. and J. DODSLEY, at Tully's-Head in
Pall Mall. MDCCLVIII.

HYMN TO THE NAIADS.
By Dr. AKENSIDE.
MDCCXLVI.
ARGUMENT.
The Nymphs who preside over springs and rivulets are addressed at daybreak in
honor of their several functions, and of the relations which they bear to the
natural and to the moral world. Their origin is deduced from the first
allegorical deities, or powers of nature; according to the doctrine of the old
mythological poets, concerning the generation of the Gods and the rise of
things. They are then successively considered, as giving motion to the air and
exciting summer-breezes; as nourishing and beautifying the vegetable world; as
contributing to the fullness of navigable rivers, and consequently to the
maintenance of commerce; and by that means, to the maritime part of military
power. Next is represented their favorable influence upon health, when
assisted by rural exercise: which introduces their connection with the art of
physic, and the happy effects of mineral, medicinal springs. Lastly, they are
celebrated for the friendship which the Muses bear them, and for the trae
inspiration which temperance only can receive; in opposition to the enthusiasm
of the more licentious poets.

HYMN TO THE NAIADS.
OVER yonder eastern hill the twilight throws
Her dusky mantle; and the God of day,
With bright Astraea seated by his side,
Waits yet to leave the ocean. Tarry, Nymphs.
Ye Nymphs, ye blue-ey'd progeny of Thames,
Who now the mazes of this rugged heath
^race with your fleeting steps; who all night long
^epeat, amid the cool and tranquil air,
^our lonely murmurs, tarry; and receive
^y offered lay. To pay you homage due,
^eave the gates of sleep; nor shall my lyre
Too far into the splendid hours of morn
Engage your audience: my observant hand
Shall close the strain ere any sultry beam
Approach you. To your subterranean haunts
Ye then may timely steal; to pace with care
The humid sands; to loosen from the soil
The bubbling sources; to direct the rills
To meet in wider channels; or beneath
Some grotto's dripping arch, at height of noon
To slumber, sheltered from the burning heaven.
Where shall my song begin, ye Nymphs? or end?
Wide is your praise and copious -- First of things,
First of the lonely powers, ere Time arose,
Were Love and Chaos: Love, the sire of Fate;
Elder than Chaos. Born of Fate was Time,
Who many sons and many comely births
Devoured, relentless father: till the child
Of Rhea drove him from the upper sky,
And quelled his deadly might. Then social reigned
The kindred powers, Tethys, and reverend Ops,
And spotless Vesta; while supreme of sway
Remained the cloud-compeller. From the couch
Of Tethys sprang the sedgy-crowned race,
Who from a thousand urns, over every clime,
Send tribute to their parent; and from them
Are ye, O Naiads: Arethusa fair,
And tuneful Aganippe; that sweet name,
Bandusia; that soft family which dwelt
With Syrian Daphne; and the honored tribes
Beloved of Paeon. Listen to my strain,
Daughters of Tethys: listen to your praise.
You, Nymphs, the winged offspring, which of old
Aurora to divine Astraeus bore,
Owns; and your aid beseeches. When the might
Of Hyperion, from his noontide throne,
Unbends their languid pinions, aid from you
They ask: Favonius and the mild South-west
From you relief implore. Your sallying streams
Fresh vigor to their weary wings impart.
Again they fly, disporting; from the mead
Half-ripen'd and the tender blades of corn,
To sweep the noxious mildew; or dispel
Contagious steams, which often the parched earth
Breathes on her fainting sons. From noon to eve,
Along the river and the paved brook,
Ascend the cheerful breezes; hailed of bards
Who, fast by learned Came, the Mantuan lyre
Solicit; nor unwelcome to the youth
Who on the heights of Tibur, all inclined
Over rushing Anio, with a pious hand
The reverend scene delineates, broken fanes,
Or tombs, or pillar'd aqueducts, the pomp
Of ancient time; and happily, while he scans
The ruins, with a silent tear revolves
The fame and fortune of imperious Rome.
You too, O Nymphs, and your unenvious aid
The rural powers confess; and still prepare
For you their grateful treasures. Pan commands,
Often as the Delian king with Sirius holds
The central heavens, the father of the grove
Commands his Dryads over your abodes
To spread their deepest umbrage. well the God
Remembereth how indulgent ye supplied
Your genial dews to nurse them in their prime.
Pales, the pasture's queen, wherever ye stray,
Pursues your steps, delighted; and the path
With living verdure clothes. Around your haunts
The laughing Chloris, with profusest hand,
Throws wide her blooms, her odours. Still with you
Pomona seeks to dwell: and over the lawns,
And over the vale of Richmond, where with Thames
Ye love to wander, Amalthea pours
Well-pleased the wealth of that Ammonian horn,
Her dower; unmindful of the fragrant isles
Nysaean or Atlantic. Nor can thou,
(Albeit often, ungrateful, thou do mock
The beverage of the sober Naiad's urn,
O Bromius, O Lenaean) nor can thou
Disown the powers whose bounty, ill repaid,
With nectar feeds thy tendrils. Yet from me,
Yet, blameless Nymphs, from my delighted lyre,
Accept the rites your bounty well may claim;
Nor heed the scoffings of the Edonian band.
For better praise awaits you. Thames, your sire,
As down the verdant slope your duteous rills
Descend, the tribute stately Thames receives,
Delighted; and your piety applauds;
And bids his copious tide roll on secure,
For faithful are his daughters; and with words
Auspicious gratulates the bark which, now
His banks forsaking, her adventurous wings
Yields to the breeze, with Albion's happy gifts
Extremest isles to bless. and often at morn,
When Hermes, from Olympus bent over earth
To bear the words of Jove, on yonder hill
Stoops lightly-sailing; often intent your springs
He views: and waving over some newborn stream
His blessed pacific wand, "And yet," he cries,
"Yet," cries the son of Maia, "though recluse
"And silent be your stores, from you, fair Nymphs,
"Flows wealth and kind society to men.
"By you my function and my honored name
"Do I possess; while over the Boetic vale,
"Or through the towers of Memphis, or the palms
"By sacred Ganges watered, I conduct
"The English merchant: with the buxom fleece
"Of fertile Ariconium while I clothe
"Sarmatian kings; or to the household Gods
"Of Syria, from the bleak Cornubian shore,
"Dispense the mineral treasure which of old
"Sidonian pilots sought, when this fair land
"Was yet unconscious of those generous arts
"Which wise Phoenicia from their native clime
"Transplanted to a more indulgent heaven."
Such are the words of Hermes: such the praise,
O Naiads, which from tongues celestial waits
Your bounteous deeds. From bounty issues power:
And those who, sedulous in prudent works,
Relieve the wants of nature, Jove repays
With generous wealth and his own seat on earth,
Fit judgments to pronounce, and curb the might
Of wicked men. Your kind unfailing urns
Not vainly to the hospitable arts
Of Hermes yield their store. For, O ye Nymphs,
Has he not won the unconquerable queen
Of arms to court your friendship? You she owns
The fair associates who extend her sway
Wide over the mighty deep; and grateful things
Of you she utters, often as from the shore
Of Thames, or Medway's vale, or the green banks
Of Vecta, she her thundering navy leads
To Calpe's foaming channel, or the rough
Cantabrian coast; her auspices divine
Imparting to the senate and the prince
Of Albion, to dismay barbaric kings,
The Iberian, or the Celt. The pride of kings
Was ever scorned by Pallas: and of old
Rejoiced the virgin, from the brazen prow
Of Athens over Aegina's gloomy surge,
To drive her clouds and stroms; o'erwhelming all
The Persian's promised glory, when the realms
Of Indus and the soft Ionian clime,
When Lybia's torrid champain and the rocks
Of cold Imaus joined their servile bands,
To sweep the sons of liberty from earth.
In vain: Minerva on the brazen prow
Of Athens stood, and with the thunder's voice
Denounced her terrors on their impious heads,
And shook her burning Aegis. Xerxes saw:
From Heracleum, on the mountain's height
Throned in his golden car, he knew the sign
Celestial; felt unrighteous hope forsake
His faltering heart, and turned his face with shame.
Hail, ye who share the stern Minerva's power;
Who arm the hand of liberty for war;
And give, in secret, the Britannic name
To awe contending monarchs: yet benign,
Yet mild of nature; to the works of peace
More prone, and lenient of the many ills
Which wait on human life. Your gentle aid
Hygeia well can witness; she who saves,
From poisonous cates and cups of pleasing bane,
The wretch devoted to the entangling snares
Of Bacchus and of Comus. Him she leads
To Cynthia's lonely haunts. To spread the toils,
To beat the coverts, with the jovial horn
At dawn of day to summon the loud hounds,
She calls the lingering sluggard from his dreams:
And where his breast may drink the mountain-breeze,
And where the fervor of the sunny vale
May beat upon his brow, through devious paths
Beckons his rapid courser. Nor when ease,
Cool ease and welcome slumbers have becalmed
His eager bosom, does the queen of health
Her pleasing care withold. His decent board
She guards, presiding; and the frugal powers
With joy sedate leads in: and while the brown
Ennaean dame with Pan presents her stores;
While changing still, and comely in the change,
Vertumnus and the Hours before him spread
The garden's banquet; you to crown his feast,
To crown his feast, O Naiads, you the fair
Hygeia calls: and from your shelving seats,
And groves of poplar, plenteous cups ye bring,
To slake his veins: till soon a purer tide
Flows down those loaded channels; washes off
The dregs of luxury, the lurking seeds
Of crude disease; and through the abodes of life
Sends vigor, sends repose. Hail, Naiads: hail,
Who give, to labor, health; to stooping age,
The joys which youth had squandered. Often your urns
Will I invoke; and, frequent in your praise,
Abash the frantic Thyrsus with my song.
For not estranged from your benignant arts
Is he, the God, to whose mysterious shrine
My youth was sacred, and my votive cares
Are due; the learned Paeon. Often when all
His cordial treasures he has searched in vain;
When herbs, and potent trees, and drops of balm
Rich with the genial influence of the sun,
(To rouse dark fancy from her plaintive dreams,
To brace the nerveless arm, with food to win
Sick appetite, or hush the unquiet breast
Which pines with silent passion) he in vain
Has proved; to your deep mansions he descends.
Your gates of humid rock, your dim arcades,
He enters; where impurpled veins of ore
Gleam on the roof; where through the rigid mine
Your trickling rills insinuate. There the God
From your indulgent hands the steaming bowl
Wafts to his pale-ey'd suppliants; wafts the seeds
Merallic and the elemental salts
Washed from the pregnant glebe. They drink: and soon
Flies pain; flies inauspicious care: and soon
The social haunt or unfrequented shade
Hears Io, Io Paean; as of old,
When Python fell. And, O propitious Nymphs,
Often as for hapless mortals I implore
Your salutary springs, through every urn
O shed selected atoms, and with all
Your healing powers inform the recent wave.
My lyre shall pay your bounty. Nor disdain
That humble tribute. Though a mortal hand
Excite the strings to utterance, yet for themes
Not unregarded of celestial powers,
I frame their language; and the Muses deign
To guide the pious tenor of my lay.
The Muses (sacred be their gifts divine)
In early days did to my wondering sense
Their secrets often reveal: often my raised ear
In slumber felt their music: often at noon
Or hour of sunset, by some lonely stream,
In field or shady grove, they taught me words
Of power from death and envy to preserve
The good man's name, whence yet with grateful mind^
And offerings unprofan'd by ruder eye,
My vows I send, my homage, to the seats
Of rocky Cirrha, where with you they dwell:
Where you their chaste companions they admit
Through all the hallowed scene: where often intent,
And leaning over Castalia's mossy verge,
They mark the cadence of your confluent urns,
How tunefull yielding gratefullest repose
To their consorted measure: till again,
With emulation all the sounding choir,
And bright Apollo, leader of the song,
Their voices through the liquid air exalt,
And sweep their lofty strings: those awful strings,
That charm the mind of Gods: that fill the courts
Of wide Olympus with oblivion sweet
Of evils, with immortal rest from cares;
Assuage the terrors of the throne of Jove;
And quench the formidable thunderbolt
Of unrelenting fire. With slackened wings,
While now the solemn concert breathes around,
Incumbent over the scepter of his lord
Sleeps the stern eagle; by the numbered notes,
Possessed; and satiate with the melting tone:
Sovereign of birds. The furious God of war,
His darts forgetting and the rapid wheels
That bear him vengeful over the embattled plain,
Relents, and sooths his own fierce heart to ease,
Unwonted ease. The sire of Gods and men,
In that great moment of divine delight,
Looks down on all that live; and whatsoever
He loves not, over the peopled earth and over
The interminated ocean, he beholds
Cursed with abhorrence by his doom severe,
And troubled at the sound. Ye, Naiads, ye
With ravished ears the melody attend
Worthy of sacred silence. But the slaves
Of Bacchus with tempestuous clamours strive
To drown the heavenly strains; of highest Jove,
Irreverent; and by mad presumption fired
Their own discordant raptures to advance
With hostile emulation. Down they rush
From Nysa's vine-impurpled cliff, the dames
Of Thrace, the Satyrs, and the unruly Fauns,
With old Silenus, through the midnight gloom
Tossing the torch impure, and high in air
The brandished Thyrsus, to the Phrygian pipe's
Shrill voice, and to the clashing cymbals, mixed
With shrieks and frantic uproar. May the Gods
From every unpolluted ear avert
Their orgies! If within the seats of men,
Within the seats of men, the walls, the gates
Which Pallas rules, if happily there be found
Who loves to mingle with the revel-band
And hearken to their accents; who aspires
From such instructers to inform his breast
With verse; let him, fit votarist, implore
Their inspiration. He perchance the gifts
Of young Lyaeus, and the dread exploits,
May sing in aptest numbers: he the fate
Of sober Pentheus, he the Paphian rites,
And naked Mars with Cytheraea chained,
And strong Alcides in the spinster's robe,
May celebrate, applauded. But with you,
O Naiads, far from that unhallowed rout,
Must dwell the man whoever to praised themes
Invokes the immortal Muse. the immortal Muse
To your calm habitations, to the cave
Corycian or the Delphic mount, will guide
His footsteps; and with your unsullied streams
His lips will bathe: whether the eternal lore
Of Themis, or the majesty of Jove,
To mortals he reveal; or teach his lyre
The unenvied guerdon of the patriot's toils,
In those unfading islands of the blessed,
Where sacred bards abide. Hail, honored Nymphs;
Thrice hail. for you the Cyrenaic shell,
Behold, I touch, revering. To my songs
Be present ye with favorable feet,
And all profaner audience far remove.
ODE To the Right Honorable FRANCIS Earl of HUNTINGDON.
MDCCXLVII.
By the Same.
I. 1.
THE wise and great of every clime,
Through all the spacious walks of Time,
Wherever the Muse her power displayed,
With joy have listened and obeyed.
For, taught of heaven, the sacred Nine
Persuasive numbers, forms divine,
To mortal sense impart:
They best the soul with glory fire;
They noblest counsels, boldest deeds inspire;
And high over Fortune's rage inthrone the fixed heart.
I. 2.
Nor less prevailing is their charm
The vengeful bosom to disarm;
To melt the proud with human woe,
And prompt unwilling tears to flow.
Can wealth a power like this afford?
Can Cromwell's arts, or Marlborough's sword;
An equal empire claim?
No, HASTINGS. Thou my words wilt own:
Thy breast the gifts of every Muse has known;
Nor shall the giver's love disgrace thy noble name.
I. 3.
The Muse's awful art,
And the fair function of the poet's tongue,
Never shall thou blush to honor; to assert
From all that scorned vice or slavish fear has sung.
Nor shall the blandishment of Tuscan strings
Warbling at will in pleasure's myrtle bower;
Nor shall the baser notes to Celtic kings
By lying minstrels paid in evil hour,
Move Thee to spurn the heavenly Muse's reign.
A different strain,
And other themes
From her prophetic shades and hallowed streams
(Thou well can witness) meet the purged ear:
Such, as when Greece to her immortal shell
Rejoicing listened, godlike sounds to hear;
To hear the sweet instructress tell
(While men and heroes thronged around)
How life its noblest use may find,
How best for freedom be resigned;
And how, by glory, virtue shall be crowned.
II. 1.
Such was the Homer.
Chian father's strain
To many a kind domestic train,
Whose pious hearth and genial bowl
Had cheered the reverend pilgrim's soul:
When, every hospitable rite
With equal bounty to requite,
He struck his magic strings;
And poured spontaneous numbers forth,
And seized their ears with tales of ancient worth,
And filled their musing hearts with vast heroic things.
II. 2.
Now often, where happy spirits dwell,
Where yet he tunes his charming shell,
Often near him, with applauding hands,
The genius of his country stands.
To listening gods he makes him known,
That man divine, by whom were sown
The seeds of Grecian fame:
Who first the race with freedom fired;
From whom Lycurgus Sparta's sons inspired;
From whom Plataean palms and Cyprian trophies came.
II. 3.
O noblest, happiest age!
When Aristides ruled, and Cimon fought;
When all the generous fruits of Homer's page
Exulting Pindar saw to full perfection brought.
O Pindar, often shall thou be hailed of me:
Not that Apollo fed thee from his shrine;
Not that thy lips drank sweetness from the be;
Nor yet that, studious of thy notes divine,
Pan danced their measure with the sylvan throng:
But that thy song
Was proud to unfold
What thy base rulers trembled to behold;
Amid corrupted Thebes was proud to tell
The deeds of Athens and the Persian shame:
Hence on thy head their impious vengeance fell,
But thou, O faithful to thy fame,
The Muse's law did rightly know;
That who would animate his lays,
And other minds to virtue raise,
Must feel his own with all her spirit glow.
III. 1.
Are there, approved of later times,
Whose verse adorned a Octavius Caesar.
tyrant's crimes?
Who saw majestic Rome betrayed,
And lent the imperial ruffian aid?
Alas! not one polluted bard,
No, not the strains that Mincius heard,
Or Tibur's hills replied,
Dare to the Muse's ear aspire;
Save that, instructed by the Grecian lyre,
With freedom's ancient notes their shameful task they hide.
III. 2.
Mark, how the dread Pantheon stands,
Amid the domes of modern hands:
Amid the toys of idle state,
How simply, how severely great!
Then turn, and, while each western clime
Presents her tuneful sons to Time,
So mark thou Milton's name;
And add, "Thus differs from the throng
"The spirit which informed thy awful song,
"Which bade thy potent voice protect thy country's fame."
III. 3.
Yet hence barbaric zeal
His memory with unholy rage pursues;
While from these arduous cares of public weal
She bids each bard begone, and rest him with his Muse.
O fool! to think the man, whose ample mind
Must grasp at all that yonder stars survey;
Must join the noblest forms of every kind,
The world's most perfect image to display,
Can ever his country's majesty behold,
Unmoved or cold!
O fool! to deem
That He, whose thought must visit every theme,
Whose heart must every strong emotion know
By nature planted, or by fortune taught;
That He, if happily some presumptuous foe,
With false ignoble science fraught,
Shall spurn at freedom's faithful band;
That He their dear defense will shun,
Or hide their glories from the sun,
Or deal their vengeance with a woman's hand!
IV. 1.
I care not that in Arno's plain,
Or on the sportive banks of Seine,
From public themes the Muse's quire
Content with polished ease retire.
Where priests the studious head command,
Where tyrants bow the warlike hand
To vile ambition's aim,
Say, what can public themes afford,
Save venal honors to an hateful lord,
Reserved for angry heaven and scorned of honest fame?
IV. 2.
But here, where freedom's equal throne
To all her valiant sons is known;
Where all are conscious of her cares,
And each the power, that rules him, shares;
Here let the bard, whose dastard tongue
Leaves public arguments unsung,
Bid public praise farewell:
Let him to fitter climes remove,
Far from the hero's and the patriot's love,
And lull mysterious monks to slumber in their cell.
IV. 3.
O HASTINGS, not to all
Can ruling heaven the same endowments lend:
Yet still does nature to her offspring call,
That to one general weal their different powers they bend,
Unenvious. Thus alone, though strains divine
Insorm the bosom of the Muse's son;
Though with new honors the patrician's line
Advance from age to age; yet thus alone
They win the suffrage of impartial fame.
The poet's name
He best shall prove,
Whose lays the soul with noblest passions move.
But thee, O progeny of heroes old,
Thee to severer toils thy fate requires:
The fate which formed thee in a chosen mould,
The grateful country of thy sires,
Thee to sublimer paths demand;
Sublimer than thy sires could trace,
Or thy own EDWARD teach his race,
Though Gaul's proud genius sank beneath his hand.
V. 1.
From rich domains and subject farms,
They led the rustic youth to arms;
And kings their stern achievements feared;
While private strife their banners reared.
But loftier scenes to thee are shown,
Where empire's wide-establish'd throne
No private master fills:
Where, long foretold, The People reigns:
Where each a vassal's humble heart disdains;
And judges what he sees; and, as he judges, wills.
V. 2.
Here be it thine to calm and guide
The swelling democratic tide;
To watch the state's uncertain frame,
And baffle faction's partial aim:
But chiefly, with determined zeal,
To quell that servile band, who kneel
To freedom's banished foes;
That monster, which is daily found
Expert and bold thy country's peace to wound;
Yet dreads to handle arms, nor manly counsel knows.
V. 3.
It Is highest heaven's command,
That guilty aims should sordid paths pursue;
That what ensnares the heart should curb the hand,
And virtue's worthless foes be false to glory too.
But look on freedom. see, through every age,
What labors, perils, griefs, has she disdained!
What arms, what regal pride, what priestly rage,
Have her dread offspring conquered or sustained!
For Albion well have conquered. Let the strains
Of happy swains,
Which now resound
Where Scarsdale's cliffs the swelling pastures bound,
Bear witness. there, often let the farmer hail
The sacred orchard which imbowers his gate,
And show to strangers passing down the vale,
Where Candish, Booth, and Osborne sat;
When bursting from their country's chain,
Even in the midst of deadly harms,
Of papal snares and lawless arms,
They planned for freedom this her awful reign.
VI. 1.
This reign, these laws, this public care,
Which Nassau gave us all to share,
Had never adorned the English name,
Could fear have silenced freedom's claim.
But fear in vain attempts to bind
Those lofty efforts of the mind
Which social good inspires;
Where men, for this, assault a throne,
Each adds the common welfare to his own;
And each unconquered heart the strength of all acquires.
VI. 2.
Say, was it thus, when late we viewed
Our fields in civil blood imbrued?
When fortune crowned the barbarous host,
And half the astonished isle was lost?
Did one of all that vaunting train,
Who dare affront a peaceful reign,
Durst one in arms appear?
Durst one in counsels pledge his life?
Stake his luxurious fortunes in the strife?
Or lend his boasted name his vagrant friends to cheer?
VI. 3.
Yet, HASTINGS, these are they
Who challenge to themselves thy country's love
The true; the constant: who alone can weigh,
What glory should demand, or liberty approve!
But let their works declare them. Thy free powers,
The generous powers of thy prevailing mind,
Not for the tasks of their confederate hours,
Lewd brawls and lurking slander, were designed.
Be thou thy own approver. Honest praise
Often nobly sways
Ingenuous youth:
But, sought from cowards and the lying mouth,
Praise is reproach. Eternal GOD alone
For mortals fixes that sublime award.
He, from the faithful records of his throne,
Bids the historian and the bard
Dispose of honor and of scorn;
Discern the patriot from the slave;
And write the good, the wise, the brave,
For lessons to the multitude unborn.
ODE To the Right Reverend BENJAMIN Lord Bishop of WINCHESTER.
By the Same.
I. 1.
FOR toils which patriots have endured,
For treason quelled and laws secured,
In every nation Time displays
The palm of honorable praise.
Envy may rail; and faction fierce
May strive: but what, alas, can Those
(Though bold, yet blind and sordid foes)
To gratitude and love oppose,
To faithful story and persuasive verse?
I. 2.
O nurse of freedom, Albion, say,
Thou tamer of despotic sway,
What man, among thy sons around,
Thus heir to glory have thou found?
What page, in all thy annals bright,
Have thou with purer joy surveyed
Than that where truth, by Hoadly's aid,
Shines through the deep unhallowed shade
Of kingly fraud and sacerdotal night?
I. 3.
To him the Teacher blessed
Who sent religion, from the palmy field
By Jordan, like the morn to cheer the west,
And lifted up the veil which heaven from earth concealed,
To Hoadly thus He uttered his behest:
"Go thou, and rescue my dishonored law
"From hands rapacious and from tongues impure:
"Let not my peaceful name be made a lure
"The snares of savage tyranny to aid:
"Let not my words be impious chains to draw
"The freeborn soul, in more than brutal awe,
"To faith without assent, allegiance unrepaid."
II. 1.
No cold nor unperforming hand
Was armed by heaven with this command.
The world soon felt it: and, on high,
To William's ear with welcome joy
Did Lock among the blessed unfold
The rising hope of Hoadly's name:
Godolphin then confirmed the fame;
And Summers, when from earth he came,
And valiant Stanhope the fair sequel told. Mr. Lock died in 1704, when Mr.
Hoadly was beginning to distinguish himself in the cause of civil and religious
liberty: Lord Godolphin in 1712, when the doctrines of the Jacobite faction
were chiefly favored by those in power: Lord Summers in 1716, amid the
practices of the nonjuring clergy against the protestant establishment; and
lord Stanhope in 1721, during the controversy with the lower house of
convocation.

II. 2.
Then drew the lawgivers around,
(Sires of the Grecian name renowned)
And listening asked, and wondering knew,
What private force could thus subdue
The vulgar and the great combined;
Could war with sacred folly wage;
Could a whole nation disengage
From the dread bonds of many an age,
And to new habits mould the public mind.
II. 3.
For not a conqueror's sword,
Nor the strong powers to civil founders known,
Were his: but truth by faithful search explored,
And social sense, like seed, in genial plenty sown.
Wherever it took root, the soul (restored
To freedom) freedom too for others sought.
Not monkish craft the tyrant's claim divine,
Not regal zeal the bigot's cruel shrine
Could longer guard from reason's warfare sage;
Not the wild rabble to sedition wrought,
Nor synods by the papal Genius taught,
Nor St. John's spirit loose, nor Atterbury's rage.
III. 1.
But where shall recompense be found?
Or how such arduous merit crowned?
For look on life's laborious scene:
What rugged spaces lie between
Adventurous virtue's early toils
And her triumphal throne! The shade
Of death, mean time, does often invade
Her progress; nor, to us displayed,
Wears the bright heroine her expected spoils.
III. 2.
Yet born to conquer is her power:
-- O Hoadly, if that favorite hour
On earth arrive, with thankful awe
We own just heaven's indulgent law,
And proudly thy success behold;
We 'attend thy reverend length of days
With benediction and with praise,
And hail Thee in our public ways
Like some great spirit famed in ages old.
III. 3.
While thus our vows prolong
Thy steps on earth, and when by us resigned
Thou join'st thy seniors, that heroic throng
Who rescued or preserved the rights of human kind,
O! not unworthy may thy Albion's tongue
Thee still, her friend and benefactor, name:
O! never, Hoadly, in thy country's eyes,
May impious gold, or pleasure's gaudy prize,
Make public virtue, public freedom, vile;
Nor our own manners tempt us to disclaim
That heritage, our noblest wealth and fame,
Which Thou have kept entire from force and factious guile.
INSCRIPTIONS.
By the Same.
I. For a GROTTO.
TO me, whom in their lays the shepherds call
Actaea, daughter of the neigbouring stream,
This cave belongs. The fig tree and the vine,
Which over the rocky entrance downward shoot,
Were placed by Glycon. He with cowslips pale,
Primrose, and purple Lychnis, decked the green
Before my threshold, and my shelving walls
With honeysuckle covered. Here at noon,
Lulled by the murmur of my rising fount,
I slumber: here my clustering fruits I tend;
Or from the humid flowers, at break of day,
Fresh garlands weave, and chase from all my bounds
Each thing impure or noxious. Enter-in,
O stranger, undismayed. nor bat nor toad
Here lurks: and if thy breast of blameless thoughts
Approve thee, not unwelcome shall thou tread
My quiet mansion: chiefly, if thy name
Wise Pallas and the immortal Muses own.
II. For a Statue of CHAUCER at WOODSTOCK.
SUCH was old Chaucer. such the placid mien
Of him who first with harmony informed
The language of our fathers. Here he dwelt
For many a cheerful day. these ancient walls
Have often heard him, while his legends blithe
He sang; of love, or knighthood, or the wiles
Of homely life: through each estate and age,
The fashions and the follies of the world
With cunning hand portraying. Though perchance
From Blenheim's towers, O stranger, thou art come
Glowing with Churchill's trophies; yet in vain
Do thou applaud them, if thy breast be cold.
To him, this other hero; who, in times
Dark and untaught, began with charming verse
To tame the rudeness of his native land.
III.
WHOEVER thou art whose path in summer lies
Through yonder village, turn thee where the grove
Of branching oaks a rural palace old
Imbosoms. there dwells Albert, generous lord
Of all the harvest round. and onward thence
A low plain chapel fronts the morning light
Fast by a silent riv'let. Humbly walk,
O stranger, over the consecrated ground;
And on that verdant hilloc, which thou see
Beset with osiers, let thy pious hand
Sprinkle fresh water from the brook and strew
Sweet Smelling flowers. for there does Edmund rest,
The learned shepherd; for each rural art
Famed, and for songs harmonious, and the woes
Of ill-requited love. The faithless pride
Of fair Matilda sank him to the grave
In manhood's prime. But soon did righteous heaven
With tears, with sharp remorse, and pining care,
Avenge her falsehood. nor could all the gold
And nuptial pomp, which lured her plighted faith
From Edmund to a loftier husband's home,
Relieve her breaking heart, or turn aside
The strokes of death. Go, traveller; relate
The mournful story. happily some fair maid
May hold it in remembrance, and be taught
That riches cannot pay for truth or love.
IV.
O YOUTHS and virgins: O declining eld:
O pale misfortune's slaves: O ye who dwell
Unknown with humble quiet; ye who wait
In courts, or fill the golden seat of kings:
O sons of sport and pleasure: O thou wretch
That weep'st for jealous love, or the sore wounds
Of conscious guilt, or death's rapacious hand
Which left thee void of hope: O ye who roam
In exile; ye who through the embattled field
Seek bright renown; or who for nobler palms
Contend, the leaders of a public cause;
Approach: behold this marble. Know ye not
The features? Has not often his faithful tongue
Told you the fashion of your own estate,
The secrets of your bosom? Here then, round
His monument with reverence while ye stand,
Say to each other: "This was Shakespeare's form;
"Who walked in every path of human life,
"Felt every passion; and to all mankind
"Does now, will ever that experience yield
"Which his own genius only could acquire."
V.
GULIELMUS III. FORTIS, PIUS, LIBERATOR, CUM INEUNTE AETATE PATRIAE LABENTI
ADFUISSET SALUS IPSE UNICA; CUM MOX ITIDEM REIPUBLICAE BRITANNICAE VINDEX
RENUNCIATUS ESSET ATQUE STATOR; TUM DENIQUE AD ID SE NATUM RECOGNOVIT ET REGEM
FACTUM, UT CURARET NE DOMINO IMPOTENTI CEDERENT PAX, FIDES; FORTUNA, GENERIS
HUMANI.

AUCTORI PUBLICAE FELICITATIS P. G. A. M. A.

VI. For a Column at RUNNYMEDE.
THOU, who the verdant plain do traverse here,
While Thames among his willows from thy view
Retires; O stranger, stay thee, and the scene
Around contemplate well. This is the place
Where England's ancient barons, clad in arms
And stern with conquest, from their tyrant king
(Then rendered tame) did challenge and secure
The charter of thy freedom. Pass not on
Till thou have blessed their memory, and paid
Those thanks which God appointed the reward
Of public virtue. and if chance thy home
Salute thee with a father's honored name,
Go, call thy sons: instruct them what a debt
They owe their ancestors; and make them swear
To pay it, by transmitting down entire
Those sacred rights to which themselves were born.
ODE.
By the Same.
I.
IF rightly tuneful bards decide,
If it be fixed in love's decrees,
That beauty ought not to be tried
But by its native power to please,
Then tell me, youths and lovers, tell,
What fair can Amoret excel?
II.
Behold that bright unsullied smile,
And wisdom speaking in her mien:
Yet (she so artless all the while,
So little studious to be seen)
We naught but instant gladness know,
Nor think to whom the gift we owe.
III.
But neither music, nor the powers
Of youth and mirth and frolic cheer,
Add half that sunshine to the hours,
Or make life's prospect half so clear,
As memory brings it to the eye
From scenes where Amoret was by.
IV.
Yet not a satirist could there
Or fault or indiscretion find;
Nor any prouder sage declare
One virtue, pictured in his mind,
Whose form with lovelier colors glows
Than Amoret's demeanor shows.
V.
This sure is beauty's happiest part:
This gives the most unbounded sway:
This shall inchant the subject heart
When rose and lily fade away;
And She be still, in spite of time,
Sweet Amoret in all her prime.
ODE TO THE TIBER.
WRITTEN ABROAD.
By WILLIAM WHITEHEAD, Esquire On entering the CAMPANIA of ROME, at OTRICOLI,
MDCCLV.
I.
HAIL sacred Stream, whose waters roll
Immortal through the classic page!
To Thee the Muse-devoted soul,
Though destined to a later age
And less indulgent clime, to Thee,
Nor thou disdain, in runic lays
Weak mimic of true harmony,
His grateful homage pays.
Far other strains thine elder ear
With pleased attention wont to hear,
When he, who strung the Latian lyre,
And he, who led the Aonian quire
From Mantua's reedy lakes with osiers crowned,
Taught Echo from thy banks with transport to resound.
Thy banks? -- alas, is this the boasted scene,
This dreary, wide, uncultivated plain,
Where sickening Nature wears a fainter green,
And Desolation spreads her torpid reign?
Is this the scene where Freedom breathed,
Her copious horn where Plenty wreathed,
And health at opening day
Bade all her roseate breezes fly,
To wake the sons of Industry,
And make their fields more gay?
II.
Where is the villa's rural pride,
The swelling dome's imperial gleam,
Which loved to grace thy verdant side,
And tremble in thy golden stream?
Where are the bold, the busy throngs,
That rushed impatient to the war,
Or tuned to peace triumphal songs,
And hailed the passing car?
Along the solitary The Flaminian way.
road,
The eternal flint by Consuls trod,
We muse, and mark the sad decays
Of mighty works, and mighty days!
For these vile wastes, we cry, had Fate decreed
That Veii's sons should strive, for these Camillus bleed?
Did here, in aftertimes of Roman pride,
The musing shepherd from Soracte's height
See towns extend wherever thy waters glide,
And temples rise, and peopled farms unite?
They did. For this deserted plain
The Hero strove, nor strove in vain;
And here the shepherd saw
Unnumber'd towns and temples spread,
While Rome majestic reared her head.
And gave the nations law.
III.
Yes, Thou and Latium once were great.
And still, ye first of human things,
Beyond the grasp of time or fate
Her fame and thine triumphant springs.
What though the mouldering columns fall,
And strew the desert earth beneath,
Tho'ivy round each nodding wall
Entwine it is fatal wreath,
Yet say, can Rhine or Danube boast
The numerous glories thou have lost?
Can even Euphrates' palmy shore,
Or Nile, with all his mystic lore,
Produce from old records of genuine fame
Such heroes, poets, kings, or emulate thy name?
Even now the Muse, the conscious Muse is here;
From every ruin's formidable shade
Eternal Music breathes on Fancy's ear,
And wakes to more than form the illustrious dead.
Thy Caesar's, Scipios, Catos rise,
The great, the virtuous, and the wise,
In solemn state advance!
They fix the philosophic eye,
Or trail the robe, or lift on high
The lightning of the lance.
IV.
But chief that humbler happier train
Who knew those virtues to reward
Beyond the reach of chance or pain
Secure, the historian and the bard.
By them the hero's generous rage
Still warm in youth immortal lives;
And in their adamantine page
Thy glory still survives.
Through deep Savannahs wild and vast,
Unheard, unknown through ages past,
Beneath the sun's directer beams
What copious torrents pour their streams!
No fame have they, no fond pretense to mourn,
No annals swell their pride, or grace their storied urn.
Whilst Thou, with Rome's exalted genius joined,
Her spear yet lifted, and her corslet braced,
Can tell the waves, can tell the passing wind
Thy wondrous tale, and cheer the listening waste.
Though from his caves the unseeling North
Poured all his legion'd tempests forth,
Yet still thy laurels bloom:
One deathless glory still remains,
Thy stream has rolled through LATIAN plains,
Has washed the walls of ROME.
ELEGIES.
By the Same.
ELEGY I. Written at the CONVENT of HAUT VILLERS in CHAMPAGNE, 1754.
SILENT and clear, through yonder peaceful vale,
While Marne's slow waters weave their mazy way,
See, to the exulting sun, and fost'ring gale,
What boundless treasures his rich banks display!
Fast by the stream, and at the mountain's base,
The lowing herds through living pastures rove;
Wide waving harvests crown the rising space;
And still superior nods the viny grove.
High on the top, as guardian of the scene,
Imperial Sylvan spreads his umbrage wide;
Nor wants there many a cot, and spire between,
Or in the vale, or on the mountain's side,
To mark that Man, as tenant of the whole,
Claims the just tribute of his culturing care,
Yet pays to Heaven, in gratitude of soul,
The boon which heaven accepts, of praise and prayer.
O dire effects of war! the time has been
When Desolation vaunted here her reign;
One ravaged desert was yon beauteous scene,
And Marne ran purple to the frighted Seine.
Often at his work the toilsome day to cheat
The swain still talks of those disastrous times
When Guise's pride, and Conde's ill-star'd heat
Taught christian zeal to authorize their crimes:
Often to his children sportive on the grass
Does dreadful tales of worn Tradition tell,
Often points to Epernay's ill-fated pass
Where Force thrice triumphed, and where Biron fell.
O dire effects of war! -- may ever more
Through this sweet vale the voice of Discord cease!
A British bard to Gallia's fertile shore
Can wish the blessings of eternal peace.
Yet say, ye monks, (beneath whose moss-grown seat,
Within whose cloistered cells the indebted Muse
Awhile sojourns, for meditation meet,
And these loose thoughts in pensive strain pursues,)
Avails it aught, that War's rude tumults spare
Yon clustered vineyard, or yon golden field,
If niggards to yourselves, and fond of care,
You slight the joys their copious treasures yield?
Avails it aught that Nature's liberal hand
With every blessing grateful man can know
Clothes the rich bosom of yon smiling land,
The mountain's sloping side, or pendant brow,
If meagre Famine paint your pallid cheek,
If breaks the midnight bell your hours of rest,
If'midst heart-chilling damps, and winter bleak,
You shun the cheerful bowl, and moderate feast!
Look forth, and be convinced! it is Nature pleads,
Her ample volume opens on your view,
The simple-minded swain, who running reads,
Feels the glad truth, and is it hid from you?
Look sorth, and be convinced. Yon prospects wide
To Reason's ear how forcibly they speak,
Compared with those how dull is lettered Pride,
And Austin's babbling Eloquence how weak!
Temperance, not Abstinence, in every bliss
Is Man's true joy, and therefore Heaven's command
The wretch who riots thanks his God amiss:
Who starves, rejects the bounties of his hand.
Mark, while the Marne in yon full channel glides,
How smooth his course, how Nature smiles around!
But should impetuous torrents swell his tides,
The fairy landscape sinks in oceans drowned.
Nor less disastrous should his thrifty urn
Neglected leave the once well-water'd land,
To dreary wastes yon paradise would turn,
Polluted ooze, or heaps of barren sand.
ELEGY II. On It is now a garden belonging to Marchese di Corre.
the MAUSOLEUM of AUGUSTUS. To the Right Honorable George Bussy Villiers,
Viscount Villiers.
Written at ROME. 1756.
AMID these mouldering walls, this marble round,
Where slept the Heroes of the Julian name,
Say, shall we linger still in thought profound,
And meditate the mournful paths to fame?
What no' no cypress shades, in funeral rows,
No sculptured urns, the last records of Fate,
Over the shrunk terrace wave their baleful boughs,
Or breathe in storied emblems of the great;
Yet not with heedless eye will we survey
The scene though changed, nor negligently tread;
These variegated walks, however gay,
Were once the silent mansions of the dead.
In every shrub, in every flow'ret's bloom
That paints with different hues yon smiling plain,
Some Hero's ashes issue from the tomb,
And live a vegetative life again.
For matter dies not, as the Sages say,
But shifts to other forms the pliant mass,
When the free spirit quits it is cumb'rous clay,
And sees, beneath, the rolling Planets pass.
Perhaps, my Villiers, for I sing to Thee,
Perhaps, unknowing of the bloom it gives,
In yon fair scyon of Apollo's tree
The sacred dust of young Marcellus lives.
Pluck not the leaf -- 'twere sacrilege to wound
The ideal memory of so sweet a shade;
In these sad seats an early grave he found,
And He is said to be the first person buried in this monument.
the first rites to gloomy Dis conveyed.
Witness Quantos ille virum magnum mavortis ad urbem
Campus aget gemitus!

thou Field of Mars, that often had known
His youthful triumphs in the mimic war,
Thou heardst the heartfelt universal groan
When over thy bosom rolled the funeral car.
Witness -- Vel quae, Tyberine, videbis
Funera, cum tumulum praeterlabere recentem.
VIRG.
thou Tuscan stream, where often he glowed
In sportive struglings with the opposing wave,
Fast by the recent tomb thy waters flowed
While wept the wise, the virtuous, and the brave.
O lost too soon! -- yet why lament a fate
By thousands envied, and by Heaven approved;
Rare is the boon to those of longer date
To live, to die, admired, esteemed, beloved.
Weak are our judgments, and our passions warm,
And slowly dawns the radiant morn of truth,
Our expectations hastily we form,
And much we pardon to ingenuous youth.
Too often we satiate on the applause we pay
To rising Merit, and resume the Crown;
Full many a blooming genius. snatched away,
Has fallen lamented who had lived unknown.
For hard the task, O Villiers, to sustain
The important burden of an early fame;
Each added day some added worth to gain,
Prevent each wish, and answer every claim.
Be thou Marcellus, with a length of days!
But O remember, whatso'er thou art,
The most exalted breath of human praise
To please indeed much echo from the heart.
Though thou be brave, be virtuous, and be wise,
By all, like him, admired, esteemed, beloved,
It Is from within alone true Fame can rise,
The only happy is the Self-approv'd.
ELEGY III. To the Right Honorable George Simon Harcourt, Visc. Newnham.
Written at ROME. 1756.
YES, noble Youth, it is true; the softer arts,
The sweetly-sounding string, and pencil's power,
Have warmed to rapture even heroic hearts,
And taught the rude to wonder, and adore.
For Beauty charms us, whether she appears
In blended colors; or to soothing sound
Attunes her voice; or fair proportion wears
In yonder swelling dome's harmonious round.
All, all she charms; but not alike to all
It Is given to revel in her blissful bower;
Coercive ties, and Reason's powerful call
Bid some but taste the sweets, which some devour.
When Nature governed, and when Man was young,
Perhaps at will the untutored Savage roved,
Where waters murmured, and where clusters hung
He fed, and slept beneath the shade he loved.
But since the Sage's more sagacious mind,
By Heaven's permission, or by Heaven's command,
To polished states has social laws assigned,
And general good on partial duties planned,
Not for ourselves our vagrant steps we bend
As heedless Chance, or wanton Choice ordain;
On various stations various tasks attend,
And Men are born to trifle or to reign.
As chaunts the woodman, whilst the Dryads weep;
And falling forests fear the uplifted blow,
As chaunts the shepherd, whilst he tends his sheep,
Or weaves to pliant forms the osier bough,
To me it is given, whom Fortune loves to lead
Through humbler toils to life's sequestered bowers;
To me it is given to wake the amusive reed,
And sooth with song the solitary hours.
But Thee superior soberer toils demand,
Severer paths are thine of patriot fame;
Thy birth, thy friends, thy king, thy native land,
Have given thee honors, and have each their claim.
Then nerve with fortitude thy feeling breast
Each wish to combat, and each pain to bear;
purn with disdain the inglorious love of rest,
Nor let the siren Ease approach thine ear.
Beneath yon cypress shade's eternal green
See prostrate Rome her wondrous story tell,
Mark how she rose the world's imperial queen,
And tremble at the prospect how she fell!
Not that my rigid precepts would require
A painful struggling with each adverse gale,
Forbid thee listen to the enchanting Lyre,
Or turn thy steps from Fancy's flowery vale.
Whatever of Greece in sculptured brass survives,
Whatever of Rome in mouldering arcs remains,
Whatever of Genius on the canvass lives,
Or flows in polished verse, or airy strains,
Be these thy leisure; to the chosen few,
Who dare excel, thy fost'ring aid afford;
Their arts, their magic powers with honors due
Exalt; but be thyself what they record.
ELEGY IV. To an OFFICER.
Written at ROME 1756.
FROM Latian fields, the mansions of Renown,
Where fixed the Warrior God his fated seat;
Where infant Heroes learnt the martial frown,
And little hearts for genuine glory beat;
What for my friend, my soldier, shall I frame?
What nobly-glowing verse that breathes of arms,
To point his radiant path to deathless fame,
By great examples, and terrific charms?
Quirinus first, with bold, collected bands,
The sinewy sons of strength, for empire strove;
Beneath his thunder bowed the astonished lands,
And temples rose to Mars, and to Feretrian Jove.
War taught contempt of death, contempt of pain,
And hence the Fabii, hence the Decii come:
War urged the slaughter, though she wept the slain,
Stern War, the rugged nurse of virtuous Rome.
But not from antique fables will I draw,
To fire thy feeling soul, a dubious aid,
Though now, even now, they strike with rev'rent awe,
By Poets or Historians sacred made.
Nor yet to thee the babbling Muse shall tell
What mighty Kings with all their legions wrought,
What cities sunk, and storied nations fell
When Caesar, Titus, or when Trajan fought,
From private worth, and Fortune's private ways
Whilst over yon hill the exalted The trophies of Marius, now erected before
the Capitol.
Trophy shows
To what vast heights of incorrupted praise
The great, the self-ennobled Marius rose.
From steep Arpinum's rock-invested shade,
From hardy Virtue's emulative school
His daring flight the expanding Genius made,
And by obeying nobly learnt to rule.
Abashed, confounded, stern Iberia groaned,
And Afric trembled to her utmost coasts;
When the proud land its destined Conqueror owned
In the new Consul, and his veteran hosts.
Yet Chiefs are madmen, and Ambition weak,
And mean the joys the laureled harvests yield,
If Virtue fail. Let Fame, let Envy speak
Of Capsa's walls, and Sextia's watery field.
But sink for ever, in oblivion cast,
Dishonest triumphs, and ignoble spoils.
Minturnae's Marsh severely paid at last
The guilty glories gained in civil broils.
Nor yet his vain contempt the Muse shall praise
For scenes of polished life, and lettered worth;
The steel-rib'd Warrior wants not Envy's ways
To darken theirs, or call his merits forth,
Witness yon Cimbrian Trophies! -- Marius, there
Thy ample pinion found a space to fly
As the plumed eagle soaring sails in air,
In upper air, and scorns a middle sky.
Thence too thy Country claimed thee for her own,
And bade the Sculptor's toil thy acts adorn,
To teach in characters of living stone
Eternal lessons to the youth unborn.
For wisely Rome her warlike Sons rewards
With the sweet labors of her Artists' hands;
He wakes her Graces, who her empire guards,
And both Minervas join in willing bands.
O why, Britannia, why untrophied pass
The patriot deeds thy godlike Sons display,
Why breathes on high no monumental brass,
Why swells no Arc to grace Culloden's day?
Wait we 'till faithless France submissive bow
Beneath that Hero's delegated spear,
Whose lightning smote Rebellion's haughty brow,
And scattered her vile rout with horror in the rear?
O Land of Freedom, Land of Arts, assume
That graceful dignity thy merits claim;
Exalt thy Heroes like imperial Rome,
And build their virtues on their love of fame.
So shall the modest worth, which checks my friend,
Forget its blush when roused by Glory's charms;
From breast to breast the generous warmth descend,
And still new trophies rise, at once, to Arts, and Arms.
ELEGY V. TO a FRIEND Sick.
Written at ROME 1756.
'TWAS in this The Insula Tiberina, where there are still some small remains of
the famous temple of Aesculapius.
isle, O Wright indulge my lay,
Whose naval form divides the Tuscan flood,
In the bright dawn of her illustrious day
Rome fixed her Temple to the healing God.
Here stood his altars, here his arm he bared,
And round his mystic staff the serpent twined,
Through crowded portals hymns of praise were heard,
And victims bled, and sacred seers divined.
On every breathing wall, on every round
Of column, swelling with proportioned grace,
Its stated seat some votive tablet found,
And storied wonders dignified the place.
Often from the balmy blessings of repose,
And the cool stillness of the night's deep shade,
To light and health the exulting Votarist rose,
Whilst fancy worked with med'cine's powerful aid.
Often in his dreams (no longer clogged with fears
Of some broad torrent, or some headlong steep,
With each dire form Imagination wears
When harrass'd Nature sinks in turbid sleep)
Often in his dreams he saw diffusive day
Through bursting glooms its cheerful beams extend;
On billowy clouds saw sportive Genii play,
And bright Hygeia from her heaven descend.
What marvel then, that man's overflowing mind
Should wreath-bound columns raise, and altars fair,
And grateful offerings pay, to Powers so kind,
Though fancy-form'd, and creatures of the Air.
Who that has writhed beneath the scourge of pain,
Or felt the burdened languor of disease,
But would with joy the slightest respite gain,
And idolize the hand which lent him ease?
To Thee, my friend, unwillingly to thee
For truths like these the anxious Muse appeals.
Can Memory answer from affliction free,
Or speaks the sufferer what, I fear, he feels?
No, let me hope ere this in Romely grove
Hygeia revels with the blooming Spring,
Ere this the vocal seats the Muses love
With hymns of praise, like Paeon's temple, ring.
It was not written in the book of Fate
That, wandering far from Albion's sea-girt plain,
Thy distant Friend should mourn thy shorter date,
And tell to alien woods and streams his pain.
It was not written. Many a year shall roll,
If aught the inspiring Muse aright presage,
Of blameless intercourse from Soul to Soul,
And friendship well matur'd from Youth to Age.
ELEGY VI. To another FRIEND.
Written at ROME 1756.
BEHOLD, my friend, to this small The medal of Marcus Aurelius.
orb confined,
The genuine features of Aurelius' face;
The father, friend, and lover of his kind,
Shrunk to a narrow coin's contracted space.
Not so his fame; for erst did heaven ordain
Whilst seas should waft us, and whilst suns should warm,
On tongues of men, the friend of man should reign,
And in the arts he loved the patron charm.
Often as amidst the mouldering spoils of Age,
His moss-grown monuments my steps pursue;
Often as my eye revolves the historic page,
Where pass his generous acts in fair review,
Imagination grasps at mighty things,
Which men, which angels might with rapture see;
Then turns to humbler scenes its safer wings,
And, blush not whilst I speak it, thinks on thee.
With all that firm benevolence of mind
Which pities whilst it blames the unfeeling vain,
With all that active zeal to serve mankind,
That tender suffering for another's pain,
Why were not thou to thrones imperial raised,
Did heedless Fortune slumber at thy birth,
Or on thy virtues with indulgence gazed,
And gave her grandeurs to her sons of earth?
Happy for thee, whose less distinguished sphere
Now chears in private the delighted eye,
For calm Content, and smiling Ease are there,
And, Heaven's divinest gift, sweet Liberty.
Happy for me, on life's serener flood
Who sail, by talents as by choice restrained,
Else had I only shared the general good,
And lost the friend the Universe had gained.
The LYRIC MUSE to Mr. MASON.
On the Recovery of the Right Honorable the Earl of HOLDERNESSE from a
dangerous Illness.
By the Same.
MASON, snatch the votive Lyre,
D'Arcy lives, and I inspire.
It Is the Muse that deigns to ask,
Can thy hand forget it is task?
Or can the Lyre it is strains refuse
To the Patron of the Muse?
Hark, what notes of artless love
The feathered poets of the grove,
Grateful for the bowers they fill,
Warble wild on Sion hill;
In tuneful tribute duly paid
To the Master of the shade!
And shall the Bard sit fancy-proof
Beneath the hospitable roof,
Where every menial face affords
Raptured thoughts that want but words?
And the Patron's dearer part,
The gentle sharer of his heart,
Wears her wonted charms again.
Time, that felt Affliction's chain,
Learns on lighter wings to move;
And the tender pledge of love,
Sweet Amelia, now is pressed
With double transport to her breast.
Sweet Amelia, thoughtless why,
Imitates the general joy;
Innocent of care or guile
See the lovely Mimic smile,
And, as the heartfelt raptures rise,
Catch them from her Mother's eyes.
Does the noisy town deny
Soothing airs, and exstacy?
Sion's shades afford retreat,
Thither bend thy pilgrim feet.
There bid the imaginary train,
Coinage of the Poet's brain,
Not only in effects appear,
But forms, and limbs, and features wear.
Let festive Mirth, with flowrets crowned,
Lightly tread the measured round;
And Peace, that seldom knows to share
The Statesman's friendly bowl, be there;
While rosy Health, superior guest,
Loose to the Zephyrs bares her breast;
And, to add a sweeter grace,
Give her soft Amelia's face.
Mason, why this dull delay?
Haste, to Sion haste away.
There the Muse again shall ask,
Nor thy hand forget its task;
Nor the Lyre it is strains refuse
To the Patron of the Muse.
On the IMMORTALITY of the SOUL.
TRANSLATED From the LATIN of ISAAC HAWKINS BROWN, Esquire
By SOAME JENNYNS, Esquire
BOOK I.
TO all inferior animals it is given
TO enjoy the state allotted them by Heaven;
No vain researches ever disturb their rest,
No fears of dark futurity molest.
Man, only Man sollicitous to know
The springs whence Nature's operations flow,
Plods through a dreary waste with toil and pain,
And reasons, hopes, and thinks, and lives in vain;
For sable Death still hovering over his head,
Cuts short his progress, with his vital thread,
Wherefore, since Nature errs not, do we find
These seeds of Science in the human mind,
If no congenial fruits are predesign'd?
For what avails to Man this power to roam
Through ages past, and ages yet to come,
TO explore new worlds over all the aetherial way,
Chained to a spot, and living but a day?
Since all must perish in one common grave,
Nor can these long laborious searches save.
Were it not wiser far, supinely laid,
To sport with Phyllis in the noontide shade?
Or at thy jovial festivals appear,
Great Bacchus, who alone the soul can clear
From all that it has felt, and all that it can fear?
Come on then, let us feast: let Chloe sing,
And soft Neaera touch the trembling string;
Enjoy the present hour, nor seek to know
What good or ill tomorrow may bestow.
But these delights soon pall upon the taste;
Let Us try then if more serious cannot last:
Wealth let us heap on wealth, or fame pursue,
Let power and glory be our points in view;
In courts, in camps, in senates let us live,
Our levees crowded like the buzzing hive:
Each weak attempt the same sad lesson brings,
Alas, what vanity in human things!
What means then shall we try? where hope to find
A friendly harbor for the restless mind?
Who still, you see, impatient to obtain
Knowledge immense, (so Nature's laws ordain)
Even now, though fettered in corporeal clay,
Climbs step by step the prospect to survey,
And seeks, unwearied, Truth's eternal ray.
No fleeting joys she asks, which must depend
On the frail senses, and with them must end;
But such as suit her own immortal fame,
Free from all change, eternally the same.
Take courage then, these joys we shall attain;
Almighty Wisdom never acts in vain;
Nor shall the soul, on which it has bestowed
Such powers, ever perish, like an earthly clod;
But purged at length from foul corruption's stain,
Freed from her prison, and unbound her chain,
She shall her native strength, and native skies regain:
To heaven an old inhabitant return,
And draw nectareous streams from truth's perpetual urn.
Whilst life remains, (if life it can be called
TO exist in fleshly bondage thus enthralled)
Tired with the dull pursuit of worldly things,
The soul scarce wakes, or opes her gladsome wings,
Yet still the godlike exile in disgrace
Retains some marks of her celestial race;
Else whence from Mem'ry's store can she produce
Such various thoughts, or range them so for use?
Can matter these contain, dispose, apply?
Can in her cells such mighty treasures lie?
Or can her native force produce them to the eye?
Whence is this power, this foundress of all arts,
Serving, adorning life, through all its parts,
Which names imposed, by letters marked those names,
Adjusted properly by legal claims,
From woods, and wilds collected rude mankind,
And cities, laws, and governments designed?
What can this be, but some bright ray from heaven,
Some emanation from Omniscience given?
When now the rapid stream of Eloquence
Bears all before it, passion, reason, sense,
Can its dread thunder, or its lightning's force
Derive their essence from a mortal source?
What think you of the bard's enchanting art,
Which, whether he attempts to warm the heart
With fabled scenes, or charm the ear with rhyme,
Breathes all pathetic, lovely, and sublime?
Whilst things on earth roll round from age to age,
The same dull force repeated; on the stage
The poet gives us a creation new,
More pleasing, and more perfect than the true;
The mind, who always to perfection hastes,
Perfection, such as here she never tastes,
With gratitude accepts the kind deceit,
And thence foresees a system more complete.
Of those what think you, who the circling race
Of suns, and their revolving planets trace,
And comets journeying through unbounded space?
Say, can you doubt, but that the all-searching soul,
That now can traverse heaven from pole to pole,
From thence descending visits but this earth,
And shall once more regain the regions of her birth?
Could she thus act, unless some Power unknown,
From matter quite distinct, and all her own,
Supported, and impelled her? She approves
Self-conscious, and condemns; she hates, and loves,
Mourns, and rejoices, hopes, and is afraid,
Without the body's unrequested aid:
Her own internal strength her reason guides,
By this she now compares things, now divides;
Truth's scattered fragments piece by piece collects,
Rejoins, and thence her edifice erects;
Piles arts on arts, effects to causes ties,
And rears the aspiring fabric to the skies:
From whence, as on a distant plain below,
She sees from causes consequences flow,
And the whole chain distinctly comprehends,
Which from the Almighty's throne to earth descends:
And lastly, turning inwardly her eyes,
Perceives how all her own ideas rise,
Contemplates what she is, and whence she came,
And almost comprehends her own amazing frame.
Can mere machines be with such powers endued,
Or conscious of those powers, suppose they could?
For body is but a machine alone
Moved by external force, and impulse not its own.
Rate not the extension of the human mind
By the plebeian standard of mankind,
But by the size of those gigantic few,
Whom Greece and Rome still offer to our view;
Or Britain well-deserving equal praise,
Parent of heroes too in better days.
Why should I try her numerous sons to name
By verse, law, eloquence consigned to fame?
Or who have forced fair Science into sight
Long lost in darkness, and afraid of light.
Over all superior, like the solar ray
First Bacon ushered in the dawning day,
And drove the mists of sophistry away;
Pervaded nature with amazing force,
Following experience still throughout his course,
And finishing at length his destined way
To Newton he bequeathed the radiant lamp of day.
Illustrious souls! if any tender cares
Affect angelic breasts for man's affairs,
If in your present happy heavenly state,
You're not regardless quite of Britain's fate,
Let this degenerate land again be blessed
With that true vigor, which she once possessed;
Compel us to unfold our slumbering eyes
And to our ancient dignity to rise.
Such wondrous powers as these must sure be given
For most important purposes by heaven;
Who bids these stars as bright exemples shine
Besprinkled thinly by the hand divine,
To form to virtue each degenerate time,
And point out to the soul its origin sublime.
That there is a self which after death shall live,
All are concerned about, and all believe;
That something's ours, when we from life depart
This all conceive, all feel it at the heart;
The wise of learned antiquity proclaim
This truth, the public voice declares the same;
No land so rude but looks beyond the tomb
For future prospects in a world to come.
Hence, without hopes to be in life repaid,
We plant slow oaks posterity to shade;
And hence vast pyramids aspiring high
Lift their proud heads alost, and time defy.
Hence is our love of same, a love so strong,
We think no dangers great, or labors long,
By which we hope our beings to extend,
And to remotest times in glory to descend.
For fame the wretch beneath the gallows lies
Disowning every crime for which he dies;
Of life profuse, tenacious of a name,
Fearless of death, and yet afraid of shame.
Nature has wove into the human mind
This anxious care for names we leave behind,
TO extend our narrow views beyond the tomb,
And give an earnest of a life to come:
For, if when dead, we are but dust or clay,
Why think of what posterity shall say?
Her praise, or censure cannot us concern,
Nor ever penetrate the silent urn.
What mean the nodding plumes, the funeral train,
And marble monument, that speaks in vain,
With all those cares, which every nation pays
To their unfeeling dead in different ways!
Some in the slower-strewn grave the corpse have laid,
And annual obsequies around it paid,
As if to please the poor departed shade;
Others on blazing piles the body burn,
And store their ashes in the faithful urn;
But all in one great principle agree
To give a fancied immortality.
Why should I mention those, whose ouzy soil
Is rendered fertile by the overflowing Nile,
Their dead they bury not, nor burn with fires,
No graves they dig, erect no sun'ral pires,
But, washing first the embowel'd body clean,
Gums, spice, and melted pitch they pour within;
Then with strong fillets bind it round and round,
To make each flaccid part compact, and sound;
And lastly paint the varnished surface over
With the same features, which in life it wore:
So strong their presage of a future state,
And that our nobler part survives the body's fate.
Nations behold remote from reason's beams,
Where Indian Ganges rolls his sandy streams,
Of life impatient rush into the fire,
And willing victims to their gods expire!
Persuaded the loose soul to regions flies,
Blessed with eternal spring, and cloudless skies.
Nor is less famed the oriental wife
For steadfast virtue, and contempt of life:
These heroines mourn not with loud female cries
Their husbands lost, or with overflowing eyes,
But, strange to tell! their funeral piles ascend,
And in the same sad flames their sorrows end;
In hopes with them beneath the shades to rove,
And there renew their interrupted love.
In climes where Boreas breathes eternal cold,
See numerous nations, warlike, fierce, and bold,
To battle all unanimously run,
Nor fire, nor sword, nor instant death they shun:
Whence this disdain of life in every breast,
But from a notion on their minds impressed,
That all, who for their country die, are blessed.
Add too to these the once prevailing dreams,
Of sweet Elysian groves, and Stygian streams:
All show with what consent mankind agree
In the firm hope of Immortality.
Grant these the inventions of the crafty priest,
Yet such inventions never could subsist,
Unless some glimm'rings of a future state
Were with the mind coaeval, and innate:
For every fiction, which can long persuade,
In truth must have its first foundations laid.
Because we are unable to conceive,
How unembody'd souls can act, and live,
The vulgar give them forms, and limbs, and faces,
And habitations in peculiar places;
Hence reasoners more refined, but not more wise,
Struck with the glare of such absurdities,
Their whole existence fabulous suspect,
And truth and falsehood in a lump reject;
Too indolent to learn what may be known,
Or else too proud that ignorance to own.
For hard's the task the daubing to pervade
Folly and fraud on Truth's fair form have laid;
Yet let that task be ours; for great the prize;
Nor let us Truth's caelestial charms despise,
Because that priests, or poets may disguise.
That there is a God from Nature's voice is clear,
And yet what errors to this truth adhere?
How have the fears and follies of mankind
Now multiplied their gods, and now subjoined
To each the frailties of the human mind?
Nay superstition spread at length so wide,
Beasts, birds, and onions too were deify'd.
The Athenian sage revolving in his mind
This weakness, blindness, madness of mankind,
Foretold, that in maturer days, though late,
When Time should ripen the decrees of Fate,
Some God would light us, like the rising day,
Through error's maze, and chase these clouds away.
Long since has Time fulfilled this great decree,
And brought us aid from this divinity.
Well worth our search discoveries may be made
By Nature, void of the caelestial aid:
Let Us try what her conjectures then can reach,
Nor scorn plain Reason, when she deigns to teach.
That mind and body often sympathize
Is plain; such is this union Nature ties:
But then as often too they disagree,
Which proves the soul's superior progeny.
Sometimes the body in full strength we find,
Whilst various ails debilitate the mind;
At others, whilst the mind its force retains,
The body sinks with sickness and with pains:
Now did one common fate their beings end,
Alike they would sicken, and alike they would mend.
But sure experience, on the slightest view,
Shows us, that the reverse of this is true;
For when the body often expiring lies,
Its limbs quite senseless, and half closed its eyes,
The mind new force, and eloquence acquires,
And with prophetic voice the dying lips inspires.
Of like materials were they both composed,
How comes it, that the mind, when sleep has closed
Each avenue of sense, expatiates wide
Her liberty restored, her bonds untied?
And like some bird who from its prison flies,
Claps her exulting wings, and mounts the skies.
Grant that corporeal is the human mind,
In must have parts in infinitum joined;
And each of these must will, perceive, design,
And draw confusedly in a different line;
Which then can claim dominion over the rest,
Or stamp the ruling passion in the breast?
Perhaps the mind is formed by various arts
Of modelling, and figuring these parts;
Just as if circles wiser were than squares;
But surely common sense aloud declares
That site, and figure are as foreign quite
From mental powers, as colors black or white.
Allow that motion is the cause of thought,
With what strange powers must motion then be fraught?
Reason, sense, science, must derive their source
From the wheel's rapid whirl, or pully's force;
Tops whipped by schoolboys sages must commence,
Their hoops, like them, be cudgelled into sense,
And boiling pots overflow with eloqeunce.
Whence can this very motion take its birth?
Not sure from matter, from dull clods of earth;
But from a living spirit lodged within,
Which governs all the bodily machine:
Just as the Almighty Universal Soul
Informs, directs, and animals the whole.
Cease then to wonder how the immortal mind
Can live, when from the body quite disjoined;
But rather wonder, if she ever could die,
So framed, so fashioned for eternity;
Self-mov'd, not formed of parts together tied,
Which time can dissipate, and force divide;
For beings of this make can never die,
Whose powers within themselves, and their own essence lie.
If to conceive how any thing can be
From shape abstracted and locality
Is hard; what think you of the Deity?
His Being not the least relation bears,
As far as to the human mind appears,
To shape, or size, similitude or place,
Clothed in no form, and bounded by no space.
Such then is God, a Spirit pure refined
From all material dross, and such the human mind.
For in what part of essence can we see
More certain marks of Immortality?
Even from this dark confinement with delight
She looks abroad, and prunes herself for flight;
Like an unwilling inmate longs to roam
From this dull earth, and seek her native home.
Go then forgetful of its toil and strife,
Pursue the joys of this fallacious life;
Like some poor fly, who lives but for a day
Sip the fresh dews, and in the sunshine play,
And into nothing then dissolve away.
Are these our great pursuits, is this to live?
These all the hopes this much-loved world can give!
How much more worthy envy is their fate,
Who search for truth in a superior state?
Not groping step by step, as we pursue,
And following reason's much entangled clue,
But with one great, and instantaneous view.
But how can sense remain, perhaps you will say,
Corporeal organs if we take away!
Since it from them proceeds, and with them must decay.
Why not? or why may not the soul receive
New organs, since even art can these retrieve?
The silver trumpet aids the obstructed ear,
And optic glasses the dim eye can clear;
These in mankind new faculties create,
And lift him far above his native state;
Call down revolving planets from the sky,
Earth's secret treasures open to his eye,
The whole minute creation make his own,
With all the wonders of a world unknown.
How could the mind, did she alone depend
On sense, the errors of those senses mend?
Yet often, we see those senses she corrects,
And often their information quite rejects.
In distances of things, their shapes and size,
Our reason judges better than our eyes.
Declares not this the soul's pre-eminence
Superior to, and quite distinct from sense?
For sure it is likely, that, since now so high
Clogged and unfledged she dares her wings to try,
Loosed, and mature, she shall her strength display,
And soar at length to Truth's refulgent ray.
Inquire you how these powers we shall attain,
It Is not for us to know; our search is vain:
Can any now remember or relate
How he existed in the embryo state?
Or one from birth insensible of day
Conceive ideas of the solar ray?
That light's denied to him, which others see,
He knows, perhaps you will say, -- and so do we.
The mind contemplative finds nothing here
On earth, that is worthy of a wish or fear:
He, whose sublime pursuit is God and truth,
Burns, like some absent and impatient youth,
To join the object of his warm desires,
Thence to sequestered shades, and streams retires,
And there delights his passion to rehearse
In wisdom's sacred voice, or in harmonious verse.
To me most happy therefore he appears,
Who having once, unmoved by hopes or fears,
Surveyed this sun, earth, ocean, clouds, and flame,
Well satisfied returns from whence he came.
Is life a hundred years, or ever so few,
It Is repetition all, and nothing new:
A sair, where thousands meet, but none can stay,
An inn, where travelers bait, then post away;
A sea, where man perpetually is tossed,
Now plunged in business, now in trifles lost:
Who leave it first, the peaceful port first gain;
Hold then! no farther launch into the main:
Contract your sails; lise nothing can bestow
By long continuance, but continued woe:
The wretched privilege daily to deplore
The funerals of our friends, who go before:
Diseases, pains, anxieties, and cares,
And age surrounded with a thousand snares.
But whither hurried by a generous scorn
Of this vain world, ah, whither am I borne?
Let Us not unbid the Almighty's standard quit,
However severe our post, we must submit.
Could I a firm persuasion once attain
That after death no being would remain;
To those dark shades I Would willingly descend,
Where all must sleep, this drama at an end:
Nor life accept, although renewed by Fate
Even from its earliest, and its happiest state.
Might I from Fortune's bounteous hand receive
Each boon, each blessing in her power to give,
Genius, and science, morals, and good-sense,
Unenvied honors, wit and eloquence,
A numerous offspring to the world well known
Both for paternal virtues, and their own;
Even at this mighty price I Would not be bound
To tread the same dull circle round, and round;
The soul requires enjoyments more sublime,
By space unbounded, undestroy'd by time.
BOOK II.
GOD then through all creation gives, we find,
Sufficient marks of an indulgent mind,
Excepting in ourselves; ourselves of all
His works the chief on this terrestrial ball,
His own bright image, who alone unblest
Feel ills perpetual, happy all the rest.
But hold presumptuous! charge not heaven's decree
With such injustice, such partiality.
Yet true it is, survey we life around,
Whole hosts of ills on every side are found;
Who wound not here and there by chance a foe,
But at the species meditate the blow:
What millions perish by each others hands
In war's fierce rage? or by the dread commands
Of tyrants languish out their lives in chains,
Or lose them in variety of pains?
What numbers pinched by want, and hunger die,
In spite of Nature's liberality?
(Those, still more numerous, I to name disdain,
By lewdness, and intemperance justly slain;)
What numbers guiltless of their own disease
Are snatched by sudden death, or waste by slow degrees?
Where then is Virtue's well deserved reward! --
Let Us pay to Virtue every due regard,
That she enables man, let us confess,
To bear those evils, which she cannot redress,
Gives hope, and conscious peace, and can assuage
The impetuous tempests both of lust, and rage;
Yet she is a guard so far from being sure,
That often her friends peculiar ills endure:
Where Vice prevails severest is their fate,
Tyrants pursue them with a threefold hate;
How many struggling in their country's cause,
And from their country meriting applause,
Have fallen by wretches fond to be enslaved,
And perished by the hands themselves had saved?
Soon as superior wotth appears in view,
See knaves, and fools united to pursue!
The man so formed they all conspire to blame,
And Envy's poisonous tooth attacks his fame;
Should he at length, so truly good and great,
Prevail, and rule with honest views the state,
Then must he toil for an ungrateful race,
Submit to clamor, libels, and disgrace,
Threatened, opposed, defeated in his ends,
By foes seditious, and aspiring friends.
Hear this, and tremble! all who would be great,
Yet know not what attends that dangerous wretched state.
Is private life from all these evils free?
Vice of all kinds, rage, envy there we see,
Deceit, that Friendship's mask insidious wears,
Quarrels, and feuds, and law's entangling snares.
But there are pleasures still in human life,
Domestic ease, a tender loving wife,
Children, whose dawning smiles your heart engage,
The grace, and comfort of soft-stealing age:
If happiness exists, it is surely here,
But are these joys exempt from care and fear?
Need I the miseries of that state declare,
When different passions draw the wedded pair?
Or say how hard those passions to discern,
Ere the die's cast, and it is too late to learn?
Who can insure, that what is right, and good,
These children shall pursue? or if they should,
Death comes, when least you fear so black a day,
And all your blooming hopes are snatched away.
We say not, that these ills from Virtue flow,
Did her wise precepts rule the world, we know
The golden ages would again begin,
But it is our lot in this to suffer, and to sin.
Observing this, some sages have decreed
That all things from two causes must proceed;
Two principles with equal power endu'd,
This wholly evil, that supremely good.
From this arise the miseries we endure,
Whilst that administers a friendly cure;
Hence life is checkered still with bliss, and woe,
Hence tares with golden crops promiscuous grow,
And poisonous serpents make their dread repose
Beneath the covert of the fragrant rose.
Can such a system satisfy the mind?
Are both these Gods in equal power conjoined,
Or one superior? Equal if you say,
Chaos returns, since neither will obey;
Is one superior? good, or ill must reign,
Eternal joy, or everlasting pain.
Whiche'er is conquered must entirely yield,
And the victorious God enjoy the field:
Hence with these fictions of the Magi's brain!
Hence ouzy Nile, with all her monstrous train!
Or comes the Stoic nearer to the right?
He holds, that whatsoever yields delight,
Wealth, fame, externals all, are useless things;
Himself half starving happier far than kings.
It Is fine indeed to be so wondrous wise!
By the same reasoning too he pain denies;
Roast him, or flea him, break him on the wheel,
Retract he will not, though he cannot but feel:
Pain's not an ill, he utters with a groan;
What then? an inconvenience it is, he will own:
What? vigor, health, and beauty? are these good?
No: they may be accepted, not pursued:
Absurd to squabble thus about a name,
Quibbling with different words, that mean the same.
Stoic, were you not framed of flesh and blood,
You might be blessed without external good;
But know, be self-sufficient as you can,
You are not spirit quite, but frail, and mortal man.
But since these sages, so absurdly wise,
Vainly pretend enjoyments to despise,
Because externals, and in Fortune's power,
Now mine, now thine, the blessings of an hour;
Why value then, that strength of mind, they boast,
As often varying, and as quickly lost?
A headache hurts it, or a rainy day,
And a slow fever wipes it quite away.
See Lord Summers.
one whose councils, one Duke of Marlborough.
whose conquering hand
Once saved Britannia's almost sinking land:
Examples of the mind's extensive power,
Examples too how quickly fades that flower.
Dean Swift.
Him let me add, whom late we saw excel
In each politer kind of writing well;
Whether he strove our follies to expose
In easy verse, or droll, and hum'rous prose;
Few years alas! compel his throne to quit
This mighty monarch over the realms or wit,
See self-surviving he is an idiot grown!
A melancholy proof our parts are not our own.
Thy tenets, Stoic, yet we may forgive,
If in a future state we cease to live.
For here the virtuous suffer much, it is plain;
If pain is evil, this must God arraign;
And on this principle confess we must,
Pain can no evil be, or God must be unjust.
Blind man! whose reason such strait bounds confine,
That ere it touches truth's extremest line,
It stops amazed, and quits the great design.
Own you not, Stoic, God is just and true?
Dare to proceed; secure this path pursue:
'Twill soon conduct you far beyond the tomb,
To future justice, and a life to come.
This path you say is hid in endless night,
It Is self-conceit alone obstructs your sight;
You stop, ere half your destined course is run,
And triumph, when the conquest is not won;
By this the Sophists were of old misled:
See what a monstrous race from one mistake is bred!
Hear then my argument: -- confess we must,
A God there is, supremely wise and just:
If so, however things affect our sight,
As sings our bard, whatever is, is right.
But is it right, what here so often appears,
That vice should triumph, virtue sink in tears?
The inference then, that closes this debate,
Is, that there must exist a future state.
The wise extending their enquiries wide
See how both states are by connection tied;
Fools view but part, and not the whole survey,
So crowd existence all into a day.
Hence are they led to hope, but hope in vain,
That Justice never will resume her reign;
On this vain hope adulterers, thieves rely,
And to this altar vile assassins fly.
"But rules not God by general laws divine?
"Man's vice, or virtues change not the design:"
What laws are these? instruct us if you can: --
There Is one designed for brutes, and one for man:
Another guides inactive matter's course,
Attracting, and attracted by its force:
Hence mutual gravity subsists between
Far distant worlds, and ties the vast machine.
The laws of life why need I call to mind,
Obeyed by birds, and beasts of every kind;
By all the sandy desart's ravage brood,
And all the numerous offspring of the flood;
Of these none uncontrolled, and lawless rove,
But to some destined end spontaneons move:
Led by that instinct, heaven itself inspires,
Or so much reason, as their state requires;
See all with skill acquire their daily food,
All use those arms, which Nature has bestowed;
Produce their tender progeny, and feed
With care parental, whilst that care they need;
In these loved offices completely blessed,
No hopes beyond them, nor vain fears molest.
Man over a wider field extends his views;
God through the wonders of his works pursues,
Exploring thence his attributes, and laws,
Adores, loves, imitates the Eternal Cause;
For sure in nothing we approach so nigh
The great example of divinity,
As in benevolence: the patriot's soul
Knows not selt-center'd for itself to roll,
But warms, enlightens, animates the whole:
Its mighty orb embraces first his friends,
His country next, then man; nor here it ends,
But to the meanest animal descends.
Wise Nature has this social law confirmed,
By forming man so helpless. and unarmed;
His want of others' aid, and power of speech
T'implore that aid this lesson daily teach:
Mankind with other animals compare,
Single how weak, and impotent they are!
But view them in their complicated state,
Their powers how wondrous, and their strength how great,
When social virtue individuals joins,
And in one solid mass, like gravity combines?
This then is the first great law by Nature given,
Stamped on our souls, and ratified by Heaven;
All from utility this law approve,
As every private bliss must spring from social love.
Why deviate then so many from this law?
See passions, custom, vice, and folly draw!
Survey the rolling globe from East to West,
How few, alas! how very few are blessed?
Beneath the frozen poles, and burning line,
What poverty, and indolence combine,
To cloud with Error's mists the human mind?
No trace of man, but in the form we find.
And are we free from error, and distress,
Whom Heaven with clearer light has pleased to bless?
Whom true Religion leads? (for she but leads
By soft persuasion, not by force proceeds;)
Behold how we avoid this radiant sun!
This proffered guide how obstinately shun,
And after Sophistry's vain systems run!
For these as for essentials we engage
In wars, and massacres, with holy rage;
Brothers by brothers' impious hands are slain,
Mistaken Zeal, how savage is thy reign!
Unpunished vices here so much abound,
All right, and wrong, all order they confound;
These are the giants, who the gods defy,
And mountains heap on mountains to the sky;
Sees this the Almighty Judge, or seeing spares,
And deems the crimes of man beneath his cares?
He sees; and will at last rewards bestow,
And punishments, not less assured for being slow.
Nor doubt I, though this state confused appears,
That even in this God sometimes interferes;
Sometimes, lest man should quite his power disown,
He makes that power to trembling nations known:
But rarely this; not for each vulgar end,
As Superstition's idle tales pretend,
Who thinks all foes to God, who are her own,
Directs his thunder, and usurps his throne.
Nor know I not, how much a conscious mind
Avails to punish, or reward mankind;
Even in this life thou, impious wretch, must feel
The Fury's scourges, and the infernal wheel;
From man's tribunal, though thou hop'st to run,
Thyself thou can not, nor thy conscience shun:
What must thou suffer, when each dire disease,
The progeny of Vice, thy fabric seize?
Consumption, fever, and the wreaking pain
Of spasms, and gout, and stone, a frightful train!
When life new tortures can alone supply,
Life thy sole hope thou wilt hate, yet dread to die.
Should such a wretch to numerous years arrive,
It can be little worth his while to live;
No honors, no regards his age attend,
Companions fly; he never could have a friend:
His flatterers leave him, and with wild affright
He looks within, and shudders at the sight:
When threatening Death uplifts his pointed dart,
With what impatience he applies to art,
Life to prolong amidst disease and pains!
Why this, if after it no sense remains?
Why should he choose these miseries to endure,
If Death could grant an everlasting cure?
It Is plain there is something whispers in his ear,
(Though fain he would hide it) he has much to fear.
See the reverse! how happy those we find,
Who know by merit to engage mankind?
Praised by each tongue, by every heart beloved,
For Virtues practiced, and for Arts improved:
Their easy aspects shine with smiles serene,
And all is peace, and happiness within:
Their sleep is never disturbed by fears, or strife,
Nor lust, nor wine, impair the springs of life.
Him Fortune can not sink, nor much elate,
Whose views extend beyond this mortal state;
By age when summoned to resign his breath,
Calm, and serene, he sees approaching death,
As the safe port, the peaceful silent shore,
Where he may rest, life's tedious voyage over:
He, and he only, is of death afraid,
Whom his own conscience has a coward made;
Whilst he, who Virtue's radiant course has run,
Descends like a serenely-setting sun:
His thoughts triumphant Heaven alone employs,
And Hope anticipates his future joys.
So good, so blessed the illustrious Bishop of Worcester.
Hough we find,
Whose image dwells with pleasure on my mind;
The Mitre's glory, Freedom's constant friend,
In times which asked a champion to defend;
Who after near a hundred virtuous years,
His senses perfect, free from pains and fears,
Replete with life, with honors, and with age,
Like an applauded actor left the stage;
Or like some victor in the Olympic games,
Who, having run his course, the crown of Glory claims.
From this just contrast plainly it appears,
How Conscience can inspire both hopes and fears;
But whence proceed these hopes, or whence this dread,
If nothing really can affect the dead?
See all things join to promise, and presage
The sure arrival of a future age!
Whatever their lot is here, the good and wise,
Nor dote on life, nor peevishly despise.
An honest man, when Fortune's storms begin,
Has Consolation always sure within,
And, if she sends a more propitious gale,
He Is pleased, but not forgetful it may fail.
Nor fear that he, who sits so loose to life,
Should too much shun its labors, and its strife;
And scorning wealth, contented to be mean,
Shrink from the duties of this bustling scene;
Or, when his country's safety claims his aid,
Avoid the fight inglorious, and afraid:
Who scorns life most must surely be most brave,
And he, who power contemns, be least a slave:
Virtue will lead him to Ambition's ends,
And prompt him to defend his country, and his friends,
But still his merit you can not regard,
Who thus pursues a posthumous reward;
His soul, you cry, is incorrupt and great,
Who quite uninfluenc'd by a future state,
Embraces Virtue from a nobler sense
Of her abstracted, native excellence,
From the self-conscious joy her essence brings,
The beauty, fitness, harmony of things.
It may be so: yet he deserves applause,
Who follows where instructive Nature draws;
Aims at rewards by her indulgence given,
And soars triumphant on her wings to heaven.
Say what this venal virtuous man pursues,
No mean rewards, no mercenary views;
Not wealth usurious, or a numerous train,
Not fame by fraud acquired, or title vain!
He follows but where Nature points the road,
Rising in Virtue's school, till he ascends to God.
But we the inglorious common herd of man,
Sail without compass, toil without a plan;
In Fortune's varying storms for ever tossed,
Shadows pursue, that in pursuit are lost;
Mere infants all, till life's extremest day,
Scrambling for toys, then tossing them away.
Who rests of Immortality assured
Is safe, whatever ills are here endured:
He hopes not vainly in a world like this,
To meet with pure uninterrupted bliss;
For good and ill, in this imperfect state,
Are ever mixed by the decrees of Fate.
With Wisdom's richest harvest Folly grows,
And baleful hemlock mingles with the rose;
All things are blended, changeable, and vain,
No hope, no wish we perfectly obtain;
God may perhaps (might human Reason's line
Pretend to fathom infinite design)
Have thus ordained things, that the restless mind
No happiness complete on earth may find;
And, by this friendly chastisement made wise,
To heaven her safest, best retreat may rise.
Come then, since now in safety we have past
Through Error's rocks, and see the port at last,
Let us review, and recollect the whole. --
Thus stands my argument. -- The thinking soul
Cannot terrestrial, or material be,
But claims by Nature Immortality:
God, who created it, can make it end,
We question not, but cannot apprehend
He will; because it is by him endued
With strong ideas of all-perfect Good:
With wondrous powers to know, and calculate
Things too remote from this our earthly state;
With sure presages of a life to come,
All false and useless; if beyond the tomb
Our beings cease: we therefore cannot believe
God either acts in vain, or can deceive.
If every rule of equity demands,
That Vice and Virtue from the Almighty's hands,
Should due rewards, and punishments receive,
And this by no means happens whilst we live,
It follows, that a time must surely come,
When each shall meet their well-adjusted doom:
Then shall this scene, which now to human sight
Seems so unworthy Wisdom infinite,
A system of consummate skill appear,
And every cloud dispersed, be beautiful and clear.
Doubt we of this! what solid proof remains,
That over the world a wise Disposer reigns?
Whilst all Creation speaks a power divine,
Is it deficient in the main design?
Not so: the day shall come, (pretend not now
Presumptuous to enquire or when, or how)
But after death shall come the important day,
When God to all his justice shall display;
Each action with impartial eyes regard,
And in a just proportion punish and reward.
The ARBOR: An ODE to CONTENTMENT.
By Mr. THOMAS COLE.
TO these lone shades, where Peace delights to dwell,
May Fortune often permit me to retreat;
Here bid the world, with all its cares, farewell,
And leave its pleasures to the rich and great.
Often as the summer's sun shall cheer this scene,
With that mild gleam which points his parting ray,
Here let my soul enjoy each eve serene,
Here share its calm, 'till life's declining day.
No gladsome image then should 'scape my sight,
From these gay flowers, which border near my eye,
To yon bright cloud, that decks, with richest light,
The gilded mantle of the western sky.
With ample gaze, I Would trace that ridge remote,
Where opening cliffs disclose the boundless main;
With earnest ken, from each low hamlet note
The steeple's summit peeping over the plain.
What various works that rural landscape fill,
Where mingling hedge-rows beauteous fields enclose;
And prudent Culture, with industrious skill,
Her checkered scene of crops and fallows shows?
How should I love to mark that riv'let's maze,
Through which it works its untaught course along;
Whilst near its grassy banks the herd shall graze,
And blithsome milkmaid chaunt her thoughtless song?
Still would I note the shades of lengthening sheep,
As scattered over the hill's slant brow they rove;
Still note the day's last glimmering luster creep
From off the verge of yonder upland grove.
Nor should my leisure seldom wait to view
The slow-wing'd rooks in homeward train succeed;
Nor yet forbear the swallow to pursue,
With quicker glance, close skimming over the mead.
But mostly here should I delight to explore
The bounteous laws of Nature's mystic power;
Then muse on him who blesses all her store,
And give to solemn thoughts the sober hour.
Let Mirth unenvied laugh with proud disdain,
And deem it spleen one moment thus to waste;
If so she keep far hence her noisy train,
Nor interrupt those joys she cannot taste.
Far sweeter streams shall flow from Wisdom's spring.
Than she receives from Folly's costliest bowl;
And what delights can her chief dainties bring,
Like those which feast the heavenly-pensive soul?
Hail Silence then! be thou my frequent guest;
For thou art wont my gratitude to raise,
As high as wonder can the theme suggest,
Whenever I meditate my Maker's praise.
What joy for tutored Piety to learn,
All that my christian solitude can teach,
Where weak-ey'd Reason's self may well discern
Each clearer truth the gospel deigns to preach?
No object here but may convince the mind,
Of more than thoughtful honesty shall need;
Nor can Suspense long question here to find
Sufficient evidence to fix its creed.
It Is God that gives this bower its aweful gloom;
His arched verdure does its roof invest;
He breathes the life of fragrance on its bloom;
And with his kindness makes its owner blessed.
Oh! may the guidance of thy grace attend
The use of all thy bounty shall bestow;
Lest folly should mistake its sacred end,
Or vice convert it into means of woe.
Incline and aid me still my life to steer,
As conscience dictates what to shun or choose;
Nor let my heart feel anxious hope or fear,
For aught this world can give me or refuse.
Then shall not wealth's parade one wish excite,
For wretched state to barter peace away;
Nor vain ambition's lure my pride invite,
Beyond contentment's humble path to stray.
What though thy wisdom may my lot deny,
The treasured plenty freely to dispense;
Yet well thy goodness can that want supply
With larger portions of benevolence.
And sure the heart that wills the generous deed,
May all the joys of Charity command;
For she best loves from notice to recede,
And deals her unsought gifts with secret hand.
Then will I sometimes bid my fancy steal,
That unclaim'd wealth no property restrains;
Soothe with fictitious aid my friendly zeal,
And realize each goodly act she feigns.
So shall I gain the gold without alloy;
Without oppression, toil, or treacherous snares;
So shall I know its use, its power employ,
And yet avoid its dangers and its cares.
And spite of all that boastful wealth can do,
In vain would Fortune strive the rich to bless,
Were they not flattered with some distant view
Of what she never can give them to possess.
Even Wisdom's high conceit great wants would feel,
If not supplied from Fancy's boundless store;
And naught but shame makes power itself conceal,
That she, to satisfy, must promise more.
But though experience will not fail to show,
However its truth man's weakness may upbraid,
That what he mostly values here below,
Owes half its relish to kind Fancy's aid;
Yet should not Prudence her light wing command,
She may too far extend her heedless flight;
For Pleasure soon shall quit her fairy-land
If Nature's regions are not held in sight.
From Truth's abode, in search of kind deceit,
Within due limits she may safely roam;
If roving does not make her hate retreat,
And with aversion shun her proper home.
But thanks to those, whose fond parental care,
To Learning's paths my youthful steps confined,
I need not shun a state which lets me share
Each calm delight that soothes the studious mind.
While genius lasts, his fame shall never decay,
Whose artful hand first caused its fruits to spread;
In lasting volumes stamped the printed lay,
And taught the Muses to embalm the dead.
To him I owe each fair instructive page,
Where Science tells me what her sons have known;
Collects their choicest works from every age,
And makes me wise with knowledge not my own.
Books rightly used may every state secure:
From fortune's evils may our peace defend;
May teach us how to shun, or to endure,
The foe malignant, and the faithless friend.
Should rigid Want withdraw all outward aid,
Kind stores of inward comfort they can bring;
Should keen Disease life's tainted stream invade,
Sweet to the soul from them pure health may spring.
Should both at once man's weakly frame infest,
Some lettered charm may still relief supply;
Against all events prepare his patient breast,
And make him quite resigned to live, or die.
For though no words can time or fate restrain;
No sounds suppress the call of Nature's voice;
Though neither rhymes, nor spells, can conquer pain,
Nor magic's self make wretchedness our choice;
Yet reason, while it forms the subtle plan,
Some purer source of pleasure to explore,
Must deem it vain for that poor pilgrim, man,
To think of resting 'till his journey's over:
Must deem each fruitless toil, by heaven designed
To teach him where to look for real bliss;
Else why should heaven excite the hope to find
What balk'd pursuit must here for ever miss?
The GROTTO: An ODE to SILENCE.
By the Same.
COME, musing Silence, nor refuse to shed
Thy sober influence over this darkling cell:
The desert waste and lonely plain,
Could never confine thy peaceful reign;
Nor do thou only love to dwell
'Mid the dark mansions of the vaulted dead:
For still at eve's serenest hour,
All nature owns thy soothing power:
Often have thou deigned with me to rove,
Beneath the calm sequestered grove;
Often deigned my secret steps to lead
Along the dewy pathless mead;
Or up the dusky lawn, to spy
The last faint gleamings of the twilight sky.
Then will thou still thy pensive vot'ry meet,
Often as he calls thee to this gloomy seat:
For here, with many a solemn mystic rite,
Were thou invoked to consecrate the ground,
Ere these rude walls were reared remote from sight,
Or ere with moss this shaggy roof was crowned.
Hail! blessed parent of each purer thought,
That does at once the heart exalt and mend!
Here will thou never fail to find
My vacant solitude inclined
Thy serious lessons to attend.
For they I ween shall be with goodness fraught,
Whether thou bid me meditate
On man, in untaught nature's state;
How far this life he ought to prize;
How far its transient scenes despise:
What heights his reason may attain,
And where its proud attempts are vain:
What toils his virtue ought to brave,
For Hope's rewarding joys beyond the grave:
Or if in man redeemed thou bid me trace
Each wondrous proof of heaven's transcendent grace;
Then breathe some sparks of that celestial fire,
Which in the raptured seraph glows above,
Where sainted myriads crowd the joyful choir,
And harp their praises round the throne of love.
The trisling sohs of Levity and Pride
Hence shall thy aweful seriousness exclude;
Nor shall loud Riot's thoughtless train
With srantic mirth this grott profane.
No foe to Peace shall here intrude.
For thou will kindly bid each found subside,
Save such as soothes the listening sense,
And serves to aid thy influence:
Save where, soft-breathing over the plain,
Mild Zephyr waves the rustling grain:
Or where some stream, from rocky source,
Slow trickles down its ceaseless course:
Or where the sea's imperfect roar
Comes gently murmuring from the distant shore.
But most in Philomel, sweet bird of night,
In plaintive Philomel, is thy delight:
For she, or studious to prolong her grief,
Or often to vary her exhaustless lay,
With frequent pause, from thee shall seek relief,
Nor close her strain, till dawns the noisy day.
Without thy aid, to happier tasteful art,
No deep instructive science could prevail:
For only where thou do preside,
Can wit's inventive powers be tried;
And reason's better task would fail,
Did not thy haunts the serious theme impart.
The critic, that with plodding head,
Toils over the learning of the dead;
The cloistered hermit that explores,
By midnight lamp, religion's stores;
Each sage that marks, with thoughtful gaze,
The lunar orb, or planet's maze;
And every bard, that strays along
The sylvan shade, intent on sacred song;
Shall all to thee those various praises give,
Which, through thy friendly aid, themselves receive:
For though thou may from glory's seats retire,
Where loud applause proclaims the honored name;
Yet does thy modest wisdom still inspire
Each nobler work that swells the voice of Fame.
The PICTURE of HUMAN LIFE.
Translated from the GREEK of CEBES the THEBAN.
By Mr. T. SCOTT.
Et vitae monstrata via est.
HOR.
WHILE Saturn's This temple was probably in the city of Thebes, for Cebes was a
Theban.
fane with solemn step we trod,
And viewed the Devout offerings, for the most part in discharge of vows.
votive honors of the God,
A pictured tablet, over the portal raised,
Attached our eye: in wonder lost, we gazed.
The pencil there some strange device had wrought,
And fables, all its own, disguised the thought.
Nor camp it seemed, nor city: the design,
Whose moral mocked our labor to divine,
Was a walled court, where rose another bound,
And, higher still, a third still lessening ground.
The nether area opened, at a gate
Where a vast crowd impatient seemed to wait.
Within, a group of female figures stood,
In motley dress, a sparkling multitude.
Without, in station at the porch, was seen
A venerable form, in act and mien
Like some great teacher who with urgent tongue,
Authoritative, warned the rushing throng.
From doubt to doubt we wandered; when appeared
A sire, who thus the hard solution cleared.
Strangers, that allegoric seen, I guess,
Conquers your skill, our home-born wits no less.
A foreigner, long since, whose nobler mind
Learning's best culture to strong genius joined,
Here lived, conversed, and showed the admiring age
Another Samian or Elean sage.
He reared this dome to Saturn's aweful name,
And gave that portrait to eternal fame.
He reasoned much, high argument he chose,
High as his theme his great conceptions rose.
Such wisdom flowing from a mouth but young
I heard astonished, and enjoyed it long:
Him often I heard this moral piece expound,
With nervous eloquence and sense profound.
Father, if leisure with thy will conspire,
Yield, yield that comment to our warm desire.
Free to bestow, I warn you first, beware:
Danger impends, which summons all your care.
Wise, virtuous, blessed, whose heart our precepts gain,
The Caselian and Salmasian editions read (...) wicked, instead of (...)
bitter. JOHNSON.
Abandoned, blind, and wretched, who disdain.
For know, our purposed theme resembles best
The famed Enigma of the Theban pest:
The interpreter a plighted crown enjoyed,
The stupid perished, by the Sphinx destroyed.
Count Folly as a Sphinx to all mankind,
Her problem, How is Good and Ill desin'd?
Misjudging here, by Folly's law we die,
Not instant victims of her cruelty;
From day to day our reasoning part she wounds,
Devours its strength, its noblest powers confounds:
Awakes the lash of Vid.. 186.
Punishment, and tears
The mind with pangs which guilty life prepares,
With opposite effect, where thoughtful skill
Discerns the boundaries of Good and Ill,
Folly must perish; and the illumined breast
To Virtue saved, is like the immortals blessed.
Give audience, then, with no unheeding ear.
O haste, no heedless auditors stand here,
With strong desire, in dread suspense we wait,
So great the blessing, and the bane so great.
Instant, he raised his oratorial hand,
And said (our eye he guided with a wand)
Behold life's pencil'd scene, the natal gate,
The numbers thronging into mortal state.
Which danger's path, and which to safety bears,
That ancient, Genius of mankind, declares.
See him aloft, benevolent he bends,
One hand is pointing, one a roll extends
Reason's imperial code; by heaven impressed
In living letters on the human breast.
Opposed to him, Delusion plies her part,
With skin of borrowed snow, and blush of art,
With hypocritic fawn, and eyes askance
Whence soft infection steals in every glance.
Her faithless hand presents a crystal bowl,
Whose poisonous draught intoxicates the soul.
Error and ignorance infused, compose
The fatal beverage which her fraud bestows.
Is that the hard condition of our birth?
Must all drink Error who appear on earth?
All; yet in some their measure drowns the mind,
Others but taste, less erring and less blind.
The first court, or the sensual life.
The Opinions, and Desires, and Pleasures rise
Behind the gate, thick-glitt'ring on our eyes;
Thick as bright atoms in the solar ray,
Diverse their drap'ry and profusely gay.
These tempting forms, each like a mistress dressed,
Our early steps with powerful charms arrest:
Soon as we enter life, with various art
Of dalliance they assail the unguarded heart.
All promise joy, we rush to their embrace;
To bliss or ruin here begins our race.
Happy, thrice happy, who entrust their youth,
To right Opinions, and ascend to Truth:
Whom Wisdom tutors, whom the Virtues hail,
And with their own substantial feast regale.
The rest are harlots: by their flatt'ries won,
In chase of empty sciences we run:
Or Fortune's vanities pursue, and stray
With sensual Pleasure in more dangerous way.
See the mad rounds their giddy followers tread,
Delusion's cup strong-working in their head.
Fast as one shoal of fools have deluged through,
Succeeding shoals the busy farce renew.
Who on that globe stands stretching to her flight?
Wild seems her aspect, and bereaved of sight.
Fortune, blind, frantic, deaf. With restless wings
The world she ranges, and her favors flings:
Flings and resumes, and plunders and bestows,
Caprice divide the blessings and the woes.
Her grace unstable as her tottering ball,
Whenever she smiles she meditates our fall.
When most we trust her, we are cheated most,
In desolating loss we mourn our boast:
Her cruel blast invades our hasty fruit,
And withers all our glory at the root.
What mean those multitudes around her? Why
Such motley attitudes perplex our eye?
Some, in the act of wildest rapture, leap,
In agony some wring their hands, and weep.
The unreas'ning crowd; to passion's sequel blind,
By passion fired and impotent of mind:
Competitors in clamorous suit, to share
The toys she tosses with regardless air;
Trifles, for solid worth by most pursued,
Bright-colour'd vapors and fantastic good:
The pageantry of wealth, the blaze of fame,
Titles, an offspring to extend the name,
Huge strength, or beauty which the strong obey,
The victor's laurel, and despotic sway.
These, humored in their vows, with lavish praise
The glory of the gracious goddess raise:
Those other, losers in her chance-full game,
Shorn of their all, or frustrate in their aim,
In murmurs of their hard mishap complain,
And curse her partial and malignant reign.
Now, further still in this low sensual ground,
Traverse yon flowery mount's sequestered bound.
In the green center of those citron shades,
Among gardens, fountains, bow'ry walks, and glades,
Voluptuous Sin her powerful spells employs,
Souls to seduce, seducing she destroys.
See! Lewdness, loosely zon'd, her bosom bares,
See! Riot her luxurious bowl prepares:
There stands Avidity, with ardent eye,
There dimpling Adulation smooths her lie.
There station'd to what end?
In watch for prey,
Fortune's infatuate favorites of a day.
These they caress, they flatter, they entreat
To try the pleasures of their soft retreat,
Life disencumber'd, frolicksom, and free,
All ease, all mirth, and high felicity.
Whome'er by their inveigling arts they win
To tread that magic paradise of Sin,
In airy dance his jocund hours skim round,
Sparkles the bowl, the festal songs resound:
His blood ferments, fired by the wanton glance,
And his loose soul dissolves in amorous trance.
While circulating joys to joys succeed,
While new delights the sweet delirium feed;
The prodigal, in raptured fancy, roves
Over fairy fields and through Elysian groves:
Sees glittering visions in succession rise,
And laughs at Socrates the chaste and wise.
'Till, sober'd by distress, awake, confused,
Amazed, he knows himself a wretch abused;
A short illusion his imagined feast,
Himself the game, himself the slaughtered beast.
Now, raving for his squandered wealth in vain,
Slave to those tyrant jilts he drags their chain:
Compelled to suffer hard and hungry need,
Compelled to dare each foul and desperate deed.
Villain, or knave, he joins the sharping tribe,
Robs altars, or is perjured for a bribe:
Stabs for a purse, his country pawns for gold,
To every crime of blackest horror sold.
Shiftless at length, of all resource bereft,
In the dire gripe of Punishment he is left.
Observe this strait-mouth'd cave: the unwilling light
Just shows the dismal deep descent to night.
In centry see these haggard crones, whose brows
Rude locks o'erhang, a frown their forehead plows:
Swarthy and foul their shrivelled skin behold,
And slutt'ring shreds their vile desence from cold.
High-brandishing her lash, with stern regard,
Stands Punishment, an ever-waking ward;
While sullen Melancholy mopes behind,
Fixed, with her head upon her knees inclined:
And, frantic with remorseful fury, there
Fierce Anguish stamps, and rends her shaggy hair.
Who that ill-featur'd spectre of a man,
Shivering in nakedness, so spare and wan?
And she, whose eye aghast with horror stares,
Whose meagre form a sister's likeness bears?
Loud Lamentation, wild Despair. All these,
Fell vulturs, the devoted caitiff seize.
Ah dreadful durance! with these fiends to dwell!
What tongue the terrors of his soul can tell?
Worried by these foul fiends, the wretch begins
Sharp penance, wages of remembered sins:
Then deeper sinks, plunged in the pit of Woe,
Worse sufferings in worse hell to undergo:
Unless, rare guest, Repentance over the gloom
Diffuse her radiance, and repeal his doom.
She comes! meek-ey'd, arrayed in grave attire,
See Right Opinion, joined with Good Desire,
Handmaids of Truth: with those, an adverse pair
( False Wisdom's minions, that deceiving fair)
Attend her solemn step: the furies flee.
Come forth, she calls, come forth to liberty,
Guilt-harrass'd thrall: thy future lot decide,
And, pond'ring well, elect thy future guide.
Momentous option! choosing right, he will find
A sovereign medicine for his ulcer'd mind;
Led to True Wisdom, whose cathartic bowl
Recovers and beatifies the soul.
Misguided else, a counterfeit he will gain,
Whose art is only to amuse the brain:
From vice to studious folly now he flies,
From bliss still erring, still betrayed by lies.
O heavens! where end the risks we mortals run?
How dreadful this, and yet how hard to shun!
Say, father, what distinctive marks declare
That counterfeit of Wisdom?
The second court, or the studious life.
View her there.
At yonder gate, with decent port, she stands,
Her spotless form that second court commands:
Styled Wisdom by the crowd, the thinking few
Know her disguise, the phantom of the true:
Skilled in all learning, skilled in every art
To grace the head, not meliorate the heart.
The saved, who meditate their noble flight
From a bad world, to Wisdom's lofty height,
Just touching at this inn, for short repast,
Then speed their journey forward to its last.
This the sole path?
Another path there lies,
The plain man's path, without proud Science wise.
Who they, which traverse this deluder's bound?
A busy scene, all thought or action round.
Her lovers, whom her specious beauty warms,
Who grasp, in vision, Truth's immortal charms,
Vain of the glory of a false embrace:
Fierce syllogistic tribes, a wrangling race,
Bards rapt beyond the moon on Fancy's wings,
And mighty masters of the vocal strings:
Those who on labored speeches waste their oil,
Those who in crabbed calculations toil,
Who measure earth, who climb the starry road,
And human fates by heavenly signs forebode,
Pleasure's philosophers, Lyceum's pride,
Disdainful soaring up to heights untried.
All who in learned trifles spin their wit,
Or comment on the works by triflers writ.
Who are yon active females, like in face
To the lewd harlots, in the nether space,
Vile agents of voluptuous Sin?
The same.
Admitted here?
Even here, eternal shame!
They boast some rarer less ignoble spoils,
Art, wit, and reason, tangled in their toils.
And Fancy, with the Opinions in her rear,
Enjoys these studious walks, no stranger here:
Where wild hypothesis, and learned romance
Too often lead up the philosophic dance.
Still these ingenious heads alas! retain
Delusion's dose, still the vile dregs remain
Of ignorance with madding folly joined,
And a foul heart pollutes the embellished mind.
Nor will presumption from their souls recede,
Nor will they from one vicious plague be freed,
Till, weary of these vanities, they have found
The exalted way to Truth's enlightened ground,
Quaff'd her eathartic, and all cleans'd within,
By that strong energy, from pride and sin,
Are healed and saved. But loit'ring here they spend
Life's precious hours in thinking to no end:
From science up to science let them rise,
And arrogate the swelling style of wise,
Their wisdom's folly, impotent and blind,
Which cures not one distemper of the mind.
Enough. Discover now the faithful road,
Which mounts us to the joys of Truth's abode.
Survey this solitary waste, which rears
Nor bush nor herb, nor cottage there appears.
At distance see you strait and lonely gate
(No crowds at the forbidding entrance wait)
Its avenue a rugged rocky soil,
Traveled with painful step and tedious toil.
Beyond the wicket, towering in the skies
See Difficulty's cragged mountain rise,
Narrow and sharp the ascent; each edge a brink,
Whence to vast depth dire precipices sink.
Is that the way to Wisdom? Dreadful way!
The landscape frowns with danger and dismay.
Yet higher still, around the mountain's brow
Winds you huge rock, whose steep smooth sides allow
No track. Its top two sister figures grace,
Health's rosy habit glowing in their face.
With arms protended over the verge they lean,
The promptitude of friendship in their mien.
The powers of Continence and Patience, there
Station'd by Wisdom, her commission bear
To rouse the spirit of her fainting son
Thus far advanced, and urge and urge him on.
Courage! they call, the coward's sloth disdain,
Yet, yet awhile, the noble toil sustain:
A lovely path soon opens to your sight,
But ah! how climbed that rock's bare slippery height?
These generous guides, who Virtue's course befriend,
In succor of her pilgrim, swift descend,
Draw up their trembling charge; then, smiling, greet
With kind command to rest his weary feet.
With their own force his panting breast they arm,
And with their own intrepid spirit warm:
Next, plight their guidance in his future way
To Wisdom, and in rapturous view display
The blissful road (there it invites your eyes)
How smooth and easy to the foot it lies,
Through beauteous land, from all annoyance clear,
Of thorny evil and perplexing fear.
The third court, or the virtuous life.
You lofty grove's delicious bowers to gain,
You cross the expanse of this enameled plain;
A meadow with eternal beauty bright,
Beneath a purer heaven, o'crslow'd with light.
Full in the center of the plain, behold
A court far-flaming with its wall of gold
And gate of diamond, where the righteous rest;
This clime their home, the country of the blessed:
Here all the Virtues dwell, communion sweet!
With Happiness, who rules the peaceful seat.
In station at the effulgent portal, see
A beauteous form of mildest majesty.
Her eyes how piercing! how sedate her mien!
Mature in life, her countenance serene:
Spirit and solid thought each feature shows,
And her plain robe with state unstudy'd flows.
She stands upon a cube of marble, fixed
As the firm rock, two lovely nymphs betwixt,
Her daughters, copies of her looks and air,
Here candid Truth, and sweet Persuasion there:
She, she is Wisdom. In her steadfast die,
Behold the expressive type of certainty:
Certain her way, and permanent the deed
Of gift substantial to her friends decreed.
She gives the confidence erect and clear,
She gives magnanimous contempt of fear,
And bids the invulnerable mind to know
Her safety from the future shafts of woe.
O treasure, richer than the sea or land!
But why without the walls her destined stand?
There standing, she presents her potent bowl,
Divine cathartic, which restores the soul.
This asks a comment.
In some dire disease,
Machaon's skill first purges off the lees:
Then clear and strong the purple current flows,
And life, renewed in every member glows:
But if the patient all control despise,
Just victim of his stubborn will he dies.
So Wisdom, by her rules, with healing art
Expells Delusion's mischiefs from the heart;
Blindness, and error, and high-boasting pride,
Intemp'rance, lust, fierce wrath's impetuous tide,
Hydropic avarice, all the plagues behind
Which in the first mad court oppressed the mind.
Thus purged, her pupil through the gate she brings,
The Virtues hail their guest, the guest enraptured sings.
Behold the spotless band, celestial charms!
Scene that with awe chastises whom it warms:
No harlotry, no paint, no gay excess,
But beauty unaffected as their dress.
See Knowledge grasping a refulgent star,
See Fortitude in panoply of war:
Justice her equal scale aloft displays,
And rights both human and divine she weighs.
There Moderation, all the pleasures bound
In brazen chains her dreaded feet surround.
There bounteous Liberality expands
To want, to worth, her ever-loaded hands.
The florid hue of Temperance, her side
Adorned by Health a nymph in blooming pride.
Lo, soft-ey'd Meekness holds a curbing rein,
Anger's high-mettled spirit to restrain:
While Moral Order tunes her golden lyre,
And white-rob'd Probity compleats the choir.
O fairest of all fair! O blissful state!
What hopes sublime our ravished soul dilate!
Substantial hopes, if by the doctrine taught,
The fashioned manners are to habit wrought.
Yes, it is resolved. We'll every nerve employ.
Live, then, restored; and reap the promised joy.
But whither do the Virtues lead their trust?
To Happiness, rewarder of the just.
Look upward to the hill beyond the grove,
A sovereign pile extends its front above:
Stately and strong, the lofty castle stands,
Its boundless prospect all the courts commands.
Within the porch, high on a jasper throne,
The Imperial Mother by her form is known;
Bright as the morn, when smiling on the hills
Earth, air, and sea with vernal joy she fills.
Rich without lavish cost her vest behold
In colors of the sky, and fringed with gold:
A tiar, wreathed with every flower that blows
Of liveliest tints, around her temples glows:
Eternal bloom her snowy temples binds,
Fearless of burning suns and blasting winds.
Now, with a crown of wondrous power, her hand
(Assistant, round her, all the Virtues stand)
Adorns her hero, honorable meed
Of conquests won by many a valiant deed.
What conquests?
Formidable beasts subdued:
Laboring he fought, he routed, he pursued.
Once, a weak prey, beneath their force he cowr'd,
Overthrown, and worried, and well-nigh devoured:
Till roused from his inglorious sloth, possessed
With generous ardour kindling in his breast,
Lord of himself, the victor now constrains
Those hostile monsters in his powerful chains.
Explain those savage beasts at war with man.
Error and Ignorance, which head the van,
Heart-gnawing Grief, and loud-lamenting Woe,
Incontinence, a wild-destroying foe,
Rapacious Avarice; cruel numbers more
Over all he triumphs now, their slave before.
O great achievements! more illustrious far
These triumphs, than the bloody wreaths of war.
But, say; what salutary power is shed
By the fair crown, which decks the hero's head?
Most beatific. For possessing this
He lives, rich owner of man's proper bliss:
Bliss independent or on wealth or power,
Fame, birth, or beauty, or voluptuous hour.
His hope's divorced from all exterior things,
Within himself the fount of pleasure springs;
Springs ever in the self-approving breast,
And his own honest heart's a constant feast.
Where, next, his steps?
He measures back his way,
Conducted by the Virtues, to survey
His first abode. The giddy crowd, below,
Wasting their wretched span in crime they show;
How in the whirl of passions they are tossed,
And, shipwrecked on the lurking shelves, are lost:
Here fierce Ambition haling in her chain
The mighty, there a despicable train
Impure in Lust's inglorious fetter bound,
And slaves of Avarice rooting up the ground:
Thralls of Vainglory, thralls of swelling Pride,
Unnumber'd fools, unnumber'd plagues beside.
All-pow'rless they to burst the galling band,
To spring aloft, and reach you happy land,
Entangled, impotent the way to find,
The clear instruction blotted from their mind
Which the Good Genius gave; Guilt's gloomy fears
Becloud their suns and sadden all their years.
I stand convinced, but yet perplexed in thought
Why to review a well-known scene he is brought.
Scene rudely known. Uncertain and confused,
His judgment by illusions was abused.
His evil was not evil, nor his good
Aught else but vanity misunderstood.
Confounding good and evil, like the throng,
His life, like theirs, was action always wrong.
Enlightened now in the true bliss of man,
He shapes his altered course by Wisdom's plan:
And, blessed himself, beholds with weeping eyes
The madding world an hospital of sighs.
This retrospection ended, where succeeds
His course?
Wherever his wise volition leads.
Wherever it leads, safety attends him still:
Not safer, should he on Apollo's hill,
Among the Nymphs, among the vocal Powers,
Dwell in the Sanctum of Corycian bowers:
Honored by all, the friend of human kind,
Beloved physician of the sin-sick mind;
Not Esculapius more, whose power to save
Redeems his patient from the yawning grave.
But never more shall his old restless foes
Awake his fears, nor trouble his repose?
Never. In righteous habitude inured,
From Passion's baneful anarchy secured,
In each enticing scene, each instant hard,
That sovereign antidote his mind will guard:
Like him, who, of some virtuous drug possessed,
Grasps the fell viper coil'd within her nest,
Hears her dire hissings, sees her terrors rise,
And, unappall'd, destruction's tooth defies.
You troops in motion from the mount explain,
Various to view; for there a goodly train,
With garlands crowned, advance with comely pace,
Noble their port, and in each tranquil face
Joys sparkles: others, a bare-headed throng,
Battered and gash'd, drag their slow steps along,
Captives of some strange female crew.
The crowned,
Long seeking, safe arrived at Wisdom's bound,
Exult in her imparted grace. Apostates.
The rest,
Those on whom Wisdom, unprevailing, pressed
Her healing aid; rejected from her care,
In evil plight their wicked days they wear:
Those too, who Difficulty's hill had gained,
There basely stopped, by dastard sloth detained:
Apostate now, in thorny wilds they rove,
Pursuing suries scourge the caitiff drove;
Sorrows which gnaw, remorseful Thoughts which tear,
Blindness of mind, and heart-oppressing Fear,
With all the contumelious rout of Shame,
And every ill, and every hateful name.
Relapsed to Lewdness, and her sensual Queen,
Unblushing at themselves, but drunk with spleen,
Wisdom's high worth their cankered tongues dispraise,
Revile her children, and blaspheme her ways.
Deluded wretches, (thus their madness cries)
Dull mopes, weak dupes of philosophic lies,
Uncomforted, unjoyous, and unblest,
Lost from the pleasures here at large possessed.
What pleasures boast they?
Pleasures of the stews,
Pleasures which Riot's frantic bowls infuse.
These high fruition their gross souls repute,
And man's chief good to sink into a brute.
But who that lovely bevy, blithe and gay,
So smoothly gliding down the hilly way?
The distinction between Opinion and Knowledge.
Those are the Opinions, who have guided right
The unexperienced to the plain of light:
Returning, new adventurers to bring,
The blessings of the last-arriv'd they sing.
Why ingress yielded to their favored ward
Among the Virtues, to themselves debarred?
Opinion's foot is never never found
Where Knowledge dwells, it is interdicted ground,
At Wisdom's gate the Opinions must resign
Their charge, those limits their employ confine.
Thus trading barks, skilled in the watery road,
To distant climes convey their precious load,
Then turn their prow, light bounding over the main,
And with new traffic store their keels again.
Thus far is clear. But yet untold remains
What the Good Genius to the crowd ordains,
Just on the verge of life.
The instructions of the Genius.
He bids them hold
A spirit with erected courage bold.
Never (he calls) on Fortune's faith rely,
Nor grasp her dubious gifts as property.
Let not her smile transport, her frown dismay,
Nor praise, nor blame, nor wonder at her sway
Which reason never guides: it is fortune still,
Capricious chance and arbitrary will,
Bad bankers, vain of treasure not their own,
With foolish rapture hug the trusted loan:
Impatient, when the powerful bond demands
Its unremember'd covenant from their hands.
Unlike to such, without a sigh restore
What Fortune lends: anon she will lavish more,
Repenting of her bounty snatch away,
Yea seize your patrimonial fund for prey.
Embrace her proffered boon, but instant rise,
Spring upward, and secure a lasting prize,
The gift which Wisdom to her sons divides;
Knowledge, whose beam the doubting judgment guides.
Scatters the sensual fog, and clear to view
Distinguishes false interest from the true.
Flee, flee to this, with unabating pace,
Nor parley for a moment at the place
Where Pleasure and her Harlots tempt, nor rest
But at False Wisdom's inn, a transient guest:
For short refection, at her table sit,
And taste what science may your palate hit:
Then wing your journey forward, till you reach
True Wisdom, and imbibe the truths she will teach.
Such is the advice the friendly Genius gives,
He perishes who scorns, who follows lives.
And thus this moral piece instructs; if aught
Is mystic still, reveal your doubting thought.
Thanks, generous Sire; tell, then, the transient bait,
The Genius grants us at False Wisdom's gate.
Natural knowledge, how far useful, and when unprofitable and hurtful.
Whatever in arts or sciences is found
Of solid use, in their capacious round,
These, Plato reasons, like a curbing rein,
Unruly youth from devious starts restrain.
Must we, solicitous our souls to save,
Assistance from these previous studies crave?
Necessity there is none. We'll not deny
Their merit in some less utility:
But they contribute, we averr, no part
To heal the manners and amend the heart.
An author's meaning, in a tongue unknown,
May glimmer through translation in our own:
Yet masters of his language, we might gain
Some trivial purposes by tedious pain.
So in the sciences, though, rudely taught,
We may attain the little that we ought;
Yet, accurately known they might convey
More light not wholly useless in its way.
But Virtue may be reached, through all her rules,
Without the curious subtleties of schools.
How! not the learned excel the common shoal,
In powerful aids to meliorate the soul?
Blind as the crowd alas! to good and ill,
Entangled by the like corrupted will,
What boasts the man of letters over the rest?
Skilled in all tongues, of all the arts possessed,
What hinders but he sink into a sot,
A libertine or villain in a plot,
Miser, or knave, or whatsoever you will name
Of mortal lunacy and reason's shame.
How, then, for living right
Avail those studies, and their vaunted light
Beyond the vulgar?
Nothing. But disclose
The cause from whence this strange appearance grows.
Held by a potent charm in this retreat
They dwell, content with nearness to the seat
Of Virtuous Wisdom.
Near, methinks, in vain:
Since numbers, often, from out the nether plain,
'Scap'd from the snares of Lewdness and Excess,
Undevious to her lofty station press,
Yet pass these lettered clans.
What, then, are these
In moral things, advantaged over the lees
Of human race? in moral things, we find
These duller or less tractable of mind.
Decypher that.
Pride, pride averts their eyes
From offered light: in self-sufficience wise,
Although unknowing, they presume to know:
Clogged with that vain conceit they creep below,
Nor can mount up to you exalted bound,
True Wisdom's mansion, by the humble found.
Not found by these, till the vain visions spread,
By False Opinion, in the learned head,
Repentance scatter; and, deceived no more,
They own the illusion which deceived before,
That for True Wisdom they embraced her shade,
And hence the healing of their souls delayed.
Strangers, these lessons, often revolving, hold
Fast to your hearts, and into habit mould:
To this high scope life's whole attention bend,
Despise aught else as erring from your end.
Do thus, or unavailing is my care,
And all the instruction dies away in air.
The DROPSICAL MAN.
By Mr. W. TAILOR.
A JOLLY, brave toper, who could not forbear
Though his life was in danger, old port and stale beer,
Gave the doctors the hearing -- but still would drink on,
Till the dropsy had swelled him as big as a tun.
The more he took physic the worse still he grew,
And tapping was now the last thing he could do.
Affairs at this crisis, and doctors come down,
He began to consider -- so sent for his son.
Tom, see by what courses I Have shortened my life,
I Am leaving the world ere I Am forty and five;
More than probable it is, that in twenty-four hours,
This manor, this house, and estate will be yours;
My early excesses may teach you this truth,
That it is working for death to drink hard in one's youth.
Says Tom, (who is a lad of a generous spirit,
And not like young rakes who 're in haste to inherit.)
Sir, don't be disheartened; although it be true,
The operation is painful, and hazardous too,
It Is no more than what many a man has gone through.
And then, as for years, you may yet be called young,
Your lise after this may be happy and long.
Don't flatter me, Tom, was the father's reply,
With a jest in his mouth and a tear in his eye;
Too well by experience, my vessels, thou know,
No sooner are tap'd, but they give up the ghost.
PARADISE REGAINED.
By H. T.
I.
SEEK not for Paradise with curious eye
In Asiatic climes, where Tigris' waves
Mixed with Euphrates in tumultuous joy,
The spacious plains of Babylonia laves.
II.
It Is gone with all its charms; and like a dream,
Like Babylon itself, is swept away;
Bestow one tear upon the mournful theme,
But let it not thy gentle heart dismay.
III.
For know wherever love and virtue guide,
They lead us to a state of heavenly bliss,
Where joys unknown to guilt and shame preside,
And pleasures unalloy'd each hour increase.
IV.
Behold that grove, whose waving boughs admit,
Through the live colonade the fruitful hill,
A moving prospect with fat herds replete,
Whose lowing voices all the valley fill.
V.
There, through the spiry grass where glides the brook,
(By yon tall poplar which erects its head
Above the verdure of the neighboring oak,)
And gently murmurs over the adjoining mead;
VI.
Philander and Cleora, happy pair,
Taste the cool breezes of the gentle wind;
Their breasts from guilt, their looks are free from care,
Sure index of a calm contented mind.
VII.
It Is here in virtuous love the studious fair
Informs her babes, nor scorns herself to improve,
While in his smile she lives, whose pleasing care
Dispenses knowledge from the lips of love.
VIII.
No wild desires can spread their poison here,
No discontent their peaceful hours attend;
False joys, nor flattering hopes, nor servile fear,
Their gentle minds with jarring passions rend.
IX.
Here often in pleasing solitude they rove,
Recounting over the deeds of former days;
With inward joy their well-spent time approve,
And feel a recompense beyond all praise.
X.
Or in sweet converse through the grove, or near
The fountain's brink, or where the arbour's shade
Beats back the heat, fair Virtue's voice they hear,
More musical by sweet digressions made.
XI.
With calm dependence every good they taste,
Yet feel their neighbor's wants with kind regret,
Nor cheer themselves alone, (a mean repast!)
But deal forth blessings round their happy seat.
XII.
It Is to such virtue, that the power supreme
The choicest of his blessings has designed,
And shed them plenteous over every clime,
The calm delights of an untainted mind.
XIII.
Ere yet the sad effects of foolish pride,
And mean ambition still employed in strife,
And luxury did over the world preside,
Depraved the taste, and palled the joys of life.
XIV.
For such the Spring, in richest mantle clad,
Pours forth her beauties through the gay parterre;
And Autumn's various bosom is overspread
With all the blushing fruits that crown the year.
XV.
Or Summer tempts, in golden beams arrayed,
Which over the fields in borrowed luster glow,
To meditate beneath the cooling shade
Their happy state, and whence their blessings flow.
XVI.
Even rugged Winter varies but their joy,
Painting the cheek with fresh vermilion-hue;
And those rough frosts which softer frames annoy
With vigorous health their slack'ning nerves renew.
XVII.
From the dark bosom of the dappled Morn
To Phoebus shining with meridian light,
Or when mild Evening does the sky adorn,
Or the pale Moon rides through the spangled night,
XVIII.
The varying scenes in every virtuous soul
Each pleasing change with various pleasures bless,
Raise cheerful hopes, and anxious fears control,
And form a Paradise of inward peace.
To the Right Hon. Sir ROBERT WALPOLE.
-- Quo censet amiculus, ut si
Caecus iter monstrare velit. --
HOR.
By the Honorable Mr. D --
THOUGH strength of genius by experience taught
Gives thee to sound the depths of human thought,
To trace the various workings of the mind,
And rule the secret springs that rule mankind;
Rare gift! yet, Walpole, will thou condescend
To listen, if thy unexperienced friend
Can aught of use impart, though void of skill,
And raise attention by sincere good will:
For friendship sometimes want of parts supplies,
The heart may furnish what the head denies.
As, when the rapid Rhine over swelling tides
To grace old Ocean's coast in triumph rides,
Though rich in source, he drains a thousand springs,
Nor scorns the tribute each small riv'let brings:
So thou shall hence absorb each feeling ray,
Each dawn of meaning in thy brighter day;
Shall like, or where thou can not like, excuse,
Since no mean interest shall profane the Muse;
No malice wrapped in truth's disguise offend,
No flattery taint the freedom of a friend.
When first a generous mind surveys the great,
And views the crowds that on their fortune wait,
Pleased with the show, (though little understood,)
He only seeks the power, to do the good:
Thinks, till he tries, it is godlike to dispose,
And gratitude still springs when bounty flows;
That every grant sincere affection wins,
And where our wants have end, our love begins.
But they who long the paths of state have trod,
Learn from the clamours of the murmuring crowd,
Which crammed, yet craving, still their gates besiege,
It Is easier far to give, than to oblige.
This of thy conduct seems the nicest part,
The chief perfection of the statesman's art,
To give to fair assent a fairer face,
Or soften a refusal into grace.
But few there are, that can be freely kind,
Or know to fix the favors on the mind;
Hence some whenever they would oblige, offend,
And while they make the fortune, lose the friend:
Still give unthank'd; still squander, not bestow,
For great men want not what to give, but how.
The race of men that follow courts, it is true,
Think all they get, and more than all, their due;
Still ask, but never consult their own deserts,
And measure by their interest, not their parts.
From this mistake so many men we see
But ill become the thing they wish to be:
Hence discontent and fresh demands arise,
More power, more favor in the great man's eyes:
All feel a want, though none the cause suspects,
But hate their patron for their own defects.
Such none can please, but who reforms their hearts,
And when he gives them places, gives them parts.
As these o'erprize their worth, so sure the great
May sell their favors at too dear a rate.
When merit pines while clamor is preferred,
And long attachment waits among the herd;
When no distinction, where distinction's due,
Marks from the many the superior few;
When strong cabal constrains them to be just,
And makes them give at last, because they must,
What hopes that men of real worth should prize
What neither friendship gives, nor merit buys.
The man who justly over the whole presides,
His well-weigh'd choice with wise affection guides:
Knows when to stop with grace, and when advance,
Nor gives from importunity, or chance;
But thinks how little gratitude is owed,
When favors are extorted, not bestowed.
When safe on shore ourselves, we see the crowd
Surround the great, importunate and loud,
Through such a tumult it is no easy task,
To drive the man of real worth to ask;
Surrounded thus, and giddy with the show
It Is hard for great men rightly to bestow;
From hence so few are skilled in either case,
To ask with dignity, or give with grace.
Sometimes the great, seduced by love of parts,
Consult our genius, but neglect our hearts;
Pleased with the glittering sparks that genius flings,
They lift us towering on the eagle's wings:
Mark out the flights by which themselves begun.
And teach our dazzled eyes to bear the sun,
'Till we forgot the hand that made us great,
And grow to envy, not to emulate.
To emulate a generous warmth implies,
To reach the virtues that make great men rise;
But envy wears a mean malignant face,
And aims not at their virtues but their place.
Such to oblige, how vain is the pretense,
When every favor is a fresh offense,
By which superior power is still implied,
And while it helps the fortune, hurts the pride.
Slight is the hate neglect or hardships breed,
But those who hate from envy, hate indeed.
Since so perplexed the choice, whom shall we trust?
Methinks, I hear thee cry, the brave, the just;
The man by no mean fears or hopes controlled,
Who serves thee from affection, not for gold!
We love the honest, and esteem the brave,
Despise the coxcomb, but detest the knave;
No show of parts the truly wise seduce,
To think that knaves can be of real use.
The man who contradicts the public voice,
And strives to dignify a worthless choice,
Attempts a task that on the choice reflects,
And lends us light to point out new defects.
One worthless man that gains what he pretends,
Disgusts a thousand unpretending friends;
And since no art can make a counter pass,
Or add the weight of gold to mimic brass,
When princes to bad ore their image join,
They more debase the stamp than raise the coin;
Be thine that care, true merit to reward,
And gain that good; nor will the task be hard.
Souls found alike so quick by nature blend,
An honest man is more than half thy friend.
Him no mere views, no haste to rise shall sway,
Thy choice to sully, or thy trust betray.
Ambition here shall at due distance stand,
Nor is wit dangerous in an honest hand:
Besides, if failings at the bottom lie,
He views those failings with a lover's eye.
Though small his genius, let him do his best,
Our wishes and belief supply the rest:
Let others barter servile faith for gold,
His friendship is not to be bought or sold.
Fierce opposition he unmoved shall face,
Modest in favor, daring in disgrace;
To share thy adverse fate alone pretend,
In power a servant, out of power a friend.
Here pour thy favors in an ample flood,
Indulge thy boundless thirst of doing good.
Nor think that good alone to him confined;
Such to oblige is to oblige mankind.
If thus thy mighty master's steps thou trace,
The brave to cherish, and the good to grace,
Long shall thou stand from rage and faction free,
And teach us long to love the king and thee;
Or fall a victim, dangerous to the foe,
And make him tremble when he strikes the blow;
While honor, gratitude, affection join,
To deck thy close, and brighten thy decline.
Illustrious doom! the great when thus displaced,
With friendship guarded, and with virtue graced,
In aweful ruin, like Rome's senate, fall
The prey and worship of the wondering Gaul.
No doubt to genius some reward is due,
(Excluding that were satirizing you):
But yet believe thy undesigning friend,
When truth and genius for thy choice contend,
Though both have weight, when in the balance cast,
Let probity be first, and parts the last.
On these foundations if thou dare be great,
And check the growth of folly and deceit,
When party rage shall drop through length of days,
And calumny be ripened into praise,
Then future times shall to thy worth allow
That same, which envy would call flattery now.
Thus far my zeal, though for the task unfit,
Has pointed out the rocks where others split:
By that inspired, though stranger to the Nine,
And negligent of any fame but thine,
I take that friendly, but superfluous part,
That acts from nature what I teach from art.
To a LADY on a LANDSCAPE of her Drawing.
By Mr. PARRAT.
BEHOLD the magic of Theresa's hand!
A new creation blooms at her command.
Touched into life the vivid colors glow,
Catch the warm stream, and quicken as they flow.
The ravished sight the pleasing landscape fills,
Here sink the valleys, there rise the hills.
Not with more horror nods bleak Calpe's height,
Than herethe pictured rock astounds the sight.
Not Thames more devious-winding leaves his source,
Than here the wandering rivers shape their course.
Obliquely laboring runs the gurgling rill;
Still murmuring runs, or seems to murmur still.
An aged oak, with hoary moss overspread,
Here lifts aloft it is venerable head;
There overshadowing hangs a sacred wood,
And nods inverted in the neighboring flood.
Each tree as in it is native forest shoots,
And blushing bends with Autumn's golden fruits.
Thy pencil lends the rose a lovelier hue,
And gives the lily fairer to our view.
Here fruits and flowers adorn the varied year,
And paradise with all its sweets is here.
There stooping to its fall a tower appears,
With tempests shaken, and a weight of years.
The daisied meadow, and the woodland green,
In order rise, and fill the various scene.
Some parts, in light magnificently dressed,
Obtrusive enter, and stand all confessed.
Whilst others decently in shades are thrown,
And by concealing make their beauties known,
Alternate thus, and mutual is their aid,
The lights owe half their luster to the shade.
So the bright fires that light the milky way,
Lost and extinguished in the solar ray;
In the sun's absence pour a flood of light,
And borrow all their brightness from the night.
To cheat our eyes how well do thou contrive;
Each object here seems real and alive.
Not more resembling life the figures stand,
Formed by Lysippus, or by Phidias' hand.
Unnumber'd beauties in the piece unite;
Rush on the eye, and crowd upon the sight.
At once our wonder and delight you raise,
We view with pleasure, and with rapture praise.
ODE to CUPID on VALENTINE's Day.
By the Same.
COME thou rosy-dimpled boy,
Source of every heartfelt joy,
Leave the blissful bowers awhile,
Paphos and the Cyprian isle:
Visit Britain's rocky shore,
Britons too thy power adore,
Britons hardy, bold, and free,
Own thy laws, and yield to thee,
Source of every heartfelt joy,
Come thou rosy-dimpled boy.
Haste to Sylvia, haste away,
This is thine, and Hymen's day;
Bid her thy soft bondage wear,
Bid her for Love's rites prepare.
Let the nymphs with many a flower
Deck the sacred nuptial bower.
Thither lead the lovely fair,
And let Hymen too be there.
This is thine, and Hymen's day,
Haste to Sylvia, haste away.
Only while we love we live,
Love alone can pleasure give;
Pomp and power, and tinsel state,
Those false pageants of the great,
Crowns and scepters, envied things,
And the pride of Eastern kings,
Are but childish empty toys,
When compared to Love's sweet joys,
Love alone can pleasure give,
Only while we love, we live.
To the Honorable and Reverend F. C.
IN frolick's hour, ere serious thought had birth,
There was a time, my dear C -- s, when
The Muse would take me on her airy wing
And waft to views romantic; there present
Some motley vision, shade and sun: the cliff
O'erhanging, sparkling brooks, and ruins gray;
Bad me meanders trace, and catch the form
Of varying clouds, and rainbows learn to paint.
Sometimes Ambition, brushing by, would twitch
My mantle, and with winning look sublime
Allure to follow. What though steep the track,
Her mountain's top would overpay when climbed
The scaler's toil; her temple there was fine,
And lovely thence the prospects. She could tell
Where laurels grew, whence many a wreath antique;
But more advised to shun the barren twig,
(What is immortal verdure without fruit?)
And woo some thriving art: her numerous mines
Were open to the searcher's skill and pains.
Caught by the harangue, heart beat, and fluttering pulse
Sounded irregular marches to be gone --
What, pause a moment when Ambition calls?
No, the blood gallops to the distant goal,
And throbs to reach it. Let the lame sit still.
When Fortune gentle, at the hill's verge extreme,
Arrayed in decent garb, but somewhat thin,
Smiling approached, and what occasion asked,
Of climbing? She already provident
Had cater'd well, if stomach could digest
Her viands, and a palate not too nice.
Unfit she said, for perilous atrempt,
That manly limb required, and sinews tough.
She took, and laid me in a vale remote,
Amid the gloomy scene of fir and yew,
On poppy beds, where Morpheus strewn the ground:
Obscurity her curtain round me drew,
And siren Sloth a dull quietus sung.
Sithence no fairy lights, no quickening ray,
Nor stir of pulse, nor objects to entice
Abroad the spirits; but the cloistered heart
Sits squat at home, like pagod in a nitch
Obscure, or grandees with nod-watching eye,
And folded arms, in presence of the throne,
Turk, or Indostan. -- Cities, forums, courts
And prating sanhedrims, and drumming wars,
Affect no more than stories told to bed
Lethargic, which at intervals the sick
Hears and forgets, and wakes to doze again.
Instead of converse and variety,
The same trite round, the same sta le silent scene:
Such are thy comforts, blessed Solitude!
But Innocence is there, but Peace all kind,
And simple Quiet with her downy couch,
Meads lowing, tune of birds, and lapse of streams,
And Saunter, with a book, and warbling Muse,
In praise of hawthorns. -- Life's whole business this!
Is it to bask in the sun? if so, a snail
Were happy crawling on a southern wall.
Why sits Content upon a cottage-sill
At eventide, and blesses the coarse meal
In sooty corner? why sweet slumbers wait
The hard pallet? not because from haunt remote
Sequestered in a dingle's bushy lap:
It Is labor makes the peasant's sav'ry fare,
And works out his repose: for ease must ask
The leave of diligence to be enjoyed.
Oh! listen not to that enchantress Ease
With seeming smile, her palatable cup
By standing grows insipid; and beware
The bottom, for there is poison in the lees.
What health impaired, and crowds inactive maimed?
What daily martyrs to her sluggish cause!
Less strict devoir the Russ and Persian claim
Despotic; and as subjects long inured
To servile burden, grow supine and tame,
So fares it with our sovereign and her train.
What though with lure fallacions she pretend
From worldly bondage to set free, what gain
Her votaries? What avails from iron chains
Exempt, if rosy fetters bind as fast.
Bestir, and answer your creation's end.
Think we that man with vigorous power endowed,
And room to stretch, was destined to sit still?
Sluggards are Nature's rebels, slight her laws,
Nor live up to the terms on which they hold
Their vital lease. Laborious terms and hard,
But such the tenure of our earthly state!
Riches and fame are Industry's reward;
The nimble runner courses Fortune down,
And then he banquets, for she feeds the bold.
Think what you owe your country, what yourself.
If splendour charm not, yet avoid the scorn
That treads on lowly stations. Think of some
Assiduous booby mounting over your head,
And thence with saucy grandeur looking down:
Think of (Reflexion's stab!) the pitying friend
With shoulder shrug'd, and sorry. Think that Time
Has golden minutes, if discreetly seized:
And if some sad example, indolent,
To warn and scare be wanting -- think of me.
To the Reverend T -- T --, D.D.
-- FRench power, and weak allies, and war, and want --
No more of that, my friend; you touch a string
That hurts my ear. All politics apart,
Except a generous wish, a glowing prayer
For British welfare, commerce, glory, peace.
Give party to the winds: it is a word,
A phantom sound, by which the cunning great
Whistle to their dependents: a decoy
To gull the unwary, where the master stands
Encouraging his minions, his trained birds,
Fed and caressed their species to betray.
See with what hollow blandishment and art
They lead the winged captive to the snare:
Fools! that in open ether might have soared,
Free as the air they cut; sip'd purest rills,
Dined with the Thames, or bathed in crystal lakes.
We wear no badges, no dependence own:
Who truly loves thee, dearest Liberty,
A silken fetter will uneasy sit.
Heaven knows it is not Insolence that speaks!
The tribute of respect to greatness due
Not the bribed sycophant more willing pays.
Still, still as much of party be retained,
As principle requires, and sense directs:
Else our vain bark, without a rudder, floats
The scorn and pastime of each veering gale.
This gentle evening let the sun descend
Untroubled, while it paints your ambient hills
With faded luster, and a sweet farewell.
Here is our seat: that castle opposite,
Proud of it is woody brow, adorns the scene.
Dictate, O versed in books, and just of taste,
Dictate the pleasing theme of our discourse.
Shall we trace Science from her Eastern home
Chaldaean; or the banks of Nile, where Thebes,
Nursing her daughter arts, majestic stood,
And poured forth knowledge from an hundred gates?
There first the marble learned to mimic life,
The pillar'd temple rose, and pyramids,
Whose undecaying grandeur laughs at Time;
Birthplace of letters, where the sun was shown
His radiant way, and heavens were taught to roll.
There too the Muses tuned their earliest lyre
Warbling soft numbers to Serapis' ear;
'Till chased by tyrants, or a milder clime
Inviting, they removed with pilgrim harps,
And all their band of harmony to Greece.
As when a flock of linnets, if perchance
Delivered from the falcon's talon, fly
With trembling wing to cover, and renew
Their notes; tell every bush of their escape,
And thrill their merry thanks to Liberty.
The tuneful tribe, pleased with their new abode,
Polished the rude inhabitants, whence tales
Of listening woods, and rocks that danced to sound.
Hear the full chorus lifting hymns to Jove!
Linus and Orpheus catch the strain, and all
The raptured audience utter loud applause.
A song, believe me, was no trifle then:
Weighty the Muse's task, and wide her sway:
Here Is was religion, the resounding fanes
Echoed her language; polity was here is
And the world bowed to legislative verse.
As states increased, and governments were formed,
Her aid less useful, she retired to grots
And shady bowers, content to teach and please.
Under her laurel frequent bards reposed;
Voluble Pindar troll'd his rapid song,
Or Sappho breathed her spirited complaint:
Here the stage buskin, there the lyric choir,
And Homer's epic trumpet. Happy Greece,
Blessed in her offspring! Seat of eloquence,
Of arts and reason; patriot-virtue's seat!
Did the sun thither dart uncommon rays!
Did some presiding genius hover over
That animated soil with brooding wings!
The sad reverse might start a gentle tear --
Go, search in Athens for herself, enquire
Where are her orators, her sages now:
Her arsenal overturned, her walls in dust,
But far less ruined than her soul decayed.
The stone inscribed to Socrates, debased
To prop a reeling cott: Minerva's shrine
Possessed by those who never heard her name.
Upon the mount where old Musaeus sung,
Sits the grim turban'd captain, and exacts
Harsh tribute; on the spot where Plato taught
His heavenly strains sublime, a stupid Turk
Is preaching ignorance and Mahomet.
Turn next to Rome: is that the clime, the place,
Where once, as Fame reports, Augustus lived?
What magic has transformed her, shrunk her nerves?
A withered laurel, and a mouldering arch! --
Could the pure crimson tide, the noblest blood
That ever flowed, to such a puddle turn?
She ends, like her long Appian, in a marsh;
Or Jordan's river pouring his clear urn
Into the black Asphaltus' slimy lap.
Patrons of wit, and victors of mankind,
Bards, warriors, worthies (revolution strange)
Are pimps and fiddlers, mountebanks and monks.
In Tully's beehive, magazine of sweets,
The lazy drones are buzzing or asleep.
But we forgive the living for the dead;
Indebted more to Rome than we can pay.
Of a long dearth prophetic, she laid in
A feast for ages. -- O thou banquet nice,
Where the soul riots with secure excess!
What felt delight! what pleasing useful hours
Repeated owe we to her lettered sons!
We by their favor Tiber's walks enjoy,
Their temples trace, and share their noble games;
Enter the crowded theater at will,
Go to the forum, hear the consul plead,
Are present in the thundering Capitol
When Tully speaks; at softer hours attend
Harmonious Virgil to his Mantuan farm,
Or Baian, and with happy Horace talk
In myrtle groves by Teverone's cascade.
Hail, precious pages! that amuse and teach,
Exalt the genius, and improve the breast.
Ye sage historians all your stores unfold,
Reach your clear steady mirror -- in that glass
The forms of good and ill are well portray'd.
But chiefly thou, divine Philosophy,
Shed thy blessed influence; with thy train appear
Of graces mild, far be the Stoic boast,
The Cynic's snarl, and churlish pedantry.
Bright visitant, if not too high my wish,
Come in the lovely dress you wore, a guest
At Plato's table, or at Tusculum,
The Roman feasting his selected friends.
Tamer of pride! at thy serene rebuke
See crouching insolence, spleen and revenge
Before thy shining taper disappear.
Tutor of human life, auspicious guide,
Whose faithful clue unravels every Muse,
Whose conduct smooths the roughest paths; whose voice
Controuls each storm, and bids the roar be still:
O condescend to gild my darksome roof:
Let me know thee -- the Delphic oracle
Is then obeyed -- and I shall know myself.
VACATION.
By -- Esquire
HENCE sage, mysterious law,
That sit'st with rugged brow, and crabbed look
Over thy black-letter'd book,
And the night-watching student strik'st with awe;
Away with thy dull train,
Slow-paced Advice, Surmise, and squint-eyed Doubt;
Dwell with the noisy-rout
Of busy men, 'mid cities and thronged halls,
Where Clamor ceaseless bawls,
And enmity and strife thy state sustain.
But on me thy blessings pour,
Sweet Vacation. Thee, of yore,
In all her youth and beauty's prime,
Summer bore to aged Time,
As he one sunny morn beheld her
Tending a field of corn: the elder
There 'mid poppies red and blue,
Unsuspected nearer drew,
And, with softly-sliding pace
Hastening to a stolen embrace,
Filled her with thee; and joy and mirth
Hung on thy auspicious birth.
Come, sweet goddess; full of play,
Ever unconfined and gay,
Bring the leisure-hours with thee
Leading on the Graces three
Dancing; nor let aught detain
The Holidays, a smiling train.
Whose fair brows let Peace serene
Crown with olive-branches green.
Bring too Health with ruddy cheek,
Lively air, and countenance sleek,
Attended, as she is wont to be,
With all her jolly company
Of exercises, chase, and flight,
Active strength, and cunning slight,
Nimble feats, and playful bouts,
Leaps of joy, and cheerful shouts,
Tricks and pranks and sports and games
Such as youthful Fancy frames.
And, O kind goddess, add to these
Cheerful Content, and placid Ease;
Not her who fondly sits near,
Dull Indolence in elbow'd chair;
But Ease who aids the harmonious Nine,
Tuning their instruments divine,
And without whom, in lofty strain,
Phaebus' client tries in vain
To raise his feeble voice above
The crowd, and catch the ear of Jove.
And do thou, Vacation, deign
To let me pass among thy train;
So may I thy vot'ry true,
All thy flowery paths pursue,
Pleased still with thee to meet
In some friendly rural seat;
Where I gladsome often survey
Nature in her best array,
Woods and lawns and lakes between,
Fields of corn and hedges green,
Fallow grounds of tawny hue,
Distant hills, and mountains blue;
On whose ridge far off appears
A wood (the growth of many years)
Of aweful oak, or gloomy pine,
Above the horizon's level line
Rising black: such those of old
Where British druids wont to hold
Solemn assemblies, and to keep
Their rites, unfolding myst'ries deep,
Such that famed Dodona's grove,
Sacred to prophetic Jove.
Often I admire the verdant steep,
Spotted white with many a sheep,
While, in pastures rich below
Among the grazing cattle, slow
Moves the bull with heavy tread
Hanging down his lumpish head,
And the proud steed neigheth often
Shaking his wanton mane aloft.
Or, traversing the wood about,
The jingling packhorse-bells remote
I hear, amid the noontide stillness,
Sing through the air with brassy shrillness;
What time the waggon's cumbrous load
Grates along the grav'lly road:
There onward, dressed in homely guise,
Some unregarded maiden hies,
Unless by chance a trav'ling 'squire,
Of base intent and foul desire,
Stops to ensnare, with speech beguiling,
Sweet innocence and beauty smiling.
Nor fail I joyful to partake
The lively sports of country wake,
Where many a lad and many a lass
Foot it on the close-trod grass.
There nimble Marian of the green
Matchless in the jig is seen,
Allowed beyond compare by all,
The beauty of the rustic ball:
While, the tripping damsels near,
Stands a lout with waggish leer;
He, if Marian chance to show
Her taper leg and stocking blue,
Winks and nods and laughs aloud,
Among the merry-making crowd,
Utt'ring forth, in awkward jeer,
Words unmeet for virgin's ear.
Soon as evening clouds have shed
Their watery store on earth's soft bed,
And through their flowing mantles thin,
Clear azure spots of sky are seen,
I quit some oak's close-cover'd bower
To taste the boon of new-fall'n shower,
To pace the corn-field's grassy edge
Close by a fresh-blown sweet-bri'r hedge;
While at every green leaf's end
Pearly drops of rain depend,
And an earthy fragrance 'round
Rises from the moistened ground.
Sudden a sunbeam darting out,
Brightens the landscape all about,
With yellow light the grove o'erspreads,
And tips with gold the haycocks' heads;
Then, as mine eye is eastward led,
Some fair castle rears its head,
Whose height the country round commands,
Well known mark to distant lands,
There the windows glowing bright
Blaze from afar with ruddy light
Borrowed from clouds of scarlet dye,
Just as the sun has left the sky.
But if chill Eurus cut the air
With keener wing, I then repair
To park or woodland, shelter meet,
Near some noble's ancient seat,
Where long winding walks are seen
Stately oaks and elms between,
Whose arms promiscuous form above
High over-arch'd a green alcove;
While the hoarse-voic'd hungry rook
Near her stick-built nest does croak,
Waving on the topmost bough;
And the master stay below
Bellows loud with savage roar,
Stalking all his hinds before.
Thus musing, night with even pace
Steals on, o'ershad' wing nature's face;
While the bat with dusky wings
Flutters round in giddy rings,
And the buzzing chaffers come
Close by mine ear with solemn hum.
Homeward now my steps I guide
Some rising grassy bank beside,
Studded thick with sparks of light
Issuing from many a glowworm bright;
While village-cur with minute bark
Alarms the pilf'rer in the dark,
Save what light the stars convey,
Clustered in the milky way,
Or scattered numberless on high
Twinkling all over the boundless sky,
Then within doors let me meet
The viol touched by finger neat,
Or, soft symphonies among,
Wrap me in the sacred song,
Attun'd by Handel's matchless skill,
While Attention mute and still
Fixes all my soul to hear
The voice harmonious, sweet and clear.
Nor let smooth-tongu'd Converse fail,
With many a well-devised tale.
And stories linked, to twist a chain
That may awhile old Time detain,
And make him rest upon his scythe
Pleased to see the hours so blithe:
While, with sweet attractive grace,
The beauteous house-wife of the place
Wins the heart of every guest
By courteous deeds, and all contest
Which shall readiest homage show
To such sovereign sweetness due.
These delights, Vacation, give
And I with thoe will choose to live.
To a LADY very handsome, but too fond of DRESS.
By the Same.
PRITHEE why so fantastic and vain!
What charms can the toilet supply?
Why so studious, admirers to gain?
Need beauty lay traps for the eye?
Because that thy breast is so fair,
Must thy tucker be still setting right?
And can thou not laughing forbear,
Because that thy teeth are so white?
Shall sovereign beauty descend
To act so ignoble a part,
Whole hours at the looking-glass spend,
A slave to the dictates of art?
And cannot thy heart be at rest
Unless thou excellest each fair
In trinkets and trumpery dressed?
Is not that a superfluous care?
Vain, idle attempt! to pretend
The lilly with whiteness to deck!
Does the rich solitaire recommend
The delicate turn of thy neck?
The glossy bright hue of thy hair
Can powder or jewels adorn?
Can perfumes or vermilions compare
With the breath or the blush of the morn?
When, embarrass'd with baubles and toys,
You Are set out so enormously fine,
Over-doing thy purpose destroys,
And to please thou have too much design:
Little know thou, how beauty beguiles;
How alluring the innocent eye;
What sweetness in natural smiles,
And what charms in simplicity lie.
Thee Nature with beauty has clad,
With genuine ornaments dressed;
Nor can Art an embellishment add
To set off what already is best:
Be it thine, self-accomplish'd to reign;
Bid the toilet be far set apart,
And dismiss with an honest disdain
That impertinent Abigail, Art.
ANACREON. ODE III.
Translated by the Same.
IN the dead of the night, when with labor oppressed
All mortals enjoy the calm blessing of rest,
Cupid knocked at my door, I awoke with the noise,
And "who is it (I called) that my sleep thus destroys?
"You need not be frightened, he answered mild,
"Let me in; I Am a little unfortunate child;
"'It Is a dark rainy night; and I Am wet to the skin;
"And my way I have lost; and do, pray, let me in."
I was moved with compassion; and striking a light,
I opened the door; when a boy stood in sight,
Who had wings on his shoulders: the rain from him dripp'd,
With a bow and with arrows too he was equipped.
I stirred up my sire, and close by its side
I set him down by me: with napkins I dried,
I chafed him all over, kept out the cold air,
And I wrung with my hands the wet out of his hair.
He from wet and from cold was no sooner at ease,
But taking his bow up, he said, "if you please
"We will try it; I would by experiment know
"If the wet has not damaged the string of my bow.
Forthwith from his quiver an arrow he drew,
To the string he applied it, and twang went the yew;
The arrow was gone; in my bosom it centered:
No sting of a hornet more sharp ever entered.
Away skipp'd the urchin, as brisk as a be,
And laughing, "I wish you much joy friend, quoth he:
"My bow is undamag'd, for true went the dart;
"But you will have trouble enough with your heart."
An Imitation of HORACE, Ode II. Book III. Angustam amice, etc.
By Mr. TITLEY, to Dr. BENTLEY.
HE that would great in science grow,
By whom bright Virtue is adored,
At first must be content to know
An humble roof, an homely board.
With want, and rigid college laws
Let him inured betimes, comply;
Firm to religion's sacred cause,
The learned combat let him try;
Let him her envied praises tell,
And all his eloquence disclose
The fierce endeavors to repel,
And still the tumult of her foes.
Him early formed, and seasoned young
Subtle opposers soon will fear,
And tremble at his artful tongue,
Like Parthians at the Roman spear.
Grim death the inevitable lot
Which fools and cowards strive to fly,
Is with a noble pleasure sought
By him who dares for truth to die,
With purest luster of her own
Exalted Virtue ever shines,
Nor as the vulgar smile or frown
Advances now and now declines.
A glorious and immortal prize,
She on her hardy son bestows,
She shows him heaven, and bids him rise,
Though pain, and toil, and death oppose:
With laboring slight he wings the obstructed way,
Leaving both common souls and common clay.
A Reply to a Copy of Verses made in Imitation of Ode II. Book III. of HORACE,
Angustam amice pauperiem pati, etc.
And sent by Mr. TITLEY to Dr. BENTLEY.
By Dr. BENTLEY.
WHO strives to mount Parnassus' hill,
And thence poetic laurels bring,
Must first acquire due force, and skill,
Must fly with swans, or eagle's wing.
Who nature's treasures would explore,
Her mysteries and arcana know,
Must high, as lofty Newton soar,
Must stoop, as delving Woodward low.
Who studies ancient laws and rites,
Tongues, arts, and arms, and history,
Must drudge like Seldom days and nights,
And in the endless labor die.
Who travels in religious jars
Truth mixed with error, shade with rays,
Like Whiston wanting pyx or stars,
In ocean wide or sinks or strays.
But grant our hero's hope long toil
And comprehensive genius crown,
All sciences, all arts his spoil,
Yet what reward, or what renown?
Envy, innate in vulgar souls,
Envy steps in and stops his rise,
Envy, with poisoned tarnish fouls
His luster, and his worth decries;
He lives inglorious, or in want,
To college and old books confined,
Instead of learned he is called pedant,
Dunces advanced, he is left behind:
Yet left content, a genuine stoic he,
Great without patron, rich without South Sea.
Inscription on a GROTTO of Shells at CRUX-EASTON, the Work of Nine young
Ladies,
By Mr. POPE.
HERE shunning idleness at once and praise,
This radiant pile nine rural sisters raise;
The glittering emblem of each spotless dame,
Clear as her soul, and shining as her frame;
Beauty which Nature only can impart,
And such a polish as disgraces Art;
But Fate disposed them in this humble sort,
And hid in deserts what would charm a court.
VERSES occasioned by seeing a GROTTO built by Nine Sisters.
SO much this building entertains my sight,
Naught but the builders can give more delight,
In them the masterpiece of Nature's shown,
In this I see Art's masterpiece in stone.
O! Nature, Nature, thou have conquered Art;
She charms the sight alone, but you the heart.
N. H.

An EXCUSE for INCONSTANCY, 1737.
By the Rev. Dr. LISLE.
WHEN Phoebus's beams are withdrawn from our sight,
We admire his fair sister, the regent of night;
Though languid her beauty, though feeble her ray,
Yet still she is akin to the God of the day.
When Susan, like Cynthia, has finished her reign,
Then Charlotte, like Phoebus, shall shine out again.
As Catholic bigots fall humble before
The pictures of those whom in heart they adore,
Which though known to be nothing but canvass and paint,
Yet are said to enliven their zeal to the saint;
So to Susan I bow, charming Charlotte, for she
Has just beauty enough to remind me of thee.
Inconstant and faithless in love's the pretense
On which you arraign me: pray hear my defense.
Such censures as these to my credit redound;
I acknowledge, and thank a good appetite for it,
When ven'son and claret are not to be found,
I can make a good meal upon mutton and port.
Though The seat of the honorable R. H -- t.
Highclear's so fine that a prince would not scorn it,
Though nature and taste have combined to adorn it,
Yet the artist that owns it would think it severe,
Were a law made to keep him there all round the year.
How enraged would the rector of Wotton, the author's parish in the isle of
Wight.
Boscoville look,
If the king should enjoin him to read but one book;
And how would his audience their fortune bemoan,
The gave 'em no sermons but what were his own.
It Is variety only makes appetite last,
And by changing our dishes we quicken our taste.
To VENUS. A RANT, 1732.
Set to Music by Dr. HAYES.
By the Same.
RECITATIVE.
O Goddess most revered above,
Bright parent of almighty Love,
Whose power the immortal Gods confess,
Hear and approve my fond address:
In melting softness I thy doves outvie,
Then teach me like thy swans to sing and fly;
So I thy vot'ry will for ever be;
My song, my life I Will consecrate to thee.
AIR.
Give me numbers strong and sweet,
Glowing language, pointed wit;
Words that might a Vestal move,
And melt a frozen heart to love.
Bid, bid thy blind boy
All his vigor employ;
On his wings would I soar up to fame:
It Is but just, if he scorch
My breast with his torch,
In my wit too he kindle a flame.
RECITATIVE.
Trophies to Chastity let others raise,
In notes as cold as the dull thing they praise,
To rage like mine more sprightly themes belong;
Gay youth inspires, and beauty claims my song;
Me all the little Loves and Graces own;
For I was born to worship them alone.
AIR.
Tell not me the joys that wait
On him that is rich, on him that is great:
Wealth and wisdom I despise:
Cares surround the rich and wise.
No, no, -- let love, let life be mine;
Bring me women, bring me wine:
Speed the dancing hours away,
And mind not what the grave ones say;
Speed, and gild 'em as they fly
With love and freedom, wit and joy;
Business, title, pomp, and state,
Give 'em to the fools I hate.
The POWER of MUSIC. A SONG.
Imitated from the SPANISH.
By the Same.
Set to MUSIC by Dr. HAYES.
I.
WHEN Orpheus went down to the regions below,
Which men are forbidden to see,
He tuned up his lyre, as old histories show,
To set his Euridice free.
II.
All hell was astonished a person so wise
Should rashly endanger his life,
And venture so far, -- but how vast their surprise?
When they heard that he came for his wife.
III.
To find out a punishment due to his fault,
Old Pluto had puzzled his brain,
But hell had not torments sufficient, he thought,
-- So he gave him his wife back again.
IV.
But pity succeeding found place in his heart,
And pleased with his playing so well,
He took her again in reward of his art;
Such merit had music in hell!
LETTER from SMYRNA to his Sisters at CRUX-EASTON, 1733.
By the Same.
THE hero who to Smyrna bay
From Easton, Hants, pursued his way,
Who traversed seas, and hills and vales,
To fright his sisters with his tales,
Sing heavenly Muse; for what befell
Thou saw, and only thou can tell.
Say first (but one thing I premise,
I Will not be chid for telling lies;
Besides, my grannum used to say
I always had a knack that way,
So, if the love of truth be in ye,
Read Strabo, Diodorus, Pliny --
But like some authors I could name,
Wrapped in myself I lose my theme.)
Say first, those very rocks we spied,
But left 'em on the starboard side,
Where Juno urged the Trojan's sat.
Shield us, ye Gods, from female hate!
Then how precarious was the doom
Of Caesar's line, and mighty Rome,
Snatched from the very jaws of ruin,
And saved, poor Dido.
Die, for thy undoing.
What saw we on Sicilian ground?
(A soil in ancient verse renowned)
The self-same spot, or Virgil ly'd,
On which the good Anchises died;
The fields where Ceres' daughter sported,
And where the pretty Cyclops courted.
The nymph hard-hearted as the rocks,
Refused the monster, scorned his flocks,
And took a shepherd in his stead,
With naught but love and worth to plead;
An instance of a generous mind
That does much honor to your kind,
But in an age of fables grew,
So possibly it may not be true.
While on the summit Aetna glows,
His shivering sides are chilled with snows.
Beneath, the painted landscape charms;
Here infant Spring in Winter's arms
Wantons secure; in youthful pride
Stands Summer laughing by her side;
Even Autumn's yellow robes appear,
And one gay scene discloses all the year.
Hence to rude Cerigo we came,
Known once by Cytherea's name;
When Ocean first the goodess bore,
She rose on this distinguished shore.
Here first the happy Paris stopped,
When Helen from her lord elop'd.
With pleased reflection I surveyed
Each secret grott, each conscious shade;
Envied his choice, approved his flame,
And fondly wished my lot the same.
O were the cause revived again!
For charming Queensbury lived not then,
The radiant fruit, had she been there,
Would scarce have fallen to Venus' share;
Saturnia's self had waved her claim,
And modest Pallas blushed for shame;
All had been right: the Phyrgian swain
Had sighed for her, but sighed in vain;
The fair Oenone joy'd to find,
The pains she felt repaid in kind;
No rape revenged, no room for strife,
Atrides might have kept his wife,
Old Troy in peace and plenty smiled --
But the Iliad.
best poem had been spoiled.
How did my heart with joy run over,
When to the famed Cecropian shore,
Wafted by gentle breezes, we
Came gliding through the smooth still sea!
While backward roved my busy thought
On deeds in distant ages wrought;
On tyrants gloriously withstood;
On seas distained with Persian blood;
On trophies raised over hills of slain
In Marathon's unrivaled plain.
Then, as around I cast my eye,
And viewed the pleasing prospect nigh,
The land for arms and arts renowned,
Where wit was honored, poets crowned;
Whose manners and whose rules refined
Our souls, and civilized mankind;
Or (yet a loftier pitch to raise
Our wonder, and complete its praise)
The land that Socrates.
Plato's master bore --
How did my heart with joy run over!
Now coasting on the eastern side,
We peeped where Peneus rolls his tide:
Where Arethusa came to appease
The shepherd that had lost his bees,
And led him to Cyrene's grott;
It Is a long tale, and matters not.
Dryden will tell you all that past;
See, Virgil's Georgics, book the last.
I speak on it, but to let you know
This grott still stands in statu quo;
Of which if any doubts remain,
I Have proof, as follows, clear and plain.
Here, sisters, we such honors met!
Such honors I shall never forget.
The Goddess (no uncommon case)
Proud, I suppose, to show her place,
Or piqu'd perhaps at your renown,
Sent Boreas to invite us down;
And he so pressed it, that we used
Some pains to get ourselves excused.
My brother shipmates, all in haste
Declared, that shells were not their taste;
And I had At Crux-Easton.
somewhere seen, you know,
A siner grott than she could show.
Hence let the Muse to Delos roam,
Or Nio, famed for Homer's tomb;
To Naxos, known in ancient time,
For Bacchus' love, for Theseus' crime.
Can she the Lesbian vine forget
Whence Horace reinforced his wit?
Where the famed harp Arion strung
Nor played more sweet than Sapho sung?
Could the old bards revive again,
How would they mourn the inverted scene!
Scarce with the barren waste acquainted,
They once so beautifully painted.
And here, 'twixt friends, I needs must say,
But let it go no farther, pray,
These sung-up, cried up countries are
Displeasing, rugged, black, and bare;
And all l've yet beheld or known
Serve only to endear my own.
The matters I shall next disclose,
It Is likely may be wrapped in prose;
But verse methought would suit these better,
Besides, it lengthens out my letter.
Read then, dear girls, with kind regard,
What comes so far, what comes so hard;
And to our mother too make known,
How traveling has improved her son.
Let not malicious critics join
Pope's homespun rhimes in rank with mine,
Formed on that very spot of earth,
Where Homer's self received his birth;
Add, as I said, to enhance their worth,
The pains they cost in bringing forth;
While his, as all mankind agrees,
Though wrote with care, are wrote with ease.
Part of a LETTER to my Sisters at CRUX-EASTON, wrote from CAIRO in EGYPT,
AUGUST 1734.
By the Same.
WHILE you, my dear girls, in your paradise stray,
Diverting with innocent freedom the day,
I wander alone in a barbarous land,
Half baked by the sun, half blind by the sand.
Then your wood too and grotto so swim in my sight,
They give me no respite by day nor by night;
No sooner asleep but I Am dreaming of you;
I am just waked from one, -- would to God it were true.
Methought I was now a fine gentleman grown,
And had got, Lord knows how, an estate of my own;
Good-bye to plain Tom, I was raised a peg higher;
Some called me his worship, and others the squire.
'Twas a place, I remember, exactly like Easton,
A scene for an emperor's fancy to feast on.
There I built a fine house with great cost and great care,
(Your la'ships have formed many such in the air)
Not of stucco, nor brick, but as good Portland stone,
As Kent would desire to be working upon.
The apartments not small, nor monstrously great,
But chiefly for use, and a little for state;
So begilt, and becarv'd, and with ornaments graced,
That every one said, I Would an excellent taste.
Here I lived like a king, never hoarded my pelf,
Kept a coach for my sisters, a nag for myself,
With something that is good when our Highclear friends come,
And, spite of 'squire Herbert, a fire in each room.
A canal made for profit as well as for pleasure,
That Is about, let me see, two acres in measure;
Both the eye to delight, and the table to crown,
With a jack, or a perch, when my uncles come down.
An exceeding great wood, that is been set a great while,
In length near a league, and in breadth near a mile.
There every dear girl her bright genius displays,
In a thousand fine whimsies a thousand fine ways.
O how charming the walks to my fancy appear!
What a number of temples and grottos are here!
My soul was transported to such an extreme,
That I leaped up in raptures, -- when lo! 'twas a dream;
Then vexing I chid the impertinent day
For driving so sweet a delusion away.
Thus specter arise, as by nurse-maids we are told,
And hie to the place where they buried their gold:
There hovering around until morning remain;
Then sadly return to their torments again.
LETTER from MARSEILLES to my Sisters at CRUX-EASTON, MAY 1735.
By the Same.
SCENE, the study at Crux-Easton. Molly and Fanny are sitting at work; enter to
them Harriot in a passion. HARRIOT. LORD! sister, here is the butcher come,
And not one word from brother Tom;
The punctual spark, that made his boast
He Would write by every other post!
That ever I was so absurd
To take a man upon his word!
Quoth Frances, Child, I wonder much
You could expect him to keep touch;
It Is so, my dear, with all mankind;
When out of sight you're out of mind.
Think you he would to his sisters write?
Was ever girl so unpolite!
Some fair Italian stands possessed,
And reigns sole mistress in his breast;
To her he dedicates his time,
And fawns in prose, or sighs in rhyme;
She Will give him tokens of her love,
Perhaps not easy to remove;
Such as will make him large amends
For loss of sisters, and of friends.

Cries Harriot, when he comes to France,
I hope in God he will learn to dance,
And leave his awkward habits there,
I Am sure he has enough to spare.
O could he leave his faults, says Fanny,
And bring the good alone, if any,
Poor brother Tom, he would grow so light,
The wind might rob us of him quite!
Of habits he may well get clear;
Ill humors are the faults I fear,
For in my life I never saw yet
A creature half so passionate.
Good heavens! how did he rave and tear,
On my not going you know where;
I scarcely yet have got my dread off:
I thought he would bite my sister's head off.
'Tween him and Jenny what a clatter
About a fig, a mighty matter!
I could recount a thousand more,
But scandal's what I most abhor.
Molly, who long had patient sat,
And heard in silence all their chat,
Observing how they spoke with rancour,
Took up my cause, for which I thank her.
What eloquence was then displayed,
The charming things that Molly said,
Perhaps it suits not me to tell;
But faith! she spoke extremely well.
She first, with much ado, put on
A prudish face, then thus begun.
Heyday! quoth she, you let your tongue
Run on most strangely, right or wrong;
It Is what I never can connive at;
Besides, consider whom you drive at,
A person of established credit,
Nobody better, though I said it,
In all that is good, so tried and known,
Why, girls, he is quite a proverb grown,
His worth no mortal dares dispute:
Then he is your brother too to boot.
At this she made a moment's pause,
Then with a sigh resumed the cause.
Alas! my dears, you little know
A sailor's toil, a trav'ler's woe;
Perhaps this very hour he strays
A lonely wretch through desert ways;
Or shipwrecked on a foreign strand,
He falls beneath some ruffian's hand;
Or on the naked rock he lies,
And pinched by famine wastes and dies:
Can you this hated brother see
Floating, the sport of wind and sea?
Can you his feeble accents hear,
Though but in thought, nor drop a tear?
He faintly strives, his hopes are fled,
The billows booming over his head;
He mounts upon the waves again,
He calls on us, but calls in vain;
To death preserves his friendship true,
And mutters out a kind adieu.
See, now he rises to our sight,
Now sinks in everlasting night.
Here Fanny's color rose and fell,
And Harriot's throat began to swell;
One sidled to the window quite,
Pretending some unusual sight,
The other left the room outright;
While Molly laughed, her ends obtained,
To think how artfully she feigned.
The HISTORY of PORSENNA, King of RUSSIA.
IN TWO BOOKS.
By the Same.
Arva, beata
Petamus arva, divites et insulas,
HOR. Epod. 16.
BOOK I.
IN Russia's frozen clime some ages since
There dwelt, historians say, a worthy prince,
Who to his people's good consigned his care,
And fixed the basis of his empire there;
Enlarged their trade, the liberal arts improved,
Made nations happy, and himself beloved;
To all the neighboring states a terror grown,
The dear delight, and glory of his own.
Not like those kings who vainly seek renown
From countries ruined, and from battles won;
Those mighty Nimrods, who mean laws despise,
Call murder but a princely exercise,
And if one bloodless sun should steal away,
Cry out with Titus, they have lost a day;
Who, to be more than men, themselves debase
Beneath the brute, their Maker's form deface,
Raising their titles by their God's disgrace.
Like fame to bold Erostratus we give,
Who scorned by less than sacrilege to live;
On holy ruins raised a lasting name,
And in the temples's fire diffused his shame.
Far different praises, and a brighter fame,
The virtues of the young Porsenna claim;
For by that name the Russian king was known,
And sure a nobler never adorned the throne.
In war he knew the deathful sword to wield,
And sought the thickest dangers of the field,
A bold commander, but, the storm o'erblown,
He seemed as he were made for peace alone;
Then was the golden age again restored,
Nor less his justice honored than his sword.
All needless pomp, and outward grandeur spared,
The deeds that graced him were his only guard;
No private views beneath a borrowed name;
His and the public interest were the same.
In wealth and pleasure let the subject live,
But virtue is the king's prerogative;
Porsenna there without a rival stood,
And would maintain his right of doing good.
Nor did his person less attraction wear,
Such majesty and sweetness mingled there;
Heaven with uncommon art the clay refined,
A proper mansion for so fair a mind;
Each look, each action bore peculiar grace,
And love itself was painted on his face.
In peaceful time he suffered not his mind
To rust in sloth, though much to peace inclined;
Nor wanton in the lap of pleasure lay,
And lost to glory loiter'd life away;
But active rising ere the prime of day,
Through woods and lonely deserts loved to stray;
With hounds and horns to wake the furious bear,
Or rouse the tawny lion from his laire;
To rid the forest of the savage brood,
And whet his courage for his country's good.
One day, as he pursued the dangerous sport,
Attended by the nobles of his court,
It chanced a beast of more than common speed
Sprang from the brake, and through the desert fled.
The ardent prince impetuous as the wind
Rushed on, and left his lagging train behind.
Fired with the chase, and full of youthful blood,
Over plains, and vales, and woodland wilds he rode,
Urging his courser's speed, nor thought the day
How wasted, nor how intricate the way;
Nor, till the night in dusky clouds came on,
Restrained his pace, or found himself alone.
Missing his train, he strove to measure back
The road he came, but could not find the track;
Still turning to the place he left before,
And only laboring to be lost the more.
The bugle horn, which over his shoulders hung,
So loud he winded, that the forest rung;
In vain, no voice but echo from the ground,
And vocal woods, made mock'ry of the sound.
And now the gathering clouds began to spread
Over the dun face of night a deeper shade;
And the hoarse thunder growling from afar,
With herald voice proclaimed the approaching war;
Silence awhile ensued, -- then by degrees
A hollow wind came mutt'ring through the trees.
Sudden the full fraught sky discharged its store,
Of rain and rattling hail a mingled shower;
The active lightning ran along the ground;
The fiery bolts by fits were hurled around,
And the wide forests trembled at the sound.
Amazement seized the prince; -- where could he fly?
No guide to lead, no friendly cottage nigh.
Pensive and unresolved awhile he stood,
Beneath the scanty covert of the wood;
But drove from thence soon sallied forth again,
As chance directed, on the dreary plain;
Constrained his melancholy way to take
Through many a loathsome bog, and thorny brake,
Caught in the thicket, floundring in the lake.
Wet with the storm, and wearied with the way,
By hunger pinched, himself to beasts a prey;
Nor wine to cheer his heart, nor fire to burn,
Nor place to rest, nor prospect to return.
Drooping and spiritless, at life's despair
He bade it pass, not worth his farther care;
When suddenly he spied a distant light,
That faintly twinkled through the gloom of night,
And his heart leaped for joy, and blessed the welcome sight.
Oft-times he doubted, it appeared so far,
And hung so high, 'twas nothing but a star,
Or kindled vapor wandering through the sky,
But still pressed on his steed, still kept it in his eye;
Till, much fatigue, aad many dangers past,
At a huge mountain he arrived at last.
There lighting from his horse, on hands and knees
Grop'd out the darksome road, by slow degrees,
Crawling or clamb'ring over the rugged way;
The thunder rowls above, the flames around him play,
Joyful at length he gained the steepy height,
And found the rift whence sprang the friendly light,
And here he stopped to rest his wearied feet,
And weigh the perils he had still to meet;
Unsheathed his trusty sword, and dealt his eyes
With caution round him to prevent surprise,
Then summoned all the forces of his mind,
And entering boldy cast his fears behind;
Resolved to push his way, whatever withstood,
Or perish bravely as a monarch should.
While he the wonders of the place surveyed,
And through the various cells at random strayed,
In a dark corner of the cave he viewed
Somewhat, that in the shape of woman stood;
But more deformed than dreams can represent
The midnight hag, or poet's fancy paint
The Lapland witch, when she her broom bestrides,
And scatters storms and tempests as she rides.
She looked as nature made her to disgrace
Her kind, and cast a blot on all the race;
Her shrivel'd skin with yellow spots besmeared
Like moldy records seemed; her eyes were blear'd;
Her feeble limbs with age and palsy shook;
Bent was her body, haggard was her look.
From the dark nook outcrept the filthy crone,
And propp'd upon her crutch came tottering on.
The prince in civil guise approached the dame,
Told her his piteous case, and whence he came,
And till Aurora should the shades expel,
Implored a lodging in her friendly cell.
Mortal, whoever thou art, the fiend began,
And as she spoke a deadly horror ran
Through all his frame; his cheeks the blood forsook,
Chatter'd his teeth, his knees together struck.
Whoever thou art, that with presumption rude
Dare on our sacred privacy intrude,
And without license in our court appear,
Know, you are the first that ever entered here.
But since thou plead'st excuse, you are hither brought
More by thy fortune than thy own default,
Thy crime, though great, an easy pardon finds,
For mercy ever dwells in royal minds;
And would you learn from whose indulgent hand
You live, and in whose aweful presence stand,
Know farther, through you wide extended plains
Great Eolus the king of tempests reigns,
And in this lofty palace makes abode,
Well suited to his state, and worthy of the God.
The various elements his empire own,
And pay their humble homage at his throne;
And hither all the storms and clouds resort,
Proud to increase the splendour of his court.
His queen am I, from whom the beauteous race
Of winds arose, sweet fruit of our embrace!
She scarce had ended, when, with wild uproar,
And horrid din, her sons impetuous pour
Around the cave; came rushing in amain
Lybs, Eurus, Boreas, all the boisterous train;
And close behind them on a whirlwind rode
In clouded majesty the blustering God.
Their locks a thousand ways were blown about;
Their cheeks like full-blown bladders strutted out;
Their boasting talk was of the feats the had done,
Of trees uprooted, and of towns overthrown;
And when they kindly turned them to accost
The prince, they almost pierced him with their frost.
The gaping hag in fixed attention stood,
And at the close of every tale cried -- good,
Blessing with outstretch'd arms each darling son,
In due proportion to the mischief done.
And where, said she, does little Zephyr stray?
Know ye, my sons, your brother's rout today?
In what bold deeds does he his hours employ?
Grant heaven no evil has befallen my boy!
Never was he known to linger thus before.
Scarce had she spoke, when at the cavern door
Came lightly tripping in a form more fair
Than the young poet's fond ideas are,
When fired with love, he tries his utmost art
To paint the beauteous tyrant of his heart.
A satin vest his slender shape confined,
Embroidered over with flowers of every kind,
Flora's own work, when first the goddess strove
To win the little wanderer to her love.
Of burnished silver were his sandals made,
Silver his buskins, and with gems o'erlaid;
A saffron-colour'd robe behind him flowed,
And added grace and grandeur as he trod.
His wings than lillies whiter to behold,
Sprinkled with azure spots, and streaked with gold;
So thin their form, and of so light a kind,
That they for ever danced, and fluttered in the wind.
Around his temples with becoming air,
In wanton ringlets curled his auburn hair,
And over his shoulders negligently spread;
A wreath of fragrant roses crowned his head.
Such his attire, but O! no pen can trace,
No words can show the beauties of his face;
So kind! so winning! so divinely fair!
Eternal youth and pleasure flourish there;
There all the little loves and graces meet,
And every thing that is soft, and every thing that is sweet.
Thou vagrant, cried the dame in angry tone,
Where could thou loiter thus so long alone?
Little thou car'st what anxious thoughts molest,
What pangs are laboring in a mother's breast.
Well do ye show your duty by your haste,
For thou of all my sons art always last:
A child less fondled would have fled more fast.
Sure it is a curse on mothers, doomed to mourn,
Where best they love, the least and worst return.
My dear mamma, the gentle youth replied,
And made a low obeisance, cease to chide,
Nor wound me with your words, for well you know,
Your Zephyr bears a part in all your woe;
How great must be his sorrow then to learn
That he himself's the cause of your concern!
Nor had I loiter'd thus had I been free,
But the fair princess of Felicity
Entreated me to make some short delay,
And asked by her who could refuse to stay?
Surrounded by the damsels of her court
She sought the shady grove, her loved resort;
Fresh rose the grass, the flowers were mixed between,
Like rich embroid'ry on a ground of green,
And in the midst, protected by the shade,
A crystal stream in wild meanders played;
While in its banks, the trembling leaves among,
A thousand little birds in concert sung,
Close by a mount with fragrant shrubs o'ergrown,
On a cool mossy couch she laid her down;
Her air, her posture, all conspired to please;
Her head upon her snowy arm at ease.
Reclined a studied carelessness expressed;
Loose lay her robe, and naked heaved her breast.
Eager I flew to that delightful place,
And poured a shower of kisses on her face;
Now hovered over her neck, her breast, her arms,
Like bees over flowers, and tasted all their charms;
And then her lips, and then her cheeks I tried,
And fanned, and wantoned round on every side.
O Zephyr, cried the fair, thou charming boy,
Thy presence only can create me joy;
To me thou art beyond expression dear,
Nor can I quit the place while thou art here.
Excuse my weakness, madam, when I swear
Such gentle words joined with so soft an air,
Pronounced so sweetly from a mouth so fair,
Quite ravished all my sense, nor did I know
How long I staid, or when, or where to go.
Mean while the damsels debonnair and gay,
Prattled around, and laughed the time away:
These in soft notes addressed the ravished ear,
And warbled out so sweet, 'twas heaven to hear;
And those in rings, beneath the greenwood shade,
Danced to the melody their fellows made,
Some studious of themselves, employed their care
In weaving flowery wreaths to deck their hair;
While others to some favorite plant conveyed
Refreshing showers, and cheered its drooping head.
A joy so general spread through all the place,
Such satisfaction dwelt on every face,
The nymphs so kind, so lovely looked the queen,
That never eye beheld a sweeter scene.
Porsenna, like a statue fixed appeared,
And wrapped in silent wonder gazed and heard;
Much he admired the speech, the speaker more,
And dwelt on every word, and grieved to find it over.
O gentle youth, he cried, proceed to tell,
In what fair country does this princess dwell;
What regions unexplor'd, what hidden coast
Can so much goodness, so much beauty boast?
To whom the winged god with gracious look,
Numberless sweets diffusing while he spoke,
Thus answered kind -- These happy gardens lie
Far hence removed, beneath a milder sky;
Their name -- The kingdom of Felicity.
Sweet scenes of endless bliss, enchanted ground,
A soil for ever sought, but seldom found;
Though in the search all human kind in vain
Weary their wits, and waste their lives in pain;
In different parties, different paths they tread,
As reason guides them, or as follies lead;
These wrangling for the place they never shall see,
Debating those, if such a place there be;
But not the wisest, nor the best can say
Where lies the point, or mark the certain way.
Some few, by Fortune favored for her sport,
Have sailed in sight of this delightful port;
In thought already seized the blessed abodes,
And in their fond delirium ranked with gods.
Fruitless attempt! all avenues are kept
By dreadful foes, sentry that never slept.
Here fell Detraction darts her poisonous breath
Fraught with a thousand stings, and scatters death;
Sharp-sighted Envy there maintains her post,
And shakes her flaming brand, and stalks around the coast.
These on the helpless bark their fury pour,
Plunge in the waves, or dash against the shore;
Teach wretched mortals they were doomed to mourn,
And never must rest but in the silent urn.
But say, young monarch, for what name you bear
Your mien, your dress, your person, all declare;
And though I seldom fan the frozen north,
Yet I have heard of brave Porsenna's worth;
My brother Boreas through the world has flown,
Swelling his breath to spread forth your renown;
Say, would you choose to visit this retreat,
And view the world where all these wonders meet?
Wish you some friend over that tempestuous sea
To bear you safe! behold that friend in me.
My active wings shall all their force employ,
And nimbly waft you to the realms of joy;
As once to gratify the god of Love,
I bore fair Psyche to the Cyprian grove;
Or as Jove's bird descending from an high,
Snatched the young Trojan trembling to the sky.
There perfect bliss thou may for ever share,
'Scap'd from the busy world, and all its care;
There in the lovely princess shall thou find
A mistress ever blooming, ever kind.
All ecstacy on air Porsenna trod,
And to his bosom strained the little god;
With grateful sentiments his heart o'erflow'd,
And in the warmest words millions of thanks bestowed.
When Eolus in surly humor broke
Their strict embrace, and thus abruptly spoke.
Enough of compliment; I hate the sport
Of meanless words; this is no human court;
Where plain and honest are discarded quite,
For the more modish title of polite;
Where in soft speeches hypocrites impart
The venomed ills that lurk beneath the heart;
In friendship's holy guise their guilt improve,
And kindly kill with specious show of love.
For us, -- my subjects are not used to wait,
And waste their hours to hear a mortal prate;
They must abroad before the rising sun,
And hie 'em to the seas: there is mischief to be done.
Excuse my plainness, Sir, but business stands,
And we have storms and shipwrecks on our hands.
He ended frowning, and the noisy rout,
Each to his several cell went puffing out.
But Zephyr, far more courteous than the rest,
To his own bower conveyed the royal guest;
There on a bed of roses neatly laid,
Beneath the fragrance of a myrtle shade,
His limbs to needful rest the prince applied,
His sweet companion slumbering by his side.
BOOK II.
NO sooner in her silver chariot rose
The ruddy morn, than sated with repose
The prince addressed his host; the God awoke,
And leaping from his couch, thus kindly spoke.
This early call, my lord, that chides my stay,
Requires my thanks, and I with joy obey.
Like you I long to reach the blissful coast,
Hate the slow night, and mourn the moments lost.
The bright Rosinda, loveliest of the fair
That crowd the princess' court, demands my care;
Even now with fears and jealousies o'erborn
Upbraids, and calls me cruel and forsworn.
What sweet rewards on all my toils attend,
Serving at once my mistress and my friend;
Just to my love and to my duty too,
Well paid in her, well pleased in pleasing you.
This said, he led him to the cavern gate,
And clasped him in his arms, and poised his weight;
Then ballancing his body here and there,
Stretched forth his agile wings, and launched in air;
Swift as the fiery meteor from on high
Shoots to its goal, and gleams athwart the sky.
Here with quick fan his laboring pinions play;
There glide at ease along the liquid way;
Now lightly skim the plain with even flight;
Now proudly soar above the mountain's height.
Spiteful Detraction, whose envenomed hate
Sports with the sufferings of the good and great,
Spares not our prince, but with opprobrious sneer
Arraigns him of the heinous sin of fear;
That he, so tried in arms, whose very name
Infused a secret panic where it came,
Even he, as high above the clouds he flew,
And spied the mountains lessening to the view,
Naught round him but the wide expanded air,
Helpless, abandoned to a stripling's care,
Struck with the rapid whirl, and dreadful height,
Confessed some faint alarm, some little fright.
The friendly God, who instantly divined
The terrors that possessed his fellow's mind,
To calm his troubled thoughts, and cheat the way,
Described the nations that beneath them lay,
The name, the climate, and the soil's increase,
Their arms in war, their government in peace;
Showed their domestic arts, their foreign trade,
What interest they pursued, what leagues they made.
The sweet discourse so charmed Porsenna's ear,
That lost in joy he had no time for fear.
From Scandinavia's cold inclement waste
Over wide Germania's various realms they past,
And now on Albion's fields suspend their toil,
And hover for awhile, and bless the soil.
Over the gay scene the prince delighted hung,
And gazed in rapture, and forgot his tongue;
Till bursting forth at length. Behold, cried he,
The promised isle, the land I longed to see;
Those plains, those vales, and fruitful hills declare
My queen, my charmer must inhabit there.
Thus raved the monarch, and the gentle guide,
Pleased with his error, thus in smiles replied.
I must applaud, my lord, the lucky thought;
Even I, who know the original, am caught,
And doubt my senses, when I view the draught.
The slow-ascending hill, the lofty wood
That mantles over its brow, the silver flood
Wandering in mazes through the flowery mead,
The herd that in the plenteous pastures feed,
And every object, every scene excites
Fresh wonder in my soul, and fills with new delights:
Dwells cheerful Plenty there, and learned Ease,
And Art with Nature seems at strife to please.
There Liberty, delightful goddess, reigns,
Gladdens each heart, and gilds the fertile plains;
There firmly seated may she ever smile,
And shower her blessings over her favorite isle:
But see, the rising sun reproves our stay.
He said, and to the ocean winged his way,
Stretching his course to climates then unknown,
Nations that swelter in the burning zone;
There in Peruvian vales a moment staid,
And smoothed his wings beneath the citron shade;
Then swift his oary pinions plied again,
Crossed the new world, and sought the Southern main;
Where many a wet and weary league o'erpast,
The wished for paradise appeared at last.
With force abated now they gently sweep
Over the smooth surface of the shining deep;
The Dryads hailed them from the distant shore,
The Nereids played around, the Tritons swam before,
While soft Favonius their arrival greets,
And breathes his welcome in a thousand sweets.
Nor pale disease, nor health-consuming care,
Nor wrath, nor foul revenge can enter there;
No vapour's foggy gloom imbrowns the sky;
No tempests rage, no angry lightnings fly;
But dews, and soft-refreshing airs are found,
And pure aetherial azure shines around.
Whatever the sweet Sabaean soil can boast,
Or Mecca's plains, or India's spicy coast;
What Hybla hills, or rich Oebalia's fields,
Or flowery vale of famed Hymettus yields;
Or what of old the Hesperian orchard graced;
All that was ever delicious to the taste,
Sweet to the smell, or lovely to the view,
Collected there with added beauty grew.
High-tow'ring to the heavens the trees are seen,
Their bulk immense, their leaf for ever green;
So closely interwove, the tell-tale sun
Can never descry the deeds beneath them done,
But where by fits the sportive gales divide
Their tender tops, and fan the leaves aside.
Like a smooth carpet at their feet lies spread
The matted grass, by bubbling fountains fed;
And on each bough the feathered choir employ
Their melting notes, and naught is heard but joy.
The painted flowers exhale a rich perfume,
The fruits are mingled with eternal bloom,
And Spring and Autumn hand in hand appear,
Lead on the merry months, and join to cloth the year.
Here, over the mountain's shaggy summit poured,
From rock to rock the tumbling torrent roared,
While beauteous Iris in the vale below
Paints on the rising fumes her radiant bow.
Now through the meads the mazy current strayed,
Now hid its wand'rings in the myrtle shade;
Or in a thousand veins divides its store,
Visits each plant, refreshes every flower;
Over gems and golden sands in murmurs flows,
And sweetly soothes the soul, and lulls to soft repose.
If hunger call, no sooner can the mind
Express her will to needful food inclined,
But in some cool recess, or opening glade,
The seats are placed, the tables neatly laid,
And instantly conveyed by magic hand
In comely rows the costly dishes stand;
Meats of all kinds that nature can impart,
Prepared in all the nicest forms of art.
A troop of sprightly nymphs arrayed in green,
With flowery chaplets crowned, come scudding in;
With fragrant blossoms these adorn the feast,
Those with officious zeal attend the guest;
Beneath his feet the silken carpet spread,
Or sprinkle liquid odours over his head.
Others in ruby cups with roses bound
Delightful! deal the sparkling nectar round;
Or weave the dance, or tune the vocal lay;
The lyres resound, the merry minstrels play,
Gay health, and youthful joys overspread the place,
And swell each heart, and triumph in each face.
So when emboldened by the vernal air,
The busy bees to blooming fields repair;
For various use employ their chymic power;
One culls the snowy pounce, one sucks the flower;
Again to different works returning home,
Same Or stive, stipant.
steeve the honey, some erect the comb;
All for the general good in concert strive,
And every soul's in motion, every limb's alive.
And now descending from his flight, the God
On the green turf released his precious load;
There, after mutual salutations past,
And endless friendship vowed, they part in haste;
Zephyr impatient to behold his love,
The prince in raptures wandering through the grove;
Now skipping on, and singing as he went,
Now stopping short to give his transports vent;
With sudden gusts of happiness oppressed,
Or stands entranced, or raves like one possessed;
His mind afloat, his wandering senses quite
Overcome with charms, and frantic with delight;
From scene to scene by random steps conveyed,
Admires the distant views, explores the secret shade,
Dwells on each spot, with eager eye devours
The woods, the lawns, the buildings, and the bowers;
New sweets, new joys at every glance arise,
And every turn creates a fresh surprise.
Close by the borders of a rising wood,
In a green vale a crystal grotto stood;
And over its sides, beneath a beech en shade,
In broken falls a silver fountain played.
Hither, attracted by the murmuring stream,
And cool recess, the pleased Porsenna came,
And on the tender grass reclining chose
To wave his joys awhile, and take a short repose.
The scene invites him, and the wanton breeze
That whispers through the vale, the dancing trees,
The warbling birds, and rills that gently creep,
All join their music to prolong his sleep.
The princess for her morning walk prepared;
The female troops attend, a beauteous guard.
Arrayed in all her charms appeared the fair;
Tall was her stature, unconfined her air;
Proportion decked her limbs, and in her face
Lay love inshrin'd, lay sweet attractive grace
Temp'ring the aweful beams her eyes conveyed,
And like a lambent flame around her played.
No foreign aids, by mortal ladies worn,
From shells and rocks her artless charms adorn;
For grant that beauty were by gems increased,
It Is rendered more suspected at the least;
And foul defects, that would escape the sight,
Start from the piece, and take a stronger light.
Her chestnut hair in careless rings around
Her temples waved, with pinks and jes'mine crowned,
And, gathered in a silken cord behind,
Curled to the waist, and floated in the wind;
Over these a veil of yellow gause she wore,
With amaranths and gold embroidered over.
Her snowy neck half naked to the view
Gracefully fell; a robe of purple hue
Hung loosely over her slender shape, and tried
To shade those beauties, that it could not hide.
The damsels of her train with mirth and song
Frolic behind, and laugh and sport along.
The birds proclaim their queen from every tree;
The beasts run frisking through the groves to see;
The Loves, the Pleasures, and the Graces meet
In antic rounds, and dance before her feet.
By whatever fancy led, it chanced that day
They through the secret valley took their way,
And to the crystal grot advancing spied
The prince extended by the fountain's side.
He looked as, by some skilful hand expressed,
Apollo's youthful form retired to rest;
When with the chase fatigued he quits the wood
For Pindus' vale, and Aganippe's flood;
There sleeps secure, his careless limbs displayed
At ease, encircled by the laurel shade;
Beneath his head his sheaf of arrows lie,
His bow unbent hangs negligently by.
The slumbering prince might boast an equal grace,
So turned his limbs, so beautiful his face.
Waking he started from the ground in haste,
And saw the beauteous choir around him placed;
Then, summoning his senses, ran to meet
The queen, and laid him humbly at her feet.
Deign, lovely princess, to behold, said he,
One, who has traversed all the world to see
Those charms, and worship thy divinity:
Accept thy slave, and with a gracious smile
Excuse his rashness, and reward his toil.
Stood motionless the fair with mute surprise,
And read him over with admiring eyes;
And while she steadfast gazed, a pleasing smart
Ran thrilling through her veins, and reached her heart.
Each limb she scanned, considered every grace,
And sagely judged him of the phoenix' race.
An animal like this she never had known,
And thence concluded there could be but one;
The creature too had all the phoenix' air;
None but the phoenix could appear so fair.
The more she looked, the more she thought it true,
And called him by that name, to show she knew.
O handsome phoenix, for that such you are
We know; your beauty does your breed declare;
And I with sorrow own through all my coast
No other bird can such perfection boast;
For nature formed you single and alone:
Alas! what pity it is there is but one!
Were there a queen so fortunate to show
An aviary of charming birds like you,
What envy would her happiness create
In all, who saw the glories of her state!
The prince laughed inwardly, surpised to find
So strange a speech, so innocent a mind.
The compliment indeed did some offense
To reason, and a little wronged her sense;
He could not let it pass, but told his name,
And what he was, and whence, and why he came;
And hinted other things of high concern
For him to mention, and for her to learn;
And she 'ad a piercing wit, of wondrous reach
To comprehend whatever he could teach.
Thus hand in hand they to the palace walk,
Pleased and instructed with each others talk.
Here, should I tell the furniture's expense,
And all the structure's vast magnificence,
Describe the walls of shining sapphire made,
With emerald and pearl the floors inlaid,
And how the vaulted canopies unfold
A mimic heav'nd, and flame with gems and gold;
Or how Felicity regales her guest,
The wit, the mirth, the music, and the feast;
And on each part bestow the praises due,
'Twould tire the writer, and the reader too.
My amorous tale a softer path pursues:
Love and the happy pair demand my Muse.
O could her art in equal terms express
The lives they lead, the pleasures they possess!
Fortune had never so plenteously before
Bestowed her gifts, nor can she lavish more.
It Is heaven itself, it is ecstacy of bliss,
Uninterrupted joy, untir'd excess;
Mirth following mirth the moments dance away;
Love claims the night, and friendship rules the day,
Their tender care no cold indiff'rence knows;
No jealousies disturb their sweet repose;
No sickness, no decay; but youthful grace,
And constant beauty shines in either face.
Benumming age may mortal charms invade,
Flowers of a day that do but bloom and fade;
Far different here, on them it only blows
The lilly's white, and spreads the blushing rose;
No conquest over those radiant eyes can boast;
They like the stars shine brighter in its frost;
Nor fear its rigor, nor its rule obey;
All seasons are the same, and every month is May.
Alas! how vain is happiness below!
Man soon or late must have his share of woe;
Slight are his joys, and fleeting as the wind;
His griefs wound home, and leave a sting behind.
His lot distinguished from the brute appears
Less certain by his laughter than his tears;
For ignorance too often our pleasure breeds,
But sorrow from the reasoning soul proceeds.
If man on earth in endless bliss could be,
The boon, young prince, had been bestowed on thee.
Bright shone thy stars, thy Fortune flourished fair,
And seemed secure beyond the reach of care,
And so might still have been, but anxious thought
Has dashed thy cup, and thou must taste the draught.
It so befell, as on a certain day
This happy couple toy'd their time away,
He asked how many charming hours were flown,
Since on her slave her heaven of beauty shone.
Should I consult my heart, cried he, the rate
Were small, a week would be the utmost date:
But when my mind reflects on actions past,
And counts its joys, time must have fled more fast.
Perhaps I might have said, three months are gone.
Three months! replied the fair, three months alone!
Know that three hundred years have rolled away,
Since at my feet the lovely phoenix lay.
Three hundred years! re-echo'd back the prince,
A whole three hundred years completed since
I landed here! O! whither then are flown
My dearest friends, my subjects, and my throne?
How strange, alas! how altered shall I find
Each earthly thing, each scene I left behind!
Who knows me now? on whom shall I depend
To gain my rights? where shall I find a friend?
My crown perhaps may grace a foreign line,
A race of kings, that know not me nor mine;
Who reigns may wish my death, his subjects treat
My claim with scorn, and call their prince a cheat.
Oh had my life been ended as begun!
My destined stage, my race of glory run,
I should have died well pleased; my honored name
Had lived, had flourished in the list of fame;
Reflecting now my mind with horror sees
The sad survey, a scene of shameful ease,
The odious blot, the scandal of my race,
Scarce known, and only mentioned with disgrace.
The fair beheld him with impatient eye,
And red with anger made this warm reply.
Ungrateful man! is this the kind return
My love deserves; and can you thus with scorn
Reject what once you prized, what once you swore
Surpassed all charms, and made even glory poor?
What gifts have I bestowed, what favors shown!
Made you partaker of my bed and throne;
Three centuries preserved in youthful prime,
Safe from the rage of death, and injuries of time.
Weak arguments! for glory reigns above
The feeble ties of gratitude and love;
I urge them not, nor would request your stay;
The phantom glory calls, and I obey;
All other virtues are regardless quite,
Sunk and absorbed in that superior light.
Go then, barbarian, to thy realms return,
And show thyself unworthy my concern;
Go, tell the world, your tender heart could give
Death to the princess, by whose care you live.
At this a deadly pale her cheeks overspread,
Cold trembling seized her limbs, her spirits fled;
She sunk into his arms: the prince was moved,
Felt all her griefs, for still he greatly loved.
He sighed, he wished he could forget his throne,
Confine his thoughts, and live for her alone;
But glory shot him deep, the venomed dart
Was fixed within, and rankled at his heart;
He could not hide its wounds, but pined away
Like a sick flower, and languish'd in decay.
An age no longer like a month appears,
But every month becomes a hundred years.
Felicity was grieved, and could not bear
A scene so changed, a sight of so much care.
She told him with a look of cold disdain,
And seeming ease, as women well can feign,
He might depart at will; a milder air
Would mend his health; he was no prisoner there;
She kept him not, and wished he never might find
Cause to regret the place he left behind;
Which once he loved, and where he still must own,
He had at least some little pleasure known.
If these prophetic words awhile destroy
His peace, the former balance it in joy.
He thanked her for her kind concern, but chose
To quit the place, the rest let heaven dispose.
For Fate, on mischiefs bent, perverts the will,
And first infatuates whom it means to kill.
Aurora now, not, as she wont to rise,
In gay attire tinged with a thousand dies,
But sober-sad in solemn state appears,
Clad in a dusky veil bedewed with tears.
Thick mantling clouds beneath her chariot spread,
A faded wreath hangs drooping from her head.
The sickening sun emits a feeble ray,
Half drowned in fogs, and struggling into day.
Some black event the threatening skies foretell.
Porsenna rose to take his last farewell.
A curious vest the mournful princess brought,
And armor by the Lemnian artist wrought;
A shining lance with secret virtue stored,
And of resistless force a magic sword;
Caparisons and gems of wondrous price,
And loaded him with gifts and good advice;
But chief she gave, and what he most would need,
The fleetest of her stud, a flying steed.
The swift Grifippo, said the afflicted fair,
(Such was the courser's name) with speed shall bear,
And place you safely in your native air;
Assist against the foe, with matchless might
Ravage the field, and turn the doubtful fight;
With care protect you till the danger cease,
Your trust in war, your ornament in peace.
But this, I warn, beware; whatever shall lay
To intercept your course, or tempt your stay,
Quit not your saddle, nor your speed abate,
Till safely landed at your palace gate.
On this alone depends your weal or woe;
Such is the will of Fate, and so the Gods foreshew.
He in the softest terms repaid her love,
And vowed, nor age, nor absence should remove
His constant faith, and sure she could not blame
A short divorce due to his injured fame.
The debt discharged, then should her soldier come
Gay from the field, and flushed with conquest, home;
With equal ardour her affection meet,
And lay his laurels at his mistress' feet.
He ceased, and sighing took a kind adieu;
Then urged his steed; the fierce Grifippo flew;
With rapid force outstripp'd the lagging wind,
And left the blissful shores, and weeping fair behind;
Now over the seas pursued his airy flight,
Now scower'd the plains, and climbed the mountain's height.
Thus driving on at speed the prince had run
Near half his course, when, with the setting sun,
As through a lonely lane he chanced to ride,
With rocks and bushes fenced on either side,
He spied a wagon full of wings, that lay
Broke and o'erturn'd across the narrow way.
The helpless driver on the dirty road
Lay struggling, crushed beneath the incumbent load.
Never in human shape was seen before
A wight so pale, so feeble, and so poor.
Comparisons of age would do him wrong,
For Nestor's self, if placed by him, were young.
His limbs were naked all, and worn so thin,
The bones seemed starting through the parchment skin.
His eyes half drowned in rheum, his accents weak,
Bald was his head, and furrowed was his cheek.
The conscious steed stopped short in deadly fright,
And back recoiling stretched his wings for flight.
When thus the wretch with supplicating tone,
And rueful face, began his piteous moan,
And, as he spoke, the tears ran trickling down.
O gentle youth, if pity ever inclined
Thy soul to generous deeds, if ever thy mind
Was touched with soft distress, extend thy care
To save an old man's life, and ease the load I bear.
So may propitious heaven your journey speed,
Prolong your days, and all your vows succeed.
Moved with the prayer the kind Porsenna staid,
Too nobly-minded to refuse his aid,
And, prudence yielding to superior grief,
Leaped from his steed, and ran to his relief;
Removed the weight, and gave the prisoner breath,
Just choked, and gasping on the verge of death.
Then reached his hand, when lightly with a bound
The grizly spectre vaulting from the ground,
Seized him with sudden gripe, the astonished prince,
Stood horror-struck, and thoughtless of defense.
O king of Russia, with a thundering sound
Bellowed the ghastly fiend, at length you are found.
Receive the ruler of mankind, and know,
My name is Time, thy ever-dreaded foe.
These feet are foundered, and the wings you see
Worn to the pinions in pursuit of thee;
Through all the world in vain for ages sought,
But Fate has doomed thee now, and thou art caught.
Then round his neck his arms he nimbly cast,
And seized him by the throat, and grasped him fast;
Till forced at length the soul sorsook its seat,
And the pale breathless corse fell bleeding at his feet.
Scarce had the cursed spoiler left his prey,
When, so it chanced, young Zephyr passed that way;
Too late his presence to assist his friend,
A sad, but helpless witness of his end.
He chafes, and fans, and strives in vain to cure
His streaming wounds; the work was done too sure.
Now lightly with a soft embrace uprears
The lifeless load, and bathes it in his tears;
Then to the blissful seats with speed conveys,
And graceful on the mossy carpet lays
With decent care, close by the fountain's side,
Where first the princess had her phoenix spied.
There with sweet flowers his lovely limbs he strewn,
And gave a parting kiss, and sighs and tears bestowed.
To that sad solitude the weeping dame,
Wild with her loss, and swollen with sorrow, came.
There was she wont to vent her griefs, and mourn
Those dear delights that must no more return.
Thither that morn with more than usual care
She sped, but O what joy to find him there!
As just arrived, and weary with the way,
Retired to soft repose her hero lay.
Now near approaching she began to creep
With careful steps, loath to disturb his sleep;
Till quite overcome with tenderness she flew,
And round his neck her arms in transport threw.
But, when she found him dead, no tongue can tell
The pangs she felt; she shrieked, and swooning fell.
Waking, with loud laments she pierced the skies,
And filled the affrighted forest with her cries.
That fatal hour the palace gates she barred,
And fixed around the coast a stronger guard;
Now rare appearing, and at distance seen,
With crowds of black misfortunes placed between;
Mischiefs of every kind, corroding care,
And fears, and jealousies, and dark despair.
And since that day (the wretched world must own
These mournful truths by sad experience known)
No mortal ever enjoyed that happy clime,
And every thing on earth submits to Time.
The EVER-GREEN.
WHEN tepid breezes fan'd the air,
And violets perfumed the glade,
Pensive and grave my charming fair
Beneath yon shady lime was laid.
Flourish, said I, those favored boughs,
And ever soothe the purest flames!
Witness to none but faithful vows!
Wounded by none but faithful names!
Yield every tree that crowns the grove
To this which pleased my wandering dear!
Range where ye will, ye bands of love,
Ye still shall seem to revel here.
Lavinia smiled -- and whilst her arm
Her fair reclining head sustained,
Betrayed she felt some fresh alarm;
And thus the meaning smile explained.
When summer suns shine forth no more,
Will then this lime its shelter yield?
Protect us when the tempests roar,
And winter drives us from the field?
Yet faithful then the fir shall last --
I smile, she cried, but ah! I tremble,
To think when my fair season's past,
Which Damon then will most resemble.
ANSWER.
TOO timorous maid! can time or chance
A pure ingenuous flame control?
O lay aside that tender glance,
That melts my frame, that kills my soul!
Were but thy outward charms admired,
Frail origin of female sway!
My flame like other flames inspired,
Might then like other flames decay:
But whilst thy mind shall seem thus fair,
Thy soul's unfading charms be seen;
Thou may resign that shape and air,
Yet find thy swain -- an ever-green.
CANDOR.
THE warmest friend, I ever proved,
My bitterest foe I see:
The kindest maid I ever loved,
Is false to love and me.
But shall I make the angry vow,
Which tempts my wavering mind?
Shall dark suspicion cloud my brow,
And bid me shun mankind?
Avaunt, thou hell-born fiend! no more
Pretend my steps to guide;
Let me be cheated over and over,
But let me still confide.
If this be folly, all my claim
To wisdom I resign;
But let no sage presume to name
His happiness with mine.
LYSANDER to CLOE.
IT IS true, my wish will never find
Another nymph so fair, so true;
Since all that is bright, and all that is kind,
In those expressive eyes I view.
And I with grateful zeal could haste,
To China for the merest toy;
Could scorch on Lybia's barren waste,
To give my dear a moment's joy.
But fickle as the wave or wind,
I once may slight those lovely arms;
Pardon a free ingenuous mind,
I do not half deserve thy charms.
If I in any praise excel,
It Is in soft scenes to paint my flame;
But Cloe's sweetness bids me tell,
I shall not long remain the same.
I know its season will expire,
Replac'd by cool esteem alone;
Nor more thy matchless breast admire
Than I detest and scorn my own.
This interval my fate allows,
And friendship dictates all I say;
O shun to hear my future vows,
When giddy love resumes the lay.
So some poor maniac can foresee
The random hours of madness nigh;
He mourns the fates' severe decree,
And cautions whom he loves to fly.
CLOE to LYSANDER.
OF vagrant loves, and fickle flames
Lysander's Muse may tell,
And sure such artless freedom claims
His Cloe's best farewell.
Whenever his heart becomes the theme
We see his fancy shine;
But let not vain Lysander dream
That ever that heart was mine.
Can he that fondly hopes to move,
With caution chill his lay?
Can he who feels the power of love,
Foretell that love's decay?
Why teize believing nymphs in vain,
Go seek some pathless vale,
And listen to thy vocal strain
Soft echoing down the dale.
While artless Cloe hence retired,
Shall this sad maxim prove;
No bosom, once with love inspired,
Could ever cease to love.
To the Memory of an agreeable LADY buried in Marriage to a Person undeserving
her.
'TWAS always held, and ever will,
By sage mankind, discreeter
TO anticipate a lesser ill
Than undergo a greater.
When mortals dread diseases, pain,
And languishing conditions;
Who don't the lesser ills sustain
Of physic and physicians?
Rather than lose his whole estate
He that but little wise is,
Full gladly pays four parts in eight
To taxes and excises.
With numerous ills in single life
The batchelor's attended;
Such to avoid, he takes a wife --
And much the case is mended.
Poor Gratia, in her twentieth year,
Foreseeing future woe,
Chose to attend a monkey here,
Before an ape below.
An ELEGY, written on VALENTINE Morning.
By ****
HARK, through the sacred silence of the night,
Loud Chanticleer does sound his clarion shrill,
Hailing with song the first pale gleam of light,
That floats the dark brow of you eastern hill.
Bright star of morn, oh! leave not yet the wave,
To deck the dewy frontlet of the day,
Nor thou, Aurora, quit Tithonus' cave,
Nor drive retiring darkness yet away,
Ere these my rustic hands a garland twine,
Ere yet my tongue indite a simple song,
For her I mean to hail my Valentine,
Sweet maiden, fairest of the virgin throng.
Sweet is the morn, and sweet the gentle breeze
That fans the fragrant bosom of the spring,
Sweet chirps the lark. and sweeter far than these
The gentle love-song gurgling turtles sing.
Oh let the flowers be fragrant as the morn,
And as the turtle's song my ditty sweet;
Those flowers my woven chaplet must adorn,
That ditty must my waking charmer greet.
And thou, blessed saint, whom choral creatures join
In one enlivening symphony to hail,
Oh be propitious, gentle Valentine,
And let each holy tender sigh prevail.
Oh give me to approach my sleeping love,
And strew her pillow with the freshest flowers,
No sigh unhallowed shall my bosom move,
Nor step profane pollute my true-love's bowers.
At sacred distance only will I gaze,
Nor bid my unreproved eye refrain,
Mean while my tongue shall chaunt her beauty's praise,
And hail her sleeping with the gentlest strain.
"Awake my fair, awake, for it is time;
Hark, thousand songsters rise from yonder grove,
And rising carol this sweet hour of prime,
Each to his mate, a roundelay of love.
All nature sings the hymeneal song,
All nature follows, where the spring invites;
Come forth my love, to us these joys belong,
Ours is the spring, and all her young delights.
For us she throws profusely forth her flowers,
Which in fresh chaplets joyful I will twine;
Come forth my fair, oh do not lose these hours,
But wake, and be my faithful Valentine.
Full many an hour, all lonely have I sighed,
Nor dared the secret of my love reveal,
Full many a fond expedient have I tried
My warmest wish in silence to conceal.
And often to far retired solitude
All mournfully my slow step have I bent,
Luxurious there indulged my musing mood,
And there alone have given my sorrows vent.
This day resolved I dare to plight my vow.
This day, long since the feast of love decreed,
Emboldened will I speak my flame, nor thou
Refuse to hear how sore my heart does bleed."
Yet if I should behold my love awake,
Ah frail resolves, ah whither will ye fly?
Full well I know I shall not silence break,
But struck with awe almost for fear shall die.
Oh no, I will not trust a fault'ring speech
In broken phrase an awkward tale to tell,
A tale, whose tenderness no tongue can reach,
Nor softest melody can utter well.
But my meek eye, best herald to my heart,
I will compose to soft and downcast look,
And at one humble glance it shall impart
My love, nor fear the language be mistook.
For she shall read (apt scholar at this lore)
With what fond passion my true bosom glows,
How hopeless of return I still adore,
Nor dare the boldness of my wish disclose.
Should she then smile, -- yet ah! she smiles on all,
Her gentle temper pities all distress;
On every hill, each vale, the sunbeams fall,
Each herb, and flower, each tree, and shrub they bless.
Alike all nature grateful owns the boon,
The universal ray to all is free;
Like fond Endymion should I hope the moon,
Because among the rest she shines on me?
Hope, vain presumer, keep, oh keep away:
Even if my woe her gentle bosom move,
Pity some look of kindness may display;
But each soft glance is not a look of love.
Yet heavenly visitant, thou do not quit
Those bowers where angels sweet division sing,
Nor deignest thou on mortal shrine to sit
Alone, for round thee ever on the wing,
Glad choirs of loves attend, and hovering wait
Thy mild command; of these thy blooming train
Oh bid some sylph in morning dreams relate,
Ere yet my love awake, my secret pain.
The DOWAGER.
By the Same.
WHERE aged elms in many a goodly row
Give yearly shelter to the constant crow,
A mansion stands: -- long since the pile was raised,
Whose Gothic grandeur the rude hind amazed.
For the rich ornament on every part,
Confessed the founder's wealth, and workman's art:
Though as the range of the wide court we tread,
The broken arch now totters over the head;
And where of old rose high the social smoke,
Now swallows build, and lonely ravens croak.
Though Time, whose touch each beauty can deface,
Has torn from every tower the sculptured grace;
Though round each stone the sluggard ivy crawls,
Yet ancient state sits hovering on the walls.
Where wont the festal chorus to resound,
And jocund dancing frequent beat the ground,
Now Silence spreads around her gloomy reign,
Save when the mastiff clanks his iron chain,
Save when his hoarse bark echoes dire alarm,
Fierce to protect the place from midnight harm,
Its only guard; no revel sounding late
Drives the night villain from the lonely gate.
An hallowed matron and her simple train
These solemn battlements alone contain
An hoary dowager, whose placid face
Old age has decked with lovely aweful grace;
With almost vernal bloom her cheek still strow'd,
As beauty lingering left her loved abode;
That loved abode, where joined with truth and sense
She formed the features to mute eloquence,
And bade them charm the still attentive throng,
Who watched the sacred lessons of her tongue.
For not through life the dame had lived retired,
But once had shone, even 'midst a court admired:
What time the loved possessor of her charms
Returning from the war in victor arms,
Called from his monarch's tongue the plausive praise,
While honor wreathed him with unfading bays.
She, happy partner of each joyful hour,
Then walked serene amid the pomp of power:
While all confessed no warrior's wish could move
For fairer prize, than such accomplished love:
Nor to that love could aught more transport yield,
Than graceful valor from the victor field.
Thus flourished once the beauteous and the brave;
But mortal bliss meets still the untimely grave:
Aurelius died -- his relict's pious tear
Over his loved ashes frequent flowed sincere,
Each decent rite with due observance paid,
Each solemn requiem offered to his shade,
Placed 'mid the brave his urn in holy ground,
And bade his hallowed banners wave around.
Then left the gaudy scenes of pomp and power,
While prudence beckoned to that ancient bower,
And those paternal fields, the sole remains
Of ample woods and far-extended plains,
Which tyrant custom rudely tore away
To distant heirship an expected prey.
Serene she sought the far-retired grove,
Once the blessed mansion of her happy love,
Pleased with the thought, that memory often would raise
A solemn prospect of those blooming days
Aurelius gave: her pious purpose now
To keep still constant to her sacred vow;
In lonely luxury her sorrows feed,
And pass her life in widow's decent weed.
One pledge of love her comfort still remained,
Whom in this solitude she careful trained
To virtuous lore; and while as year by year
New graces made Aurelia still more dear;
Full many an hour unheeded she would trace
The father's semblance in the daughter's face;
While tender sighs often heaved her faithful breast,
And sudden tears her lasting love expressed.
Thus long she dwelt in innate virtues great,
Amid the villagers in sacred state:
For every grace to which submission bows,
The power which conscious dignity bestows,
She felt superior; for from ancient race
She gloried her long ancestry to trace;
And ever bade Aurelia's thought aspire
To every grace, each ray of sacred sire,
That full of heaven-born dignity informs
The mortal breast which ardent virtue warms;
Then led her to the venerable hall
Where her successive sires adorned the wall,
And arched windows with their blazon bright
Shed through the herald glow a solemn light:
There clad in rough habiliments of war
Full many a hero bore a glorious scar;
There in the civic fur, the sons of peace,
Whose counsels bade their country's tumults cease;
While by their side, gracing the ancient scene,
Hung gentle ladies of most comely mien.
Then eager through the well-known tale she run,
In what fair cause each honor had been won,
What female grace each virgin had possessed
To charm to gentle love the manly breast;
Pleased to observe how long her generous blood
Through fair and brave had passed a spotless flood.
Mean while the young Aurelia's bosom fired
With emulation, by each tale inspired,
In eager transport frequent breathed her prayer
The graces of her ancestry to share:
Nor breathed in vain, her fond maternal guide
Cherished with care each spark of virtuous pride;
And ever as she gave a lesson new,
Would point some old example to her view:
Inflamed by this, her mind was quickly fraught
With each sage precept, that her mother taught.
The goodly dame thus blessed in her employ
Felt each soft transport of parental joy,
And lived content, her utmost wish fulfilled
In the fair prospect of a virtuous child:
Resigned she waited now the aweful hour
When death should raise her to that heavenly bower,
Where with her loved Aurelius she might share
The pleasing task, to watch with guardian care
Their offspring's steps, and hovering over her head,
The gracious dew of heavenly peace to shed;
Nor feared her decency of life would prove
An added bliss to all the joys above.
ODE to the Honorable ****
By the late Mr. F. COVENTRY.
NOW Britain's senate, far renowned,
Assembles full an aweful band!
Now Majesty with golden circle crowned,
Mounts her bright throne, and waves her gracious hand.
"Ye chiefs of Albion with attention hear,
"Guard well your liberties, review your laws,
"Begin, begin the important year,
"And boldly speak in Freedom's cause."
Then starting from her summer's rest
Glad Eloquence unbinds her tongue.
She feels rekindling raptures wake her breast,
And pours the sacred energy along.
'Twas here great Hampden's patriot voice was heard,
Here Pym, Kimbolton fired the British soul,
When Power her arm despotic reared
But felt a senate's great control.
'Twas here the pond'ring worthies sat,
Who fixed the crown on William's head,
When awe-struck tyranny renounced the state,
And bigot JAMES his injured kingdoms fled.
Thee, generous youth, whom nature, birth adorn,
The Muse selects from yon assembled throng:
O thou to serve thy country born,
Tell me, young hero of my song,
Thy genius now in fairest bloom,
And warm with fancy's brightest rays,
Why sleeps thy soul unconscious of it is doom?
Why idly fleet thy unapplauded days?
Thy country beckons thee with lifted hand,
Arise, she calls, awake thy latent flame,
Arise, it is England's high command,
And snatch the ready wreaths of fame.
Be this thy passion; greatly dare
A people's jarring wills to sway,
With cursed Corruption wage eternal war,
That where thou goe'st, applauding crowds may say,
"Lo, that is he, whose spirit-ruling voice
"From her wild heights can call Ambition down,
"Can still Sedition's brutal noise,
"Or shake a tyrant's purple throne:"
Then chiefs, and sages yet unborn
Shall boast thy thoughts in distant days,
With thee fair History her leaves adorn,
And laurell'd bards proclaim thy lasting praise.
To Miss ****.
By Miss ELISA CARTER.
I.
THE midnight moon serenely smiles
Over nature's soft repose,
No lowering cloud obscures the skies,
Nor ruffling tempest blows.
II.
Now every passion sinks to rest,
The throbbing heart lies still,
And varying schemes of life no more
Distract the laboring will.
III.
In silence hushed, to reason's voice
Attends each mental power;
Come dear Amanda, and enjoy
Reflection's favorite hour.
IV.
Come, while this peaceful scene invites;
Let Us search this ample round;
Where shall the lovely fleeting form
Of Happiness be found?
V.
Does it amidst the frolic mirth
Of gay assemblies dwell?
Or hide beheath the solemn gloom
That shades the hermit's cell?
VI.
How often the laughing brow of joy
A sickening heart conceals,
And through the cloister's deep recess
Invading sorrow steals.
VII.
In vain through beauty, fortune, wit,
The fugitive we trace!
It dwells not in the faithless smile
That brightens Clodio's face.
VIII.
However our varying notions rove,
All yet agree, in one,
To place its being in some state,
At distance from our own.
IX.
O blind to each indulgent gift
Of power, supremely wise,
Who fancy happiness in aught
That Providence denies.
X.
Vain is alike the joy we seek,
And vain what we possess,
Unless harmonious reason tunes
The passions into peace.
XI.
To temperate bounds, to few desires,
Is happiness confined,
And deaf to folly's noise attends
The music of the mind.
To Chloe, written on the Author's Birth Day.
THE minutes, the hours, the days, and the years,
That fill up the current of Time,
Neither flowing with hopes, neither ebbing with fears,
Unheeded rolled on to my prime.
In infancy prattling, in youth full of play,
Still pleased with whatever was new:
I bad the old cripple fly swifter away,
To overtake some gay trifle in view.
But when Chloe with sweetness and sense in her look,
First taught me the lesson of love;
Then I counted each step the winged fugitive took,
And bade him more leisurely move.
Stop, runaway, stop, nor thy journey pursue,
For Chloe has gi'en me her heart;
To enjoy it thy years will prove many two few,
If you make so much haste to depart.
Still, still he flies on -- still, still let him flee,
He never can cancel my joy:
That conquest, O Death, is reserved for thee,
But Time cannot change, or destroy.
Lady MARY W***, to Sir W*** Y***
I.
DEAR Colin, prevent my warm blushes,
Since how can I speak without pain;
My eyes have often told you their wishes,
Ah! cannot you their meaning explain?
My passion would lose by expression,
And you too might cruelly blame:
Then don't you expect a confession
Of what is too tender to name.
II.
Since yours is the province of speaking,
Why should you expect it of me?
Our wishes should be in our keeping,
'Till you tell us what they should be.
Then quickly why don't you discover?
Did your breast feel tortures like mine,
Eyes need not tell over and over
What I in my bosom confine.
Sir W***** Y*****'s Answer.
I.
GOOD madam, when ladies are willing,
A man must needs look like a fool;
For me I would not give a shilling
For one that is kind out of rule.
At least you might stay for my offer,
Not snatch like old maids in despair,
If you have lived to these years without proffer,
Your sighs are now lost in the air.
II.
You might leave me to guess by your blushing,
And not speak the matter so plain;
It Is ours to pursue and be pushing,
It Is yours to affect a disdain.
That you're in a pityful taking,
By all your sweet ogles I see;
But the fruit that will fall without shaking
Indeed is too mellow for me.
Miss SOPER's Answer to a Lady, who invited her to retire into a monastic Life
at St. CROSS, near WINCHESTER.
I.
IN vain, mistaken maid, you would fly
To desert and to shade;
But since you call, for once I Will try
How well your vows are made.
II.
To noise and cares let us bid adieu,
And solitude commend;
But how the world will envy you,
And pity me your friend.
III.
You, like rich metal hid in earth,
Each swain will dig to find;
But I expect no second birth,
For dross is left behind.
REPENTANCE.
By the Same.
I.
ALL attendants apart
I examined my heart,
Last night when I laid me to rest.
And methinks I Am inclined
To a change of my mind,
For you know second thoughts are the best.
II.
To retire from the crowd
And make ourselves good,
By avoiding of every temptation,
Is in truth to reveal
What we'd better conceal,
That our passions want some regulation.
III.
It will much more redound
To our praise to be found
In a world so abounding with evil,
Unspotted and pure,
Though not so demure;
And to wage open war with the devil.
IV.
In bidding farewell
To the thoughts of a cell,
I Will prepare for a militant life;
And if brought to distress,
Why then -- I Will confess,
And do penance in shape of a wife.
A SONG.
By T. P***CY.
O Nancy, will thou go with me,
Nor sigh to leave the flaunting town:
Can silent glens have charms for thee,
The lowly cot and russet gown?
No longer dressed in silken sheen,
No longer decked with jewels rare,
Say can thou quit each courtly scene,
Where thou were fairest of the fair?
O Nancy! when you are far away,
Will thou not cast a wish behind?
Say can thou face the parching ray,
Nor shrink before the wintry wind?
O can that soft and gentle mien
Extremes of hardship learn to bear,
Nor sad regret each courtly scene,
Where thou were fairest of the fair?
O Nancy! can thou love so true,
Through perils keen with me to go,
Or when thy swain mishap shall rue,
To share with him the pang of woe?
Say should disease or pain befall,
Will thou assume the nurse's care,
Nor wistful those gay scenes recall
Where thou were fairest of the fair?
And when at last thy love shall die,
Will thou receive his parting breath?
Will thou repress each struggling sigh,
And cheer with smiles the bed of death?
And will thou over his breathless clay
Strew flowers, and drop the tender tear,
Nor then regret those scenes so gay,
Where thou were fairest of the fair?
CYNTHIA, an Elegiac POEM.
By the Same.
-- Libeat tibi Cynthia mecum
Roscida muscosis antra tenere jugis.
PROPERT.
BENEATH an aged oak's embow'ring shade,
Whose spreading arms with gray moss fringed were,
Around whose trunk the clasping ivy strayed;
A love lorn youth often pensive would repair.
Fast by, a Naid taught her stream to glide,
Which through the dale a winding channel wore
The silver willow decked its verdant side,
The whispering sedges waved along the shore.
Here often, when Morn peeped over the dusky hill;
Here often when Eve bedewed the misty vale;
Careless he laid him all beside the rill,
And poured in strains like these his artless tale.
Ah! would he say -- and then a sigh would heave:
Ah Cynthia! sweeter then the breath of morn,
Soft as the gentle breath that fans at eve,
Of thee bereft how shall I live forlorn?
Ah! what avails this sweetly solemn bower,
That silent stream where dimpling eddies play;
Yon thymy bank bedecked with many a flower,
Where maple-tufts exclude the beam of day.
Robbed of my love, for how can these delight,
Though lavish Spring her smiles around has cast!
Despair, alas! that whelms the soul in night,
Dims the sad eye and deadens every taste.
As droops the lilly at the blighting gale;
Or -- On her left breast
A mole cinque-spotted: like the crimson drops
IN the bottom of a cowslip.
Shakespeare's Cymbeline, Act 3^
crimson-spotted cowslip of the mead,
Whose tender stalk (alas! their stalk so frail)
Some hasty foot has bruised with heedless tread:
As droops the woodbine, when some village hind
Has felled the sapling elm it fondly bound;
No more it gadding dances in the wind,
But trails its fading beauties on the ground:
So droops my soul, dear maid, downcast and sad,
For ever! ah! for ever torn from thee:
Bereft of each sweet hope, which once it had,
When love, when treacherous love first smiled on me.
Return blessed days, return ye laughing hours,
Which led me up the roseat steep of youth;
Which strewn my simple path with vernal flowers,
And bade me court chaste Science and fair Truth.
Ye know, the curling breeze, or gilded fly
That idly wantons in the noontide air,
Was not so free, was not so gay as I,
For ah! I knew not then or love, or care.
Witness ye winged daughters of the year,
If ever a sigh had learnt to heave my breast!
If ever my cheek was conscious of a tear,
'Till Cynthia came and robbed my soul of rest.
O have you seen, bathed in the morning dew,
The budding rose its infant bloom display;
When first its virgin tints unfold to view,
It shrinks and scarcely trusts the blaze of day.
So soft, so delicate, so sweet she came,
Youth's damask glow just dawning on her cheek:
I gazed, I sighed, I caught the tender flame,
Felt the fond pang, and drooped with passion, weak.
Yet not unpitied was my pain the while;
For often beside yon sweet-briar in the dale,
With many a blush, with many a melting smile,
She sat and listened to the plaintive tale.
Ah me! I fondly dreamt of pleasures rare,
Nor deemed so sweet a face with scorn could glow;
How could you cruel then pronounce despair,
Chill the warm hope, and plant the thorn of woe?
What though no treasures canker in my chest,
Nor crowds of suppliant vassals hail me lord!
What though my roof can boast no princely guest,
Nor surfeits lurk beneath my frugal board!
Yet should Content, that shuns the gilded bed,
With smiling Peace, and Virtue there forgot,
And rose-lip'd Health, which haunts the straw-built shed,
With cherub Joy, frequent my little cot:
Led by chaste Love, the decent band should come,
O charmer would thou deign my roof to share?
Nor should the Muses scorn our simple dome,
Or knit in mystic dance, the Graces fair.
The wood-land nymphs, and gentle fays, at eve
Forth from the dripping cave and mossy dell,
Should round our hearth fantastic measures weave,
And shield from mischief by their guardian spell.
Come then bright maid, and quit the city throng,
Have rural joys no charm to win the soul?
-- She proud, alas! derides my lowly song,
Scorns the fond vow, and spurns the russet stole.
Then Love begone, thy thriftless empire yield,
In youthful toils I Will lose the unmanly pain:
With echoing horns I Will rouse the jocund field,
Urge the keen chase, and sweep along the plain.
Or all in some lone moss-grown tower sublime
With midnight lamp I Will watch pale Cynthia round,
Explore the choicest rolls of ancient Time,
And heal with Wisdom's balm my hapless wound.
Or else I Will roam -- Ah no! that sigh profound,
Tells me that stubborn love disdains to yield;
Nor flight, nor Wisdom's balm can heal the wound,
Nor pain forsake me in the jocund field.
DIALOGUE to CHLORINDA.
By Mr. ALSOP.
S. CEASE, Chlorinda, cease to chide me,
When my passion I relate:
Why should kindness be denied me?
Why should love be paid with hate?
If the fruit of all my wishes
Must be, to be treated so;
What could you do more than this is
To your most outrageous foe?

C. Simple Strephon, cease complaining,
Talk no more of foolish love;
Think not ever my heart to reign in,
Think not all you say can move.
Did I take delight to fetter
Thrice ten thousand slaves a day,
Thrice ten thousand times your betters
Gladly would my rule obey.

S. Strive not fairest, to unbind me;
Let me keep my pleasing chain:
Charms that first to love inclined me,
Will for ever love maintain.
Would you send my heart a roving?
First to love I must forbear.
Would you have me cease from loving?
You must cease from being fair.

C. Strephon, leave to talk thus idly;
Let me hear of love no more:
You mistake Chlorinda widely,
Thus to teize her over and over.
Seek not her who still forbids you;
To some other tell your moan:
Choose wherever your fancy leads you,
Let Chlorinda but alone.

S. If Chlorinda still denies me
That which none but she can give,
Let the whole wide world despise me,
It Is for her alone I live.
Grant me yet this one poor favor,
With this one request comply;
Let us each go on for ever,
I to ask, and you deny.

C. Since, my Strephon, you so kind are,
All pretensions to resign;
Trust Chlorinda. -- You may find her
Less severe than you divine.
Strephon struck with joy beholds her,
Would have spoke but knew not how;
But he looked such things as told her
More than all his speech could do.

To CHLORINDA.
By the Same.
SEE, Strephon, what unhappy fate
Does on thy fruitless passion wait,
Adding to flame fresh fuel:
Rather than thou should favor find,
The kindest so^ on earth's unkind,
And the best nature cruel.
The goodness, which Chlorinda shows,
From mildness and good breeding flows,
But must not love be styled:
Or else it is such as mothers try,
When wearied with incessant cry,
They still a froward child.
She with a graceful mien and air,
Genteely civil, yet severe,
Bids thee all hopes give over.
Friendship she offers, pure and free;
And who, with such a friend as she,
Could want, or wish for more?
The cur that swam along the flood,
His mouth well filled with morsel good,
(Too good for common cur!)
By visionary hopes betrayed,
Gaping to catch a fleeting shade,
Lost what he held before.
Mark, Strephon, and apply this tale,
Lest love and friendship both should fail;
Where then would be thy hope?
Of hope, quoth Strephon, talk not, friend;
And for applying -- know, the end
Of every cur's a rope.
The Fable of IXION. To CHLORINDA.
By the Same.
IXION, as the poets tell us,
Was one of those pragmatic fellows,
Who claim a right to kiss the hand
Of the best lady in the land;
Demonstrating by dint of reason,
That impudence in love's no treason.
He let his fancy soar much higher;
And ventured boldly to aspire
To Juno's high and mighty grace,
And wooed the goddess face to face.
What mortal ever had whims so odd,
To think of cuckolding a God?
For she was both Jove's wife and sister,
And yet the rascal would have kissed her.
How he got up to heaven's high palace,
Not one of all the poets tell us;
It must be therefore understood,
That he got up which way he could.
Nor is it, that I know, recorded,
How bows were made, and speeches worded;
So, leaving this to each one's guess,
I Will only tell you the success.
But first I stop awhile to show
What happened lately here below.
Chlorinda, who beyond compare
Of all the fair ones is most fair;
Chlorinda, by the Gods designed
To be the pattern of her kind,
With every charm of face and mind;
Glanced lightning from her eyes so blue,
And shot poor Strephon through and through.
He, over head and ears her lover,
Tried all the ways he could to move her;
He sighed, and vowed, and prayed and cried,
And did a thousand things beside:
She let him sigh, and pray, and cry on --
But now hear more about Ixion.
The Goddess, proud, (as folks report her)
Disdained that mortal wight should court her,
And yet she chose the fool to flatter,
To make him fancy some great matter,
And hope in time he might get at her;
Graced him with now and then a smile,
But inly scorned him all the while;
Resolved at last a trick to show him,
Seeming to yield and so undo him.
Now which way, do ye think, she took?
(For do it she would by hook or crook)
Why, thus I find it in my book.
She called a pretty painted cloud,
The brightest of the wandering crowd,
For she you know is queen of the air,
And all the clouds and vapors there
Governs at will, by nod or summons,
As Walpole does the house of commons.
This cloud which came to her stark naked,
She dressed as fine as hands could make it.
From her own wardrobe out she brought
Whatever was dainty, wove or wrought.
A smock which Pallas spun and gave her
Once on a time to gain her favor;
A gown that have not on earth its fellow,
Of finest blue and lined with yellow,
Fit for a Goddess to appear in,
And not a pin the worse for wearing.
A quilted petticoat beside,
With whalebone hoop six fathom wide.
With these she decked the cloud do you see?
As like herself, as like could be:
So like, that could not I or you know
Which was the cloud, and which was Juno.
Thus dressed she sent it to the villain,
To let him act his wicked will on:
Then laughed at the poor fool aloud,
Who for a Goddess grasped the cloud.
This you will say was well done on her
TO expose the tempter of her honor --
But more of him you need not hear;
Only to Strephon lend an car.
He never entertained one thought
With which a Goddess could find fault;
His spotless love might be forgiven
By every saint in earth and heaven.
Juno herself, though nice and haughty,
Would not have judged his passion naughty.
All this Chlorinda's self confessed,
And owned his flame was pure and chaste,
Read what his teeming Muse brought forth,
And praised it far beyond its worth:
Mildly received his fond address,
And only blamed his love's excess:
Yet she, so good, so sweet, so smiling,
So full of truth, so unbeguiling,
One way or other still devised,
To let him see he was despised:
And when he plumed, and grew most proud,
All was a vapor, all a cloud.
A TALE. To CHLORINDA.
By the Same.
DAME Venus, a daughter of Jove's,
And amongst all his daughters most fair,
Lost, it seems, to other day the two doves,
That wafted her car through the air.
The dame made a heavy sad rout,
Ran about heaven and earth to condole 'em;
And sought high and low to find out,
Where the biddyes were strayed, or who stole'em.
To the God, who the stragglers should meet,
She promised most tempting fine pay,
Six kisses than honey more sweet,
And a seventh far sweeter than they.
The proposal no sooner was made,
But it put all the Gods in a flame;
For who would not give all he had
To be kissed by so dainty a dame.
To Cyprus, to Paphos they run,
Where the Goddess often used to retire;
Some rode round the world with the sun,
And searched every country and shire.
But with all their hard running and riding,
Not a God of 'em claimed the reward;
For no one could tell tale or tiding,
If the doves were alive or were starved.
At last the sly shooter of men
Young Cupid, (I beg the God's pardon)
Mamma, your blue birds I have seen
In a certain terrestrial garden.
Where, where, my dear child, quickly show,
Quoth the dame, almost out of her wits:
Do but go to Chlorinda's, says Cu,
And you will find 'em in shape of pewits.
Is it she that has done me this wrong?
Full well I know her, and her arts;
She has followed the thieving trade long,
But I thought she dealt only in hearts.
I shall soon make her know, so I shall --
And with that to Jove's palace she run,
And began like a bedlam to bawl,
I am cheated, I Am robbed, I Am undone.
Chlorinda, whom none can approach
Without losing his heart or his senses,
Has stolen the two doves from my coach,
And now flaunts it at Venus' expenses.
She has changed the poor things to pewits,
And keeps 'em like ordinary fowls:
So when she robs men of their wits,
She turns 'em to asses or owls.
I could tell you of many a hundred
Of figure, high station, and means,
Whom she without mercy has plundered,
Ever since she came into her teens.
But her thefts upon earth I Would have borne,
Or have let 'em all pass for mere fable;
But nothing will now serve her turn,
But the doves out of Venus's stable.
Is it fit, let your mightyship say,
That I, like some pitiful flirt,
Should tarry within doors all day,
Or else trudge it afoot in the dirt?
Is it fit that a mortal should trample
On me who am styled queen of beauty?
O make her, great Jove, an example,
And teach Nimble-fingers her duty.
Sir Jove when he heard her thus rage,
For all his great gravity, smiled;
And then, like a judge wise and sage,
He began in terms sober and mild.
Learn, daughter, to bridle your tongue,
Forbear to traduce with your prattle
The fair, who has done you no wrong,
And scorns to purloin goods and chattel,
She needs neither gewgaw, nor trinket,
To carry the world all before her;
Her deserts, I would have you to think it,
Are enough to make all men adore her.
Your doves are elop'd, I confess,
And choose with Chlorinda to dwell;
But blame not the lady for this;
For sure it is no crime to excel.
As for them, I applaud their high aims;
Having served from the time of their birth
The fairest of heavenly dames,
They would now serve the fairest on earth.
ODE on Lyric POETRY.
By Mr. MARRIOT.
I. 1.
INMATE of smoking cots, whose rustic shade,
Within its humble bed,
Her twittering progeny contains,
The swallow sweeps the plains,
Or lightly skims from level lakes the dew.
The ringdove ever true
In plaintive accents tells of unrelenting fate,
Far from the raven's croak, and bird of night
That shrieking wings her flight
When, at his muttered rite,
Hid in the dusky desert vale,
With starting eye, and visage pale
The grimly wizard sees the specter rise unholy;
But haunts the woods that held her beauteous mate,
And wooes the Echo soft with murmurs melancholy.
I. 2.
Sublime alone the feathered monarch flies,
His nest dark mists upon the mountains shrowed;
In vain the howling storms arise,
When borne on outstretch'd plume aloft he springs
Dashing with many a stroke the parting cloud,
Or to the buoyant air commits his wings
Floating with even sail adown the liquid skies;
Then darting upward, swift his wings aspire,
Where thunders keep their gloomy seat,
And lightnings armed with heaven's avenging ire.
None can the dread artillery meet,
Or through the airy region rove,
But he who guards the throne of Jove,
And grasps the flaming bolt of sacred fire.
I. 3.
Know, with young Ambition bold,
In vain, my Muse, thy dazzled eyes explore
Distant aims, where wont to soar,
Their burning way the kindling spirits hold.
Heights too arduous wisely shun;
Humbler flights thy wings attend;
For heaven-taught Genius can alone ascend
Back to her native sky,
And with directed eagle eye
Pervade the lofty spheres, and view the blazing sun.
II. 1.
But hark! over all the flower-enamell'd ground
What music breaths around!
I see, I see the virgin train
Unlock their streams again,
Rolling to many a vale their liquid lapse along.
While at the warbled song
Which holds entranced Attention's wakeful ear,
Broke are the magic bands of iron sleep.
Love, wayward child, often wont to weep,
In tears his robe to steep
Forgets; and Care that counts his store,
Now thinks each mighty business over;
While sits on ruined cities, war's wide-wasting glory,
Ambition, ceasing the proud pile to rear,
And sighs; unfinished leaving half her ample story.
II. 2.
Then once more, sweet enthusiast, happy lyre,
Thy soothing solace deign awhile to bring.
I strive to catch the sacred fire,
And wake thee emulous' on Granta's plain,
Where all the Muses haunt his hallowed spring,
And where the Graces shun the sordid train
Scornful of heaven-born arts which thee and peace inspire;
On life's sequestered scenes they silent wait,
Nor heed the baseless pomp of power,
Nor shining dreams that crowd at Fortune's gate;
But smooth the invitable hour
Of pain, which man is doomed to know,
And teach the moral mind to glow
With pleasures placed beyond the shaft of Fate.
II. 3.
But, alas! the amusive reed
Ill suits the lyre that asks a master's hand,
And fond fancies vainly feed
A breast that life's more active scenes demand.
Sloth ignoble to disclaim
It Is enough: the lyre unstring.
At other feet the victor palm I fling
In Granta's glorious shrine;
Where crowned with radiance divine
Her smiles shall nurse the Muse; the Muse shall lift her fame.
ARION, an ODE.
By the Same.
I.
QUEEN of each sacred found, sweet child of air,
Who sitting throned upon the vaulted sky,
Do catch the notes which undulating fly,
Often wafted up to thy exalted sphere,
On the soft bosom of each rolling cloud,
Charming thy listening ear
With strains that bid the panting lover die;
Or laughing mirth, or tender grief inspire,
Or with full chorus loud
Which list our holy hope, or fan the hero's fire:
Enchanting Harmony, it is thine to cheer
The soul by woe which sinks oppressed,
From sorrow's eye to wipe the tear,
And on the bleeding wound to pour the balmy rest.
II.
'Twas when the winds were roaring loud,
And Ocean swelled his billows high,
By savage hands condemned to die,
Raised on the stem the trembling Lesbian stood
All pale he heard the tempest blow,
As on the watery grave below
He fixed his weeping eye.
Ah! hateful lust of impious gold,
What can thy mighty rage withold,
Deaf to the melting powers of Harmony!
But ere the bard unpitied dies,
Again his soothing art he tries,
Again he sweeps the strings,
Slowly sad the notes arise,
While thus in plaintive sounds the sweet musician sings.
III.
From beneath the coral cave
Circled with the silver wave,
Where with wreaths of emerald crowned
Ye lead the festive dance around,
Daughters of Venus, hear, and save.
Ye Tritons, hear, whose blast can swell
With mighty sounds the twisted shell;
And you, ye sister Sirens, hear,
Ever beauteous, ever sweet,
Who lull the listening pilot's ear
With magic song, and softly breathed deceit.
By all the Gods who subject roll
From gushing urns their tribute to the main,
By him who bids the winds to roar,
By him whose trident shakes the shore,
If ever for you I raise the sacred strain
When pious mariners your power adore,
Daughters of Nereus, here and save.
IV,
He sung, and from the coral cave,
Circled with the silver wave,
With pitying ear
The Nereids hear,
Gently the waters flowing,
The winds now ceased their blowing,
In silence listening to their tuneful lay.
Around the bark's sea-beaten side,
The sacred dolphin played,
And sportive dashed the briny tide,
The joyous omen soon the bard surveyed.
Nor feared with bolder leap to try the watery way.
On his scaly back now riding,
Over the curling billow gliding,
Again with bold triumphant hand
He bade the notes aspire,
Again to joy attun'd the lyre,
Forgot each danger past, and reached secure the land.
HORACE, Book 2. Ode II. Quid belliosus Cantaber, etc.
Imitated by Lord B -- H. -- PAUL to FAZ.
I.
NEVER dear Faz, torment thy brain
With idle fears of France or Spain,
Or any thing that is foreign:
What can Bavaria do to us,
What Prussia's monarch, or the Russ,
Ore'en prince Charles of Lorrain.
II.
Let us be cheerful whilst we can,
And lengthen out the short-lived span,
Enjoying every hour,
The moon itself we see decay,
Beauty's the worse for every day,
And so 's the sweetest flower.
III.
How often, dear Faz, have we been told,
That Paul and Faz are both grown old,
By young and wanton lasses?
Then, since our time is now so short,
Let us enjoy the only sport
Of tossing off our glasses.
IV.
From White's we'll move the expensive scene,
And steal away to Richmond Green;
There free from noise and riot,
Polly each morn shall fill our tea,
Spread bread and butter -- and then we
Each night get drunk in quiet.
V.
Unless perchance earl L -- comes,
As noisy as a dozen drums,
And makes an horrid pother;
Else might we quiet sit and quaff,
And gently chat, and gayly laugh
At this and that and to other.
VI.
Br -- shall settle what is to pay,
Adjust accounts by algebra;
I Will always order dinner --
Br -- though solemn, yet is sly,
And leers at Poll with roguish eye
To make the girl a sinner.
VII.
Powell, do you hear, let us have the ham,
Some chicken and a chine of lamb --
And what else? -- let us see -- look ye --
Br -- must have his damned boullie,
B -- fattens on his fricassee
I Will have my water-suchy.
VIII.
When dinner comes we'll drink about,
No matter who is in, or out,
'Till wine or sleep overtake us;
Each man may nod, or nap, or wink,
And where it is our turn to drink,
Our neigh bour then shall wake us.
IX.
Thus let us live in soft retreat,
Nor envy, nor despise the great,
Submit to pay our taxes;
With peace or war be well content,
'Till eased by a good parliament
'Till Scroop his hand relaxes.
X.
Never enquire about the Rhine;
But fill your glass, and drink your wine;
Hope things may mend in Flanders:
The Dutch we know are good allies,
So are they all with subsidies,
And we have choice commanders.
XI.
Then here is the King, God bless his grace,
Though neither you nor I have place,
He has many a sage adviser;
And yet no treason's sure in this,
Let who will take the prayer amiss,
God send 'em all much wiser.
A PANEGYRIC on ALE.
-- Mea nec Falernae
Temperant vites, neque Formiani
Pocula colles.
HOR.
By T. W*****
BALM of my cares, sweet solace of my toils,
Hail, juice benignant! over the costly cups
Of riot-stirring wine, unwholesome draught,
Let Pride's loose sons prolong the wasteful night:
My sober evening let the tankard bless,
With toast imbrown'd, and fragrant nutmeg fraught,
While the rich draught with often repeated whiffs
Tobacco mild improves: divine repast!
Where no crude surfeit, or intemperate joys
Of lawless Bacchus reign: but over my soul
A calm Lethean creeps: in drowsy trance
Each thought subsides, and sweet oblivion wraps
My peaceful brain, as if the magic rod
Of leaden Morpheus over mine eyes had shed
It Is opiate influence. What though sore ills
Oppress, dire want of chill-dispelling coals,
Or cheerful candle, save the makeweight's gleam
Hap'ly remaining; heart-rejoicing ale
Chears the sad scene, and every want supplies.
Meantime not mindless of the daily task
Of tutor sage, upon the learned leaves
Of deep Smiglecius much I meditate;
While ale inspires, and lends her kindred aid
The thought-perplexing labor to pursue,
Sweet Helicon of logic! -- But if friends
Congenial call me from the toilsome page,
To pot-house I repair, the sacred haunt,
Where, Ale, thy votaries in full resort
Hold rites nocturnal. In capacious chair
Of monumental oak, and antique mould,
That long has stood the rage of conquering Time
Inviolate, (not in more ample seat
Smokes rosy justice, when the important cause,
Whether of henroost or of mirthful rape,
In all the majesty of paunch, he tries:)
Studious of ease, and provident I place
My gladsome limbs, while in repeated round
Returns replenished the successive cup,
And the brisk fire conspires to genial joy.
Nor seldom to relieve the lingering hours
In innocent delight, amufive putt
On smooth joint-stool in emblematic play
The vain vicissitudes of fortune shows.
Nor reckoning, name tremendous, me disturbs,
Nor, call'd-for, chills my breast with sudden fear,
While on the wonted door (expressive mark!)
The frequent penny stands described to view
In snowy characters, a graceful row.
Hail Ticking! surest guardian of distress,
Beneath thy shelter pennyless I quaff
The chearing cup: though much the poet's friend
Never yet attempted in poetic strain,
Accept this humble tribute of my praise.
Nor proctor thrice with vocal heel alarms
Our joys secure, nor deigns the lowly roof
Of pot-house snug to visit: wiser he
The splendid tavern haunts, or coffee-house
Of James or Juggins, where the grateful breath
Of mild tobacco never diffused its balm;
But the lewd spendthrift, falsely deemed polite,
While steams around the fragrant Indian bowl
Often damns the vulgar sons of humbler Ale:
In vain -- the proctor's voice alarms their joy;
Just fate of wanton pride, and vain excess!
Nor less by day delightful is thy draught,
Heart-easing Ale, whose sorrow-soothing sweets
Often I repeat in vacant afternoon,
When tattered stockings ask my mending hand
Not unexperienced, while the tedious toil
Slides unregarded. Let the tender swain
Each morn regale on nerve-relaxing tea,
Companion meet of languor-loving nymph:
Be mine each morn with eager appetite
And hunger undissembled, to repair
To friendly butt'ry, there on smoking crust
And foaming Ale to banquet unrestrained,
Material breakfast! Thus in ancient times
Our ancestors robust with liberal cups
Ushered the morn, unlike the languid sons
Of modern days; nor ever had the might
Of Britons brave decayed, had thus they fed,
With English Ale improving English worth.
With ale irriguous, undismayed I hear
The frequent dun ascend my lofty dome
Importunate: whether the plaintive voice
Of laundress shrill awake my startled ear,
Or tailor with obsequious bow advance;
Or groom invade me with defying look
And fierce demeanor, whose emaciate steeds
Had panted often beneath my goring steel:
In vain they plead or threat; all-powerful Ale
Excuses new supplies, and each descends
With joyless pace and debt-despairing looks.
Even Sp -- y with indignant bow retires,
Sternest of duns! and conquered quits the field.
Why did the gods such various blessings pour
On helpless mortals, from their grateful hands
So soon the short liv'd-bounty to recall?
Thus while, improvident of future ill
I quaff the luscious tankard unrestrained,
And thoughtless riot in ambrosial bliss,
Sudden (dire fate of all things excellent!)
The unpiting bursar's cross affixing hand
Blasts all my joys, and stops my glad career.
Nor now the friendly pot-house longer yields
A sure retreat when evening shades the skies,
Nor Noted alehouses in Oxford.
Sheppard, ruthless widow, now vouchsafes
The wonted trust, and Noted alehouses in Oxford.
Winter ticks no more.
Thus Adam exiled from the blissful scenes
Of Eden grieved, no more in hallowed bower
On nect'rine fruits to feast, fresh shade or vale
No more to visit, or vine-mantled grot;
But all forlorn the naked wilderness,
And unrejoicing solitudes to trace.
Thus too the matchless bard, whose lay resounds
The Splendid Shilling's praise, in nightly gloom
Of lonesome garret pined for cheerful Ale:
Whose steps in verse Miltonic I pursue,
Mean follower! like him with honest love
Of Ale divine inspired, and love of song.
But long may bounteous Heaven with watchful care
Avert his hapless fate! enough for me,
That burning with congenial flame I dared
His guiding steps at distance to pursue,
And sing his favorite theme in kindred strains.
ODE to the Genius of ITALY, occasioned by the Earl of CORKE's going Abroad.
By Mr. J. DUNCOMBE.
OTHOU that on a pointless spear reclined
In dusk of eve often take thy lonely way
Where Tyber's slow, neglected waters stray,
And pour'st thy fruitless sorrows to the wind,
Grieving to see his shore no more the seat
Of arts and arms, and liberty's retreat.
Italia's Genius, rear thy drooping head,
Shake off thy trance, and weave an olive crown,
For see! a noble guest appears, well known
To all thy worthies, though in Britain bred;
Guard well thy charge, for know, our polished isle
Reluctant spares thee such a son as BOIL.
There, while their sweets thy myrtle groves dispense,
Lead to the Sabine or the Tuscan plain,
Where playsul Horace tuned his amorous strain,
And Tully poured the stream of eloquence;
Nor fail to crown him with that ivy bloom
Which graceful mantles over thy Maro's tomb.
At that blessed spot, from vulgar cares refined,
In some soft vision or indulgent dream
Inspire his fancy with a glorious theme,
And point new subjects to his generous mind,
At once to charm his country, and improve
The last, the youngest object of his love.
But O! mark well his transports in that shade
Where circled by the bay's unfading green,
Amidst a rural and sequestered scene
His much-loved Pliny rests his honored head:
There, rapt in silence, will he gaze around,
And strew with sweetest flowers the hallowed ground.
But see! the sage, to mortal view confessed,
Thrice waves the hand, and says, or seems to say,
"The debt I owe thee how shall I repay?
"Welcome to Latium's shore, illustrious guest!
"Long may thou live to grace thy native isle,
"Humane in thought and elegant in style!
"While on thy consort I with rapture gaze
"My own Calphurnia rises to my view:
"That bliss unknown but to the virtuous few,
"Briton! is thine; charmed with domestic praise
"Thine are those heartfelt joys that sweeten life,
"The son, the friend, the daughter and the wise."
Content with such approof, when genial Spring
Bids the shrill blackbird whistle in the vale,
Home may he hasten with a prosperous gale,
And Health protect him with her fost'ring wing;
So shall Britannia to the wind and sea
Entrust no more her favorite ORRERY.
To C*** P****, Esquire
FROM friendship's cradle up the verdant paths
Of youth, life's jolly spring; and now sublimed
To its full manhood and meridian strength,
Her latest stage, (for friendship ever hale
Knows not old age, diseases, and decay,
But burning keeps her sacred fire, 'till death's
Cold hand extinguish) at this spot, this point,
Here, P***, we social meet, and gaze about,
And look back to the scenes our pastime trod
In nature's morning, when the gamesome hours
Had sliding feet, and laughed themselves away.
Luxurious season! vital prime! where Thames
Flows by Etona's walls, and cheerful sees
Her sons wide swarming; or where sedgy Came
Bathes with slow pace his academic grove,
Pierian walks! -- O never hope again,
(Impossible! untenable!) to grasp
Those joys again; to feel alike the pulse
Dancing, and fiery spirits boiling high:
Or see the pleasure that with careless wing
Swept on, and flowery garlands tossed around
Disporting! Try to call her back -- as well
Bid yesterday return, arrest the flight
Of Time; or musing by a river's brink,
Say to the wave that huddles swiftly by
For ever, from thy fountain roll anew.
The merriment, the tale, and heartfelt laugh
That echoed round the table, idle guests,
Must rise, and serious inmates take their place.
Reflection's daughters, sad and world-worn thoughts
Dislodging Fancy's empire -- Yet who knows
Exact the balance of our loss and gain?
Who knows how far a rattle may outweigh
The mace or scepter? But as boys resign
The plaything, bauble of their infancy,
So fares it with maturer years: they sage,
Imagination's any regions quit,
And under Reason's banner take the field,
With resolution face the cloud or storm,
While all their former rainbows die away.
Some to the palace with regardful step,
And courtly blandishment resort, and there
Advance obsequious; in the sunshine bask
Of princely grace, catch the creating eye,
Parent of honors: -- in the senate some
Harangue the full-bench'd auditory, and wield
Their listening passions (such the power, the sway
Of Reason's eloquence!) -- or at the bar,
Where Cowper, Talbot, Summers, York before
Pleaded their way to glory's chair supreme,
And worthy filled it. Let not these great names
Damp, but incite: nor Murray's praise obscure
Thy younger merit. Know, these lights, ere yet
To noonday luster kindled, had their dawn.
Proceed familiar to the gate of Fame,
Nor think the task severe, the prize too high
Of toil and honor, for thy father's son.
Epistle from the late Lord Viscount B -- GB -- KE to Miss LUCY A -- K -- NS.
DEAR thoughtless CLARA to my verse attend,
Believe for once thy lover and thy friend;
Heaven to each sex has various gifts assigned,
And shown an equal care of human-kind;
Strength does to man's imperial race belong,
To yours that beauty which subdues the strong;
But as our strength when misapplied, is lost,
And what should save, urges our ruin most.
Just so, when beauty prostituted lies,
Of bawds the prey, of rakes the abandoned prize,
Women no more their empire can maintain,
Nor hope, vile slaves of lust, by love to reign,
Superior charms but make their case the worse,
And what should be their blessing, prove their curse.
Oh nymph! that might reclined on Cupid's breast,
Like Psyche, sooth the God of love to rest;
Or, if ambition moved thee, Jove enthral,
Brandish his thunder, and direct its fall;
Survey thyself, contemplate every grace
Of that sweet form, of that angelic face,
Then CLARA say, were those delicious charms
Meant for lewd brothels, and rude ruffians arms?
No CLARA, no! that person, and that mind,
Were formed by nature, and by heaven designed
For nobler ends; to these return, though late,
Return to these, and so avert thy fate.
Think CLARA, think, (nor will that thought be vain)
Thy slave, thy HARRY, doomed to drag his chain
Of love, ill-treated and abused, that he
From more inglorious chains might rescue thee.
Thy drooping health restored; by his fond care,
Once more thy beauty its full luster wear;
Moved by his love, by his example taught,
Soon shall thy soul, once more with virtue fraught,
With kind and generous truth thy bosom warm,
And thy fair mind, like thy fair person charm.
To virtue thus, and to thyself restored,
By all admired, by one alone adored,
Be to thy HARRY ever kind and true,
And live for him, who more than dies for you.
The CHEAT's APOLOGY.
By Mr. ELLIS.
It Is my vocation, Hal!
SHAKESPEARE.
LOOK round the wide world each profession you will find
Has something dishonest, which mystery they call;
Each knave points another, at home is stark blind,
Except but his own, there is a cheat in them all:
When taxed with imposture the charge he will evade,
And like Falstaff pretend he but lives by his trade.
The hero ambitious (like Philip's great son,
Who wept when he found no more mischief to do)
Never scruples a neighboring realm to o'er-run,
While slaughters and carnage his sabre imbrue.
Of rapine and murder the charge he will evade,
For conquest is glorious, and fighting his trade.
The statesman, who steers by wise Machiavel's rules,
Is never to be known by his tongue or his face;
They Are traps by him used to catch credulous fools,
And breach of his promise he counts no disgrace;
But policy calls it, reproach to evade,
For flatt'ry's his province, cajoling his trade.
The priest will instruct you this world to despise,
With all its vain pomp, for a kingdom on high;
While earthly preferments are chiefly his prize,
And all his pursuits give his doctrine the lie;
He Will plead you the gospel your charge to evade:
The lab'rer's entitled to live by his trade.
The lawyer, as often on the wrong side as right,
Who tortures for fee the true sense of the laws,
While black he by sophistry proves to be white,
And falsehood and perjury lists in his cause;
With steady assurance all crime will evade:
His client's his care, and he follows his trade.
The sons of Machaon, who thirsty for gold
The patient past cure visit thrice in a day,
Write largely the Pharmacop league to uphold,
While poverty's left to diseases a prey;
Are held in repute for their glittering parade:
Their practice is great, and they shine in their trade.
Since then in all stations imposture is found,
No one of another can justly complain;
The coin he receives will pass current around,
And where he is cousen'd he cousens again:
But I, who for cheats this apology made,
Cheat myself by my rhyming, and starve by my trade.
SONG.
By the Same.
AS Chloe plied her needle's art,
A purple drop the spear
Made from her heedless finger start,
And from her eyes a tear.
Ah! might but Chloe by her smart
Be taught for mine to feel;
Mine caused by Cupid's piercing dart,
More sharp than pointed steel!
Then I her needle would adore,
Love's arrow it should be,
Indu'd with such a subtle power
To reach her heart for me.
Another.
By the Same.
SUE venal Belinda to grant you the blessing
As Jove courted Danae, or vain's your addressing;
For love, she asserts, all that is generous inspires,
And therefore rich tokens of love she requires.
Such suitors as nothing but ardours are boasting,
Will never reach Elysium, but ever he coasting,
Like pennyless ghosts denied passage by Charon,
They Will find, without fee, unrelenting the fair one.
But give me the nymph not ungrateful to wooing,
Who love pays with love, and caresses with cooing,
By whom a true heart is accepted as sterling,
And Cupid alone makes her lover her darling.
To Mr. GRENVILLE on his intended Resignation,
By RICHARD BERENGER, Esquire
A Wretch tired out with Fortune's blows,
Resolved at once to end his woes;
And like a thoughtless silly elf,
In the next pond to drown himself.
It Is fit, quoth he, my life should end,
The cruel world is not my friend;
I have (...) meat, nor drink, nor clothes,
But want each joy that wealth bestows;
Be^des, I hold my life my own,
And when I please may lay it down;
A wretched hopeless thing am I,
Forgetting, as forgot, I Will die.
Not so, said one who stood behind,
And heard him thus disclose his mind;
Consider well pray what you do,
And think what numbers live in you:
If you go drown, your woes to ease,
Pray who will keep your lice and fleas?
On yours alone their lives depend,
With you they live, with you must end.
On great folks thus the little live,
And in their sunshine bask and thrive:
But when those suns no longer shine,
The hapless insects droop and pine.
Oh GRENVILLE then this tale apply,
Nor drown yourself lest I should die:
Compassionate your louse's case,
And keep your own to save his place.
To Mr. GARRICK, on his erecting a Temple and Statue to SHAKESPEARE.
By the Same.
-- Viridi in campo signum de marmore ponam
Propter aquam, tardis ingens ubi slexibus errat
Thamesis, et multa praetexit arundine ripas;
In medio mihi SHAKESPEARE erit, templumque tenebit.
VIRGIL.
WHERE yonder trees rise high in cheerful air,
Where yonder banks eternal verdure wear,
And opening flowers diffusing sweets around
Paint with their vivid hues the happy ground;
While Thames majestic rolls the meads between,
And with his silver current crowns the scene;
There GARRICK, satiate of well-earn'd applause,
From crowds, and shouting theaters withdraws:
There courts the Muse, turns over the instructive page,
And meditates new triumphs for the stage.
Thine, SHAKESPEARE, chief -- for thou, must ever shine
His pride, his boast, unequaled and divine.
There too thy vot'ry to thy merit just,
Has raised the dome, and placed thy honored bust,
Bidding the pile to future times proclaim
His veneration for thy mighty name.
A place more fit his zeal could never find
Than this fair spot, an emblem of thy mind --
As hill and dale there charm the wondering eye
Such sweet variety thy scenes supply --
Like the tall trees sublime thy genius towers,
Sprightly thy fancy, as the opening flowers;
While copious as the tide Thames pours along
Flow the sweet numbers of thy heavenly song
Serenely pure, and yet divinely strong --
Look down, great shade, with pride this tribute see,
The hand that pays it makes it worthy thee --
As famed Apelles was allowed alone
To paint the form august of Philip's son,
None but a GARRICK can, O bard divine!
Lay a fit offering on thy hallowed shrine.
To speak thy worth is his peculiar boast,
He best can tell it, for he feels it most.
Blessed bard! thy fame through every age shall grow,
Till nature cease to charm, or Thames to flow.
Thou too, with him, whose fame thy talents raise,
Shall share our wonder, and divide our praise;
Blended with his thy merits rise to view,
And half thy Shakespeare's fame to thee is due:
Unless the actor with the bard conspire,
How impotent his strength, how faint his fire!
One boasts the mine, one brings the gold to light,
And the Muse triumphs in the actor's might.
Too weak to give her own conceptions birth,
Till all-expressive action call them forth.
Thus the sweet pipe, mute in itself, no sound
Sends forth, nor breathes its pleasing notes around;
But if some swain with happy skill endu'd,
Inspire with animating breath the wood,
Waked into voice, it pours its tuneful strains,
And harmony divine enchants the plains.
Quod spiro, et placeo, si placeo tuum est --
HOR.
On the Birthday of SHAKESPEARE. A CENTO.
Taken from his Works.
By the Same
Natura ipsa valere, et mentis viribus excitari, et quasiquodam divino spiritu
afflari. CICERO.
-- PEACE to this meeting,
Joy and fair time, health and good wishes!
Now, worthy friends, the cause why we are met,
Is in celebration of the day that gave
Immortal Shakespeare to this favored isle,
The most replenished sweet work of nature,
Which from the prime creation ever she framed.
O thou divinest nature! how thyself thou blazon'st
In this thy son! formed in thy prodigality,
To hold thy mirror up, and give the time
Its very form, and pressure! When he speaks
Each aged ear plays truant at his tales,
And younger hearings are quite ravished,
So voluble is his discourse -- Gentle
As Zephyr blowing underneath the violet,
Not wagging its sweet head -- yet as rough,
(His noble blood enchaff'd) as the rude wind,
That by the top does take the mountain pine,
And make him stoop to the vale. -- It Is wonderful
That an invisible instinct should frame him
To loyalty, unlearned; honor untaught;
Civility not seen in other; knowledge
That wildly grows in him, but yields a crop
As if it had been sown. What a piece of work!
How noble in faculty! infinite in reason!
A combination and a form indeed,
Where every God did seem to set his seal.
Heaven has him now -- yet let our idolatrous fancy
Still sanctify his relicts; and this day
Stand aye distinguished in the calendar
To the last syllable of recorded time:
For if we take him but for all in all
We never shall look upon his like again.
An ODE to SCULPTURE.
LED by the Muse, my step pervades
The sacred haunts, the peaceful shades,
Where Art and Sculpture reign:
I see, I see, at their command,
The living stones in order stand,
And marble breathe through every vein!
Time breaks his hostile scythe; he sighs
To find his power malignant fled;
"And what avails my dart, he cries,
"Since these can animate the dead?
"Since waked to mimic life, again in stone
"The patriot seems to speak, the hero frown?"
There Virtue's silent train are seen,
Fast fixed their looks, erect their mien.
Lo! while, with more than stoic soul,
The Socrates, who was condemned to die by poison.
Attic sage exhausts the bowl,
A pale suffusion shades his eyes,
Till by degrees the marble dies!
See there the injured Seneca, born at Corduba, who according to Pliny, was
trator, poet, and philosopher. He bled to death in the bath.
poet bleed!
Ah! see he droops his languid head!
What starting nerves, what dying pain,
What horror freezes every vein!
These are thy works, O Sculpture! thine to show
In rugged rock a feeling sense of woe.
Yet not alone such themes demand
The Phydian stroke, the Daedal hand;
I view with melting eyes
A softer scene of grief displayed,
While from her breast the duteous maid
Her infant sire with food supplies.
In pitying stone she weeps, to see
His squalid hair, and galling chains:
And trembling, on her bended knee,
His hoary head her hand sustains;
While every look, and sorrowing feature prove,
How soft her breast, how great her filial love.
Lo! there the wild Semiramis, cum ei circa cultum capitis sui occupatae
nundatum esset Babylonem difecisse; altera part crinium adhuc soluta protinus
ad eam expugnandam cucurrit: nec prius decorem capillorum in ordinem quam
tantam urbem in potestatem suam redegit: quocirca statua ejus Babylone posita
est etc. Val. Max. de Ira.
Assyrian queen,
With threatening brow, and frantic mien!
Revenge! revenge! the marble cries,
While fury sparkles in her eyes.
Thus was her aweful form beheld,
When Babylon's proud sons rebelled;
She left the woman's vainer care,
And flew with loose dishevelled hair;
She stretched her hand, imbrued in blood,
While pale Sedition trembling stood;
In sudden silence, the mad crowd obeyed
Her aweful voice, and Stygian Discord fled!
With hope, or fear, or love, by turns,
The marble leaps, or shrinks, or burns,
As Sculpture waves her hand;
The varying passions of the mind
Her faithful handmaids are assigned,
And rise or fall by her command.
When now life's wasted lamps expire,
When sinks to dust this mortal frame,
She, like Prometheus grasps the fire;
Her touch revives the lambent flame;
While phoenix-like, the statesman, bard, or sage,
Spring fresh to life, and-breathe through every age.
Hence, where the organ full and clear,
With loud hosannas charms the ear,
Behold (a prism within his hands)
Absorbed in thought, great A noble statue of Sir Isaac Newton, erected in
Trinity. College chapel, by Dr. Smith.
Newton stands;
Such was his solemn wonted state,
His serious brow, and musing gait,
When, taught on eagle-wings to fly,
He traced the wonders of the sky;
The chambers of the sun explored,
Where tints of thousand hues are stored;
Whence ev'ery flower in painted robes is dressed,
And varying Iris steals her gaudy vest.
Here, as Devotion, heavenly queen,
Conducts her best, her favorite train,
At Newton's shrine they bow!
And while with raptured eyes they gaze,
With Virtue's purest vestal rays,
Behold their ardent bosoms glow!
Hail, mighty Mind! hail, aweful name!
I feel inspired my laboring breast;
And lo! I pant, I burn for fame!
Come, Science, bright ethereal guest,
Oh come, and lead thy meanest, humblest son,
Through Wisdom's arduous paths to fair renown.
Could I to one faint ray aspire,
One spark of that celestial fire,
The leading cynosure, that glowed
While Smith explored the dark abode,
Where Wisdom sat on Nature's shrine,
How great my boast! what praise were mine!
Illustrious sage! who first could tell
Wherein the powers of Music dwell;
And every magic chain untie,
That binds the soul of Harmony!
To thee, when mouldering in the dust,
To thee shall swell the breathing bust:
Shall here (for this reward thy merits claim)
"Stand next in place to Newton, as in same."
True RESIGNATION.
Aequam memento rebus in arduis
Servare mentem.
HORAT.
By Mr. H****
WHEN Colin's good dame, who long held him a tug,
And defeated his hopes by the help of the jug,
Had taken too freely the chearuping cup,
And repeated the dose till it laid her quite up;
Colin sent for the doctor: with sorrowful face
He gave him his fee, and he told him her case.
Quoth Galen, I Will do what I can for your wife;
But indeed she is so bad, that I fear for her lise.
In counsel there is safety -- even send for another;
For if she should die, folks will make a strange pother,
And say that I lost her for want of good skill --
Or of better advice -- or, in short, what they will.
Says Colin, your judgment there is none can dispute;
And if physic can cure her -- I know yours will do it.
But if, after all, she should happen to die,
And they say that you killed her -- I Will swear it is a lie:
It Is the husband's chief business, whatever ensue;
And whoever finds fault -- I Will be shot -- if I do.
An EPISTLE from the King of PRUSSIA, to Monsieur VOLTAIRE. 1757.
CROYEZ que si j'etois, Voltaire,
Particulier aujourdhui,
Me contentant du necessaire,
Je verrois envoler la Fortune legere,
Et m'en mocquerois comme lui.
Je connois l'ennui des grandeurs,
Le fardeau des devoirs, le jargon des flateurs,
Et tout l'amas des petitesses,
Et leurs genres et leurs especes,
Don't il faut s'occuper dans le sein des honneurs.
Je meprise la vain gloire,
Quoique Poet et Souverain,
Quand du ciseau fatal retranchant mon destin
Atropos m'aura vu plonge dans la nuit noire,
Que m'importe l'honneur uncertain
De vivre apres ma mort an temple de Memoire:
Un instant de bonheur vaut mill ans dans l'histoire,
Nos destins sont ils donc si beaux?
Le doux Plaisir et la Mollesse,
La vive et naive Allegresse
Ont toujours fui des grands, la pomp, et les faisceaux,
Nes pour la liberte leurs troops enchantresses
Preferent l'aimable paresse
Aux austeres devoirs guides de nos travaux.
Aussi la Fortune volage
N'a jamais cause mes ennuis,
Soit qu'elle m'agace, ou qu'elle m'outrage,
Je dormirai toutes les nuits
En lui refusant mon hommage.
Mais notre etat nous fait loi,
Il nous oblige, il nous engage
A mesurer notre courage,
Sur ce qu'exige notre emploi.
Voltaire dans sons hermitage,
Dans un pais don't l'heritage
Est son antique bonne foi,
Peut s'addonner en paix a la virtue du sage
Don't Platon nous marque la loi.
Pour moi menace du naufrage,
Je dois, en affrontant l'orage,
Penser, vivre, et mourir en Roi.
Translated into English.
By JOHN GILBERT COOPER, Esquire
VOLTAIRE, believe me, were I now
In private life's calm station placed,
Let Heaven for nature's wants allow,
With cold indiff'rence would I view
Changing Fortune's winged haste,
And laugh at her caprice like you.
The insipid farce of tedious state,
Imperial duty's real weight,
The faithless courtier's supple bow,
The sickle multitude's caress,
And the great Vulgar's Littleness,
By long experience well I know;
And, though a Prince and Poet born,
Vain blandishments of glory scorn.
For when the ruthless shears of Fate
Have cut my life's precarious thread,
And ranked me with the unconscious dead,
What will it avail that I was great,
Or that the uncertain tongue of Fame
In Mem'ry's temple chaunts my name?
One blissful moment whilst we live
Weighs more than ages of renown;
What then do Potentates receive
Of good, peculiarly their own?
Sweet Ease and unaffected Joy,
Domestic Peace, and sportive Pleasure,
The regal throne and palace fly,
And, born for liberty, prefer
Soft silent scenes of lovely leisure,
To, what we Monarchs buy so dear,
The thorny pomp of sceptered care.
My pain or bliss shall never depend
On fickle Fortune's casual flight,
For, whether she is my foe or friend,
In calm repose I Will pass the night;
And never by watchful homage own
I court her smile, or fear her frown.
But from our stations we derive
Unerring precepts how to live,
And certain deeds each rank calls forth,
By which is measured human worth.
Voltaire, within his private cell
In realms where ancient honesty
Is patrimonial property,
And sacred Freedom loves to dwell,
May give up all his peaceful mind,
Guided by Plato's deathless page,
In silent solitude resigned
To the mild virtues of a Sage;
But I, against whom wild whirlwinds wage
Fierce war with wreck-denouncing wing,
Must be, to face the tempest's rage,
In thought, in life, in death a King.
At seeing John Williams was consecrated bishop of Lincoln November 11. 1621.
was translated to York December 4. 1641. and died March 25. 1649. and was
buried at Landegay near Bangor.
Archbishop WILLIAMS's Monument in CARNARVONSHIRE.
IN that remote and solitary place,
Which the seas wash, and circling hills embrace,
Where those lone walls amid the groves arise,
All that remains of thee, famed Williams, lies.
Thither, sequestered shade, creation's nook,
The wandering Muse her pensive journey took,
Curious to trace the statesman to his home,
And moralize at leisure over his tomb:
She came not, with the pilgrim, tears to shed,
Mutter a vow, or trifle with a bead,
But such a sadness did her thoughts employ,
As lives within the neighborhood of joy.
Reflecting much upon the mighty shade,
His glories, and his miseries, she said:
"How poor the lot of the once-honour'd dead!
Perhaps the dust is Williams', that we tread.
The learned, ambitious, politic, and great,
Statesman, and prelate, this alas! thy fate.
Could not thy Lincoln yield her pastor room,
Could not thy York supply thee with a tomb?
Was it for this thy lofty genius soared,
Caressed by monarchs and by crowds adored?
For this, thy hand over rivals could prevail,
Grasping by turns the crosier and the He was made lord keeper of the great
seal July 20. 1621.
seal?
Who dared on Laud's meridian power to frown.
And on aspiring Buckingham look down.
This thy gay morn, -- but ere the day decline
Clouds gather, and adversity is thine:
Doomed to behold thy country's fierce alarms,
What had thy trembling age to do with arms?
Thy lands dragoon'd, thy palaces in dust,
Why was thy life protracted to be cursed?
Thy king in chains, -- thyself by lawless might
Stripped of all power, and exiled from thy right.
Awhile the venerable hero stood,
And stemmed with quivering limbs the boisterous flood;
At length, o'er-match'd by injuries and time,
Stole from the world, and sought his native clime.
Cambria for him with moans her region fills:
She wept his downfall from a thousand hills:
Tender embraced her prelate though undone,
Stretched out the mother rocks to hide her son:
Searched, while alive, each vale for his repast,
And, when he died, received him in her breast.
Envied Ambition! what are all thy schemes,
But waking misery, or pleasing dreams,
Sliding and tottering on the heights of state!
The subject of this verse declares thy fate.
Great as he was, you see how small the gain,
A burial so obscure, a Muse so mean.
Extempore Verses upon a Trial of Skill between the two great Masters of
Defense, Messieurs FIGG and SUTTON.
By Dr. BYROM.
I.
LONG was the great Figg, by the prize-fighting swains,
Sole monarch acknowledged of Mary-bone plains:
To the towns, far and near, did his valor extend,
And swam down the river from Them to Gravesend;
Where lived Mr. Sutton, pipemaker by trade,
Who hearing that Figg was thought such a stout blade,
Resolved to put in for a share of his fame,
And so sent to challenge the champion of Them.
II.
With alternate advantage two trials had past,
When they fought out the rubbers on Wednesday last.
To see such a contest the house was so full
There hardly was room left to thrust in your skull.
With a prelude of cudgells we first were saluted,
And two or three shoulders most handsomely fluted;
Till weary at last with inferior disasters,
All the company cried, come, the masters, the masters.
III.
Whereupon the bold Sutton first mounted the stage,
Made his honors as usual and yearn'd to engage;
Then Figg, with a visage so fierce, yet sedate,
Came, and entered the lists, with his fresh-shaven pate;
Their arms were encircled with armigers too,
With a red ribbon Sutton's, and Figg's with a blue.
Thus adorned the two heroes, 'twixt shoulder, and elbow,
Shook hands, and went to it, and the word it was Bilboe.
IV.
Sure such a concern in the eyes of spectators,
Was never yet seen in our amphi-theatres.
Our commons and peers from the several places,
To half an inch distance all pointed their faces;
While the rays of old Phoebus, that shot through the sky-light,
Seemed to make on the stage a new kind of twilight;
And the Gods without doubt, if one could but have seen 'em,
Were peeping there through to do justice between 'em.
V.
Figg struck the first stroke, and with such a vast fury,
That he broke his huge weapon in twain, I assure you;
And if his brave rival this blow had not warded,
His head from his shoulders had been quite discarded.
Figg armed him again, and they took the other tilt,
And then Sutton's blade ran away from it is hilt;
The weapons were frighted, but as for the men,
In truth they never minded, but at it again.
VI.
Such a force in their blows, you would have thought it a wonder
Every stroke they received did not cleave 'em asunder.
Yet so great was their courage, so equal their skill,
That they both seemed as safe as a thief in a mill;
While in doubtful attention dame Victory stood,
And which side to take could not tell for her blood,
But remained like the ass 'twixt the bundles of hay,
Without ever stirring an inch either way.
VII.
Till Jove to the Gods signified his intention
In a speech that he made 'em too tedious to mention;
But the upshot on it was, that at that very bout,
From a wound in Figg's side the hot blood spouted out;
Her ladyship then seemed to think the case plain,
But Figg stepping forth with a sullen disdain,
Showed the gash, and appealed to the company round,
If his own broken sword had not given him the wound.
VIII.
That bruises, and wounds a man's spirit should touch,
With danger so little, with honor so much!
Well, they both took a dram, and returned to the battle,
And with a fresh fury they made the swords rattle;
While Sutton's right arm was observed to bleed,
By a touch from his rival, so Jove had decreed;
Just enough for to show that his blood was not icor,
But made up, like Figg's, of the common red-liquor.
IX.
Again they both rushed with as equal a fire on,
'Till the company cried, hold, enough of cold iron,
To the quarter-staff now, lads. So first having dram'd it,
They took to their wood, and in faith never shamed it:
The first bout they had was so fair, and so handsome,
That to make a fair bargain, was worth a king's ransom;
And Sutton such bangs on his neighbor imparted,
Would have made any fibers, but Figg's to have smarted.
X.
Then after that bout they went on to another,
But the matter must end on some fashion, or other;
So Jove told the Gods he had made a decree,
That Figg should hit Sutton a stroke on the knee.
Though Sutton disabled as soon as he hit him
Would still have fought on, but Jove would not permit him;
'Twas his fate, not his fault, that constrained him to yield,
And thus the great Figg became lord of the field.
A Letter from Cambridge to a young Gentleman at Eton School.
By Dr. LITTLETON.
THOUGH plagued with algebraic lectures,
And astronomical conjectures,
Weaned from the sweets of poetry
To scraps of dry philosophy,
You see, dear sir, I Have found a time
TO express my thoughts to you in rhyme.
For why, my friend, should distant parts,
Or times, disjoin united hearts,
Since, though by intervening space
Deprived of speaking face to face,
By faithful emissary letter
We may converse as well, or better?
And not to stretch a narrow fancy,
To show what pretty things I can say,
(As some will strain at simile,
First work it fine, and then apply;
Tag Butler's rhimes to Prior's thoughts,
And choose to mimick all their faults,
By head and shoulders bring in a stick,
To show their knack at hudibrastic,)
I Will tell you as a friend, and crony,
How here I spend my time, and money;
For time, and money, go together
As sure as weathercock, and weather;
And thrifty guardians all allow
This grave reflection to be true,
That whilst we pay so dear for learning
Those weighty truths we have no concern in,
The spark who squanders time away
In vain pursuits, and fruitless play,
Not only proves an arrant blockhead,
But, what is much worse, is out of pocket.
Whether my conduct bad, or good is,
Judge from the nature of my studies.
No more majestic Virgil's heights,
Nor towering Milton's loftier flights,
Nor courtly Flaccus's rebukes,
Who banters vice with friendly jokes,
Nor Congreve's life, nor Cowley's fire,
Nor all the beauties that conspire
To place the greenest bays upon
The immortal brows of Addison;
Prior's inimitable ease,
Nor Pope's harmonious numbers please;
Homer indeed (for critics show it)
Was both philosopher, and poet,
But tedious philosophic chapters
Quite stifle my poetic raptures,
And I to Phoebus bade adieu
When first I took my leave of you.
Now algebra, geometry,
Arithmetic, astronomy,
Optics, chronology, and statics,
All tiresome parts of mathematics;
With twenty harder names than these
Disturb my brain, and break my peace.
All seeming inconsistencies
Are nicely solved by a's, and b's;
Our eyesight is disproved by prisms,
Our arguments by syllogisms.
If I should confidently write
This ink is black, this paper white,
Or to express myself yet fuller
Should say that black, or white's a color;
They Would contradict it, and perplex one
With motion, rays, and their reflection,
And solve the apparent falsehood by
The curious texture of the eye.
Should I the poker want, and take it,
When It looks as hot, as fire can make it,
And burn my finger, and my coat,
They Would flatly tell me, it is not hot;
The fire, say they, has in it, it is true,
The power of causing heat in you;
But no more heat's in fire that heats you,
Than there is pain in stick that beats you.
Thus too philosophers expound
The names of odor, taste, and sound;
The salts, and juices in all meat
Affect the tongues of them that eat,
And by some secret poignant power
Give them the taste of sweet, and sour.
Carnations, violets, and roses
Cause a sensation in our noses;
But then there is none of us can tell
The things themselves have taste, or smell.
So when melodious Mason sings,
Or Gethring tunes the trembling strings,
Or when the trumpet's brisk alarms
Call forth the cheerful youth to arms,
Conveyed through undulating air
The music's only in the ear.
We Are told how planets roll on high,
How large their orbits, and how nigh;
I hope in little time to know
Whether the moon's a cheese, or no;
Whether the man in it, as some tell ye,
With beef and carrots fills his belly;
Why like a lunatic confined
He lives at distance from mankind;
When he at one good hearty shake,
Might whirl his prison off his back;
Or like a maggot in a nut
Full bravely eat his passage out.
Who knows what vast discoveries
From such inquiries might arise?
But feuds, and tumults in the nation
Disturb such curious speculation.
Cambridge from furious broils of state,
Foresees her near-approaching fate;
Her surest patrons are removed,
And her triumphant foes approved.
No more! this due to friendship take,
Not idly writ for writing's sake;
No longer question my respect,
Nor call this short delay neglect;
At least excuse it, when vou see
This pledge of my sincerity
For one who rhimes to make you easy,
And his invention strains to please you,
To show his friendship cracks his brains,
Sure is a madman if he feigns.
The INDOLENT.
WHAT self sufficiency and false content
Benumb the senses of the indolent!
Dead to all purposes of good, or ill,
Alive alone in an unactive will.
His only vice in's no good action lies,
And his sole virtue is his want of vice.
Business he deems too hard, trifles too easy,
And doing nothing finds himself too busy.
Silence he cannot bear, noise is distraction,
Noise kills with bustle, silence with reflection;
No want he feels, -- what has he to pursue?
To him it is less to suffer, than to do.
The busy world's a fool; the learned a sot,
And his sole hope to be by all forgot:
Wealth is procured with toil, and kept with fear,
Knowledge by labor purchased costs too dear;
Friendship's a clog, and family a jest,
A wife but a bad bargain at the best;
Honor a bubble, subject to a breath,
And all engagements vain since nulled by death;
Thus all the wise esteem, he can despise,
And caring not, it is he alone is wise:
Yet, all his wish possessing, finds no rest,
And only lives to know, he never can be blessed.
The SONG of SIMEON paraphrased.
By Mr. MERRICK.
IT IS enough -- the hour is come
Now within the silent tomb;
Let this mortal frame decay
Mingled with its kindred clay;
Since thy mercies often of old
By thy chosen seers foretold,
Faithful now and steadfast prove,
God of truth and God of love!
Since at length my aged eye,
Sees the dayspring from on high.
Son of rightcousness, to thee
Lo! the nations bow the knee,
And the realms of distant kings
Own the healing of thy wings.
Those whom death had overspread
With his dark and dreary shade,
Lift their eyes, and from afar
Hail the light of Jacob's star;
Waiting till the promised ray
Turn their darkness into day.
See the beams intensely shed
Shine over Sion's favored head.
Never may they hence remove,
God of truth and God of love!
On the Invention of LETTERS.
TELL me what Genius did the art invent,
The lively image of the voice to paint;
Who first the secret how to color sound,
And to give shape to reason, wisely found;
With bodies how to cloth ideas, taught;
And how to draw the picture of a thought;
Who taught the hand to speak, the eye to hear,
A silent language roving far and near;
Whose softest noise outstrips loud thunder's sound,
And spreads her accents through the world's vast round:
A voice heard by the deaf, spoke by the dumb,
Whose echo reaches long, long time to come;
Which dead men speak as well as those alive --
Tell me what Genius did this art contrive.
The ANSWER.
THE noble art to Cadmus owes its rise,
Of painting words, and speaking to the eyes;
He first in wondrous magic fetters bound
The airy voice, and stopped the flying sound:
The various figures by his pencil wrought,
Gave color, form, and body to the thought.
On WIT.
TRUE wit is like the brilliant stone
Dug from the Indian mine;
Which boasts two various powers in one
To cut as well as shine.
Genius, like that, if polished right,
With the same gifts abounds;
Appears at once both keen and bright,
And sparkles while it wounds.
On a SPIDER.
ARTIST, who underneath my table
Thy curious texture have displayed;
Who, if we may believe the fable,
Were once a fair ingenious maid:
Insidious, restless, watchful spider,
Fear no officious damsel's broom,
Extend thy artful fabric wider,
And spread thy banners round my room.
Swept from the rich man's costly ceiling,
You Are welcome to my homely roof;
Here may thou find a peaceful dwelling,
And undisturbed attend thy woof.
Whilst I thy wondrous fabric stare at,
And think on hapless poet's fate;
Like thee confined to lonely garret,
And rudely banished rooms of state.
And as from out thy tortured body
Thou draw'st thy slender string with pain,
So does he labor, like a noddy,
To spin materials from his brain.
He for some fluttering tawdry creature,
That spreads her charms before his eye;
And that is a conquest little better
Than thine over captive butterfly.
Thus far it is plain we both agree,
Perhaps our deaths may better show it;
It Is ten to one but penury
Ends both the spider and the poet.
The PLAY-THING changed.
KITTY's charming voice and face,
Syren-like, first caught my fancy;
Wit and humor next take place,
And now I dote on sprightly Nancy.
Kitty tunes her pipe in vain,
With airs most languishing and dying;
Calls me false ungrateful swain,
And tries in vain to shoot me slying.
Nancy with resistless art,
Always humorous, gay, and witty;
Has talked herself into my heart,
And quite excluded tuneful Kitty.
Ah Kitty! Love, a wanton boy,
Now pleased with song, and now with prattle,
Still longing for the newest toy,
Has changed his whistle for a rattle.
The FABLE of JOTHAM: To the BOROUGH-HUNTERS.
By RICHARD OWEN CAMBRIDGE, Esquire
Jotham's fable of the trees is the oldest that is extant, and as beautiful as
any which have been made since that time. ADDISON
JUDGES, Chap ix. ver. 8.
OLD Plumb, who though blessed in his Kentish retreat,
Still thrives by his oilshop in Leadenhall-street,
With a Portugal merchant, a knight by creation,
From a borough in Cornwall received invitation.
Well-assured of each vote, well equip't from the alley,
In quest of election-adventures they sally.
Though much they discoursed, the long way to beguile,
Of the earthquakes, the Jews, and the change of the style,
Of the Irish, the stocks, and the lott'ry committee,
They came silent and tired into Exeter city.
"Some books, prithee landlord, to pass a dull hour;
"No nonsense of parsons, or methodists sour,
"No poetical stuff -- a damned jingle of rhimes,
"But some pamphlet that is new, and a touch on the times."
"O Lord! says mine host, you may hunt the town round,
"I question if any such thing can be found:
"I never was asked for a book by a guest;
"And I Am sure I have all the great folk in the West.
"None of these to my knowledge ever called for a book;
"But see Sir, the woman with fish, and the cook;
"Here Is the fattest of carp, shall we dress you a brace?
"Would you have any soals, or a mullet, or plaice?"
"A place, quoth the knight, we must have to be sure,
"But first let us see that our borough's secure.
"We'll talk of the place when we have settled the poll:
"They may dress us for supper the mullet and soal.
"But do you, my good landlord, look over your shelves,
"For a book we must have, we are so tired of ourselves."
"In troth, Sir, I never had a book in my life,
"But the prayer book and bible I bought for my wife."
"Well! the bible must do; but why don't you take in
"Some monthly collection? the new magazine?"
The bible was brought and laid out on the table,
And opened at Jotham's most apposite fable;
Sir Freeport began with this verse, though no rhyme --
"The trees of the forest went forth on a time,
(To what purpose our candidates scarce could expect,
For it was not, they found, to transplant -- but ELECT)
"To the olive and fig tree their deputies came,
"But by both were refused, and their answer the same:
"Quoth the olive, shall I leave my fatness and oil
"For an unthankful office, a dignified toil?
"Shall I leave, quoth the fig tree, my sweetness and fruit,
"To be envied, or slav'd in so vain a pursuit?
"Thus rebuff'd and surpised they applied to the vine,
"He answered: shall I leave my grapes and my wine,
"(Wine the sovereign cordial of god and of man)
"To be made or the tool or the head of a clan?
"At last, as it always falls out in a scramble,
"The mob gave the cry for a bramble! a bramble!
"A bramble for ever! O! chance unexpected!
"But bramble prevailed and was duly elected."
"O! ho! quoth the knight with a look most profound,
"Now I see there is some good in good books to be found.
"I wish I had read this same bible before:
"Of long miles at the least'twould have saved us fourscore.
"You, Plumb, with your olives and oil might have staid,
"And myself might have tarried my wines to unlade.
"What have merchants to do from their business to ramble!
"Your electioneer-errant should still be a bramble."
Thus ended at once the wise comment on Jotham,
And our citizens' jaunt to the borough of Gotham.
An Elegy written in an empty Assembly-Room.
By the Same.
-- Semperque relinqui
Sola sibi --
VIRG.
ADVERTISEMENT. This poem being a parody on the most remarkable passages in the
well-known epistle of Eloisa to Abelard, it was thought unnecessary to
transcribe any lines from that poem, which is in the hands of all, and in the
memory of most readers.

IN scenes where HALLET's genius has combined
With BROMWICH to amuse and cheer the mind;
Amid this pomp of cost, this pride of art,
What mean these sorrows in a female heart?
Ye crowded walls, whose well-enlighten'd round
With lovers sighs and protestations sound,
Ye pictures flattered by the learned and wise,
Ye glasses ogled by the brightest eyes,
Ye cards, which beauties by their touch have blessed,
Ye chairs, which peers and ministers have pressed,
How are ye changed! like you my fate I moan,
Like you, alas! neglected and alone --
For ah! to me alone no card is come,
I must not go abroad -- and cannot be at home.
Blessed be that social power, the first who paired
The erring footman with the unerring card.
'Twas VENUS sure; for by their faithful aid
The whispering lover meets the blushing maid:
From solitude they give the cheerful call
To the choice supper, or the sprightly ball:
Speed the soft summons of the gay and fair,
From distant Bloomsbury to Grosvenor's square;
And bring the colonel to the tender hour,
From the parade, the senate, or the Tower.
Ye records, patents of our worth and pride!
Our daily lesson, and our nightly guide!
Wherever ye stand disposed in proud array,
The vapors vanish, and the heart is gay;
But when no cards the chimney-glass adorn,
The dismal void with heartfelt shame we mourn;
Conscious neglect inspires a sullen gloom,
And brooding sadness fills the slighted room.
If but some happier female's card I Have seen,
I swell with rage, or sicken with the spleen;
While artful pride conceals the bursting tear,
With some forced banter or affected sneer:
But now grown desperate, and beyond all hope,
I curse the ball, the d -- ss, and the pope.
And as the loads of borrowed plate go by,
Tax it! ye greedy ministers, I cry.
How shall I feel when Sol resigns his light,
To this proud splendid goddess of the night!
Then when her awkward guests in measure beat
The crowded floors, which groan beneath their feet!
What thoughts in solitude shall then possess
My tortured mind, or soften my distress!
Not all that envious malice can suggest
Will sooth the tumults of my raging breast.
(For Envy's lost amidst the numerous train,
And hisses with her hundred snakes in vain)
Though with contempt each despicable soul
Singly I view, -- I must revere the whole.
The methodist in her peculiar lot,
The world forgetting, by the world forgot,
Though single happy, though alone is proud,
She thinks of heaven (she thinks not of a crowd)
And if she ever feels a vap'rish qualm,
Some The title of a book of modern devotion.
drop of honey, or some holy balm,
The pious prophet of her sect distills,
And her pure soul seraphic rapture fills;
Grace shines around her with serenest beams,
And whispering W*** prompts her golden dreams.
Far other dreams my sensual soul employ,
While conscious nature tastes unholy joy:
I view the traces of experienced charms,
And clasp the regimentals in my arms.
To dream last night I closed my blubbered eyes;
Ye soft illusions, dear deceits arise:
Alas! no more; methinks I wandering go
To distant quarters 'midst the Highland snow:
To the dark inn where never wax-light burns,
Where in smoked tap'stry faded DIDO mourns;
To some assembly in a country town,
And meet the colonel -- in a parson's gown --
I start -- I shriek --
O! could I on my waking brain impose,
Or but forget at least my present woes!
Forget 'em -- how! -- each rattling coach suggests
The loathed ideas of the crowding guests.
To visit -- were to publish my disgrace;
To meet the spleen in every other place;
To join old maids and dowagers forlorn;
And be at once their comfort and their scorn!
For once, to read -- with this distempered brain,
Even modern novels lend their aid in vain.
My MANDOLINE -- what place can music find
Amid the discord of my restless mind?
How shall I waste this time which slowly flies!
How lull to slumber my reluctant eyes!
This night the happy and the unhappy keep
Vigils alike, -- N*** has murdered sleep.
The FAKEER: A TALE.
By the Same.
A FAKEER (a religious well known in the East
Not much like a parson, still less like a priest)
With no canting, no sly jesuitical arts,
Field-preaching, hypocrisy, learning or parts;
By a happy refinement in mortification,
Grew the oracle, saint, and the pope of his nation.
But what did he do this esteem to acquire?
Did he torture his head or his bosom with fire?
Was his neck in a portable pillory cased?
Did he fasten a chain to his leg or his waist?
No. His holiness rose to this sovereign pitch
By the merit of running long nails in his breech.
A wealthy young Indian, approaching the shrine,
Thus in banter accosts the prophetic divine:
This tribute accept for your interest with FO,
Whom with torture you serve, and whose will you must know;
To your suppliant disclose his immortal decree;
Tell me which of the heavens is allotted for me.
FAKEER. Let me first know your merits.

INDIAN. I strive to be just:
To be true to my friend, to my wife, to my trust:
In religion I duly observe every form:
With an heart to my country devoted and warm:
I give to the poor, and I lend to the rich --

FAKEER. But how many nails do you run in your breech?

INDIAN. With submission I speak to your rev'rence's tail;
But mine has no taste for a ten-penny nail.

FAKEER. Well! I Will pray to our prophet and get you preferred;
Though no farther expect than to heaven the third.
With me in the thirtieth your seat to obtain,
You must qualify duly with hunger and pain.

INDIAN. With you in the thirtieth! you impudent rogue!
Can such wretches as you give to madness a vogue!
Though the priesthood of FO on the vulgar impose,
By squinting whole years at the end of their nose,
Though with cruel devices of mortification
They adore a vain idol of modern creation,
Does the God of the heavens such a service direct?
Can his mercy approve a self-punishing sect?
Will his wisdom be worshipped with chains and with nails?
Or ever look for his rites in your noses and tails?
Come along to my house and these penances leave,
Give your belly a feast, and your breech a reprieve.

This reasoning unhinged each fanatical notion;
And staggered our saint, in his chair of promotion.
At length with reluctance he rose from his seat:
And resigning his nails and his fame for retreat;
Two weeks his new life he admired and enjoyed:
The third he with plenty and quiet was cloyed.
To live undistinguished to him was the pain,
An existence unnotic'd he could not sustain.
In retirement he sighed for the fame-giving chair:
For the crowd to admire him, to reverence and stare:
No endearments of pleasure and ease could prevail;
He the saintship resumed, and new larded his tail.
Our FAKEER represents all the vot'ries of fame;
Their ideas, their means, and their end is the same:
The sportsman, the buck; all the heroes of vice,
With their gallantry, lewdness, the bottle and dice;
The poets, the critics, the mataphysicians,
The courtier, the patriot, all politicians;
The statesman begirt with the importunate ring,
(I had almost completed my list with the king)
All labor alike to illustrate my tale;
All tortured by choice with the invisible nail.
To Mr. WHITEHEAD, On his being made POET LAUREAT.
By the Same.
IT IS so -- though we are surpised to hear it:
The laurel is bestowed on merit.
How hushed is every envious voice!
Confounded by so just a choice,
Though by prescriptive right prepared
To libel the selected bard.
But as you see the statesman's fate
In this our democratic state,
Whom virtue strives in vain to guard
From the rude pamphlet and the card;
You Will find the demagogues of Pindus
In envy not a jot behind us:
For each Aonian politician
Whose element is opposition,
Will show how greatly they surpass us,
In gall and wormwood at Parnassus.
Thus as the same detracting spirit
Attends on all distinguished merit,
When it is your turn, observe, the quarrel
Is not with you, but with the laurel.
Suppose that laurel on your brow,
For cypress changed, funereal bough!
See all things take a different turn!
The very critics sweetly mourn,
And leave their satire's poisonous sting
In plaintive elegies to sing:
With solemn threnody and dirge
Conduct you to Elysium's verge.
At Westminster the surpliced dean
The sad but honorable scene
Prepares. The well-attended hearse
Bears you amid the kings of verse.
Each rite observed, each duty paid,
Your fame on marble is displayed,
With symbols which your genius suit,
The mask, the buskin, and the flute:
The laurel crown aloft is hung:
And over the sculptured lyre unstrung
Sad allegoric figures leaning --
(How folks will gape to find their meaning!)
And a long epitaph is spread
Which happy You will never read.
But hold -- The change is so inviting
I own, I tremble while I Am writing.
Yet, WHITEHEAD, it is too soon to lose you;
Let critics flatter or abuse you,
O! teach us, ere you change the scene
To Stygian banks from Hippocrene,
How freeborn bards should strike the strings,
And how a Briton write to kings.
Verses on the Prospect of planting ARTS and LEARNING in AMERICA.
By the late Dr. BERKELEY, Bishop of CLOYNE.
THE Muse, disgusted at an age and clime,
Barren of every glorious theme,
In distant lands now waits a better time,
Producing subjects worthy fame:
In happy climes, where from the genial sun
And virgin earth such scenes ensue,
The force of art by nature seems outdone,
And fancied beauties by the true:
In happy climes the seat of innocence,
Where nature guides and virtue rules,
Where men shall not impose for truth and sense,
The pedantry of courts and schools:
There shall be sung another golden age,
The rise of empire and of arts,
The good and great inspiring epic rage,
The wisest heads and noblest hearts.
Not such as Europe breeds in her decay;
Such as she bred when fresh and young,
When heavenly flame did animate her clay,
By future poets shall be sung.
Westward the course of empire takes its way;
The four first acts already past,
A fifth shall close the drama with the day;
Time's noblest offspring is the last.
To Mr. MASON.
By WILLIAM WHITEHEAD, Esquire
I.
BELIEVE me, MASON, it is in vain
Thy fortitude the torrent braves;
Thou too must bear the inglorious chain;
The world, the world will have its slaves.
The chosen friend, for converse sweet,
The small, yet elegant retreat,
Are peaceful unambitious views
Which early fancy loves to form.
When aided by the ingenuous Muse,
She turns the philosophic page,
And sees the wise of every age
With Nature's dictates warm.
II.
But ah! to few has fortune given
The choice, to take or to refuse;
To fewer still indulgent heaven
Allots the very will to choose,
And why are varying schemes preferred?
Man mixes with the common herd
By custom guided to pursue
Or wealth, or honors, fame, or ease,
What others wish he wishes too,
Nor from his own peculiar choice,
'Till strengthened by the public voice,
His very pleasures please.
III.
How often, beneath some hoary shade
Where Came glides indolently slow,
Have thou, as indolently laid,
Preferred to heaven thy favorite vow,
"Here, here forever let me stay,
"Here calmly loiter life away,
"Nor all those vain connections know
"Which fetter down the freeborn mind
"The slave of interest, or of show;
"Whilst yon gay tenant of the grove,
"The happier heir of Nature's love,
"Can warble unconfined."
IV.
Yet sure, my friend, the eternal plan
By truth unerring was designed;
Inferior parts were made for man,
But man himself for all mankind.
Then by the apparent judge the unseen;
Behold how rolls this vast machine
To one great end, however withstood,
Directing it is impartial course.
All labor for the general good.
Some stem the wave, some till the soil,
By choice the bold, the ambitious toil,
The indolent by force.
V.
That bird, thy fancy frees from care,
With many a fear, unknown to thee,
Must rove to glean his scanty fare
From field to field, from tree to tree,
His lot, united with his kind,
Has all his little joys confined;
The Lover's and the Parent's ties
Alarm by turns his anxious breast,
Yet, bound by fate, by instinct wise,
He hails with songs the rising morn,
And pleased at Evening's cool return
He sings himself to rest.
VI.
And tell me, has not Nature made
Some stated void for thee to fill,
Some spring, some wheel which asks thy aid
To move, regardless of thy will?
Go then, go feel with glad surprise
New bliss from new attentions rise;
Till, happier in thy wider sphere,
Thou quit thy darling schemes of ease;
Nay, glowing in the full career
Even wish thy virtuous labors more;
Nor 'till the toilsome day is over
Expect the night of peace.
ODE. To INDEPENDENCY.
By Mr. MASON.
I.
HERE, on my native shore reclined,
While Silence rules this midnight hour,
I woo thee, GODDESS. On my musing mind
Descend, propitious Power!
And bid these ruffling gales of grief subside:
Bid my calmed soul with all thy influence shine;
As you chaste Orb along this ample tide
Draws the long luster of her silver line,
While the hushed breeze its last weak whisper blows,
And lulls old HUMBER to his deep repose.
II.
Come to thy Vot'ry's ardent prayer,
In all thy graceful plainness dressed;
No knot confines thy waving hair,
No zone thy floating vest.
Unsullied Honor decks thine open brow,
And Candor brightens in thy modest eye:
Thy blush is warm Content's aetherial glow,
Thy smile is Peace; thy step is Liberty:
Thou scatter'st blessings round with lavish hand,
A Spring with careless fragrance fills the land.
III.
As now over this lone beach I stray;
Thy Andrew Marvel, born at Kingston upon Hull in the year 1620.
favorite Swain often stole along,
And artless wove his Doric lay,
Far from the busy throng.
Thou heard'st him, Goddess, strike the tender string,
And badst his soul with bolder passions move:
Strait these responsive shores forgot to ring,
With Beauty's praise, or plaint of slighted Love;
To loftier flights his daring Genius rose,
And led the war, against thine, and Freedom's foes.
IV.
Pointed with Satire's keenest steel,
The shafts of Wit he darts around;
Even Parker, bishop of Oxford.
mitred Dullness learns to feel,
And shrinks beneath the wound.
In aweful poverty his honest Muse
Walks forth vindictive through a venal land:
In vain Corruption sheds her golden dews,
In vain Oppression lifts her iron hand;
He scorns them both, and, armed with truth alone,
Bids Lust and Folly tremble on the throne.
V.
Behold, like him, immortal Maid,
The Muses vestal fires I bring:
Here at thy feet the sparks I spread;
Propitious wave thy wing,
And fan them to that dazzling blaze of Song,
That glares tremendous on the Sons of Pride.
But, hark, methinks I hear her hallowed tongue!
In distant trills it echos over the tide;
Now meets mine ear with warbles wildly free,
As swells the Lark's meridian ecstacy.
VI.
"Fond Youth! to MARVELL's patriot fame,
"Thy humble breast must never aspire.
"Yet nourish still the lambent flame;
"Still strike thy blameless Lyre:
"Led by the moral Muse securely rove;
"And all the vernal sweets thy vacant Youth
"Can cull from busy Fancy's fairy grove,
"O hang their foliage round the fane of Truth:
"To arts like these devote thy tuneful toil,
"And meet its fair reward in D'ARCY's smile."
VII.
"'It Is he, my Son, alone shall cheer
"Thy sickening soul; at that sad hour,
"When over a much-loved Parent's bier,
"Thy duteous Sorrows shower:
"At that sad hour, when all thy hopes decline;
"When pining Care leads on her pallid train,
"And sees thee, like the weak, and widowed Vine,
"Winding thy blasted tendrils over the plain.
"At that sad hour shall D'ARCY lend his aid,
"And raise with Friendship's arm thy drooping head.
VIII.
This fragrant wreath, the Muses meed,
"That bloomed those vocal shades among,
"Where never Flattery dared to tread,
"Or Interest's servile throng;
"Receive, my favored Son, at my command,
"And keep, with sacred care, for D'ARCY's brow:
"Tell him, 'twas wove by my immortal hand,
"I breathed on every flower a purer glow;
"Say, for thy sake, I send the gift divine
"To him, who calls thee HIS, yet makes thee MINE."
ODE. On MELANCHOLY. To a FRIEND.
By the Same.
I.
AH! cease this kind persuasive strain,
Which, when it flows from Friendship's tongue,
However weak, however vain,
O'erpowers beyond the Siren's song:
Leave me, my friend, indulgent go,
And let me muse upon my woe.
Why lure me from these pale retreats?
Why rob me of these pensive sweets?
Can Musick's voice, can Beauty's eye,
Can Painting's glowing hand, supply
A charm so suited to my mind,
As blows this hollow gust of wind,
As drops this little weeping rill
Soft-tinkling down the moss-grown hill,
Whilst through the west, where sinks the crimson Day,
Meek Twilight slowly sails, and waves her banners gray?
II.
Say, from Affliction's various source
Do none but turbid waters flow?
And cannot Fancy clear their course?
For Fancy is the friend of Woe.
Say, mid that grove, in love-lorn state,
When yon poor Ringdove mourns her mate,
Is all, that meets the shepherd's ear,
Inspired by anguish, and despair?
Ah no, fair Fancy rules the Song:
She swells her throat; she guides her tongue;
She bids the waving Aspin-spray
Quiver in Cadence to her lay;
She bids the fringed Osiers bow,
And rustle round the lake below,
To suit the tenor of her gurgling sighs,
And sooth her throbbing breast with solemn sympathies.
III.
To thee, whose young and polished brow
The wrinkling hand of Sorrow spares;
Whose cheeks, bestrew'd with roses, know
No channel for the tide of tears;
To thee yon Abbey dank, and lone,
Where Ivy chains each mouldering stone
That nods over many a Martyr's tomb,
May cast a formidable gloom.
Yet Some there are, who, free from fear,
Could wander through the cloisters drear,
Could rove each desolated Isle,
Though midnight thunders shook the pile;
And dauntless view, or seem to view,
(As faintly flash the lightnings blue)
Thin shivering Ghosts from yawning charnels throng,
And glance with silent sweep the shaggy vaults along.
IV.
But such terrific charms as these,
I ask not yet: My sober mind
The fainter forms of sadness please;
My sorrows are of softer kind.
Through this still valley let me stray,
Wrapped in some strain of pensive GRAY:
Whose lofty Genius bears along
The conscious dignity of Song;
And, scorning from the sacred store
To waste a note on Pride, or Power,
Roves, when the glimmering twilight glooms,
And warbles mid the rustic tombs:
He too perchance (for well I know,
His heart would melt with friendly woe)
He too perchance, when these poor limbs are laid,
Will heave one tuneful sigh, and sooth my hovering Shade.
ODE.
By Mr. GRAY.
PHONANTA SYNETOISI --
PINDAR, Olymp. II.
I. 1.
AWAKE, Aeolian lyre, awake,
And give to rapture all thy trembling strings.
From Helicon's harmonious springs
A thousand rills their mazy progress take:
The laughing flowers, that round them blow,
Drink life and fragrance as they flow.
Now the rich stream of music winds along
Deep, majestic, smooth, and strong,
Through verdant vales, and Ceres' golden reign:
Now rolling down the steep amain,
Headlong, impetuous, see it pour:
The rocks, and nodding groves rebellow to the roar.
I. 2.
Oh! Sovereign of the willing soul,
Parent of sweet and solemn-breathing airs,
Enchanting shell! the sullen Cares,
And franctic Passions hear thy soft control.
On Thracia's hills the Lord of War
Has curbed the fury of his car,
And dropped his thirsty lance at thy command.
Perching on the scept'red hand
Of Jove, thy magic lulls the feathered king
With ruffled plumes, and flagging wing:
Quenched in dark clouds of slumber lie
The terror of his beak, and lightenings of his eye.
I. 3.
Thee the voice, the dance, obey,
Tempered to thy warbled lay.
Over Idalia's velvet-green
The rosy-crowned Loves are seen
On Cytherea's day,
With antic Sports, and blue-eyed Pleasures,
Frisking light in frolic measures;
Now pursuing, now retreating,
Now in circling troops they meet:
To brisk notes in cadence beating
Glance their many-twinkling feet.
Slow melting strains their Queen's approach declare:
Wherever she turns the Graces homage pay.
With arms sublime, that float upon the air,
In gliding state she wins her easy way:
Over her warm cheek, and rising bosom, move
The bloom of young Desire, and purple light of Love.
II. 1.
Man's feeble race what Ills await,
Labor, and Penury, the racks of Pain,
Disease, and Sorrow's weeping train,
And Death, sad refuge from the storms of Fate!
The fond complaint, my Song, disprove,
And justify the laws of Jove.
Say, has he given in vain the heavenly Muse?
Night, and all her sickly dews,
Her Specter wan, and Birds of boding cry,
He gives to range the dreary sky:
Till down the eastern cliffs afar
Hyperion's march they spy, and glittering shafts of war.
II. 2.
In climes beyond the solar road,
Where shaggy forms over ice-built mountains roam,
The Muse has broke the twilight-gloom
To cheer the shivering Native's dull abode.
And often, beneath the odorous shade
Of Chili's boundless forests laid,
She deigns to hear the savage Youth repeat,
In loose numbers wildly sweet,
Their feather-cinctured Chiefs, and dusky Loves.
Her track, wherever the Goddess roves,
Glory pursue, and generous Shame,
The unconquerable Mind, and Freedom's holy flame.
II. 3.
Woods, that wave over Delphi's steep,
^es, that crown the Egaean deep,
^ields, that cool Ilissus laves,
Or where Maeander's amber waves
(...) lingering Lab'rinths creep,
How do your tuneful Echo's languish,
Mute, but to the voice of Anguish!
Where each old poetic Mountain
Inspiration breathed around;
Every shade and hallowed Fountain
Murmured deep a solemn sound:
Till the sad Nine in Greece's evil hour
Left their Parnassus for the Latian plains.
Alike they scorn the pomp of tyrant-Power,
And coward Vice, that revels in her chains.
When Latium had her lofty spirit lost,
They sought, oh Albion! next, thy sea-encircled coast.
III. 1.
Far from the sun and summer-gale,
In thy green lap was Nature's Darling laid,
What time, where lucid Avon strayed,
To Him the mighty Mother did unveil
Her aweful face: The dauntless Child
Stretched sorth his little arms, and smiled.
This pencil take (she said) whose colors clear
Richly paint the vernal year:
Thine too these golden keys, immortal Boy!
This can unlock the gates of Joy;
Of Horror that, and thrilling Fears,
Or open the sacred source of sympathetic Tears.
III. 2.
Nor second He, that rode sublime
Upon the seraph-wings of Ecstasy,
The secrets of the Abyss to spy.
He passed the flaming bounds of Rlace and Time:
The living Throne, the saphire-blaze,
Where Angels tremble while they gaze,
He saw; but blasted with excess of light,
Closed his eyes in endless night.
Behold, where Dryden's less presumptuous car,
Wide over the fields of Glory bear
Two Coursers of ethereal race,
With necks in thunder clothed, and long-resounding pace.
III. 3.
Hark, his hands the lyre explore!
Bright-eyed Fancy hovering over
Scatters from her pictured urn
Thoughts, that breathe, and words, that burn.
But ah! it is heard no more --
Oh! Lyre divine, what daring Spirit
Wakes thee now? though he inherit
Nor the pride, nor ample pinion,
That the Theban Eagle bear
Sailing with supreme dominion
Through the azure deep of air:
Yet often before his infant eyes would run
Such forms, as glitter in the Muse's ray
With orient hues, unborrow'd of the Sun:
Yet shall he mount, and keep his distant way
Beyond the limits of a vulgar fate,
Beneath the Good how far -- but far above the Great.
ODE.
By the Same.
The following Ode is founded on a tradition current in Wales, that EDWARD the
First, when he completed the conquest of that country, ordered all the Bards,
that fell into his hands, to be put to death.

I. 1.
'RUIN seize thee, ruthless King!
'Confusion on thy banners wait,
'Tho' fanned by Conquest's crimson wing
'They mock the air with idle state.
'Helm, nor Hauberk's twisted mail,
'Nor even thy virtues, Tyrant, shall avail
'To save thy secret soul from nightly fears,
'From Cambria's curse, from Cambria's tears!'
Such were the sounds, that over the crested pride
Of the first Edward scattered wild dismay,
As down the steep of Snowdon's shaggy side
He wound with toilsome march his long array.
Stout Gloucester stood aghast in speechless trance:
To arms! cried Mortimer, and couched his quivering lance.
I. 2.
On a rock, whose haughty brow
Frowns over old Conway's foaming flood,
Robed in the sable garb of woe,
With haggard eyes the Poet stood;
(Loose his beard, and hoary hair
Streamed, like a meteor, to the troubled air)
And with a Master's hand, and Prophet's fire,
Struck the deep sorrows of his lyre.
'Hark, how each giant-oak, and desert cave,
'Sighs to the torrent's aweful voice beneath!
'O'er thee, oh King! their hundred arms they wave,
'Revenge on thee in hoarser murmurs breathe;
'Vocal no more, since Cambria's fatal day,
'To highborn Hoel's harp, or soft Llewellyn's lay.
I. 3.
'Cold is Cadwallo's tongue,
'That hushed the stormy main:
'Brave Urien sleeps upon his craggy bed:
'Mountains, ye mourn in vain
'Modred, whose magic song
'Made huge Plinlimmon bow his cloud-top'd head.
'On dreary Arvon's shore they lie,
'Smear'd with gore, and ghastly pale:
'Far, far aloof the affrighted ravens sail;
'The famished Eagle screams, and passes by.
'Dear lost companions of my tuneful art,
'Dear, as the light, that visits these sad eyes,
'Dear, as the ruddy drops that warm my heart,
'Ye died amidst your dying country's cries --
'No more I weep. They do not sleep.
'On yonder cliffs, a griesly band,
'I see them sit, they linger yet,
'Avengers of their native land:
'With me in dreadful harmony they join,
'And weave with bloody hands the tissue of thy line.
II. 1.
"Weave the warp, and weave the woof,
"The winding sheet of Edward's race,
"Give ample room, and verge enough
"The characters of hell to trace.
"Mark the year, and mark the night,
"When Severn shall re-echo with affright
"The shrieks of death, through Berkley's roofs that ring,
"Shrieks of an agonizing King!
"She-Wolf of France, with unrelenting fangs,
"That tear'st the bowels of thy mangled Mate,
"From thee be born, who over thy country hangs
"The scourge of Heaven. What Terrors round him wait!
"Amazement in his van, with Flight combined,
"And Sorrow's faded form, and Solitude behind.
II. 2.
"Mighty Victor, mighty Lord,
"Low on his funeral couch he lies!
"No pitying heart, no eye afford
"A tear to grace his obsequies.
Is the sable Warrior fled?
"Thy son is gone. He rests among the Dead.
"The Swarm, that in thy noontide beam were born?
"Gone to salute the rising Morn.
"Fair laughs the Morn, and soft the Zephyr blows,
"While proudly riding over the azure realm
"In gallant trim the gilded Vessel goes;
"Youth on the prow, and Pleasure at the helm;
"Regardless of the sweeping Whirlwind's sway,
"That, hushed in grim repose, expects his evening-prey.
II. 3.
" Richard the Second, (as we are told by Archbishop Scroop, Thomas of
Walsingham, and all the older Writers,) was starved to death. The story of his
assassination by Sir Piers of Exon, is of much later date.
Fill high the sparkling bowl,
"The rich repast prepare,
"Reft of a crown, he yet may share the feast:
"Close by the regal chair
"Fell Thirst and Famine scowl
"A baleful smile upon their baffled Guest.
"Heard ye the din of battle bray,
"Lance to lance, and horse to horse?
"Long Years of havoc urge their destined course,
"And through the kindred squadrons mow their way.
"Ye Towers of Julius, London's lasting shame,
"With many a foul and midnight murder fed,
"Revere his Consort's faith, his Father's fame,
"And spare the meek Usurper's holy head.
"Above, below, the rose of snow,
"Twined with her blushing foe, we spread:
"The bristled Boar in infant-gore
"Wallows beneath the thorny shade.
"Now, Brothers, bending over the accursed loom,
"Stamp we our vengeance deep, and ratify his doom.
III. 1.
"Edward, lo! to sudden fate
"(Weave we the woof. The thread is spun)
" Eleanor of Castile, died a few years after the conquest of Wales. The heroic
proof she gave of her affection for her Lord is well known. The monuments of
his regret, and sorrow for the loss of her, are still to be seen in several
parts of England.
Half of thy heart we consecrate.
"(The web is wove. The work is done.)"
'Stay, oh stay! nor thus forlorn
'Leave me unblessed, unpitied, here to mourn:
'In yon bright track, that fires the western skies,
'They melt, they vanish from my eyes.
'But oh! what solemn scenes on Snowdon's height
'Descending slow their glittering skirts unroll?
'Visions of glory, spare my aching sight,
'Ye unborn Ages, crowd not on my soul!
'No more our long-lost Arthur we bewail.
'All-hail Accession of the line of Tudor.
, ye genuine Kings, Britannia's Issue, hail!
III. 2.
'Girt with many a Baron bold,
'Sublime their starry fronts they rear;
'And gorgeous Dames, and Statesmen old
'In bearded majesty, appear.
'In the midst a Form divine!
'Her eye proclaims her of the Briton-Line;
'Her lyon-port, her awe-commanding face,
'Attemper'd sweet to virgin-grace.
'What strings symphonious tremble in the air,
'What strains of vocal transport round her play!
'Hear from the grave, great Taliessin Taliessin, Chief of the Bards,
flourished in the VIth Century. His works are still preserved, and his memory
held in high veneration among his Countrymen.
, hear;
'They breathe a soul to animate thy clay.
'Bright Rapture calls, and soaring, as she sings,
'Waves in the eye of Heaven her many-colour'd wings;
III. 3.
'The verse adorn again
'Fierce War, and faithful Love,
'And Truth severe, by fairy Fiction dressed.
'In buskined measures move
'Pale Grief, and pleasing Pain,
'With Horror, Tyrant of the throbbing breast.
'A Voice, as of the Cherub-Choir,
'Gales from blooming Eden bear;
'And distant warblings lessen on my ear,
'That lost in long futurity expire.
'Fond impious Man, think thou, yon sanguine cloud,
'Rais'd by thy breath, has quenched the Orb of day?
'To-morrow he repairs the golden flood,
'And warms the nations with redoubled ray.
'Enough for me: With joy I see
'The different doom our Fates assign.
'Be thine Despair, and sceptered Care,
'To triumph, and to die, are mine.'
He spoke, and headlong from the mountain's height
Deep in the roaring tide he plunged to endless night.


POSTSCRIPT.
HAVING now, by the advice and assistance of my friends, brought this
Collection of POEMS to a competent size, it has been thought proper that the
further progress of its growth should here be stopped. From the loose and
fugitive pieces, some printed, others in manuscript, which for forty or fifty
years past have been thrown into the world, and carelessly left to perish; I
have here, according to the most judicious opinions I could obtain in
distinguishing their merits, endeavored to select and preserve the best. The
favorable reception which the former volumes have met with, demands my warmest
acknowledgments, and calls for all my care in completing the Collection; and
in this respect, if it appear that I have not been altogether negligent, I
shall hope to be allowed the merit, which is all I claim, of having furnished
to the Public an elegant and polite Amusement. Little more need be added, than
to return my thanks to several ingenious friends, who have obligingly
contributed to this Entertainment. If the reader should happen to find, what I
hope he seldom will, any pieces which he may think unworthy of having been
inserted; as it would ill become me to attribute his dislike of them to his own
want of Taste, so I am too conscious of my own deficiencies not to allow him to
impute the insertion of them to mine.

R. DODSLEY.

INDEX to the Sixth Volume.
HYmn to the Naiades, 1746 Page 1 Ode to the Right Hon. Francis E. of
Huntingdon, 1747 15 Ode to the Right Rev. Benjamin Lord Bishop of Winchester 25
Inscriptions, 1. For a Grotto 29 2. For a Statue of Chaucer at Woodstock 30 3.
31 4. 32 5. 33 6. For a Column at Runnymede 34
Ode 35 Ode to the Tiber 37 Elegies, 1. Written at the Convent of Haut Villiers
in Champagne, 1754 41 2. On the Mausoleum of Augustus. To the Right Hon. George
Bussy Villers, Viscount Villers, written at Rome, 1756 44 3. To the Right Hon.
George Simon Harcourt, Viscount Newnham, written at Rome, 1756 47 4. To an
Officer, written at Rome, 1756 50 5. To a Friend Sick, written at Rome, 1756 54
6. To another Friend, written at Rome, 1756 56
The Lyric Muse to Mr. Mason 58 On the Immortality of the Soul, in two Books
60, 76 The Arbor: an Ode to Contentment 91 The Grotto: an Ode to Silence 97
The Picture of Human Life 100 The Dropsical Man 125 Paradise regained 126 To
the Right Hon. Sir Robert Walpole 129 To a Lady on a Landscape of her Drawing
135 Ode to Cupid on Valentine's Day 137 To the Hon. and Rev. F C. 138 To the
Rev. T*** T**, D.D. 142 Vacation 148 To a Lady very handsome, but too sond of
Dress 155 Anacreon. Ode III. 157 An Imitation of Horace, Ode II. Book III. 158
A Reply to a Copy of Verses made in Imitation of Ode II. Book III. of Horace
160 Inscription on a Grotto of Shells at Crux-Easton, the Work of Nine young
Ladies 161 Verses occasioned by seeing a Grotto built by Nine Sisters 162 An
Excuse for Inconstancy, 1737 ibid. To Venus. A Rant, 1732 164 The Power of
Music. A Song. Imitated from the Spanish 166 Letter from Smyrna to his Sisters
at Crux-Easton, 1733 167 Part of a Letter to my Sisters at Crux-Easton, wrote
from Cairo in Egypt, August 1734 172 Leter from Marseilles to my Sisters at
Crux-Easton, May 1735 174 The History of Porsenna, King of Russia, in two Books
178 The Ever-Green 211 Answer 212 Candor ibid. Lysander to Cloe 213 Cloe to
Lysander 215 To the Memory of an agreeable Lady buried in Marriage to a Person
undeserving her 216 An Elegy, written on Valentine Morning 217 The Dowager 221
Ode to the Hon. *** 225 To Miss *** 227 To Chloe, written on the Author's Birth
Day 229 Lady Mary W***, to Sir W*** Y*** 230 Sir W** Y***'s Answer ibid. Miss
Soper's Answer to a Lady, who invited her to retire into a monastic Life at St.
Cross, near Winchester 231 Repentance 232 A Song 233 Cynthia, an Elegiac Poem
234 Dialogue to Chlorinda 239 To Chlorinda 241 The Fable of Ixion. To Chlorinda
242 A Tale. To Chlorinda 246 Ode on Lyric Poetry 250 Arion. an Ode 253 Horace,
Book II. Ode II. 255 A Panegyric on Ale 258 Ode to the Genius of Italy,
occasioned by the Earl of Corke's going Abroad 263 To C*** P***, Esquire 265
Epistle from the late Lord Vise. B -- gb -- ke to Miss Lucy A -- k -- ns 267
The Cheat's Apology 268 Song 270 Another 271 To Mr. Grenville on his intended
Resignation ibid. To Mr. Garrick, on his erecting a Temple and Statue to
Shakespeare 273 On the Birthday of Shakespeare. A Cento. Taken from his Works
275 An Ode to Sculpture 276 True Resignation 280 Epistle from the King of
Prussia to Mr. Voltaire 281 At seeing Archbishop Williams's Monument in
Carnarvonshire 284 Extempore Verses upon a Trial of Skill between the two great
Masters of Defense, Messieurs Figg and Sutton 286 A Letter from Cambridge to a
young Gentleman at Eton School 290 The Indolent 294 The Song of Simeon
paraphrased 295 On the Invention of Letters 296 The Answer 297 On Wit ibid. On
a Spider 298 The Play-Thing changed 299 The Fable of Jotham: To the
Borough-Hunters 300 An Elegy written in an empty Assembly-Room 302 The Fakeer:
A Tale 306 To Mr. Whitehead, on his being made Poet Laureat 309 Verses on the
Prospect of planting Arts and Learning in America 311 To Mr. Mason 312 Ode. To
Independency 315 Ode. On Melancholy. To a Friend 318 Ode 321 Ode 326 Postscript
333
The END.

