THE TOBACCONIST, A COMEDY OF TWO ACTS Altered from BEN JOHNSON. Acted at the
THEATERS ROYAL IN THE HAY-MARKET AND EDINBURGH. (With universal applause)

Qui vult decipi, decipiatur. LONDON: Printed for J. BELL, near Exeter Change
in the Strand, and C. ETHERINGTON, at York. M, DCC, LXXI.

DEDICATION TO Sir Francis Delaval, Knight of the Bath.
SIR,
YOUR taste for, and critical knowledge of Dramatic Compositions, deserve an
offering of more worth than the following trifle; however, considered merely as
a mode to convey my sense of obligation conferred, I hope it will at least
appear an excuseable tresspass of,

SIR, Your most respectful and very obedient servant The AUTHOR.
July 1771.
PROLOGUE, Written and Spoken by Mr. GENTLEMAN.
BEN JOHNSON's name, in every ear of taste,
Must with respect, and countenance be graced;
No pen the lines of nature better drew,
No wit or satire ever higher flew;
An early pillar of the English stage,
His pieces were true pictures of the age;
Time-worn they feel impair -- yet still must please.
Nervous and just, though void of modern ease.
Fashions, in characters as well as clothes,
Change, though less often, as wavering fancy flows;
Witches and fairies with their midnight train,
No longer revel on the blasted plain;
Now every simpleton of britain's isle,
At such a fraud as Alchymy would smile;
Yet being only changed in name and shapes,
Scarce one in ten the gilded bait escapes.
Haste to the hall where law is sold like ware,
How many long robbed alchymsts ply there;
What hopes to gudgeon clients they unfold,
While empty quibbles turn to solid gold;
See swarming quacks! -- so public folly wills
Convert to gold their health-destroying pills
Change Alley view -- that scene of transmutation
That base alchemic bubble of the nation;
See beauty's self resign its brightest charms
And turn to gold in age's frozen arms.
Search all the world, examine every part;
You Will find each man an alchymist at heart
In every clime we find, if truth be told
The universal deity is gold.
Whatever of merit you perceive this night,
Grant your old bard as his undoubted right
My brain has labored -- feebly I confess,
Only to furnish a more modern dress.
My weak endeavors let your candor raise,
They hope indulgence, though they reach not praise.
Dramatis Personae.
Abel Drugger, Mr. WESTON. Subtle, Mr. GARDNER. Face, Mr. ROBSON. Sir Epicure
Mammon, Mr. GENTLEMAN. Knowlife, Mr, FEARON. Headlong, Mr. VANDERMERE. Miss
Rantipole, Mrs. DIDIER. Doll Tricksy, Mrs. GARDNER.
ADVERTISEMENT.
AS the PROLOGUE has, in part, apologized for this alteration from BEN JOHNSON,
nothing more need be added, but that it was meant to give Mr. WESTON's
established merit in the character of Abel Drugger, more frequent, familiar,
and compact opportunity of showing itself, than the Old Play can possibly
afford; upon comparison, it will be found, that very little of the original is
retained, but a general idea, and the part of Abel Drugger, to which however,
some additions have been made.

THE TOBACONIST.
ACT THE FIRST.
SCENE I.
Enter SUBTLE, followed by FACE. Subtle. NAY, nay, though thy name be Face, and
thou had a face of brass, thou shall not outface me.


Face. Then must I be unable to handle a most excellent subject; though shame and
thee have long since parted, I will so anatomize that calf's head of thine. --


Subtle. Calf's head! Blood of my life, I have a mind to mark my resentment in
such legible characters upon that Tyburn visage of thine, as will put thy
features in mourning.


Face. Come on then, see whose stomach will bear bruising best; I Will tickle
those pampered sides.


Subtle. A poor, ignorant, impertinent, ungrateful wretch; whose life, to my
disgrace be it spoken, I have saved -- vile emblem of an empty cask, much
sound, no contents, can thou forget the moldy crusts, Suffolk cheese, and
dead small beer, on which thou were starving in common with bare-ribbed rats
and limping mice?


Face. Mighty well, mighty well, master Subtle.


Subtle. Have I not made thee an occasional captain, am I not filling thy
pockets as well as thy belly; have I not taught thee, dull as thou art, to
converse with, and impose on various degrees of mankind? have I not from the
stupidest slave that ever marred common sense sharpened thy wit, smoothed thy
tongue, polished thy manners, regulated thy features, to make thee capable of
thriving in life, and this treatment, my hopeful recompense?


Face. Not so fast, not so fast, master glib-tongue, give echo fair play -- I
do indeed confess myself indebted to thee for being a thriving pupil in the
noble science of knavery, of which I admit thee an able professor; but as
motives constitute, or destroy obligation, I ask what were thine? to strengthen
and further thy own iniquitous designs; and if thou talk of favor I can
bring a powerful balance on my side, to silence your modest worship.


Subtle. With contempt I defy thee.


Face. Nay, then my tongue shall so buffet thee, that thou shall think half
Billingsgate, the seat of thy education, let loose about thy ears, and shrink
back that knave's face of thine like a snail into its shell.


Subtle. Mighty fine!


Face. Remember St. Giles's Scape-grace where I found thee a complete emblem of
poverty, resembling the fruit of a gibbet seven years exposed to wind and
weather, not a coat to thy back, a stocking to thy legs, nor a shoe to thy feet.


Subtle. Very well, go on sir.


Face. Did I not find thee tatterdemallion with a beard two inches long, not
having wherewithal to pay a penny barber; squallid cheeks, furrowed brows, sunk
eyes, and chattering teeth, crawling by the doors of cook-shops, to feed upon
the steam of baked ox heads and shins of beef.


Subtle. Tremble audacious villian at thy insolence -- fear my rage.


Face. Did I not put thee into some liking, snatch thee from Jane Shore's fate,
and when thou had not as much linen about thee as would furnish a tinder
box, did I not like a guardian genius bring thee to this house?


Subtle. Yes thy master's house, which, like a hungry mastiff, thou wast left
to guard, and for a single bone would have let in any thief.


Face. Did I not enable thee to carry on the deceptions of alchymy, fortune
telling, and algebra; your minerals, your vegetals, and animals, to fleece the
credulous vulgar; have not I provided you with conjuror's robes, stills,
glasses, furnaces, coals, and all other materials, to carry on thy profitable
farce? answer me knave have I not done all this?


Subtle. And answer me miscreant, have thou not thy share of the plunder?
sirrah thou art as craving and unthankful as a Bumbailiff.


Face. And thou, poltroon, as tricking as a Jewish Stock-Broker, or an Old
Bailey Solicitor.


Enter Tricksy. Tric. How now my masters, I thought high words struck my ears;
say what churlish point blows the wind from, to make such a gloomy appearance
of foul weather?


Subtle. Slave, there is no name vile enough for thee.


Face. Call me any thing but Subtle, and I care not.


Tric. What tantrums are these I trow? I find my ears were right, some fiend
has spread this mischief between ye, why ye look as black at each other as a
dark Christmas.


Subtle. The dog is more hateful to me than cheese.


Face. And thou to me more detestable than the fulsome steam of a
tallow-chandler's work-shop.


Tric. For shame, talk not so loud, you will discover yourselves.


Face. I care not, welcome pillory, or cart, so that varlet has his share.


Subtle. Content, so thou art cropped, or hanged, first.


Tric. Hey day, hey day, if you are for that sport have among ye; I must raise
my voice too, then look to it; why you couple of paltry, pimping, petulant
knaves cant we comfortably share gains and be quiet, cant we make fools without
being such ourselves; what bring our golden scheme to so fair a prospect, and
let it, according to your jargon, vanish in fumo -- the old dispute revived, I
suppose, about honesty, when you know in your consciences that there is not a
grain in either of you, or if there was, you would starve by it.


Face. Why it is all his fault Doll.


Subtle. I deny it.


Tric. It Is both your faults, you tinder tempered knaves; you sputter at one
another, and yet have as little courage as honesty, I know your high words and
big looks, you spend your lungs to bawl, and strain your limbs to stride,
without any meaning; what, am I a partner in all your undertakings, your
impostures, and shall I waste my wit for nothing; must I encourage fools of
various shapes, and assume as many different characters as Mr. What d' ye
Callum, Protus, to forward your designs, that they may be blown up by idle
passion.


Subtle. Take breath Doll -- take breath.


Tric. Take breath, 'ads my life, shake hands, live peaceably and cheat
industriously, or tremble at my vengeance, I Will blow ye -- get a genteel reward
for apprehending such notorious bites; turn honest myself, and make those necks
and ears you talk so lightly of, tremble at the approach of wooden and hempen
collars.


Face. Then let him leave off grumbling like a bear, that he has the heaviest
part of our plan to execute.


Subtle. So I have; above one half the work, yet not above a third of the
profit, besides ill language.


Tric. And who begins it, old snarler, don't we perform the parts allotted us
cheerfully; if yours exceeds today, our's may match it tomorrow, god's death I
have a good mind to pull you by the nose for this.


Subtle. Nay but dear Doll -- Doll the soft -- Doll the gentle.


Tric. No wheedling, Mr. Morose, but swear.


Subtle. What would thou have me swear.


Tric. To leave idle disputation and high words, for industry in promoting our
common cause, this will best become you.


Subtle. By my hopes I meant no other; what I said was only to spur him up a
little.


Face. Ay but your spurs gall worse than those of a wild London apprentice,
hack-mounted, to take the air on a sunday; they would make even the numbed
sides of a sand ass shrink.


Tric. Come, come, no more, we want no whipping, nor spurring, take hands -- no
frowns but cordiality; I proclaim a peace.


Subtle. Which for thy sake, fair mediatrix, I will keep religiously.


Face. And I.


Tric. I Will have no, no, Frenchified professions, fair faces with designing
hearts -- for my sake! keep the compact for your own.


Face. Wench of spirit, we will, and when we have stuffed our paunches, which,
before our master returns we certainly shall, as a reward for thy pains thou
shall be lady Face, or lady Subtle.


Tric. Marry, come up I trow -- a wonderful catch -- suppose I should be
neither, but of that hereafter is it not near the hour, when that Prince of
simplicity, my sweet swain, the Tobaconist, is to be here?


Subtle. It is, Face be thou in the way, to meet and conduct him to an audience.


Face. Fear not, I Will play the gudgeon with an angler's skill.


Exit. Subtle. Why Doll, thou have almost as many admirers as Hellen.


Tric. Admirers! if the frames were not gilded, the pictures would be
intolerable; as for instance Abel Drugger, whose formality of phiz, and
shallowness of scull, might for a few visits make even melancholy smile; then
my slink-haired methodist preacher, Bawlwell, who wooes me in the style of a
saint, to make me in reality a devil.


Subtle. Ha! ha! ha! well said little volatile.


Tric. Third that cumbersome repository of lewd thoughts, Sir Epicure, who
batters my ears with such pomposity of phrase, that I should always have a
dictionary at hand to understand him; he is, for mouthing, the puffed up crier
of Cupid's court.


Subtle. He is indeed a rich subject for imposition; good wench, thou art to us
as a conjuror's show cloth to draw in the gaping crowd; most of the sheep are
penned by thee, and we fleece them.


Tric. Yes that you do pretty handsomely -- but of all my numerous gallants I
am most troubled with Headlong, the betting, boxing blade, and often fancy I
stand in danger of feeling personally, by way of joke, the dexterity of his
fists.


Subtle. Hush! I hear somebody coming; -- retire till occasion demands thy
presence; and above all remember the feigned madness I have taught thee, for
thy next interview with Sir Epicure -- much depends on that.


Tric. Fear not -- he shall think me fresh slipped from the region of
Moorfields. Exit.


Subtle. Now for suitable importance of look, and essential obscurity of
phrase; by which the prudent are sometimes, and the foolish are always taken in.


Enter FACE, with ABEL DRUGGER. Face. There he is -- the wonder of the world --
past, present, and to come, are as familiar to him as thou art with thy own
face; there is not a fixed Planet, nor even a wandering star, beyond his
knowledge.


A. Drug. May hap so -- then he must have a power of acquaintances -- I should
not remember half of them.


Face. You! -- comparisons are -- but mum -- he turns upon us.


Subtle. So friend thy name is Abel Drugger.


A. Drug. Yes sir.


Subtle. And thou art a vender of Tobacco.


A. Drug. True sir.


Subtle. Free of the grocers.


A Drug. Ay an it please you.


Subtle. Thou art lucky -- a good star reigned at thy birth.


Face. Mind that little Nab.


A. Drug. I hope it was a north star -- they say that is luckiest now.


Subtle. Thou have an illustrious set of features.


A. Drug. Yes very lustrous -- mother used to call me her bright baby Abel.


Subtle. Well -- now for business -- I know thy thoughts yet require thy own
explanation -- what would thou have with me.


A. Drug. This an please your wise worship -- I am a young beginner, and am
building a new shop, if it likes your reverence -- it is just at the corner of
a street -- here is the plot on it; and I would know, by art sir, of your
venerableship which way I should make my door by necromany, and where to place
my boxes, where my shelves, and where my pots -- I should be glad to thrive --
I was wished to you by Captain Face here, my very good friend, who says that
you known men's planets and their good Angels and their bad.


Subtle. He tells you a most solemn truth, I do know them.


A. Drug. I pray you Captain speak for me to Master Doctor, his wisdom has
taken both my courage and breath away.


Face. Well, well, I Will be thy spokesman -- Doctor this is my friend; his name
Abel -- a very honest fellow.


A Drug. Yes very honest.


Face. And no Goldsmith.


A Drug. No, no Goldsmith.


Subtle. And as I have already hinted very fortunate -- at which allow me to
rejoice -- soft -- metaposcopy informs me that your chestnut, or olive colored
hair does never fail; besides your long ears promise extremely well -- you were
born on Wednesday.


A. Drug. Good now -- by my truly and so I was.


Face. Is not this astonishing.


Subtle. The thumb in chiromancy we give to Venus -- the fore finger to Jove,
the midst to Saturn, the ring to Sol, the least to Mercury. --


(While Subtle is examining Drugger's fingers, he steals off a ring.) A. Drug.
Nay, and you give them all away, I shall have none for myself.


Face. Is not this strange.


A. Drug. Yes truly, very strange. -- Missing his Ring.


Subtle. Now for attention -- this is thy house.


A. Drug. Yes sir.


Subtle. And these are your two sides.


A Drug. So they are indeed sir.


Subtle. Mark me then -- make your door here in the south, your broad side
west, and to the east side of your shop write in fair golden letters these
words, Mathlai, Tarmael, Baraborat.


A. Drug. Matlay, turnmill, boreabrat, what may that be in English, an like
your wise worship?


Face. (aside) Mum there; plain English would ruin all.


Subtle. Upon the north side inscribe Thael velil thiel.


A. Drug. Rael velil thiel.


Subtle. Those are the names of such mercurial spirits as fright flies from
boxes, cobwebs from shelves, and vermin from thy cupboards.


A. Drug. I pray you sir write down these charms, for I have but a sieve-like
memory -- all runs though.


Subtle. Fear not, I Will strengthen thy recollection, and give thee, for I like
thy countenance, such other assistance as will make thee stand a fair chance to
possess that source of boundless riches, the philosopher's stone.


Face. Hearst thou that little Nab.


A. Drug. Ay, I do, good captain -- what must I give the Doctor.


Face. Give him -- consider thou art a made man -- thou can not possibly
give less than -- but hold, that you may try his wisdom a little closer, ask
him about any particular circumstance that happened some time since -- see if
he can tell.


A. Drug. I Will do it -- with your worship's good favor, I would ask what
happened to me last Martinmass day was twelvemonth, at night.


Subtle. I see thou doubt'st my skill -- but I Will indulge thee, Aries, Taurus,
Virgo, Sagittarius, Capricornus, whisper in my ear the event I am questioned
upon.


A. Drug. Are all these brother conjurors he is talking to?


Subtle. Thou never wast at a tavern in thy life but on the evening thou have
mentioned.


A. Drug. Truth and no more I was not.


Subtle. There you was so sick --


A. Drug. What, can you tell that too -- ay, we had been out shooting water
wagtails, and I had gotten a rare stomach -- so eating a piece of fat ram
mutton for supper, it lay heavy on my stomach, and my head did so ache. --


Face. And Nab having no head.


A. Drug. No, no head.


Subtle. You were obliged to be carried home where a good old woman. --


A. Drug. Yes faith, she cured me with sodden ale, and pellitory o'th wall --
it cost me but two pence.


Face. Wonderful cheap.


A. Drug. Was'n't it master captain, why, it was but last week the Alderman of
our Ward died with eating too much, though his doctor's bill came to twenty
golden gunieas -- but I had another sickness worse than the ram mutton.


Subtle. That too I know; it was grief at being sessed eighteen pence for the
water works.


A. Drug. As I am a true man, and so it was -- ay, it had like to have cost me
my life -- 'twas done in perfect spite.


Subtle. Nay, thy very hair fell off.


A. Drug. Ay, and it has never curled since -- every syllable true as I stand
here, captain Face -- I Will give him a crown.


Face. What!


A. Drug. Yes I Will give him a crown.


Face. A crown, I blush to think of it: what, after consulting so many stars,
and obtaining such marks of good fortune, put the doctor off with a less fee
than you must give for a pettifogging lawyer's letter -- oh! shame, shame, what
gold have thou about thee.


A. Drug. A two guinea piece, which was left me by my grandmother, and I would
fain leave it to my grandchild.


Face. Pshaw, Pshaw -- give it to the doctor -- nay pause not man, and the next
visit make it ten -- is it not a cheap purchase of ten times ten millions --
mind that Nab.


A. Drug. Well, friend captain, since you desire it -- but shall not I ask him for
any change.


Face. Not for the world.


A. Drug. There then -- so I thank your worship -- I am your conjurorship's
humble servant -- [Going] -- I had almost forgot -- I would desire another
favor of his worship.


Subtle. What is that my knight of the steady phiz.


A. Drug. That your doctorship will be so kind, as to be so civil, to look over
my almanac, and cross out my ill days, that I may neither buy, nor sell, nor
trust, upon them.


Face. I promise this shall be done against the afternoon.


Subtle. It shall -- moreover, I will mark out a disposition of thy shelves,
devise a sign, with other matters that may serve thee.


Face. Rejoice Nab, thou art in high favor with the doctor.


A. Drug. I humbly thank your grace, and if your reverence comes near Pie
Corner, you shall be welcome to some of my best Oroonoko, Virginia, long cut,
short cut, saffron, shag, or -- your conjurorship's most humble servant.

Exit A. Drug.
Face. Ha! ha! ha! thus grist flows into our mill -- what think you of this
tame pidgeon?


Subtle. An excellent subject for imposition, and quite ripe for plucking; the
stock is indebted to thee for bringing him to hand -- at his next visit Doll
shall ply him on another side, in the character of a rich widow -- I must in,
and prepare myself for Sir Epicure Mammon; do thou slip on the laboratory
disguise, and watch his coming to the door.


Exeunt severally. END of the FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter SIR EPICURE, and FACE. Sir Epic. WELL, my Zephirus, do we succeed, is
our day come? Blushes the bolt's head?


Face. Even with a virgin glow.


Sir Epic. Excellent; now then Lungs, all my care must be where to get stuff
enough for transmutation.


Face. Your worship must buy the metal covering from the roofs of churches.


Sir Epic. Thou say well, and instead thereof place thatch; thatch will sit
lighter on their raftors, well after this day all that art can frame, or luxury
can desire, is mine; I Will have a seraglio, to put the grand Signior's out of
countenance, for where is that beauty can withstand a knight of gold? -- my very
slaves shall live on such viands as monarchs now call rarities; thy cares too,
my Lungs, are near an end, this night I Will manumit thee from the furnace, and
repair thy brain, hurt with fume of the metals.


Face. I thank you sir; I have indeed blown hard for your worship.


Sir Epic. And thou shall have reward, a ton of gold shall pay thee; the
largest bell our Island can afford I Will change into that glorious metal, so
may thou ring thy noble fortune -- where is thy master?


Face. Within sir at his prayers for the success of our great projection.


Sir Epic. Good soul to pray so much, and toil so hard for my emolument; thou
Lungs, when I have got thee into flesh a little, shall be my Kisler Aga, the
keeper of my wanton nymphs, more fair than those who tripped the Cyprian grove.


Face. Hold sir, not a profane word -- for see the pious doctor comes.


Exit. Enter SUBTLE. Sir Epi. Good morrow father.


Subtle. Gentle son good morrow -- but wherefore here so soon, I fear me you
are covetous, and wish possession of the stone for carnal appetite; take heed
you do not throw the near hand blessing from you with ungoverned haste; I
should be sorry to see my labor, now on the point of perfection, not prosper
where my honest love has placed them, as they have been meant for public good;
for pious uses, and mere charity -- should thou pursue ought else, a curse
will follow thy deceitful ways.


Sir Epic. I know it, venerable sir -- you shall not need to fear me, I will be
charity itself; there shall not be an empty stomach, or a threadbare coat, in
the nation; I will build churches, endow hospitals, and make lean curates plump
as fat metropolitans; I will give such premiums for virtue, that vice shall be
ashamed to show its face; I will pay off the national debt, to annihilate the
taxes upon salt, soap, leather, candles, and beer, which now gripe impoverished
pockets, all arts, all sciences, shall thrive beneath my smile; and every
comfort of life lie open to every hand, while temperance and doing good, to me,
shall be the highest luxury.


Subtle. Fairly spoken, if sincerity gives value to thy words -- Ulen, look
well to the register, and let your heat lessen by degrees, to the aludels.


Face, (within) I shall sir.


Subtle. Look on, and bring word of what complexion is glass B -- son of my
care thy happiness approaches -- how now, what color says it?


Enter FACE. The ground black sir.


Sir Epic. That Is your crow's head.


Subtle. Be not too forward son -- the process then was right.


Face. Yes, by the token sir; the retort brake, and what was saved was put into
the pellicane, and sealed with Hermes seal.


Subtle. I think 'twas so, we should now have fresh amalgama; but I care not,
let him even die.


Face. Our Knight must have the other squeeze, (Aside) I would not, you should
let any die now, if I might counsel sir, for luck's sake to the rest.


Sir Epic. Lungs, thou art right, now our harvest is at hand, why should it
want the ripening.


Face. Nay, I know it sir, I have seen the ill fortune; what are some six
ounces of fresh materials.


Sir Epic. What no more! a very trifle -- good sir, what shall I give him.


Subtle. Some twenty pounds, or you may make it five and twenty.


Sir Epic. There is my purse with thirty, I shall have as many tons ere night.


Subtle. Well snapped gudgeon, (Aside) this needed not, but you will have it so
-- now must I set the oil of luna, and the philosopher's vinegar in kemia --
Ulen, go thou for the amalgama -- son your leave a while. Exit.


Sir Epic. Lungs, where is my lovely dame, my Cyprian Queen, might I not by thy
good help, bask for a moment in the sunshine of her eye -- here is money for
the pains, thou take to serve me.


Face. I am your slave -- I Will send her to your wish. Exit.


Sir Epic. Sure every smiling planet reigned at thy birth, Sir Epicure, to mark
thee out the eldest favorite of fortune -- but she comes [ Enter TRICKSY]
allow me madam to offer up my vows with rapture at the shrine of your charms.


Tric. The vows of men, Sir Epicure, are false.


Sir Epic. Mine fair dame as true as alchymy, and rich as the philosopher's
stone, which I am shortly to possess, suffer this ring to sparkle with added
luster upon that finger, whose delicate proportion not Phidias nor Praxiteles,
were they alive again, with Art Sculptorian could describe.


Tric. Your praise and favor, sir, speak warmly to my heart.


Sir Epic. Soon shall they glow upon thee with the fervor of an Ethiopian sun;
tomorrow will purchase the monarchy of this nether globe, and make thee, my
second Venus! Queen on it. Now let a touch of those soft lips confirm our
contract.


Tric. Avaunt ambassador of sin, and touch me not -- emblem of vice, I Have found
thee.


Sir Epic. Found me, I don't know that I was lost.


Tric. Thy eyes are blind, thy tongue licentious, thy limbs disordered.


Sir Epic. How she stares.


Tric. Thou walking volcano, thou embodied fever, go lay thee in the winter's
frozen lap, and let him weep snow on thee, to allay thy raging heat.


Sir Epic. Mad as a March hare -- would I were out of the house.


Tric. Thy cousins, Etna and Vesuvius, vomit not combustibles more destructive
than are winged on thy infectious breath -- come, if thou have courage, I Will
lead the way from off this sky-crown'd rock, and headlong plunge into yon
roaring deep -- thou tremblest -- guilt makes a coward of thee, and thou must
remain a prey to self consuming flames; while white-winged doves wait to bear
me to the fields of bliss, where such as thou can never, never, never, come.

Enter FACE. What Is the matter? -- oh I see the lady's in a fit.


Sir Epic. Ay, and a devil of a fit too, I think.


Tric. Ha! what art thou another fiend? -- oh no, pardon gentle spirit dressed
in virgin robes.


Face. How did you work her to this?


Sir Epic. Nay I know not, Lungs, unless by asking a civil salute.


Face. Ah there it is -- knew you not her tender brain? once hurt by love and
matchless modesty, dear good lady. --


Sir Epic. Right, Lungs, coax her Lungs.


Tric. Nay shepherds, cease your melting strains, they are all in vain -- I
have no heart to give -- 'twas stolen long since -- what do you alter notes,
and looks so soon? -- worse than the ravens discord -- black as the brow of
night; oh, you can quickly change -- but I defy you all -- for at my beck, ten
thousand spitits wait, to whom, this nether globe, with all its load of sins
would be but a sportive toy, to bandy through unbounded regions of the
trackless air.


Face. It is all over, we shall never lay her now, and if the old man should
hear her, we should be all undone -- hark, was not that his footstep? --
(Aside) move off Doll.


Tric. The shade of Yarico, has sent a card, and would attend my route this
night -- will ye join this insubstantial meeting of visitants from the other
world: Man of flesh thou art too gross, throw off mortality, and take a frisk
amongst us.


Subtle (Entering.) What profane noise is here.


Face. He comes. (They go off)


Enter SUBTLE. How! what sight does wound my eyes? clouds and darkness, else
why shun the light? -- who is here, my son? (Brings on Sir Epic) I have lived
too long.


Sir Epic. Nay, good dear father, there was no dishonest purpose.


Subtle. Nay, tell not me, I knew it ere I saw; our great work has stood still
these ten minuets, and all our lesser works gone back -- this will retard our
happy views a month at least; if not -- (A loud crack and noise.)


Sir Epic. Mercy on us! what dreadful noise is that?


Enter FACE. Oh, sir, we are all defeated, all the works are flown in fumo.


Sir Epic. What all Lungs?


Face. All; retorts, receivers, pellicans, bolt's heads, all struck in shivers.


Subtle. Never more to be recovered.


Sir Epic. Oh! oh! oh! oh! (Faints)


Subtle. There he goes -- ha! ha! ha! blown up as well as his hopes -- this
well-timed blast, and Doll's well-acted madness, will make him bleed a fresh,
and more plentifully in view of reparation.


Face. True -- he stirs; step you aside, I Will work upon him. [Exit Subtle] Good
worthy knight, overwhelmed with grief and patience, look up -- sink not beyond
all help.


Sir Epic. Oh Lungs! what nothing saved?


Face. I fear nothing worth mention, yet the doctor, good soul, is gone to see
-- charity -- charity, he says may work a wonderful effect.


Sir Epic. I will do any thing -- I will do all.


Face. Well sir, for the present, suppose, you bring one hundred to Bethlem,
for those who have lost their wits; one hundred for the Magdalen, as sin of
that kind has been your fault, and leave the sums to disposal of our doctor;
such marks of your contrition, and his prayers may give a fresh process,
desirable effect.


Sir Epic. Thanks Lungs, for thy advice, I doubt not, it will speed, therefore
the cash I will prepare -- and henceforth be cautious of crack-brain'd beauty.


Exit. Subtle. (Peeping in) What is the lump of knightly flesh departed Face.?


Face. Yes, and with heavy heart, but not quite hopeless. --


Subtle. Right thou play'st him to a hair -- hark! I hear approaching steps --
(Exit Face) how often do the worldly wise, happy in their imagined policy, fool
away substantial possessions, pursuing shadows.


Re-enter FACE, with MISS RANTIPOLE. Face. There Madam, is the gentleman I
presume you want.


Rant. A droll figure I vow -- an admirable character for Mrs. Cornelys -- well
Mr. Conjuror, as I am told, you are very intimate with the stars, I am inclined
for a little conversation with you, and that we may better understand one
another -- there are a few guineas.


Subtle. There is no language the stars understand, or like better than what
these speak.


Rant. You must know sir, I am the happiest creature alive, in number, and
choice of admirers; I have a soldier of spirit who swears to me, a smirking
parson, who prays to me, a Puritan, who cants to me, a Jemmy wit, who rallies,
a gamester, who prefers me to the four Queens, and a Patriot, who offers to
sacrifice even liberty to my smiles.


Face. Upon my word madam, you at least have the pleasure of variety -- but
you will soon be like Alexander, have no more to conquer.


Rant. Oh its charming beyond expression; and though a little troublesome when
the rivals meet, yet I would not be without a numerous suite of worshippers for
the world -- the delightful envy it raises in your sex, and the enchanting
bustle it causes amongst the other -- then the amorous maneuvers of a glance
to one, a nod to another, a leer to a third, a smile to a fourth, a beck to a
fifth, a wink to a sixth, a sigh to a seventh, the tip of my little finger to
an eighth, caring for none, and yet kind to all; is so Jantee, so alamode -- so
every thing, that I would not sacrifice my state of conquest, to be the
matrimonial property of -- of -- no, not a Nabob, or an East India Governor
hung round with diamonds -- Husband! -- insipid, drowsy, odious title.


Subtle. Give me leave madam, as I see the charms of your person, though, with
the dim eyes of age, to enquire the beauties of your pocket; as thence perhaps,
we may properly estimate the violent attachment of your numerous admirers.


Rant. What? fortune you mean; that, sir, I am not ashamed to explain, having
had these twelvemonth past, by the will of my good old grandfather, twenty
thousand pounds, at my own disposal.


Face. Nay madam, it is not at all wonderful, that you should have an admirer
for every thousand -- besides being at your own disposal, the fatigue and
danger, of a trip to Scotland are rendered unnecessary.


Rant. True sir -- at the age of sixteen, I was very near making that trip, as
you call it -- I was then at a boarding school, and listened to the soft sighs
of Jemmy Goosequil, an Attorney's clerk; fond as Pyramus, and Thisbe, we agreed
to elope -- I got over the garden wall, on a sweet moonlight night, and posted
as far as the river of matrimonial liberty, Tweed, when my surly fox-hunting
papa, who loves a long chase at any rate, took me prisoner, horse-whipped my
poor gallant, and brought me back, as melancholy as a turtle, separated from
its cooing mate.


Subtle. I imagine Miss, you have since perceived, that it is necessary for
parents to thwart the precipitate inclinations of youth.


Rant. Ay, but not upon old gruff's principles -- at sixteen, indeed, I was a
fond, foolish, credulous, creature, and thought of nothing but flames, darts,
constancy, and dying -- if a young fellow looked but grave -- heigho! I pitied
him, but now, as lady Fanny Flirtem says, if an army of lovers was before me,
with pistols at their ears, daggers at their breasts, running nooses round
their necks, or poison at their mouths, I could look on with the most
immovable composure, the true unfeeling fashionable indifference.


Face. This is rather philosophical, than humane.


Rant. Humane ha! ha! ha! and pray what have fine ladies to do with humanity --
though there is a young Baronet in my train who could occasion some flutter
here if he was a little more polished, but the teizing creature is so pettish
and so jealous and so grave and so wise -- pray Mr. Conjuror could not you put
him under the influence of some fashionable star and teach him not to rail so
much at inconstancy, Soho-square, the Winter Ranelagh and every species of gay
life? -- icod now I talk of gay life, I Will give you a song upon the subject,
written by my rhiming swain, which I intended to sing at the next masquerade in
the character of-mum! we must not tell before hand.


Subtle. Madam your musical compliment will oblige us.


Rant. (Sings.) To do what we please and to taste every joy
To set at defiance the purple winged boy
To sneer at the grave and to laugh at the coy
Such, Such are the sweets of gay life.
With each glance of our eyes to send forth a keen dart,
To conquer at will each fine gentleman's heart,
To be perfect in Hoyle -- how delightful his art?
Such, such are the sweets of gay life.
To deck out our persons with fashion and grace,
To shine out with splendour in each public place,
And show to advantage each beautiful face,
Such, such are the sweets of gay life.
Unincumber'd with business, unruffled with care,
Possessing each object that is costly and rare,
As brilliant as sun shine -- unbounded as air,
Such, such are the joys of gay life.
Who ever refinement of pleasure would know,
To Cornely's must hasten with hearts in full glow,
No Paradise surely can vie with Soho,
Or deal out such sweets of gay life.
What avail musty rules of the grave and the wise,
They may be perhaps fitted well for the Skies,
But taste on this earth must such nonsense despise,
And stick to the sweets of gay life.

Face. A very agreeable combination of spirit and harmony.


Rant. Well Mr. Conjuror, if you can give my Baronet -- I Will send him to see
you -- a little more taste and lessen his gravity, after I have had my fling,
seen all the world, heard all the pretty things that can be said, fretted a
score of lovers to death, and am on the brink of becoming an old maid, perhaps
I may sink into a domestic animal. -- But you must excuse my abrupt departure,
I have a dozen friendly pop visits to make in less than an hour and would not
miss one for the universe; besides, I have a thousand things to prepare for
Carlisle house this evening, where amid'st Asiatic brilliance, Arabian
perfumes; Circassian beauty and Arcadian tenderness, we taste all the sweets of
gay life. Exit.


Subtle. Truly a volatile sprig of flirtation -- but methinks I hear Abel's
voice, [Exit Face] -- now gravity and absence wrap me round in thy deceptive
robe.


Enter ABEL DRUGGER. Well master Tobacconist,


A. Drug. I have brought your worship a taste of right Oroonoko -- or if that is
too mild,


Subtle. This as a mark of thy honest regard will do.


A. Drug. I wish his honor Captain Face had been here, I have not half the
dacity to speak as when he is by.


Subtle. Why not my honest friend? a just case may always speak openly, but
excuse me, reflection calls, and I must leave this world a while.


A. Drug. Leave this world a while -- and yet he stands just where he did; but
he is amongst the stars and taking a thousand miles at a jump, why these
conjurors are --

Enter FACE. (slaps Drugger on the shoulder) Oh you frightened me.


Face. So honest Nab -- I see thou art alone, for the Doctor is with his
spirits, but we'll upon him.


Subtle. How now, what mates! what Baiards have we here?


Face. I thought he would be furious -- a piece of gold to soften him.


A. Drug. What another!


Face. Ay ay, what mar the sheep for a halfpenny worth of tar -- come I Will give
it the Doctor; now thy business.


A. Drug. About a sign sir.


Face. Ay, a good, lucky, thriving sign Doctor.


Subtle. I have been thinking for his service -- I will have none that is stale
or common; a townsman born in Taurus gives the Bull, or the Bull's head -- in
Aries the Ram -- both poor devices; no let me form his name into some mystic
character, whose radii striking the senses of each passer by, shall with a
virtual influence breed affections which may result upon the party that owns it.


Face. Mark that Nab.


Subtle. He shall have a bell, that is Abel.


A. Drug. Abel.


Subtle. And by it standing, one whose name is Dee, in a rug gown.


A. Drug. A rug gown.


Subtle. D, and rug, you know, make Drug.


Face. Excellent.


Subtle. And right against him, a dog snarling Err.


A Drug. Err, Abel Drugger -- he! he! he! why that is my name.


Subtle. These emblems thus conjoined, form a lucky sign with mystery, and
hyerogliphick.


Face. Why, Abel, thou art made.


A. Drug. I do humbly thank his worship.


Face. Six more such legs will not do it, thy word is passed to bring a piece
of damask.


A. Drug. Yes sir -- but I have another thing I would impart.


Subtle. Out with it, friend.


A. Drug. There visits near me, a rich young widow.


Face. A bona roba.


A. Drug. Ay, rona boba, but nineteen at the most.


Subtle. Very good; Abel.


A Drug. She does not wear a wig, quite in the fashion, yet it stands pretty
well a cop, and I do now and then, tip her a fucus, and physic too sometimes,
for which she trusts me with all her mind.


Face. Very good Nab, go on.


Subtle. She whom thou mentionest is now in my study, casting a figure -- I
know her to be the same -- tall.


A. Drug. Yes, an like your worship, she makes a parfi mushroom of me.


Subtle. Chestnut hair -- leering eye.


A. Drug. Very leering eye -- your worship has her to a T.


Subtle. I tell thee she is within, I Will work in thy favor, and thou shall't
have immediate conference -- this tobacco is good thou gave me, how much is
there of it?


A Drug. A very honest pound.


Face. Doctor, Nab will present thee with a hogshead of it.


A. Drug. Will Not half a one do -- it costs me. --


Face. Pshaw, hang costs, when a rich widow's in the case -- and he will
furnish you also, grave sir, with one of the richest suits of damask he can
procure.


Subtle. Such men are worthy fortune's smiles -- I Will send the widow. Exit.


Face. I Will follow and keep the doctor warm in thy interest, little Nab. Exit.

Let me see, what these conjurations will cost me -- a two guinea piece, my
ring, a pound of tobacco, then a hogshead; besides a suit of damask, and
wedding charges into the bargain -- why all together cannot come to less than --
oh here she is -- what a charming figure to stand behind a counter -- I Will
warrant she will sell twice as much as me; my shop will be the meeting place of
gallants.

Enter TRICKSY. Oh, Mr. Tobaconist, your servant.


A. Drug. (Aside) How softly her mouth opens, as if her lips were afraid to
part, and then it shuts, as if they were glad to meet.


Tric. (Aside) The charming creature is wrapped up in meditation, what can that
wise set of features be engaged upon.


A Drug. How softly spoken? one to my mind exactly -- my head will not bear much
noise -- oh, who would have thought to see you here, but they say mountains
will meet.


Tric. Yes sir, things little expected will happen -- I never thought of losing
my dear husband so soon, he was the be -- be -- best creature --


A. Drug. D -- D -- don't cry, for I am so tender hearted, I cannot see any body
cry, but I must cry too.


Tric. I shall esteem you the more.


A. Drug. Esteem -- now you talk that way, have you thought any more about our
wedding.


Tric. Good sir, it is not for me to think in such a case, I must obey my fate,
what the stars say --


A. Drug. Why I never knew the stars said any thing.


Tric. Oh but they denote most certainly -- if we go together it is they must do
it.


A Drug. Say you so, then I Will go in, and ask the doctor, how and about it --
he will tell me any thing in the stars, or in the sun, or moon, or any where else.


Tric. He is indeed a wonderful man, and a most valuable friend.


A. Drug. Well I Will go -- now have I a good mind to ask a kiss -- but I cannot
reach, and may hap she may be ashamed to stoop before marriage -- so I Will stay
a bit.


Exit. Tric. So there he goes -- ha! ha! ha! a few minutes more, and my face
would have betrayed me; gravity must soon have given way.


Headl. (within.) Hollo Doctor -- master alchymist.


Tric. My fighting swain as I live, a little mal-apropos, but we must make the
best on it.


Enter HEADLONG. How now, my buxom widow here? that is more than I thought for
-- tip us thy hand -- I came to tell this here doctor, what a rare scholar I
am; I can almost quarrel with any body now -- when he has made me perfect in
the cross buttock, and brain blow, I should not fear the best he, that stands
in shoe of leather.


Tric. Excellent, I love a man of spirit.


Headl. Spirit to the backbone; I never die dunghill -- always game -- I had a
damned fine tussle in the Park just now.


Tric. Was it high fun?


Headl. Rare rig, it would have made you burst your sides with laughing; you
shall hear the whole affair.


Tric. Pray do? I love a bit of mischief, vastly.


Headl. Why you must known my girl of fire, as I was coming at a good spanking
rate, from St. James's cockpit, what should I meet in the flagged passage, of
Spring Garden; but a queer sort of a half gentleman, arm under arm, with a
damned rum waddling wife as I afterward found she was.


Tric. Going I suppose, to take a matrimonial walk, in the Park -- vugar
creatures, antediluvian wretches!


Headl. You have hit it -- as I brushed by with my arms a kimbo, this elbow
went plump into madam's bread basket; she staggered, the husband put on a
fighting face, and cries what is that for? what is that to you said I, it is to
me says he -- you lie says I -- you are an impudent blockhead says he -- you
are a ragamuffen says I, and take that -- giving him a tip a cross the cheek --
into the Park we went -- a ring was made, and as pretty a set to we had for
about five minutes as any one would wish to see, till giving him a plump of the
jaw, which broke two of his grinders, he sickned, so gave up: then we shook
hands and made friends.


Tric. Droll and pleasant to the last degree, ha! ha! ha!


Headl. Oh! but I should have told you a merry affair that happened yesterday;
after knocking off six bottles of madeira, hand to fist -- Lord Graceless -- a
damned honest fellow, and myself, matched our nags from Windsor to London, the
Peer laying sixty guineas to forty: well, off we set, and maintained a devilish
deep rate till we came to Turnham Green, where the sport began; as we were
tugging for the lead, whip, and spur; I bolted a blind beggar into the ditch;
in less than ten seconds, his Lordship flew over an old woman, riding upon an
ass between two milk-pails; such a scene, ha! ha! ha! would have made Mr. What
do you Callum, the crying philosopher, himself laugh; here lay the Peer's horse
with his neck broke, there the old woman groaning, yonder the ass kicking, and
his Lordship sprawling through the milky, way like a wounded frog in a
duck-pond.


Tric. Inimitable, ha! ha! ha! why this is higher life than your battle --
besides you won the wager.


Headl. Yes, yes, widow, I touched the spankers, the yellow boys, and intend to
lay em out in a present for you; when we are married, if any man does but
squint at you, I Will plump, and rib him.

Enter SUBTLE, FACE, and A. DRUGGER. Mr. Doctor, I have been telling my widow
here of the prettiest bruising match.


Face. Mind that Nab -- speak to him -- I Will second you.


A. Drug. Will you? then I Will do it -- your widow -- may hap not.


Headl. May hap ay -- and if I hear any more of your haps, look ye, do you see,
I Will give you a douce oth' the chaps, mind that.


A. Drug. And if you do, you may get as good as you bring, for all your
fighting face.


Tric. Nay, good gentlemen, don't fight on my account -- I Will please you both
if I can.


Headl. You -- no, no, little buxom, only a few knocks for love, to see who is
the best man, that is all -- will you strip?


A. Drug. As soon as yourself.


Headl. Now then come on, little tickle-pitcher.


A. Drug. I am at thee, bully bluff. Fight.


Face. Bravely, done my hector of Troy, thou art victorious as Alexander, and
shall be crowned with tobacco instead of laurel; take thy fair widow, retire
and compose thyself.


A. Drug. Master Captain, I can feeze tightly, when I see occasion. Exit with
Tricksy.


Enter KNOWLIFE with CONSTABLES. Know. Come, walk in gentlemen, we'll clear
this nest of hornets.


Enter FACE. How, my master returned! cursed chance! then we are all undone --
not a loophole to escape.


Know. Hey day, what my faithful Jeremy, metamophosed into an officerical
appearance?


Face. Only an innocent frolic -- if I had known your honor. --


Know. Ay, ay, if you had known I was coming, you would have been better
prepared; I doubt it not -- why hang dog, what villainous work have you been
making of this house during my absence? -- no prevarication -- I have heard of
your converting it into an impostor shop, where gulls have been decoyed to
barter real property for empty hopes.


Know. What reverend cheat art thou? the leader of the gang. (Brings on Subtle)


Subtle. What a glorious harvest is here blasted?


Enter SIR EPICURE. A feather headed puppy had like to run me over, and was
within a hair's breadth, of tumbling me neck and heels down the whole flight of
stairs -- but here it is my alchymist, here are the means of reparation, one
hundred pounds for Bethlem, as much for the Magdalen, besides fifty to purchase
fresh amalgama!


Know. What puffed up bladder of folly have we here?


Sir Epic. I am a knight, and my alchymist there is to make me a knight of gold.


Know. Thou art a knight of the post, for ought I know -- at least a knight of
the shallow skull; keep the money thou talk of to place thyself in Bedlam,
as for this alchymist, it is great odds but he is made a transmuter of metals in
earnest -- by giving him to the East India company, to send him a Nabob hunting.


Sir Epic. Nabob hunting! what are all my hopes vanished in fumo? -- no
amalgama? no flower of the sun? no projection? no bolt's head? -- I will be
better informed.


Know. In proper time you may, at present hold thy peace; if thou have any
thing to allege against these worthy gentlemen, meet them tomorrow, before
Justice Splithair, in Coxcomb Court, Law Lane; at present I must desire you to
leave my house.


Sir Epic. Your house?


Know. Yes mine sir -- no big looks, or I shall convince you of the property in
a very disagreeable manner.


Sir Epic. Oons, if this be the case, I Will never trust the stars again, and
every man that speaks a hard word in my mind shall be a cheat -- where is Mexico
-- where is Peru? Exit.


Know. Now culprits, what defense can you make.


Face. To be short sir, having a mind above servitude, and talents to try a
push in life, I was resolved to make the most of your absence; the prospect was
very fair, but the fabric of my hopes like a house of cards is levelled by a
single puff; however having little to risque, I have only lost expectation, and
having been guilty of no breach of trust respecting you, imagine myself
tolerably safe from prosecution.


Know. Mighty well, evasive sir.


Subtle. As for me sir, at whom you look with an inquisitive eye, being as low
as the blind goddess could lay me, I was ready to snatch at any means of
amending painful circumstances -- you will say, why turn impostor? -- look
through the various classes of life, and you will see how many, that hold high
heads, with fair outsides, pursue worse practices; you may style me a knave,
but since I have taken care not to be a poor one, I shall draw that respect and
safety from well lined pockets, which pennyless, shame faced, honesty could
never have obtained.


Enter A. DRUGGER, with TRICKSY. A. Drug. Master Captain, and Master Doctor, I
have settled the whole affair -- the widow here, loves me like any thing.


Know. What unfeather'd cuckoo, art thou?


A. Drug. Cuckoo in your teeth, I gave one a trimming just now, and if you jaw
much, mayhap you may come in for your share -- nay, you need not squint so at
this lady, she is a rich widow, and is to be my wife.


Know. A rich widow! ha! ha! ha! thou art too contemptible for serious
resentment, therefore I vouchsafe to tell thee, this lady is my chambermaid,
that captain, my butler, and your grave alchymist there, a cheat, picked up I
know not where; as to these three, I Will secure them for justice sake, and leave
you to find the same way out, that you came in; come gentlemen, bring him to a
place of security, till my furniture, plate, and other matters, are properly
examined into. Exeunt omnes praeter Drug.


A. Drug. The widow his chambermaid, the captain his butler, and our wise
alchymist, a cheat -- a pretty kettle of fish I have made of it -- but escaping
the marriage noose is some comfort however.

Well left thus alone I Will return to my shop,
And all future hopes from extrology drop;
Henceforth I shall think it a pitiful trade,
My head surely for conjuring never was made;
But if I could conjure -- a very good cause
Should work my first spell -- it should catch -- your applause.

FINIS.

