AN ACCOUNT OF A NEW POOR-HOUSE, ERECTED IN THE PARISH OF BOLDRE, IN NEW
FOREST, NEAR LYMINGTON, 1796.

LONDON: Printed at the Philanthropic Reform, ST. GEORGE'S FIELDS.

AN ACCOUNT, etc.
THE following account of the erection of a Poor-house, in the parish of
Boldre, in New Forest, is intended to show, how cheaply, and yet how
comfortably, the poor of a parish may be maintained, with good management,
under the present poor laws.

The old poor-house of Boldre being a wretched place, and managed without any
economy, at a great expense; it was determined, at a vestry held in the year
1792, to build a new one on a better site; to put in a respectable master and
mistress; and to give the overlooking of it to a monthly Committee of the
gentlemen and farmers of the parish.

Accordingly they borrowed the sum of 800 l. and bought a piece of ground,
about two acres and an half; elevated, dry, and airy; here they built their
house, at a little distance from the road; and yet near enough to be under the
constant eye of observation. It is built substantially of brick, single, that
the air may have a free passage through it, and extending about eighty-two feet
in front, and twenty in breadth. These dimensions give an excellent work-room
on the right, as you enter; and on the left a kitchen and back kitchen; the
master's room, which is also the Committee-room, about eighteen feet by
fourteen, occupies the center, and has a window on one side, inspecting the
work-room; and another on the opposite side, inspecting the kitchen; above
stairs, the sleeping chambers are separated nearly as those are below; only, as
there are commonly more women and children in a poor-house than men, a room at
the end of the mens' apartment is taken off for a sick room, with a separate
staircase; above the chambers are excellent garrets; behind the kitchen-part
of the house, are the pantries and other conveniences, among which is a
store-room thirty feet long.

The ground between the house and the road, which is a falling space of about
sixty yards, is divided, first into a dry convenient play-yard for the
children; and the remainder, about half an acre, running down to the road, is a
garden; the larger garden, which is about an acre, lies behind the house.

The house being thus erected, and sufficiently dry, the inhabitants of the old
house, consisting of nine or ten men and women, and between twenty and thirty
children, were brought into it, on the 19th of May, 1793; and the whole put
under the care of Mr. and Mrs. Salter, whose characters will hereafter be shown
at large in the excellent management of every part of the institution.

A more disorderly set in every particular, than this family was, when Mr.
Salter received it first under his care, cannot easily be conceived: when he
had brought them a little into order, and shown them it was his wish to be kind
and friendly to them; he got them, by degrees, to go on regularly in the
business, and duties of the house. Both he and his wife are well acquainted
with the whole business of spinning and weaving; and having set up a couple of
looms, and a number of spinning wheels, he generally presides over this part of
the business himself, and Mrs. Salter over the economy and management of the
house; both departments are admirably conducted. The inhabitants are all
employed in that business they are most fit for: some of the old women in
cooking, mending, and washing; the old men in the garden; the children and some
of the women in spinning, and weaving; children, even of four or five years of
age are employed, and earn about a penny a day. In summer they come into the
work-room at six; in winter as soon as it is light; at breakfast they have an
hour's respite, and the same at dinner; they have all tasks, which are so easy,
that if they work hard, they can finish them by two in the afternoon; but
without any exertion by six.

With regard to their food; on Sunday they have beef, pork, or veal, as each
happens to be cheapest, with plenty of vegetables, and four ounces of bread for
grown persons, and three for children; on Monday, they have the remains warmed
with vegetables and bread; on Tuesday, each grown person has a pound of
pudding, and the children three quarters of a pound; on Wednesday, beef, or
pork, or veal, as on Sunday; on Thursday, the remains as on Monday; on Friday,
they have generally soup made of a bullock's head, with vegetables and bread,
as usual; on Saturday, a clearance is made of all the remains in the house; and
if they fall short, the deficiency is made up with bread and cheese; for
breakfast, beef-broth, or milk-broth is provided; and at supper the regular
meal is six ounces of bread, and an ounce of cheese for every grown person; and
for children, four ounces of bread, and three quarters of an ounce of cheese;
this is some times varied with potatoes, which the children like better; every
thing is good in its kind: the children seldom eat up all they are helped to,
and the remainder is fried up again the next day among the remains. During the
present scarcity of bread-corn, Mrs. Salter has used a less proportion of
wheat, and a larger of potatoes, particularly for supper. During the winter of
the year 1795, the boiled potatoes and onions, and mixing them well together,
fried them with a little lard; the people were in general fonder of this dish
than of their usual meal.

Four bushels and a half of malt are allowed each month for beer. I must add,
that the master and mistress generally fare as the family does, though it is
not required by the Committee.

The clothing of the poor is equally good; every one has a new suit for
Sunday, generally spun and woven in the house. It is carefully hung up at
night, and the old clothes produced for the week.

Thus the poor are well lodged, well fed, and well clothed; and yet, on
deducting their earnings, at less than half the expense they cost the parish
before. Their food, upon an average, is scarcely ever estimated at so much as
nine pence a head weekly; whereas in the old house, with continual complaint,
the allowance was just double; though provisions, at that time, were much
cheaper than they are now.

In the article of clothing, much more is saved. Though the poor are now so
decently clad, yet by care and management, the whole expense of the clothing
this last year, including shoes, amounted only to 17 l. 6 s. 8 d. whereas the
expense of clothing the poor in the old house, did not amount to less, one
year with another, than 70 l. annually. In one year it reached 90 l. And this
might possibly be without any dishonesty on the part of the parish-officers;
for as there was no care taken to keep the clothes in repair, nor any
distinction made between old and new, the poor were always in rags, and yet
always craving for new clothes.

Another great saving, where there is a well regulated house, is made in the
article of out-doors-poor. There are numbers of people in every parish, who are
too proud to go into a poor-house, or may perhaps be under no necessity, who
are yet very ready to receive a weekly dole of a shilling, or eighteen pence a
week: their plea is, if you cannot take us into a house, you must maintain us
out of one. When this plea is cut off, numbers of them find the means of
maintaining themselves; several indeed, under the character of out-doors-poor,
every parish must maintain; but the offer of a good house draws a line between
those who ought, and those who ought not to have this indulgence. In the old
house the expense of the out-doors-poor was about 8 or 9 pounds monthly. It is
at this time only 1 l. 12 s.

Another article of saving is in the health of the poor. In the other house
there were often contagious fevers, and other disorders, from the closeness and
nastiness of the place, and its inhabitants; and though a parish-doctor was
regularly paid, yet the expense for wine and other cordials, whether necessary,
or unnecessary, was often considerable; whereas the airiness and cleanliness of
the present house -- the good clothing -- the wholsomeness, and plenty of
provisions, together with the care taken in keeping the family clean, have,
under God, such an effect upon their health, that no epidemical disorder, or
indeed disorder of any kind, has appeared among them. The face of the
parish-doctor is hardly known.

To all these articles of saving may be added, the care and integrity of the
master, and mistress. Every thing makes the best end; the very crumbs from
cutting the bread for each meal are put into the milk or broth, or whatever is
next prepared; and this is the more praise worthy, as neither the bread nor
meat is in any shape farmed to the master; so that what he does, is done
entirely from an honest principle of serving the parish. It would not indeed be
difficult for him, if he were so disposed, to turn much to his own advantage;
especially as he keeps the accounts of the parish; for which he is well
qualified, both by his skill and his integrity.

By all these modes of care, economy, and integrity, together with the profits
of the house-labour, a saving in the poor rates of the parish was made, this
year, of 157 l. 1 s. 6 d. notwithstanding the advanced price of provisions, and
a variety of expenses, necessary in a new establishment.

Without doors things are managed with the same care and order. Both the
gardens belonging to the house are in highest degree of cultivation, and bear
such quantities of potatoes, and cabbage, the chief vegetables used in the
family, that the master finds he is not only sufficiently supplied, but has
enough to feed his hogs, and often to give away to his poor neighbors. A
theft, one night, was committed in the gardens, and at least two hundred weight
of cabbages carried off. When somebody was bemoaning the loss to the master,
"It was a pitiful thing, he observed, to steal from a parish workhouse; but in
the light of an inconvenience to him, it would have been none, if they had
carried off twice as much." His ground is so well dunged, and so productive,
that among a number of large cabbages, he had the curiosity to weigh one that
seemed larger than the rest, and found its weight to be twenty-seven pounds,
after the outside leaves had been stripped off. During the scarcity of the year
1795, he was obliged indeed to purchase potatoes.

But the economy of this excellent institution is not more pleasing than the
cheerfulness, and happy air, with which every thing is conducted. The old
women, when they behave well, have little indulgences of tea, and snuff, which
they value much; the men, of tobacco; and the children's tasks are made
pleasing, by giving them little gratuities out of their earnings. The master
has the art of turning even their play-hours to use; and yet making them more
happy, than if they were left to themselves. If he want the stones, for
instance, picked out of the garden, with a small gratuity to those who pick the
most, he sets ^uch a number of little hands at work, that the business is soon
accomplished; or, if he want dung brought into the garden, he yokes half a
dozen of them to a wheel-barrow, and makes one of them the waggoner, with a
long whip, but without the power of exercising it. This employment is very
pleasing; it is good exercise, and presently dispatches the business. If the
master happen to have no em^loyment for them, during their play-hours, ^e often
makes it. He will send, for instance, ^hree or four of them, if the afternoon
be ^^^e, to some distant part of the parish, with (...) letter of no
consequence, but to amuse them with a walk, and teach them to be trusty in a
charge; or, in nutting-season, he will send three or four of such as he can
best depend on, to gather nuts in the forest; but with condition, that whatever
quantity they gather, shall be divided with those who stay at home. This year
(1795) was so abundant in nuts, and such quantities were gathered, that Mrs.
Salter thought it prudent to take the management of so large a store under her
care, and distribute it in doles.

But none of these amusements are allowed till theirs task are performed.
Sometimes in a fine morning the master signifies his intention of thus
employing three or four of them: on which the wheels run with prodigious
rapidity, and all business is over by two in the afternoon. He suffers them
also in summer to rise very early in the morning, before the family is up, and
go down quietly to their work, which they are very eager to do. Such work
appears like voluntary labor. The condition on these occasions is, not to
speak a word till the clock strike six, which is the appointed-hour. And this
condition the master says, he believes is punctually complied with; he often
hears the whirling of the wheels, but no other sound. These little restraints
are very useful in habituating children to order and decency.

To exemplify the happiness, which the individuals of this well-regulated house
enjoy, I might produce several instances; I shall specify a few.

Two old women, reduced to the lowest degree of penury, and really starving, if
their neighbors had not assisted them, resolutely held out, and declared that
they would rather die under a hedge, than go into the poor-house. If such a
declaration had been made in the time of the old poor-house, they might still
have been objects of pity; but at this time it rather cooled the charity of
their friends, who indeed thought, that maintaining them out of the house was
encouraging a discontented spirit against an institution so well conducted, and
in every light so advantageous to the poor. This had it is effect; as winter
came on, and fuel grew scarce, their pride, which had a great share in their
resistance, gave way; and they were driven to seek the comforts of a warm
kitchen fire at the house. A very short time convinced them of their folly, and
they soon declared, they had never lived so comfortably before.

There was an elderly man in the parish, of the name of Brown; he had been bred
a thatcher, but was able to work at any kind of labor; he was sensible,
honest, and good-natured in a great degree; and being a stout, robust fellow,
he might have made a very good livelihood; but he was so totally careless of
wha^ he earned, so thoughtless and imprudent it every respect, that he went
about in rags, an^ never knew where to get a dinner at noon or a bed at night;
indeed he had reduced himself at length to such a degree of weakness and
wretchedness, that he could hardly craw about. In this necessity, hunger at
length drove him into the house. Here plenty o^ good provision soon recruited
him, and he be came a useful member. To work of no kin^ he has objection; he
digs the garden; h^ carries out work; he brings meat from the market; often Mr.
Salter lets him out to work, on account of the parish; in thatching ricks and
cottages he is particularly useful. The money he earns, he always brings
honestly home; out of which he receives, for his own use, a penny in the
shilling. In the mean time he is perfectly happy; he is well clothed, well
fed, and well lodged; and as to money, as he never knew the advantages of it,
the want of it is no distress; the few halfpence he receives, he never keeps
in his pocket longer than till he has an opportunity of distributing them among
the children, and old women of the house; among whom he is so great a
favorite, that the latter show their gratitude to him by tricking him out on
Sundays with all the neatness they are able. He, who used to go about the
parish in rags, not worth picking off a dunghill, now goes to church in a good
suit of clothes; his breast is unbuttoned, and displays a deep ruffle hanging
out, neatly plaited; his cravat is well washed; and a black ribband is tied
round his neck. His ambition and consequence were one day raised, when a
stranger coming out of the church, and looking with pleasure on the orderly
procession of the workhouse family, pointed to Brown, and asked, If he was not
the master of the house? It should be remembered however, that with all his
profuseness, he was mindful, with the first money he received, to pay his
debts: these amounted to four-pence, which in some pressure of his affairs he
had formerly borrowed, and now remembered. This singular character, though he
is so industrious, that Mr. Salter thinks he maintains at least four people by
his labor, is yet so attached to the house, that nothing could prevail with
him to leave it. His neighbors often tell him, what a fool he is thus to work
for other people, when he might earn his own money; but Brown is philosopher
enough to know himself; and has had sufficient experience of the extent of his
own prudence, not to trust himself under its direction again, while he can live
under the care of so kind a master.

But the great merit of the master and mistress of this well established house,
consists in instructing the ignorant, and reforming the abandoned. Every
morning, when the bell rings for breakfast, the family all assemble in the
kitchen. Each knows his place; so there is no confusion, and a strict silence
is injoined: soon after the master comes in, and reads, and generally explains
(which he is very able to do) some easy and practical part of the
New Testament; after this they all join in prayer. On Sunday morning, and
evening, these exercises are enlarged, and accompanied often with singing
hymns, in which the children join. They sometimes sing hymns also at their
work, when twenty or thirty spinning wheels are all going together. The master
says, he would oftener introduce singing hymns at their work; but he
judiciously observes, that the slowness of the measure is too apt to introduce
slowness in their hands. One tune however has particular credit with him, the
movements of which are well adapted to the motion of the wheel; and for that
reason it goes among them by the name of the spinning-wheel tune; all other
singing the master forbids; which appeared rather hard: his reason for it
however is good; he has no objection to innocent songs; but as he found he
could not draw a line between them, and such as were corrupting, he thought it
necessary to forbid all together. The penalty is the forfeiture of the little
earnings of the day from their labor. They regulatly attend church on Sundays;
and it is a pleasing sight to see so many well clothed figures, happy faces
and healthy countenances, issuing from a parish-work-house. In the afternoon,
on Sunday, the children attend the school, where they are catechized with the
other children of the neighborhood: the old people also attend with them.

The good order of the house is preserved rather by rewards than punishments.
When this family was first received from the old house, the master had occasion
for all his prudence to manage, and bring them into order. Their habits of
idleness, and wickedness were so strong, and their ideas of order and
discipline, so weak, that he had great difficulty in preserving the true medium
between too lax, and too strict a government. If he had corrected every thing
he saw amiss, he must have been continually correcting, and might have
irritated, and hardened. His great art, therefore, was to find excuses for
passing over many faults; and yet to make the children believe he would pass
over none. When he had informed a boy, for instance, that he meant to punish
him in the evening; his wife, as if ignorant of the matter, would send him to
bed with the rest. In the morning he would call up the boy, and let him know,
how angry he was with him, and how severely he would have punished him, if his
mistress had not sent him to bed. However, as the matter was now over, he would
pass it by this time. Sometimes, however, to show he was in earnest, he would
punish an extraordinary offense with severity; at the same time he endeavored
to show that he was much readier to reward, than punish, when any thing was
done which he approves. Thus by keeping a steady hand, and not hastening the
work of reformation too quickly, he brought them by degrees into good order.
And when he had once gotten his first set orderly, it was easy to keep up an
orderly family. Such as came in afterward, though obstinate and refractory,
could not fight against so disciplined an establishment. Like headstrong
bullocks yoked in an orderly team, they could not well be mischievous. As his
plan is to rule rather by affection, than fear, in which he has been very
successful, his punishments, when he has now brought his establisment to this
orderly state, are very few, and gentle. They consist chiefly in locking up
delinquents in a room by themslves, or abridging them of a meal. But these
happen rarely. When he thinks himself under a necessity of punishing a boy
corporally, knowing the ill-fame which masters of workhouses commonly lie
under, he chooses to have some respectable person present. But he is never
driven to this extremity, but in cases of theft, or other atrocious wickedness.

In this orderly house, where all bad examples are removed, and scenes only of
piety, industry, and regularity are before the eye, several refractory, and
some abandoned people, have been reclaimed. Among the children, it is hoped,
these instructive lessons will have the best effect. But among the old people,
some, who had led loose, disorderly lives, (as a forest is not the best nursery
of virtue) have acknowledged themselves much happier in a state of decency,
regularity, and virtue; and have accordingly changed their manners, and become
orderly people; of this two, or three instances might be given.

One of the greatest instances of the happy influence of this house, in
reclaiming obstinate wickedness, was shown in a woman of the name of Young. Her
father, a reprobate fellow, had been thrown into Winchester jail for
deer-steeling; and as he could not pay his fine, which was thirty pounds, he
was tempted to obtain his liberty, by accepting the post of county-hangman,
which he held till his death. Her mother was a noisy, bawling woman, who,
neglecting her family, used to beset all passengers at the bridge, and clamor
loud of the hardness of the times, and the necessities of her family; two or
three of whom she used generally to produce in rags, to confirm her distress.
The children of such parents could hardly be supposed to turn out well. The
girl, of whom we now speak, had been put to school, with a view to teach her
some good, and keep her out of more harm. But it had little effect: as soon as
she could use her hands dexterously, she began to pilfer; and with such
ingenuity, that it is probable she had learned some lessons from her father's
conversation, who had always lodgings among his old friends in the jail, during
his periodical excursions to Winchester. To do him justice, however, he showed
a laudable fear, lest his daughter should come judicially under his hands; and
has been known to tie her up, and correct her very severely. His severity,
however, only turned her from one kind of wickedness to another. She next
introduced herself to a regiment of soldiers, who were marching through the
country, with whom she lived, till disease sent her back to her parish. She had
now no home, her father and mother being dead. She was sent therefore to the
old poor-house, which has been described as a place not much calculated to
produce reformation. When she was cured of her disorder, she went off again;
leading the same profligate life she had led before; and this was repeated two
or three times. In this state she was brought to the new house, which, at first
was a state of uneasy confinement to her. But by degrees, the comfortable life
she now led -- the recollection of what she had suffered -- and the scenes she
had gone through, though she was yet only a young woman, gave her mind a new
turn, and she became a thorough penitent. Her credit indeed is now so great,
that the master has made her one of his superintendants over the children at
work.

Thus a happy, and useful society, for such it may be called, is formed out of
the dregs of the parish. The old people, having all their wants well supplied,
feel themselves happier than they ever did before; and are glad to render
cheerfully, in return, what little services they can. And the children, bred to
industry and virtue, stand a good chance of being formed, from little
profligates, into useful members of society.

The parish of Boldre will long remember the humanity and integrity, the
judicious management, and the religious care of the master and mistress, by
whose means, chiefly, this excellent establishment has been so happily
completed.

The truth of the above particulars, is attested by the three following members
of the Committee; two of whom are in his Majesty's commission of the peace for
Hampshire, and the other is minister of the parish of Boldre.

JOHN WALTER. THOMAS ROBBINS. WILLIAM GILPIN, VICAR.


