THE MINIATURE PICTURE: A COMEDY.

PRICE ONE SHILLING AND SIXPENCE.

THE MINIATURE PICTURE; A COMEDY, IN THREE ACTS: PERFORMED AT THE
THEATER ROYAL, DRURY LANE.

printer's device for G. Riley

LONDON: Printed for G. RILEY, Bookseller, at the City Circulating Library, St.
Paul's-Church-Yard. M.DCC.LXXXI.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Mr. CAMPLY. Mr. BELVIL. Lord MACGRINNON. JOHN, the Gardener.
ELIZA CAMPLY. Miss LOVELESS. Mrs. ARABELLA LOVELESS. SUSAN, the Cookmaid. Two
Servants.
The SCENES are in Mr. Camply 's and Miss Loveless 's Houses in Oxford.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THIS Comedy of Three Acts was originally written as a Farce in Two Acts, and
never intended for the Public Theaters, nor the Public Eye.

The Author of it publishes it at the Request of several of her Friends, who
saw it misrepresented on the Stage, at Drury Lane; as she chooses to submit
Faults which are really her own, to the Judgment of the World, rather than be
accused of those which she never committed.

PROLOGUE TO THE MINIATURE PICTURE,
WRITTEN BY RICHARD BRINSLEY SHERIDAN, Esquire
Spoken by Mr. KING. CHILLED by rude gales while yet reluctant May
Withholds the beauties of the vernal day;
As some fond maid, whom matron frowns reprove,
Suspends the smile her heart devotes to love;
The season's pleasures too delay their hour,
And Winter revels with protracted power:
Then blame not, Critics, if, thus late, we bring
A Winter's Drama -- but reproach -- the Spring.
What prudent Cit dares yet the season trust,
Bask in his whisky, and enjoy the dust?
Housed in Cheapside, scarce yet the gayer spark
Atchieves the Sunday triumph of the Park;
Scarce yet you see him, dreading to be late,
Scour the New-Road, and dash through Grosvenorgate,
Anxious -- and fearful too -- his steed to show,
The hacked Bucephalus of Rotten-row:
Careless he seems, yet, vigilantly sly,
Wooes the stray glance of ladies passing by,
While his off-heel, insidiously aside,
Provokes the caper which he seems to chide.
Scarce rural Kensington due honor gains,
The vulgar verdure of her walk remains,
Where white-rob'd misses amble two by two,
Nodding to booted beaux -- "how' do, how' do?"
With generous questions that no answer wait,
"How vastly full! A'n't you come vastly late?
"Is'n't it quite charming? When do you leave town?
"A'n't you quite tired? Pray can we set you down?"
These suburb pleasures of a London May,
Imperfect yet, we hail the cold delay;
But if this plea's denied, in our excuse
Another still remains, you cannot refuse;
It is a Lady writes -- and hark -- a Noble Muse!
But see a critic starting from his bench --
"A noble author"? Yes, Sir, but the Play's not French;
Yet if it were, no blame on us could fall;
For we, you know, must follow Fashion's call:
And true it is, things lately were en train
To woo the Gallic Muse at Drury Lane;
Not to import a troop of Foreign elves,
But treat you with French Actors -- in ourselves:
A Friend we had, who vowed he would make us speak
Pure flippant French -- by contract -- in a week,
Told us 'twas time to study what was good,
Polish, and leave off being understood;
That crowded audiences we thus might bring
To Monsieur Parsons and Chevalier King:
Or should the Vulgars grumble now and then,
The Prompter might translate -- for Country Gentlemen.
Straight all subscribed -- Kings, Gods, Mutes, Singer, Actor --
A Flanders Figure-dancer our Contractor.
But here I grieve to own, though it be to you,
He acted -- even as most Contractors do,
Sold what he never dealt in, and the amount
Being first discharged, submitted his account:
And what the event? their industry was such,
Dodd spoke good Flemish, Bannister bad Dutch;
Then the rogue told us, with insulting ease,
So it was Foreign it was sure to please:
Beaux, Witsapplaud, as Fashion should commend,
And Misses laugh -- to seem to understand --
So from each clime our soil may something gain;
Manhood from Rome, and sprightliness from Spain;
Some Russian Roscius next delight the age,
And a Dutch Heinel skate along the stage.
Exotic fopperies, hail! whose flattering smile
Supplants the Sterner Virtues of our Isle!
Thus while with Chinese firs, and Indian pines,
Our nurs'ries swarm, the British Oak declines:
Yet vain our Muse's fear -- no Foreign laws
We dread, while native beauty pleads our cause:
While you too judge, whose smiles are honors higher,
Than verse should gain, but where those eyes inspire.
But if the men presume your power to awe,
Retort their churlish Senatorial law:
This is your House -- and move -- the gentlemen withdraw:
Then they may vote, with envy never ceasing,
Your Influence has increased and is increasing.
But there, I trust, the resolution's finished;
Sure none will say -- It ought to be diminished.
EPILOGUE
Written by Mr. JEKYLL.
Spoken by Mrs. ABINGTON. THE men, like tyrants of the Turkish kind,
Have long our sex's energy confined;
In full-dress black, and bows, and solemn stalk,
Have long monopoliz'd the Prologue's walk;
But still the flippant Epilogue was our's.
It asked, for gay support, the female powr's;
It asked a flirting air, coquet and free,
And so to murder it, they fixed 'on me.'
Much they mistake my talents -- I was born
To tell, in sobs and sighs, some tale forlorn;
To wet my handkerchief with Juliet's woes,
Or tune to Shore's despair my 'tragic nose.'
Yes, Gentlemen, in education's spite,
You still shall find that we can read and write;
Like you can swell a debt or a debate.
Can quit the card-table to steer the State,
And bid our Belle-Assemblee's Rhet'ric flow,
To drown your dull declaimers at Soho!
Methinks, even now, I hear my sex's tongues,
The sweet, smart melody of female lungs!
The storm of Question, the Division calm,
With "hear her! hear her; Mrs. Speaker, Ma'am!
"Oh Order! Order! Kates and Susans rise,
And Marg'ret moves, and Tabitha replies.
Look to the Camp -- Coxheath and Warley Common,
Supplied, at least, for every tent a woman;
The cartridge paper wrapped the billet-doux,
The rear and picquet formed the rendezvous;
The drum's stern rattle shook the nuptial bed,d
The knapsack pillow'd 'Lady Sturgeon's' hea;
Love was the watchword, till the morning fife
Roused the tame Major and his warlike wife.
Look to the Stage -- to-night's example draws
A female dramatist to grace the cause --
So fade the triumphs of presumptuous man!
And would you, Ladies, but complete my plan,
Here should ye sign some patriot petition,
To mend our constitutional condition.
The men invade our rights; the mimic elves
'Lisp and nickname God's creatures,' like ourselves;
Rouge more than we do, simper, flounce, and fret,
And they 'coquet, good Gods, how they coquet!
They too are coy, and monstrous to relate,
Their's is the coyness in a 'tete a tete.'
Yes, Ladies, yes, "I could a tale unfold,'
'Wou'd harrow up your' -- cushions, were it told;
Part 'your combined curls, and freeze' pomatum
At griefs and grievances, as I could state 'em.
But 'such eternal blazon must not' speak;
Besides, the house adjourns some day next week.
This fair 'Committee' shall detail the rest.
Then let the monsters, if they dare, 'Protest.'
THE MINIATURE PICTURE.
ACT I.
SCENE I. Mr. Camply 's Study.
Mr. Camply writing, Servant knocks at the Door. Mr. CAMPLY. COME in.

Enter Servant. Sir, here is a young gentleman come to wait upon you; says his
Name is Revel, I think.


Mr. CAMPLY. Revel (lays down his pen, and rises) Revel, ha! Sir Harry Revel
perhaps; desire him to walk in. (exit servant) I have not seen him since he was
ten years old: his father was the worthiest of men; and I must return some of
the attention he bestowed on me to his son.

[ Enter Eliza Camply dressed in a baronet's gown and cap; bows affectedly
several times, then salutes her brother a la Francoise; puts her cap up to her
mouth to hide her laughing, and pretends to cough.]
Mr. CAMPLY. Sir Harry Revel, I believe; I did not know that you were come to
the university, or I should certainly have waited upon you first; but you will
easily dispense with ceremony, for as you have been partly educated abroad, the
formalities of an English college must appear rather strange to you.


ELIZA, interrupting. Yes faith, strange enough, and all the old fogrums with
their faces as starched and as prim as their bands -- why we all move by
clock-work; au pied de la lettre, indeed, my good sir; for the clock directs
all our motions.


Mr. CAMPLY. I fancy my good cousin is a great puppy. (Aside) The melancholy
event of your good father's death must make every place appear dull to you, Sir
Harry; but I hope a change of scene, and the attentions of your family --


ELIZA. Family attentions and family affairs are equally my aversion, cousin --
and really the queer fancy of my father's ordering me to Oxford in his will,
after I had been for three years at an academy in France, is such an
out-of-the-way thing, that I am half comforted for his death by it already.


Mr. CAMPLY. Indeed, Sir Harry!


ELIZA. Besides, cousin, ten thousand a year, a title, and a pretty wife, are
comforts that --


Mr. CAMPLY. Are you married, Sir Harry?


ELIZA. O no, not yet, but I shall be in a short time. A-propos, as I must soon
leave this country for a little time, while I go to see the old mansion, I must
beg you will give me two or three franks for my intended --


Mr. CAMPLY. Does she inhabit this country then, Sir? What a giddy mortal!
(Aside)

[Eliza going up to one side of the table, lays down the franks, sits down; her
brother goes and fits in the chair he first rose from on the other.] Yes, Sir;
only Miss Loveless; you know -- here --


Mr. CAMPLY. Loveless! Miss Loveless!

[Embarrassed, takes up and lays down a pen.
ELIZA. Yes, cousin -- What makes you stare so? Because the lady has had sense
enough to refuse all the squires of Oxfordshire, is that any reason why she
should not accept of me?


Mr. CAMPLY. A vain wretch! (aside, and affects a laugh.) Oh, no -- no -- no, I
give you joy, Sir Harry; I think you are well fitted to each other But are you
sure, Sir, it is the same Miss Loveless I mean?


ELIZA. I cannot possibly guess what Miss Loveless may run in your head, but I
mean the great heiress, Miss Loveless, who lives here in Oxford.


Mr. CAMPLY. Indeed!


ELIZA. Indeed; and what of that?

[Takes snuff affectedly.
Mr. CAMPLY. [Affects to laugh. O nothing at all; nothing at all.


ELIZA. [Flings herself back in her chair laughing. Ha, ha, ha! my dear
brother, ha, ha! I shall die, ha, ha! I shall die at your poor disconcerted
visage; ha, ha!


Mr. CAMPLY. [Rises and goes up to her. My sister, as I hope to live! why, my
dear Bess, what whim now? When we parted at breakfast your eyes were red, and
your spirits were gone; I thought at dinner to have seen you the same sighing
melancholy creature, and here you are all life and spirits, and in breeches
too. What does all this mean? explain, explain, my little Oxonian.

[ They come forward, Eliza leaning on his shoulder.
ELIZA. Not all life and spirits neither, my dear brother; you know I have not
seen Belvil this week -- we have quarrelled.


Mr. CAMPLY. I suspected as much, but I would not ask. Pray what could you
quarrel about? You told me you had given him your picture, and that he intended
to make a demand in form to me.


ELIZA. All this was true; but for all this I have not seen him this week --
heigh ho! and I really fear I shall never see him as my lover again.


Mr. CAMPLY. How! then you really love him, my poor Bess?


ELIZA. My dear brother, indeed I do; it is that, and your being in love too,
that has made me put on this dress.


Mr. CAMPLY. Me! you dream; I in love? I? ridiculous! what could make you take
that into your head?


ELIZA. [Shaking her head. O my good Sir, all your coldness and indifference
cannot impose upon me; that animal, that Belvil, has taught my heart to read
into the hearts of others.


Mr. CAMPLY. Well, and what knowledge do you get from mine!


ELIZA. Why I have read that you are deeply, aye, deeply in love with that
weathercock, Flirtilla Loveless.


Mr. CAMPLY. Poh, poh; nonsense.


ELIZA. Very good sense, for it is true.


Mr. CAMPLY. Supposing it is true, what is that to your quarrel with Belvil?


ELIZA. Why, this dress shall reconcile me to him, that is, if he deserves it,
and make Miss Loveless fling herself at your head, or at your feet, or --


Mr. CAMPLY. Into the river sooner. I really do not understand you.


ELIZA. You know she has flirted with, and refused half the country; the only
two persons who have not sacrificed their time or inclinations to her coquetry
are you and Belvil. Now I think she likes you.


Mr. CAMPLY. O that is quite impossible -- for I never speak to her.


ELIZA. So much the better; nothing piques a coquet like your obstinate
silence. Brother, pray let me ask you one question; if you do not feel afraid
of her, why should you not speak to her?


Mr. CAMPLY. Why, why -- poh, what a question. I Will tell you, Betsy; I like her
too well to permit her to exercise her power over me; she is so handsome, and
so capricious, that she would pretend to like me for one day, send me to the
devil the next, and laugh at me for loving her all the rest of her life.


ELIZA. I have not visited her these six years, because I saw you avoided her;
but her repeated refusals convince me she likes some one, and that you are that
one, her blushes, whenever you are named, sufficiently explain.


Mr. CAMPLY. That may be pride hurt --


ELIZA. Aye, aye, pride to be sure.


Mr. CAMPLY. Well, but Belvil and you -- I am all impatience.


ELIZA. He said -- it was yesterday se'en night he said -- Miss Loveless was
prodigiously handsome and very agreeable. Why no, quoth your foolish sister;
no, quoth that creature -- No; she is very witty. I observed that she was a
great flirt, and that if I married him he should never speak to her. He said,
that was very silly. I grew angry, he laughed me into a passion, and my passion
sent him out of the house.


Mr. CAMPLY. This was all foolish enough, and then you were sorry -- hey.
(Eliza sighs.) Did he take your picture with him?


ELIZA. O yes, he had it hung about his neck; but that is not the worst part of
the story: I find he has been ever since with Miss Loveless; six days with that
odious flirtilla. Now, as I could deceive you, I am certain of improving upon
them; as Sir Harry Revel then will I go there, make violent love to her, rout
Belvil, humble her vanity, and when I have deprived her of her whole train of
admirers, and her airs, I will offer you as a --


Mr. CAMPLY. Heyday, sister, not so fast; when it is time I can offer myself;
but I do not approve of your going unless the aunt is in the plot.


ELIZA. I have wrote to her, she disapproves much of her niece's conduct, and
is very glad to enter into any scheme that is likely to alter it. Come, do not
look so grave -- wish me success, and Belvil true. (Going, returns.) Pray
contrive to make Belvil believe I am gone to London, if he should call.


Mr. CAMPLY. I will. ( Exit Eliza.) I wish her success indeed; if she can get
the better of that intolerable spirit of coquetry and love of admiration that
so entirely possesses Miss Loveless, I shall fling myself at her feet, and
think myself too happy to secure her peace of mind and honor for ever.

[ Is going, but is met by Eliza.
ELIZA. Brother, here is Mrs. Arabella Loveless, but lord Mackgrinnon is with
her, therefore pray contrive to call him out of the way.


Mr. CAMPLY. I will.

[ Servant announces Mrs. Arabella and lord Macgrinnon. Give me leave to
present my cousin, Sir Harry Revel, to you: and, my lord, I must beg the favor
of you, as you have been some time at Oxford, to introduce him to your
societies.


Lord MACGRINNON. [ Mr. Camply and Mrs. Arabella talk apart. I shall be very
happy to make him acquainted with some of the most learned and discreet
gentlemen of the different colleges, particularly with my worthy friends at
Baliol: he will meet with good cheer, as well as with cheerful and witty people,
and aw for nothing, for I am at home wherever I go.


ELIZA. That I dare say. (Camply pulls her by the elbow) I hate his northern
dialect. (Aside to her brother) O, my lord, every one must be glad when you do
them the honor of making their houses your home. (Bowing)


Lord MACGRINNON. (Aside) A pert sheeld, I fancy. (Bows)


Mrs. ARABELLA. Pray, Mr. Camply, have you not built a new hot-house lately? to
tell you the truth my visit was partly to your new plants, but chiefly to our
new neighbor here; as his worthy father was a particular friend of mine, I
wished to ask him some questions that --


Mr. CAMPLY. If lord Macgrinnon will take a walk round the shrubbery with me,
by the time we return I imagine your business with Sir Harry will be over.


Lord MACGRINNON. I Will attend you with great pleasure.

[ Exit Mr. Camply and lord Macgrinnon.
ELIZA. How do you think my new character fits upon me? Dear madam, if under
this disguise I can be of any service to you, and find out Mr. Belvil's way of
thinking in regard to your niece, I shall be too happy.


ARABELLA. (Smiling.) As to Mr. Belvil's way of thinking, I dare be sworn my
niece has no share in it.


ELIZA. Indeed!


Mrs. ARABELLA. Yes, indeed! but my dear Miss Camply, what am I to think of my
niece? she has given Mr. Belvil just the same encouragement that every other
suitor has met with. Lord Macgrinnon too is upon her list -- and yet they seem
all to be far from her heart.


ELIZA. (Smiling.) Is there no one do you think that is near it?


Mrs. ARABELLA. O no; if there was any particular person whom she meant to
please, she would not permit herself such universal coquetry.


ELIZA. My dear Madam, (Looking round) there is no man can hear me; all women
are born coquets, and nothing but a great passion for one object can cure that
natural propensity we all have to coquetry.


Mrs. ARABELLA. Surely, good sense might cure it.


ELIZA. Good sense; good sense only strengthens the foible, as it increases our
power over mankind -- but to our point; is there no one among your niece's
train of admirers whom you should wish her to prefer?


Mrs. ARABELLA. None; Mr. Belvil is not her lover -- lord Macgrinnon is a proud
Scotchman, who praises her beauty, and talks of the delights of love from
morning till night; but I suspect his views are interested, from the questions
he has asked other people concerning her estate, her money, her plate, her
houses -- in short, whatever his intentions are, the secresy he involves them
in, bespeaks them to be of no good kind.


ELIZA. Perhaps, when Sir Harry Revel appears as a serious rival, we shall find
out his plan -- but, madam, do you think Miss Loveless hates my brother?


Mrs. ARABELLA. Would to heaven your brother did not dislike her! -- he would
be a friend and protector to any woman that could please him.


ELIZA. Then set your heart at rest about him: I know he loves her, though he
disapproves of her conduct; and if you will take the excuse of a fiddle
tomorrow night, to call in your neighbors, by way of my brother's coming to
your house, as if it was a natural thing, I will take care to bring matters to
such a crisis, that your niece shall be obliged to confess a preference to my
brother; if she feels it, which I suspect.


Mrs. ARABELLA. You seem to be a connoisseur in the language of looks; I that
live with her never suspected as much.


ELIZA. She never names him, I dare say.


Mrs. ARABELLA. More than that, I think, she generally turns off the
conversation when he is named: you see, Miss Camply, this is a bad sign --


ELIZA. An excellent one rather: lord, my dear madam, you seem never to have
taken the trouble of peeping into your own mind; you are so perfectly
unacquainted with that of our sex in general -- and --

[Laughing.
Mrs. ARABELLA. I do not know which delights me most, her philosophy, or
vivacity; my ignorance proceeds not from my not searching into my own heart,
but that no one has taken the trouble of asking if I had one or not; for you
know, Miss Camply, I am an old maid.

[Laughing.
ELIZA. [Taking her hand. And so would I be one too, if at your time of life
that title would sit upon me with so much good humor and dignity -- I think I
hear my brother's voice at a distance; remember that you are only to announce
me as Sir Harry; and persuade your niece that I, Miss Camply, am gone to
London, and that you will have a dance tomorrow night.


Mrs. ARABELLA. I shall certainly not forget any part of a scheme which is
likely to join our families into one happy group.


ELIZA. [Kisses her hand. Your are an excellent being --


Enter lord Macgrinnon and Mr. Camply. Mr. CAMPLY. What, making fine speeches,
cousin --


Lord MACGRINNON. Not making love surely to such an antiquated gentlewoman?


ELIZA. [ Aside to lord Macgrinnon. Why not, my lord?


Lord MACGRINNON. I would no more squander my breath than I would my money,
unless I were to get cent. per cent. interest for it.


ELIZA. I dare say not; true Scottish economy -- I hope not to reap a cent.
per cent. interest there, my lord, but receive through other hands interest
surpassing the principal.


Lord MACGRINNON. Other hands! he does not mean the niece sure? he, he! what
the niece, hey?


Mrs. ARABELLA. Now, Mr. Camply, may not I see these plants I mentioned?


Mr. CAMPLY. Certainly. Gentlemen, will you walk?


ELIZA. We will follow you presently, cousin.

[ Exit Mr. Camply and Mrs. Arabella.
Lord MACGRINNON. How do you like the university, Sir Harry?


Sir HARRY. I don't know; I suppose it is like all other universities -- we
young fellows leave in them all the little learning we are ever possessed of;
and carry no sort of knowledge out of them, which can be of any service to us
during the rest of our lives -- how should we -- we drink port -- drive stage
coaches -- and laugh at the old Dons -- Pshaw -- Pray, my lord, how do you like
Miss Loveless, is she not very handsome?


Lord MACGRINNON. Handsome eneugh; and trowth a believe what am teld o'her,
that she is got aw the different pairts of geud breeding at the best scheuls;
but one of her greatest accomplishments is her fortune.


ELIZA. Pshaw, dirt; mere dirt, my lord! I have heard much of her high spirit
and contempt for our sex -- for women in general -- Egad I like her for it --
What do you think, my lord, is likely to soften her into love, beside ten
thousand a year and a tolerable figure?


Lord MACGRINNON. If he does mean to attack her, I will mislead him. (Aside.)
She has had so many fine speeches made to her, that I believe nothing but
neglect would move her. -- I will make him behave quite rude to her, and then
she will hate him. (Aside.) Pretend not to see her, tak na notice of her
beauty; rail against the whole sex, and I Will warrant she is your awn.


ELIZA. [Seems to muse upon it. Umph -- Indeed!


Lord MACGRINNON. And I will feed her vanity; which in good truth, as they say,
is her only weakness; I woul cram it till it shall overflow all her good sense
-- take this with you, Sir Harry, I believe she has a great deal of pride, but
na vanity at all; na, na vanity at all, I think --


ELIZA. That Is a Scotch lie now, he has some design in that. (Aside.) No
vanity, my lord, why the world attribute vanity to her, as the only shade to
her perfections -- Now swear to your lie, Sawney. (Aside.)


Lord MACGRINNON. Upon my credit, I never saw any thing like it; pride she has,
and a great deal; and my advice can only come from my desire of being of some
sarvice to you.


ELIZA. [Bowing, but laughs. Much obliged to you, my lord; have I not some
reason to suspect your advice, for I am told you are one of her lovers?


Lord MACGRINNON. Mere jest or calumny, Sir Harry, na, na; na Macgrinnon ever
married a woman that had na title -- Indeed Miss Loveless's fortune might make
a mon forget she was not noble, if he might have it aw without any lawyers
interfering; but not me, Sir Harry. Na, I will na be the first of my family to
set the example of marrying only a simple gentlewoman.


ELIZA. So you think it would be very foolish for any one to marry without
getting the fortune entirely into one's own hands?


Lord MACGRINNON. Most surely; and in truth, Sir Harry, women are come to such
a pretty high-flying pass nowadays, that ruin and beggary are the only things
that can keep a wife within the bounds of decency. Why, ye hear of nathing but
divorces; na, I should be sorry were I to give my name to any woman, that if
she chose to play the devil I must return one sixpence of her money for
separate maintenance, or that she should exact an allowance from me -- Na, na,
Sir Harry, keep the power and the pence together in your awn hands.


ELIZA. And you would have my wife love me as the Indians worship the devil,
through fear?


Lord MACGRINNON. Hey? trowth I a' think fear is the strongest had we ha of
mankind or womankind.


ELIZA. I must inform you, my lord, that I am perfectly acquainted with woman;
I judge of the whole sex by one whose mind I thoroughly possess.


Lord MACGRINNON. Possess, in trowth; and suppose you do, you possess a riddle,
that is aw, a riddle; na, na, Sir Harry, womens' minds are weak, guided by the
impulse of the moment -- here and there a flash of wit, but na judgment --


ELIZA. I could spit in his Scotch face. (Aside.)


Lord MACGRINNON. Hey? what may ye be muttering, pray, Sir?


ELIZA. I say the whole sex are much obliged to your lordship. I am quite of a
different opinion, my lord; and as I was telling you, if I was a woman myself,
I could not be better acquainted with the sex than I am; and I imagine it is
the unjust usurpation of all their natural rights and liberties which men are
possessed of that makes our sex -- I say, that makes women, my lord, women, run
into such errors.


Lord MACGRINNON. Why, if you was a woman yourself you could not plead better
for them than you do.


ELIZA. I love them all; I respect, I honor them.


Lord MACGRINNON. I love them too; but as to respect and honor --

[Shakes his head.
ELIZA. In short, my Lord, if I succeed with Miss Loveless, all the business I
shall give her family will be to settle her whole fortune upon herself.


Lord MACGRINNON. A downright feul. (Aside)


ELIZA. Entirely in her own power; that she may feel totally independent of me,
and free as air; that I may be certain nothing but her own heart and
inclination gives me her time and attentions.


Lord MACGRINNON. Aw, that is mare than I intend -- such liberty as that may
tempt her -- Na, na, Sir Harry, you are quite wrong.


ELIZA. Wrong or not, such are my ideas; and I shall follow them as fast as
possible.

[Runs out.
Lord MACGRINNON. And I shall follow you as fast as possible. I hope at least
he will take my advice in trying to pique her pride, and make her so angry,
that I may gain time to get her consent, and to make mine upon my own terms --
for if once I have her fortune, she may go and hang herself for what I care.


End of the FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE, the Drawing Room in Miss Loveless 's House.
Mrs. Arabella and Miss Loveless sitting on each side of a table, upon which
Mr. Belvil is sitting with a book, which he shuts, and turning to Miss Loveless
says -- SO you do not admire this charming poem of Henry and Emma --


Miss LOVELESS. No, indeed; that Emma you admire so much is a most unnatural
creature -- so mean-spirited -- so servile -- so humble -- in short, no woman
ever thought as Prior makes her think.


BELVIL. Yes, I know one that did. (Aside)


Miss LOVELESS. Hey? What do you mutter between your teeth?


BELVIL. I say, I believe, I know one woman whose manner of thinking might have
served as a model for Emma's mind.


Miss LOVELESS. The sentimental grave Miss Camply, perhaps?


Mrs. ARABELLA. I wish you were as grave, my dear niece.


Miss LOVELESS. Thank heaven, my dear aunt, your wish will never come to pass
-- a formal -- prim -- demure -- Lord, aunt, I dare say, poor soul, she will
die an old maid.


Mrs. ARABELLA. If she does, then it will be from choice, and not from
necessity.


Miss LOVELESS. [ To Mr. Belvil. A-propos; Mr. Belvil, it is reported you are
the charming swain she preferred to any other.


BELVIL. (Embarrassed) O faith, madam, Miss Camply and I were brought up
together; and -- therefore -- it is no wonder that -- that --

[Walks from the table, and says aside, What a foolish dog I am!


Miss LOVELESS. (Aside) He certainly is over head and ears in love with me --
What a delightful thing it will be to torment that prude, Camply, and perhaps
pique her insensible brother!


Enter a Servant, with a note to the Aunt. SERVANT. From Mr. Camply, madam.


Mrs. ARABELLA. [After having read the note. My dear, I will return presently;
I will just go and answer this.

[Exit.
Miss LOVELESS. What can that be! [Rises, and aside.


BELVIL. (Aside.) A note from Camply -- perhaps his sister has complained of
me: I am a silly puppy; for here am I making love to a woman I do not care
about, and perhaps shall entangle myself in such a manner that I shall not know
how to retreat -- without feeling the least pleasure in the pursuit too. What a
cursed fool --


Miss LOVELESS. [Approaches, and taps him on the shoulder with her fan] What,
deep in thought, Mr. Belvil; come, I Will guess the subject of that reverie.


BELVIL. My reveries can have but one subject, and you must be too well
acquainted with your own merit not to know it.


Miss LOVELESS. Pshaw; you are a flatterer -- Do you know, Mr. Belvil, that I
am tempted now-and-then to believe that you are upon the point of turning
politician?


BELVIL. Pray, why, madam?


Miss LOVELESS. Because you fall into such unaccountable reveries; then I am
sure you must be studying about some matters of importance -- perhaps you are a
patriot, and are forming a new system of government -- Lard, there will be no
bearing you if you turn reformer.


BELVIL. Ha, ha! no indeed, Miss Loveless -- when I am perfectly satisfied with
a reformation of my own private conduct, I may then perhaps advise the
community at large -- but now -- ridiculous -- ha, ha!


[ As he laughs, Miss Camply 's picture hangs out of his bosom. Miss LOVELESS.
Ha! what is that?


BELVIL. What?


Miss LOVELESS. A picture, as I hope to live! Why, Mr. Belvil, this is a very
odd fancy of yours never to have shown me that -- nay, I insist upon seeing it.


BELVIL. How unlucky! (aside) O certainly; (unties and gives it her) it is only
a picture that I had given me one day in joke -- nothing serious -- a joke --
he -- a joke -- he -- that is all. What an imprudent puppy I am! (aside)


Miss LOVELESS. A joke, is that all? O then, I Will try him (aside) So it is only
a joke --


BELVIL. A joke that engrosses all my serious thoughts though. (aside)


Miss LOVELESS. Oh, if you study your speeches, I would not give one farthing
for them.


BELVIL. Remember that I only lend you that picture, and that you must return
it as soon as possible -- Pray compare that face with your own, and imagine, if
possible you can, that it can even be looked at with patience, except indeed to
serve as a foil.


Miss LOVELESS. I Will try him. (aside) Well now I protest it is prettier than I
thought. I will keep it, with your leave, to examine the beauty at leisure; as
you are so indifferent about it, I will put in my pocket till I have an
opportunity of comparing it with the original. He looks confused. (aside)


BELVIL. How imprudent I have been! (Forces a laugh) O certainly -- keep it --
fling it away -- do just what you please with it -- he, he! --


Re-enter the Aunt. Mrs. ARABELLA. My dear niece, Mr. Camply's note was to
inform me of the arrival of Sir Harry Revel at Oxford: as Mr. Camply and his
sister are gone to London upon business, they have desired me to show their
cousin some attention, in order to dissipate his melancholy, having just lost
his father, by whose death he gets ten thousand a year. Pray, Mr. Belvil, did
you ever see him?


BELVIL. Not since he was ten years old: he was then very like Miss Camply --
very handsome --


Mrs. ARABELLA. He dines here.


Miss LOVELESS. He dines here -- handsome -- ten thousand a year, and a baronet
-- all these things are worth thinking about -- I long to see him.


BELVIL. Confounded spirit of coquetry! how unlike my Eliza! (Aside) With your
leave, ladies, I shall go and put a little powder in my hair, and return
presently.

[ Exit Belvil, bowing.
Mrs. ARABELLA. Well, my dear, has Mr. Belvil made any proposals yet?


Miss LOVELESS. Lard, aunt, the instant a man speaks to one you imagine he must
propose --


Mrs. ARABELLA. I can tell you, niece, that your encouraging so many suitors,
without my hearing of any thing serious, alarms me very much for the sake of
your reputation; there is my lord Macgrinnon who tells the whole world he is in
love with you.


Miss LOVELESS. And he tells me so too.


Mrs. ARABELLA. For shame, niece; I should have blushed myself into a fever
before I could have said such a thing. And pray do not you know that Mr. Belvil
has even been attached to Miss Camply, and yet you have suffered him to dangle
after you for a whole week -- I wish I knew his intentions.


Miss LOVELESS. Indeed, ma'am, if you choose to call me to an account for every
foolish fellow that deserts country misses for me, you will have enough to do
-- Will you condemn me in the high court of your judgment, because my charms
monopolize the attentions of mankind? -- Really, aunt -- really, you are too
unreasonable -- I cannot help it if I am admired --


Mrs. ARABELLA. I only speak to you as a friend -- you are your own mistress --
but I do not see that you like any one yourself.


Miss LOVELESS. Like, O yes, ma'am -- I like him best that says the finest
things to me; and in short, my dear aunt, I never will marry till I can find a
man who will let the whole world admire me (The aunt walks about, Miss Loveless
follows her) and that it will without his leave, I fancy. -- Stay, I must see
what sort of looks I am in, for I must try what sort of heart this baronet has
-- (aside) Your servant, Milud (with a side look as lord Macgrinnon enters,
bowing.)


Lord MACGRINNON. Pawawawh -- She looks as high and as slooty, as if a
Macgrinnon did not do her a great del of honor in courting her -- Do you ken,
now, miss Loveless -- do you ken, that na Macgrinnon but me ever was the slave
of beauty alone, before now --


Miss LOVELESS. (Still arranging her hair in a pocket-glass) Umph -- ha --


[Enter Belvil; bows. Lord MACGRINNON. Have ye been kulling some birds this
morning, Mr. Belvil?


BELVIL. No, my lord, I have been killing time in the pleasantest manner in the
world, at the feet of miss Loveless.


Lord MACGRINNON. Augh, in good troth -- and so wud I, but I never can find ye
alone.


Miss LOVELESS. Alone! what can he possibly have to say alone? (aside.)


BELVIL. What you have been often told in public -- that you look like an angel.


Lord MACGRINNON. Augh, and so you do -- and I wud have told you hoo like an
angel you were a long time ago, had you behaved more like a woman --


Miss LOVELESS. I really do not understand you.


Lord MACGRINNON. If you will indulge me with a tete-a-tete, I will unriddle my
meaning --


Miss LOVELESS. A tete-a-tete! -- Well, I Will meet you in the garden tomorrow
morning at ten o'clock.


BELVIL. (Goes up to her) May I be permitted (kisses her hand, and at that
instant Sir Harry Revel is introduced.)


ELIZA. (aside) Ha! you perfidious -- Madam, I am your most obedient -- (bows
all round, without looking at Miss Loveless, then takes out a glass and looks
through it to Mrs. Arabella) Heavens and earth, ma'am, I did not expect to find
a salon so truly a la francoise in this horrid country -- and some fine
pictures too -- That is a Rubens, I fancy -- and that a Rembrandt -- Pray is
that a Carravagio? -- Yes, it is I see.


Miss LOVELESS. (Aside) He does not even look at me -- it is a pretty fellow,
though.


BELVIL. (Aside) He is still like Eliza, but not so well though.


Miss LOVELESS. Pray, Sir Harry, how do you like Oxfordshire?


ELIZA. 'Pon my soul, madam, I know nothing about the shire -- am but just come
into it, and faith have seen nothing in it yet that would make me wish ever to
see it again.


Lord MACGRINNON. Whaut! Sir Harry, I must needs say we are all much obliged to
you for your poleet compliment.


ELIZA. (Aside to Belvil) What a Highland savage he is!


BELVIL. (Aside) What a puppy you are!


ELIZA. O, my lord, we always except the company present -- always -- always --
he! he! always --


BELVIL. He laughs to show his teeth, I suppose.


Mrs. ARABELLA. O, do you know that your picture is come home?


BELVIL. Where is it? it cannot do justice to the original, I am sure.


Lord MACGRINNON. Na -- na -- give me liveing pictures, good flesh and blood.


ELIZA. What a brute! [ To Belvil.


BELVIL. (Turns away) What a coxcomb!


ARABELLA. Will you look at it, Mr. Belvil? Gentlemen, will you give me your
opinion of it?


Miss LOVELESS. Indeed I shall not go to look at my own picture: will you stay
with me, Sir Harry?


ELIZA. O, yes; I detest those modern daubs.

(Exit all the company but Eliza and miss Loveless.)
Miss LOVELESS. Modern daubs, indeed! So you do not like modern beauties, Sir
Harry?


ELIZA. Beauties -- yes, faith, madam, I like beauties; but your English artist
here gives you ladies a yellow purple complexion, and then to set it off
dresses you in a bright rose color or blue drapery.


Miss LOVELESS. An insensible creature! he turns his back upon me to give me a
dissertation upon painting (aside.) I suppose you prefer a fine picture to a
fine woman, sir; your passionate lovers of virtu are very fond of inanimate
beauties.


ELIZA. Now is her vanity ready to burst; she is ripe for my purpose (goes
hastily to the end of the stage, and looks at her through his glass) I did not
know there was so angelic a being as yourself in England. I have examined all
the beauties, both dead and living, of France and Italy, and I think you excel
every thing I have yet seen, except a famous Madona of Guido's at Florence,
which you put me in mind of. [ Miss Loveless does as she is bid.] Be so good to
turn your head a little this way; no, no, I mistake, recline it on the other
side, lean it upon the right shoulder: no, no, I mean the left -- aye, there --
now half shut your eyes; divine upon my soul! -- Now look up to heaven --
heavenly, by this light! -- No, no, look down if you please; aye, so -- just so
-- you beautiful charming angel, thus low let me kneel and adore you.


Miss LOVELESS. (Hides her face with her fan. I protest you kill me with
confusion.


ELIZA. Here will I be fixed immovable for ever till you tell me you will be
mine; command my fortune and my life; settle my whole estate as you please, so
as you give me your heart. When shall I be blessed with your hand? speak,
speak, my lovely creature; I am upon the rack till you consent.


Miss LOVELESS. Really you do not give one time to breathe, much less to speak?


ELIZA. Your answer -- I die for your answer.


Miss LOVELESS. You shall have my answer tonight. I vow you hurry one out of
one's wits.


ELIZA. Thank you, dearest, best of women. (Rises) I think I have performed my
part to a miracle. (Aside)


Miss LOVELESS. The most impetuous man I ever met with. But Sir Harry, how
could my charms have any effect upon you, who have been brought up with your
cousin, who is the most superlatively accomplished woman in the world, if one
may credit Mr. Belvil's accounts of her?


ELIZA. I suppose you have seen her, and know there is nothing so very
extraordinary about her? Now for a description of myself. (aside)


Miss LOVELESS. Yes, I have seen her; but she blushes so much at every thing,
and at nothing -- and her countenance alters from one moment to another into
such a variety of expressions, that I really never could decide any thing about
her -- I suppose Mr. Belvil's passion for her was only a nursery prejudice.


ELIZA. Now do I dread to have my questions answered. (aside) His addresses to
you are no secret in Camply's house, I assure you; and I thought my foolish
cousin seemed to look very grave upon the subject -- but I trust you have
refused Mr. Belvil's offers --


Miss LOVELESS. His offers -- Lard, Sir Harry, you are just like my aunt, who
fancies every dangler one has is to offer; he has done every thing a respectful
lover could do, but offer: but I suppose he will.


ELIZA. Aye, aye, to be sure! (aside) Heaven forbid!


Miss LOVELESS. Yes, he cannot think seriously about Miss Camply.


ELIZA. Why not, pray?


Miss LOVELESS. Why, he has trusted her picture to me, and that looks as if he
did not care about her.


ELIZA. It does, indeed! Pray let me see that picture -- pray compare that face
with this portrait, and see if there is the least chance of Eliza's making any
conquest when you are near?


Miss LOVELESS. For heaven's sake, Sir Harry, hide it -- hide it -- here is Mr.
Belvil -- (Miss Loveless confused) Gentlemen -- Mr. Belvil, where is my aunt?
-- I must find her --

[Exit.
ELIZA. [ Stands in an affected posture looking at the picture, Mr. Belvil
approaching, Eliza shows it to him.] Do not you think this very handsome?


BELVIL. Death and destruction! where did you get that?


ELIZA. Why, it was given me this moment by a fair lady, and I intend to make
use of it as a passport to the good graces of the lady who sat for it.


BELVIL. I can hardly contain myself. What shall I say to him? (aside)


ELIZA. Now do I die to know if it is myself or Miss Camply that he is so much
disturbed about. (aside) What is the matter, Mr. Belvil? you look out of
countenance -- You look -- faith I Have hit it. You look like the secretary of
the war-office when he receives the news of a defeat instead of a victory -- or
like Sir Tantivy on a frosty morning.


BELVIL. [Belvil goes up to him. You may think yourself very witty, Sir Harry,
but your mirth at -- (his voice trembles) at this time, is the very height of
cruelty.


ELIZA. I could kiss him for that now. (aside) Are you deaf, man? I say Miss
Loveless gave me this; and really I think it like Eliza -- but in her grave
looks though.


BELVIL. Then you are very well acquainted with Miss Loveless already.


ELIZA. I could beat him with pleasure! (aside.) O yes, sir, so well that, if I
do not change my mind, we shall in all probability be married as soon as the
lawyers can finish their business.


BELVIL. (smiling) I give you joy, sir; I think you are admirably well fitted
to one another; for, enter nous, Sir Harry, the lady's vanity is equal to
yours; excuse me. ( Bows.


ELIZA. Take care, Mr. Belvil, take care: I shall make you repent of those
words ere long -- but you seem piqued; is it Miss Loveless or my cousin's
charms that disturb you so much?


BELVIL. Why do you ask, sir? is it any thing to you what are my sentiments of
either?


ELIZA. O yes, sir, I am in love with both; and shall be heartily tired of my
wife, that is to be, in a very short time; and then intend to have an affair
de coeur with my cousin; she has a fine sentimental mind, and a lovely person,
and that is the true thing for a mistress.


BELVIL. Come, come, Sir Harry, if you can be serious for a few minutes, I
shall entreat your patience, and your assistance, perhaps, in an affair which
makes me truly wretched.


ELIZA. I begin to pity him! (aside) Serious! -- ha, ha, ha, serious! upon my
credit, Belvil, thy serious phiz would make any man serious but myself; but I
never was serious in my life, nor ever intend to be so; and as you seem to be
in the dolorous penseroso style, I will leave you to improve upon your own
reflections (going, kisses the picture) Joli comme le jour ce petit minois la.


BELVIL. (Following) I insist upon your not going, Sir Harry; that picture once
was mine.


ELIZA. The more fool you for parting with it.


BELVIL. Part with it; part with it; I would as soon part with my life.


ELIZA. Poh, poh, Mr. Belvil, it is quite ridiculous in you to appear so
anxious about a picture, which, I repeat, you have parted with so easily.


BELVIL. No; by that heaven that hears us, I would as soon part with the
original, if I was possessed of her -- but it was folly and imprudence that
made me lend it to Miss Loveless; and her giving it to you was greater folly
still. I do entreat you, Sir Harry, I beseech you; shall I kneel to you for it;
what is there I will not do, if you will make me easy by restoring it?


ELIZA. Why, did the girl give it you?


BELVIL. Yes, she did.


ELIZA. She did -- faith the girl is as great a simpleton as you are.


BELVIL. (Very angry.) Very well, Sir Harry; the confession I have made gives
you a right to upbraid me; but though my heart is neatly broken by the
consequences of my foolish conduct, my spirit, my spirit is not --


ELIZA. Poor sighing swain!


BELVIL. Hell and furies! Sir Harry, do you laugh at me?


ELIZA. What would the man have? you may marry my cousin if you like it.


BELVIL. I never shall be so happy; I should be distracted with joy did I
imagine she would forgive me. Dear, dear, good Sir Harry, be instrumental to my
happiness. (Offers to embrace him.)


ELIZA. Stand off -- I am afraid you will bite me, for you are mad, mad by this
light. (walks away from him) If he had kissed me, I should have been a woman at
once. (aside) What then you really are ready to hang yourself about Eliza, hey!


BELVIL. I never loved any woman but your cousin: Oh! if you knew her!


ELIZA. I know her, do you see, just as well as I know myself -- faith -- ha, ha!
-- faith, I cannot help laughing -- so -- she -- ha, ha! let me see, she gives
you her picture, you give it away, and -- ha, ha! -- upon my credit as pretty a
couple of ninnies as ever I read of.


BELVIL. [Goes up to her in a fury. I will have it, do you hear? I will, do you
hear, Sir Harry, or it shall cost you your life to keep it.


ELIZA. Not so loud, sir, you crack the drum of my ear; these country gentlemen
are so robust. You will -- then by Jove you shall not have it; for should she
be cruel and not surrender, I shall show this picture to the whole world, and
swear she has, and that will do as well.


BELVIL. Then you are a villain.


ELIZA. With all my spirit; a rascal, a coxcomb, a puppy; and you, the worthy
Mr. Belvil. But seriously now, Bilvil; you will be a lucky man to have such a
gallant as myself to escort your wife about -- for I shall appear in every
public place with her; close to her ear -- always at her elbow -- always --


BELVIL. This usage is not to be borne.


ELIZA. Well -- [takes snuff and stares at him.


BELVIL. (Aside) What is there in that boy that quite unmans me? (goes up to
him) I expect, Sir Harry, that you will give me satisfaction?


ELIZA. Oh, sir, I expect satisfaction likewise; but this is not a proper place
to show our courage in. Tomorrow, if you please, Mr. Belvil, if you will meet
me at the end of the chesnut-tree walk at seven of clock, we will decide this
matter with any arms you please; till then I keep the picture; tomorrow the
conqueror shall wear it.


BELVIL. Bravely spoken, Sir Harry! with swords we will decide this point, and
if you fall, I shall proclaim to the world, that in your serious moments you
are a contrast to your usual character, which I must inform you, Sir Harry, is
one of the most profligate and debauched I ever met with. If you survive me,
all I ask of you is to justify me to your cousin; it is to do justice to her
honor that I expose my life.


ELIZA. I Will answer for your justification. (Aside) I die to undeceive him.
Well, sir, one of us will live to lay our laurels and our person at her feet.


BELVIL. I have a serious affair to settle, therefore I must leave you. (going,
returns) Remember the hour.


ELIZA. Yes, yes. [ Exit Belvil. Now I have sufficiently punished him, I shall
give him satisfaction, but in a much pleasanter way than he expects. Here is
then at last returned to me the copy of a very foolish original; and were the
fate of it to be well described in a modern play, I fancy it would teach many
giddy girls like myself not to part with the one till the other was secured as
fast as a lawyer and parson could bind it.


End of the SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE, Miss Loveless 's Garden.
Miss Loveless crossing the stage meets Mr. Camply, and starts. Miss LOVELESS.
HA! he here! (Aside)


Mr. CAMPLY. (Confused) I came -- I came -- to -- Pray, Miss Loveless, where is
your aunt?


Miss LOVELESS. So this visit is not to me, I find. (aside) My aunt is in the
house, I believe. Lord, I thought you were in London; for as we give a ball
tonight, the gravity of such a very sober creature as you are will quite
discompose our dancing.


Mr. CAMPLY. Your aunt has done my sister and me the honor of inviting us, and
I hastened out of town on purpose to attend her commands.


Miss LOVELESS. Her commands! I suppose you mean to dance with her too. I
protest, Mr. Camply, it will be quite edifying to see her, like a true maid of
honor in queen Bess's days, with her hands thus -- and footing it demurely, so
-- her eyes rivetted upon her feet all the time, lest the left foot should take
place improperly of the right.


Mr. CAMPLY. Ha, ha, ha! charming, I protest. Now draw my picture.


Miss LOVELESS. Pshaw! -- How in the name of wonder should I describe your
dancing, when the very sound of your voice is quite a new thing to me.


Mr. CAMPLY. Were I as vain as my cousin, Sir Harry, I should say that looked
like a reproach to me for not speaking to you before.


Miss LOVELESS. Lard now, do not apply general observations to particular
people -- For heaven's sake let us think of ourselves as little as we always
have done.


Mr. CAMPLY. Yes, yes; I know you ever had much less regard for yourself than
for any one else in the world.


Miss LOVELESS. Myself -- myself again; why, did you ever think about myself.


Mr. CAMPLY. O no, not at all -- never, never -- Ha, ha, ha! I am quite
diverted --


Miss LOVELESS. At our raillery, I suppose. (aside) That is the most provoking
laugh I ever heard; I Will cure him of that affectation, I Am determined -- Pray,
excuse me, Mr. Camply, when I tell you that nature never intended you for
raillery; it sits upon you just as a veil and beads would sit upon me.


Mr. CAMPLY. Indeed! if raillery is as proper for me as a convent is for you, I
should do nothing but laugh at my own jokes for the rest of my life. Besides, I
think you would make a very pretty nun.


Miss LOVELESS. You are quite mistaken, Mr. Camply; for I could give you a
proof that I have too much of the woman about me to make a saint of.


Mr. CAMPLY. A proof!


Miss LOVELESS. Yes; what do you think brings me into the garden at this time
of the morning?


Mr. CAMPLY. Indeed, I do not know.


Miss LOVELESS. Why, curiosity.


Mr. CAMPLY. Curiosity! as I have none of that ingredient in my composition, I
do not desire to know what is the object of yours.


Miss LOVELESS. Provoking indifference! (aside.) What do you think then of an
appointment?


Mr. CAMPLY. I should be sorry to interrupt the smallest of your amusements;
and if I see right, the object of them is too entertaining for my gravity to
relish, and so will take my leave. (Going)


Miss LOVELESS. O pray stay.

[ Enter lord Macgrinnon.
Mr. CAMPLY. My lord, your servant.

[Exit.
Miss LOVELESS. Well, my lord, what can you possibly have to say to me?


Lord MACGRINNON. That you are my divinity -- the idol of my worship -- see the
very sun shines brighter than usual to light up your beauties, and the birds
make a concert to hail your charms; while the very roses fade with envy at
seeing themselves outdone.


Miss LOVELESS. Stop, stop, my lord; there is so much poetry in all that, that
it deserves to be remembered at least. From whence did you borrow or steal it?


Lord MACGRINNON. From the brilliancy of those eyes, which might inspire the
dullest clod of earth -- those eyes that promise --


Miss LOVELESS. Promise! take care, my lord; my eyes and my tongue do always go
together, and words ought to express what the heart feels.


Lord MACGRINNON. And so they ought, most charming angel! and by St. Andrew's
holy cross I swear, that mine are true when I profess you are the star that
lights up my future hopes of happiness.


Miss LOVELESS. (Aside) A northern star then, for it is a very cold one. --
Pray, my lord, what am I to derive from all this.


Lord MACGRINNON. That my person and fortune are yours; that if you will but
consent, this night we will set off for Scotland; where we will live only to
love all the rest of our lives.


Miss LOVELESS. The usual way of proposing in his country, my lord, is
accompanied by settlements, and the consent of ones parents.


Lord MACGRINNON. Augh, my dear Miss Loveless, settlements and consents are not
necessary between people that love; nay, marriage was invented only to bind the
feuls and vulgar of both sexes; but you -- your mind, like the soaring eagle,
despises all little game, and should have no tie but your heart.


Miss LOVELESS. What does the fool mean? (Aside)


Lord MACGRINNON. Your aunt does not want you; come with me into Scotland, and
then we will conform to the odious custom of joining hands, when our hearts are
one: believe the most ardent, the most passionate, the most faithful of lovers;
here will I be rivetted like a statue to the earth, till you consent to go with
me.


Miss LOVELESS. O ho! I think I begin now to see. (Aside) Why this is a
downright run-a-way scheme, my lord; so I am to go and live with you first,
and be your wife afterward.


Lord MACGRINNON. If you do not like my society, you may return when you have
gean part of the way with me; but you mun ken that I would have my own chaplain
and the whole clan of Macgrinnons be the persons to join our hands.


Miss LOVELESS. Well, my lord, I am quite delighted with the novelty of this
idea; it is singular and out of the common style. Will you be in that arbor at
eight o'clock this evening, where I will meet you, and if you have a
post-chaise and four ready, I will accompany your lordship some part of the way
at least.


Lord MACGRINNON. O most certainly I will be there to a moment. Thank you, most
lovely, most enchanting of women. I leave you now that no one may suspect us of
agreeing so well. Adieu.

[Exit.
Miss LOVELESS. Yes, yes, we agree perfectly I believe in deceiving each other;
and could his high cheek bones imagine that I should give myself into his
power? a wretch! -- Ha, sweet revenge! (Walks up and down looking for some one)
John, get the great engine put to the edge of the water, and place the pipe so
as to come in at the top of that arbor, that when I order you, you may convey
in a great quantity of water into it.


GARDENER. Into the harber, my lady?


Miss LOVELESS. Yes, gardener.


GARDENER. (Scratches his head.) La, un please ye, my lady, madam, it will
spoil the hone-suckles at the top, and parfitly drown and ruinate the bottom.


Miss LOVELESS. Aye; no matter, John: it is only to refresh some hotheaded
creature that is to be there about eight o'clock.


GARDENER. Laws, madam, you ben't in earnest sure! Why is it a man you be going
to serve so?


Miss LOVELESS. Not an Englishman, John.


GARDENER. Zookers, a Frenchman, may-hap.


Miss LOVENESS. What think you of a Scotchman, John, hey?


GARDENER. Sniggers, my lady! master Crump says as how they be worse enemies
to us than the French; and that they have brought upon us all this 'Merican
business, so I don't care if I drown a few of 'em.


Miss LOVELESS. Yes, but John, you must take care not to convey in the water,
but as if it rained very hard, do you hear, and here is something for you to make
merry with afterward.


GARDENER. The very thoughts of it makes me merry; oddsniggs! I Will make it rain
like smoke about his ears.


Miss LOVELESS. Now go and tell Susan, the cook maid, to come here.


GARDENER. Yes. My humble thanks to you for all favors, my lady.


Enter SUSAN. Miss LOVELESS. Susan, you must go this evening at a quarter after
eight o'clock to that arbor, and let a gentleman talk to you and lead you to
his post-chaise; I Will take care he shall not do you any hurt, nor take you away.


SUSAN. I am very agreeable to any thing you bids me, my lady; but should like
to know a little about your meaning.


Miss LOVELESS. My meaning is, Susan, that he should take you for me, and just
as you are going, I Will stop you.


SUSAN. Lack-a-day, madam, he will never take such a creature as me for you:
beside, I don't find in my heart to use any one in such a way, except it were
that proud Scotch lord that comes here. No offense, I hope.


Miss LOVELESS. Why it is he, Susan, I mean to serve so: but for your life
don't you tell any one of this; if you do, it will cost you your place; so
remember.

[ Exit Miss Loveless.
SUSAN solus. Lack-a-day, she is very comical, and she is so pretty, and so good
humoured, that I does not care what I does for her.

Enter JOHN. So, John, pray now what makes you look so merry.


JOHN. Pray what makes you look so merry, Mrs. Susan?


SUSAN. I will not tell you, John.


JOHN. And I will not tell you, Mrs. Susan; so now we are quits -- Tit for tat, as
the old woman said -- hey! -- you know --


SUSAN. Out upon you, and your sayings.


JOHN. (Holds her wrists) Come, come, Mrs. Susan, you shall not stir till you tell
me what it is makes you look so brisk.


SUSAN. Hands off, man; it is no business of thine; I shall pass for a lady
before the day's over, I can tell you.


JOHN. Pass for a lady! I believe in my heart you would pass for any thing but my
wife (Shakes her arms.)


SUSAN. You hurt me, you great oaf you; I Will be your wife whenever you leave
off your jealous pated whims, man, and not before.


JOHN. Why, look ye, Susan, you always looks smirking enough when folks talks
to you, but when I talks to ye, ye look as grum, as grum as a black frost, do you
see.


SUSAN. Why do always scold so then, John? talk pleasant greable things, and
then I Will be as affabalous as my lady is.


JOHN. So, then; you means to keep me in dispense these ten years.


SUSAN. Aye; and ten to that, unless you alter; so good morning to you, Mr.
Black Frost.

[Exit.
JOHN. Now what in the name of Old Nick did she mean when she said she was to
pass for a lady? oddsnigs but I Will watch her all day.

[Exit.
SCENE changes to Camply 's house. Eliza and her brother.
ELIZA. Here, brother, I have got my picture safe at last; and never will I
part with it, but to my husband, whoever he is.


Mr. CAMPLY. Tell me, how did Belvil behave?


ELIZA. So well, that I wished myself in petticoats again twenty times; but,
indeed, you are all sad, sad, sad creatures!


Mr. CAMPLY. Am I a sad creature?


ELIZA. Yes; why, yes. Pray, why have you never given miss Loveless a hope of
your heart? I cannot help thinking her levity would have ceased with your
seeming indifference.


Mr. CAMPLY. No such thing, no such thing; trust me my dear; I have told you my
reasons for the silence I have kept, and this morning have received a
convincing proof that I am right; Oh! Miss Loveless is a coquet.


ELIZA. A coquet! you are so, I am so, it is in human nature that we should be
so, when our thoughts are not entirely fixed upon one object. I have no
patience with you, brother; you are so unreasonable.


Mr. CAMPLY. Oh, if you mean to give me a lecture upon coquettry, let us sit
down and discuss this matter quietly.

[They sit.
Enter a Servant with a packet. SERVANT. From Mr. Belvil, sir.


Mr. CAMPLY. Directed to me -- Does the servant wait?


SERVANT. No, sir; he said it required no answer, and left it.


Mr. CAMPLY. Leave it.

[Exit servant.
ELIZA. Give it, give it me directly! (Opens it) Ah! me -- my brother -- his
will -- and a letter.

[Drops the will, reads the letter and drops that too, takes out her pocket
handkerchief, leans her head upon it, and then rises and goes to the end of the
stage.]
Mr. CAMPLY. [Picks up the letter and will, and comes forward reading.] My dear
Mr. Camply, fearing lest the levity of Sir Harry's disposition might tempt him
to misrepresent the causes of our duel, I write to um -- um -- um -- um -- I
leave her my whole fortune -- um -- What a generous man! Well, sister --


ELIZA. He needed not have given me this proof of his affections; but I will
reward him.


Mr. CAMPLY. Suppose we sit down, and finish our dissertation upon coquettry?


ELIZA. Much obliged to you; but I must go and compose myself to digest a much
better subject: for in a little time I must meet Belvil to kill him, as he
thinks -- and my heart -- feel how it beats, brother -- if I don't make haste
it will certainly jump out, and be in the walk long before my legs can carry me
there.


Mr. CAMPLY. I dare say, my dear, it is there already. Come, I Will go with you
into your own room.

[Exeunt.
SCENE changes to the Chestnut Tree Walk.
BELVIL, alone. So, I may -- perhaps -- I may never -- never see Eliza's face
again. In an hour -- I may be no more.


SCENE changes to the Walk.
Enter Eliza. BELVIL. Oh, heavens! I thought she was in London -- What can
bring her here, and just at this critical instant! I dare not speak to her; and
if I durst, this present moment would be an improper one.


ELIZA. A very fine evening, Mr. Belvil.


BELVIL. Yes, madam.


ELIZA. Not too hot though.


BELVIL. No, madam.


ELIZA. I suppose you are not walking by way of amusement only, but going
somewhere?


BELVIL. No, madam.


ELIZA. O, taking a walk only?


BELVIL. No, madam.


ELIZA. Yes, madam; No madam; yes, madam, no, madam: Lard, I came here by way
of having a little conversation, and if you answer by monosyllables only, we
shall have a pretty dialogue.


BELVIL. Miss Camply, your presence, though always to me -- the -- the -- most
charming thing in the world -- is -- is -- is -- just now very unseasonable --
I wish you would go into your own house.


ELIZA. Why, do you imagine I have come quite to the end of this walk in order
to enjoy the shade of these trees, and shall go home merely because you do not
like my company? No indeed, sir, you may take yourself away if you please

[He walks up one side, she on the other.
BELVIL. How shall I get her away? (Aside)


ELIZA. Do you choose to talk to me or go, for you must do either?


BELVIL. I can do neither; but beg you will leave this fatal place.


ELIZA. This fatal place -- I fancy you have been reading blank verse of late
-- perhaps living in society with the tragic muse. Nay, do not strut about so
like a distressed hero, but answer one question I will ask you --


BELVIL. (Looking round) You can make me do any thing.


ELIZA. Pray, who are you looking for? I protest I believe you have made an
appointment, and are afraid I should disturb it -- for I know you have been
living with Miss Loveless, and I assure you I do not care about it; but as you
are no longer my lover, it is but fair you should restore me the picture I gave
you when you was.


BELVIL. I hope to give it you soon --


ELIZA. Soon! Now, now, Mr. Belvil, or never.


BELVIL. Now, I cannot.


ELIZA. (Laughs.) Then do you see this?


BELVIL. Now, by all that is villainous he has given it to you?


ELIZA. Who, my cousin? yes, Mr. Belvil, he has; and I shall keep it to give to
some one who will be more careful of it than you have been.


BELVIL. Not to him, Miss Camply, not to him; for if he fails in his promise of
meeting me here, I will pursue him to the end of the world, and tear his false
heart from that breast, which -- I beg your pardon, Miss Camply -- but he is a
villain.


ELIZA. Lord, now I think him a very pretty man.


BELVIL. I may never see you again, Miss Camply, but beware of him -- his
designs are of the worst nature; he meant that you should be in love with him.


ELIZA. You meant, Miss Loveless, should be so with you.


BELVIL. Hear me seriously, Eliza; I repeat it, this may be the last time I
shall speak to you. I detest Miss Loveless; I never loved but you -- if Sir
Harry was not a villain, he would not have given you that picture: I was to
have disputed it with him at this hour, but I imagine he is a coward, and will
not come. Now, Eliza, if ever I was dear to you -- (Kneels) thus let me entreat
you to tell me, that you do not hate me, and that you forgive me; at least I
dare not -- nay, with the resolution I have taken -- I cannot ask for more.


ELIZA. I really cannot answer for myself -- Sir Harry must answer for me.


BELVIL. (Rising hastily) What! is it you, Eliza? that soft Eliza, that could
ever drop a tear upon woes not her own, that thus mocks my distress? Surely I
dream!


ELIZA. Why, I Will fight you if you like it, instead of Sir Harry.


BELVIL. [Takes her hand. Eliza, for pity's sake be serious. Tell me that you
forgive me?


ELIZA. I must ask Sir Harry's leave.


BELVIL. [Flings her hand from him. I Will owe nothing to him but my death; would
to heaven Eliza you would kill me -- but this gaiety of yours is worse than ten
thousand deaths. What can you mean? tell me, my dear Eliza? O heavens! (He
takes hold of her hand) I feel, when I hold this soft, this lovely hand, as if
ten millions of little cupids were playing about my heart, and bidding it hope
-- at least for pardon.


ELIZA. [Leans upon his shoulder. I can hardly speak -- my stupid Belvil -- and
do not you see, and do not you feel that Sir Harry?


BELVIL. (Starts) Again, Sir Harry; come (Puts his arm round her waist) come,
speak?


ELIZA. Why, that you hold him to your breast at this instant.


BELVIL. Ha! is it possible? Is it possible? Heavens and earth! my heart
overflows with joy -- with gratitude -- with love -- I want words to express my
feelings. What can I say to you? and were you the gay coxcomb I have hated so
much? and was it for me you disguised yourself?


ELIZA. Stop, stop; not entirely for you: I wanted my picture, not knowing what
imprudencies you might be drawn into about it; and I wanted to show you that --
in short I am afraid you think me a strange bold creature; but however I do not
repent, for here is, among many others, proofs of what I wished, one which I
may destroy now.

[Takes out the will, and tears it.
BELVIL. And now, Eliza, when will you completely forgive me, and call yourself
mine?


ELIZA. Not this twelvemonth.


BELVIL. Defend me from such a resolution! I must get your brother to make you
change it.


ELIZA. Well, let us finish his adventures first, and then talk upon the
subject.


BELVIL. His adventures! why, has he changed his sex too?


ELIZA. No, no, no! but if you will walk to the house with me, I will tell you
all my plans.

[Exeunt both.
SCENE changes to Miss Loveless 's house.
Arabella and Miss Loveless. Mrs. ARABELLA. You really look very pretty, my
dear niece.


Miss LOVELESS. Yes, madam, and I am to have a pretty partner for to night.


Mrs. ARABELLA. Who is that, pray?


Miss LOVELESS. Sir Harry Revel -- and he wants to lead me a dance for life.


Mrs. ARABELLA. Pray, can you be in earnest for a moment, my dear niece, and
answer me the truth from the bottom of your heart?


Miss LOVELESS. Well, I will be very sober, and answer upon my honor truly to
every question you shall ask.


Mrs. ARABELLA. Do you like Sir Harry?


Miss LOVELESS. Yes, I do like him.


Mrs. ARABELLA. But do you love him?


Miss LOVELESS. No. A very pretty catechism this. (Aside)


Mrs. ARABELLA. Then positively you shall not marry him. Is there any one you
like then? since love is out of the question, that you like better than him?


Miss LOVELESS. No, I believe not.


Mrs. ARABELLA. I believe you do not speak the truth; what think you of Mr.
Camply? -- Why do you blush?


Miss LOVELESS. I never thought about him at all, for he never speaks to me,
nor thinks of me.


Mrs. ARABELLA. Very handsome and very sensible, though.


Miss LOVELESS. And very stupid.


Mrs. ARABELLA. Come, come, child, you like him.


Miss LOVELESS. Why, then, aunt, since I am resolved to marry Sir Harry, I will
own to you that I might have preferred Mr. Camply to all the world, but now he
is quite out of the question.


Servant introduces Miss Camply. ELIZA. Miss Loveless, I have brought you Sir
Harry Revel's excuses, and this note.


Miss LOVELESS. (Reads) Dear madam, I would advise you to insist upon dancing
with my cousin, as you are not likely to get a partner this evening of a
contrary sex to your own, if you depend upon your humble Servant,

H. REVEL.


Did you know the contents of this note, Miss Camply?


ELIZA. Yes, Miss Loveless.


Miss LOVELESS. Why then I must confess the same uncivil folly runs through the
whole family; it is downright nonsense.


ELIZA. Well, that is very odd; for my cousin is reckoned very sensible, almost
as clever as myself.


Miss LOVELESS. The girl's a downright fool (Aside) -- Well, Miss Camply, Mr.
Belvil will be here presently; I shall dance with him.


Enter Belvil. BELVIL. Pardon me, madam, I am engaged to dance with Miss Camply.


ELIZA. And I am engaged to Sir Harry.


Miss LOVELESS. I fancy, good people, you mean to be witty in some way or
other; but as I do not understand how, I must own I think the place you have
chosen to exhibit in, makes it rather uncivil; these jokes in my house are
almost rude.


ELIZA. Miss Loveless, your head thus; look down, no; up, yes -- aye, that will
do -- Do you recollect such a scene?


Miss LOVELESS. Intolerable! that puppy has given her an account of my
behavior.


ELIZA. My cousin is very justly vain of your encouragement, Miss Loveless, and
I thank you in his name for your great condescension.


Miss LOVELESS. Miss Camply, this is not to be borne; do you mean to affront me?


ELIZA. No; if I could not affront you when a man, I am sure my female
character cannot offend.


Miss LOVELESS. O heavens! and were you Sir Harry Revel only to laugh at me?
grant me patience! (She cries.)


ELIZA. No, Miss Loveless; not to laugh at you, but to regain my own lover,
whom you had nearly stolen from me.


BELVIL. Not that neither; do not be offended, Miss Loveless, if I acknowledge
that I had not the least serious intentions about you.


Miss LOVELESS. What, is there a combination -- a plot to laugh at me -- I can
tell you, Miss Camply, if my behavior appeared extraordinary, I think yours to
the full as reprehensible, to put me on a masculine habit and personate a man
for the sake of an odious man.


ELIZA. I never encouraged but that one odious man; but you, Miss Loveless,
have encouraged many.


Miss LOVELESS. Can you stand tamely by, and see me reproached in this manner?


Mrs. ARABELLA. Your conduct, my dear, deserves such reproaches.


Miss LOVELESS. Why, madam, I shall be the ridicule of the country; but I will
not stay to bear it -- I wish you joy both of you of your intended match; and I
hope you will be as heartily tired of each other soon, as I am of you at
present -- but you shall not have the pleasure of seeing me mortified -- I
shall go and live at Paris for the remainder of my life; I have an uncle that
will let me live as privately as I please. Pray, madam, make my excuses to the
company -- say I have got the headache; say any thing, and to morrow I Will go
and leave you and all my follies behind me. (Going, enter Mr. Camply)


Mr. CAMPLY. Miss Loveless, it is all my fault -- My sister has treated you in
this manner only to try you, and if my whole life can atone for the moment of
pain she has occasioned, dispose of it. I tremble for her answer. (Aside)


Miss LOVELESS. I am so amazed, I shall faint -- (Mr. Camply draws a chair and
seats her in it.)


ELIZA. (Puts a smelling bottle to her nose) Dear Miss Loveless, my brother has
been dying for you these three years; pray forgive him; he dares not kneel, but
I will, for him.


Miss LOVELESS. What am I to say to you, you odd creature?


ELIZA (to Camply) Come, child, don't stand petrified like a statue; I have
said enough; now speak for yourself.


Mr. CAMPLY. Miss Loveless, dare I flatter myself you will hear my petition?


Miss LOVELESS. No, Mr. Camply, I am determined to go, and will not make you so
bad a present as that of my hand -- besides, I like no one, and, not you
certainly, of all men in the world; for had you liked me these three years, you
could not have kept it so secret.


Mr. CAMPLY. Then my sister has deceived me only to make me still more wretched
than I was -- she -- she -- presumed, you -- did not hate me --


ELIZA. (Talks aside to the aunt, and then comes forward) I am a presuming
young woman, indeed; but I have good eyes and a feeling heart; and I am sure
you cannot be happy without each other -- so, there -- come -- your hand -- and
yours --


Miss LOVELESS. No, I don't like him.


Mr. CAMPLY. No, she hates me; I see that --


ELIZA. Oh, you do not like him! then, Mrs. Arabella, what do you say upon this
subject?


Mrs. ARABELLA. I say, since my niece has pride enough to oppose her own
happiness, that she has owned to me that she likes Mr. Camply.


Miss LOVELESS. Why then, aunt, I do think you are much worse than Mr. Belvil,
Miss Camply, or her brother; and therefore, to be revenged, I Will even stay and
try to be happier than you all seem to be -- and now, Mr. Camply, if upon
farther acquaintance we do not change our minds, we may follow the example of
Mr. Belvil and your sister.


Mr. CAMPLY. I thank you, miss, for my sister is soon to be married.


ELIZA. O not this twelvemonth -- and as no one shall say I lead them into a
scrape, we will all four be married together, and you, as my elder brother,
must begin the dance.


BELVIL. I shall endeavor to hasten the period, for a twelvemonth seems an age.


Miss LOVELESS. Enough of this! now we are all agreed, I will show you a scene
that may amuse you, if you will follow me into the garden.


SCENE changes to the garden, lord Macgrinnon peeping out of the arbor.
The de'el surely tempted me to feex upon this neeght -- for I am wat to the
skan -- (Enter Susan at one corner) Sir, sir, sir, sir --

Lord MACGRINNON. Augh, are you there?

(She takes hold of his hand, and as they are going, enter John, who pulls
her.)
JOHN. I Will lady you, with a vengeance, Mrs. Susan; what, man, cannot you be
satisfied without my mistress?


Lord MACGRINNON. Hoot, hush, mon, your mistress chooses to go.


JOHN. But I don't choose it, I tell you, you sarpent, you viper.


Lord MACGRINNON. I never saw so rude a brute: is this the way you treat your
mistress, fellow?


JOHN. Fellow yourself; why, it is because she is my mistress that she shall not go
with thee; why, if thee be a lord, thee be only a man -- and as an
Englishman, I Am the best of the two, and so you shall find me, if you dare lay
hold of her again.


Lord MACGRINNON. He Is certainly bewitched -- speak to him, sweet love --


SUSAN. Why, John -- (In a low voice)


JOHN. Why, zounds, I could tear your ugly eyes out, so I could (Sets down his
lanthorn, and beats him with a stick) there -- there -- now, will you take my
mistress --


Lord MACGRINNON. Help! help! murder!

[ The group of company appear at the end of the stage with servants and
torches, Mr. Camply runs up to John and holds his arm.]
Mr. CAMPLY. What is the matter, my lord? what is the matter?


Lord MACGRINNON. Why, Miss Loveless and I were going to take a walk together,
and that fellow is mad, I believe, for he will not let her do as she likes.


Mr. CAMPLY. Miss Loveless! why, my lord, is this Miss Loveless? you dream.
(Holds the lanthorn up to Susan 's face.


Lord MACGRINNON. Faith -- an uglier dream by half -- what in the name of
wonder can all this be?


BEVIL. This is a fine evening, my lord; but you look disturbed, what is the
matter?


Lord MACGRINNON. Matter, why all the plagues of Egypt I believe: yes, yes, I
am disturbed, and wet to the skin too; so pray what do you talk of a fine
evening for, there has been a violent storm of rain. (All the company laugh)
Na, na --


Miss LOVELESS. I am much obliged to you, my lord, for your very kind
intentions, and love of my fortune; I was so insensible of the nature of your
affection, that it is to me you are indebted for that shower of rain from
yonder engine, and for a beating into the bargain from honest John, who thought
it was his mistress you were going off with.


JOHN. What, and so you did not like him then -- Ah! Susan, Susan, I Have a
month's mind never to be jealous again.


SUSAN. Why, you great jolter-head you, did think I was going to run away;
don't ye know that nothing but gentlefolks run away with one another?


JOHN. Well, well, say no more; if ever I am jealous again I wish a frost may
nip all the trees in the garden; odsnigs, if Mr. Camply had not come, I believe
in my heart I should have broke every bone in your skin, my lord.


Lord MACGRINNON. Thank ye, I feel as if you had done it. Never did any man of
the family of Macgrinnon suffer such indignities as I have suffered from this
company; to be deluded by a woman is a trifle; a man of sense will expect it:
but I canna help reflecting on the impertinencies, the jeers, and the sluicing
that have been thrown at me, without thinking that the happiness of my noble
ancestors is disturbed by the unworthy treatment that has been offered to their
lineal descendant.

[All the company laugh.
Miss LOVELESS. Certainly nothing but his vanity could induce him to think that
I was weak enough to comply with his request; and now, Miss Camply, I will
confess that I am much indebted to you for curing me of my ridiculous plan of
conduct, and I wish you may succeed in every thing you undertake as you have in
this.


ELIZA. Why, mine was rather a bold scheme, I must confess? but if the rest of
the company (bowing round) will forget what a very lively coxcomb I have been,
I shall not repent of the pains I have taken to please every one.


Ladies, I trust you will adopt my plan,
And only wear the dress to gain the man.
FINIS.
BOOKS printed for G. RILEY.
I. The Third Edition, price Two Shillings, OF the MODERN ANECDOTE of the
Ancient Family of the Kinkvervankotsdar sprakengotchderns: a Tale. Dedicated to
the Honorable Horace Walpole, by the Author of the MINIATURE PICTURE.

II. Inscribed by Permission to General Keppel, handsomely printed in Quarto,
price 2s. 6d. THE ART of WAR; a Poem, in Six Books; Translated from the French
of the King of Prussia: with a Critique on the Poem, by the Comte Algarotti,
translated from the Italian.



