THE WORKS, IN VERSE AND PROSE, OF DR. THOMAS PARNELL, LATE ARCHDEACON OF
CLOGHER.

ENLARGED WITH VARIATIONS AND POEMS, NOT BEFORE PUBLISHED.

GLASGOW, PRINTED AND SOLD BY R. AND A. FOULIS

MDCCLV.

POEMS ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS; WRITTEN BY DR. THOMAS PARNELL, LATE ARCHDEACON OF
CLOGHER: AND PUBLISHED BY MR. POPE.

DIGNUM LAUD VIRUM MUSA VETAT MORI. HOR. TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT, EARL
OF OXFORD AND EARL MORTIMER.
SUCH were the notes thy once loved Poet sung,
'Till death untimely stopped his tuneful tongue.
O just beheld, and lost! admired, and mourned!
With softest manners, gentlest arts, adorned!
Blessed in each science, blessed in every strain!
Dear to the Muse, to HARLEY dear -- in vain!
FOR him, thou often have bid the world attend,
Fond to forget the statesman in the friend;
For SWIFT and him, despised the farce of state,
The sober follies of the wise and great;
Dextrous, the craving, fawning crowd to quit,
And pleased to 'scape from flattery to wit.
ABSENT or dead, still let a friend be dear,
(A sigh the absent claims, the dead a tear)
Recall those nights that closed thy toilsome days,
Still hear thy PARNELL in his living lays:
Who careless, now, of interest, fame, or fate,
Perhaps forgets that OXFORD ever was great;
Or deeming meanest what we greatest call,
Beholds thee glorious only in thy fall.
And sure if ought below the seats divine
Can touch immortals, it is a soul like thine:
A soul supreme, in each hard instance tried,
Above all pain, all anger, and all pride,
The rage of power, the blast of public breath,
The lust of lucre, and the dread of death.
IN vain to deserts thy retreat is made;
The muse attends thee to the silent shade:
It Is here is, the brave man's latest steps to trace,
Re-judge his acts, and dignify disgrace.
When interest calls off all her sneaking train,
When all the obliged desert, and all the vain;
She waits, or to the scaffold, or the cell,
When the last lingering friend has bid farewell.
Even now she shades thy evening walk with bays,
(No hireling she, no prostitute to praise)
Even now, observant of the parting ray,
Eyes the calm sunset of thy various day,
Through fortune's cloud one truly great can see,
Nor fears to tell, that MORTIMER is he.
SEPT. 25. 1721. A. POPE.

THE CONTENTS.
HESIOD, or the Rise of Woman. PAGE 1 Song. PAGE 11, 12, 13 Anacreontic. PAGE
15, 17 A Fairy Tale, in the ancient English Style. PAGE 20 The Vigil of Venus,
written in the Time of Julius Caesar, and by some ascribed to Catullus. PAGE 29
Battle of the Frogs and Mice. PAGE 43 To Mr. Pope. PAGE 62 Part of the first
Canto of the Rape of the Lock, with a Translation in Leonine Verse, after the
Manner of the ancient Monks. PAGE 66 Health; an Eclogue. PAGE 69 The Flies; an
Eclogue. PAGE 72 An Elegy. To an old Beauty. PAGE 75 The Book-Worm. PAGE 78 An
Allegory on Man. PAGE 82 An Imitation of some French Verses. PAGE 86 A
Night-Piece on Death. PAGE 89 A Hymn to Contentment. PAGE 93 The Hermit. PAGE
96
VISIONS.
VISION I. PAGE 109 Vision II. PAGE 116 Vision III. PAGE 123 Vision IV. PAGE
131 Vision V. PAGE 132 The Life of Zoilus. To which is prefixed a Preface by
the Author. PAGE 145 The Remarks of Zoilus upon Homer's Battle of the Frogs and
Mice. PAGE 177 Variations. PAGE 203 Bacchus, or the Vines of Lesbos. PAGE 211
Elysium. PAGE 215 To Dr. Swift. PAGE 221 Piety, or the Vision. PAGE 225
Ecstasy. PAGE 229
HESIOD: OR, THE RISE OF WOMAN.
WHAT ancient times (those times we fancy wise)
Have left on long record of Woman's rise,
What morals teach it, and what fables hide,
What author wrote it, how that author died,
All these I sing. In Greece they framed the tale
(In Greece, 'twas thought a Woman might be frail.)
Ye modern beauties! where the poet drew
His softest pencil, think he dreamt of you;
And warned by him, ye wanton pens, beware
How Heaven's concerned to vindicate the fair.
The case was Hesiod's; he the fable writ;
Some think with meaning, some with idle wit:
Perhaps it is either, as the ladies please;
I wave the contest, and commence the lays.
In days of yore, (no matter where or when,
'Twas ere the low creation swarmed with men)
That one Prometheus, sprung of heavenly birth,
(Our author's song can witness) lived on earth.
He carved the turf to mold a manly frame,
And stole from Jove his animating flame.
The sly contrivance over Olympus ran,
When thus the monarch of the stars began.
Oh versed in arts! whose daring thoughts aspire
To kindle clay with never-dying fire!
Enjoy thy glory past, that gift was thine;
The next thy creature meets, be fairly mine:
And such a gift, a vengeance so designed,
As suits the counsel of a God to find;
A pleasing bosom-cheat, a specious ill,
Which felt thy curse, yet covet still to feel.
He said, and Vulcan strait the sire commands,
To temper mortar with etherial hands;
In such a shape to mold a rising fair,
As virgin-goddesses are proud to wear;
To make her eyes with diamond-water shine,
And form her organs for a voice divine.
'Twas thus the sire ordained; the power obeyed;
And worked, and wondered at the work he made;
The fairest, softest, sweetest frame beneath,
Now made to seem, now more than seem, to breathe.
As Vulcan ends, the cheerful Queen of Charms
Clasped the new-panting creature in her arms;
From that embrace a fine complexion spread,
Where mingled whiteness glowed with softer red.
Then in a kiss she breathed her various arts,
Of trifling prettily with wounded hearts;
A mind for love, but still a changing mind;
The lisp affected, and the glance designed;
The sweet confusing blush, the secret wink,
The gentle-swimming walk, the courteous sink,
The stare for strangeness fit, for scorn the frown,
For decent yielding looks declining down,
The practiced languish, where well-feign'd desire
Would own its melting in a mutual fire;
Gay smiles to comfort; April showers to move;
And all the nature, all the art, of love.
Gold-scepter'd Juno next exalts the fair;
Her touch endows her with imperious air,
Self-valuing fancy, highly-crested pride,
Strong sovereign will, and some desire to chide:
For which, an eloquence, that aims to vex,
With native tropes of anger, arms the sex.
Minerva (skilful goddess) trained the maid
To twirl the spindle by the twisting thread,
To fix the loom, instruct the reeds to part,
Cross the long weft, and close the web with art,
An useful gift; but what profuse expense,
What world of fashions, took its rise from hence!
Young Hermes next, a close-contriving god,
Her brows encircled with his serpent rod:
Then plots and fair excuses, filled her brain,
The views of breaking amorous vows for gain,
The price of favors; the designing arts
That aim at riches in contempt of hearts;
And for a comfort in the marriage life,
The little, pilf'ring temper of a wise.
Full on the fair his beams Apollo flung,
And fond persuasion tip'd her easy tongue;
He gave her words, where oily flattery lays
The pleasing colors of the art of praise;
And wit, to scandal exquisitely prone,
Which frets another's spleen to cure its own.
Those sacred virgins whom the bards revere,
Tuned all her voice, and shed a sweetness there,
To make her sense with double charms abound,
Or make her lively nonsense please by sound.
To dress the maid, the decent Graces brought
A robe in all the dies of beauty wrought,
And placed their boxes over a rich brocade
Where pictured Loves on every cover played;
Then spread those implements that Vulcan's art
Had framed to merit Cytherea's heart;
The wire to curl, the close indented comb
To call the locks that lightly wander, home;
And chief, the mirror, where the ravished maid
Beholds and loves her own reflected shade.
Fair Flora lent her stores, the purpled Hours
Confined her tresses with a wreath of flowers;
Within the wreath arose a radiant crown;
A veil pellucid hung depending down;
Back rolled her azure veil with serpent fold,
The purfled border decked the floor with gold.
Her robe (which closely by the girdle brac't
Revealed the beauties of a slender waste)
Flowed to the feet; to copy Venus' air,
When Venus' statues have a robe to wear.
The new-sprung creature finished thus for harms,
Adjusts her habit, practices her charms,
With blushes glows, or shines with lively smiles,
Confirms her will, or recollects her wiles:
Then conscious of her worth, with easy pace
Glides by the glass, and turning views her face.
A finer flax than what they wrought before,
Through time's deep cave the Sister Fates explore,
Then fix the loom, their fingers nimbly weave,
And thus their toil prophetic songs deceive.
Flow from the rock, my flax! and swiftly flow,
Pursue thy thread; the spindle runs below.
A creature fond and changing, fair and vain,
The creature Woman, rises now to reign.
New beauty blooms, a beauty formed to fly;
New love begins, a love produced to dye;
New parts distress the troubled scenes of life,
The fondling mistress, and the ruling wife.
Men, born to labor, all with pains provide;
Women have time, to sacrifice to pride:
They want the care of man, their want they know,
And dress to please with heart-alluring show,
The show prevailing, for the sway contend,
And make a servant where they meet a friend.
Thus in a thousand wax-erected forts
A loitering race the painful be supports,
From sun to sun, from bank to bank he flies,
With honey loads his bag, with wax his thighs,
Fly where he will, at home the race remain,
Prune the silk dress, and murmuring eat the gain.
Yet here and there we grant a gentle bride,
Whose temper betters by the father's side;
Unlike the rest that double human care,
Fond to relieve, or resolute to share:
Happy the man whom thus his stars advance!
The curse is general, but the blessing chance.
Thus sung the Sisters, while the gods admire
Their beauteous creature, made for man in ire;
The young Pandora she, whom all contend
To make too perfect not to gain her end:
Then bid the winds that fly to breathe the Spring,
Return to bear her on a gentle wing;
With wafting airs the winds obsequious blow,
And land the shining vengeance safe below,
A golden coffer in her hand she bore,
(The present treacherous, but the bearer more)
'Twas fraught with pangs; for Jove ordained above,
That gold should aid, and pangs attend on love.
Her gay descent the man perceived afar,
Wondering he run to catch the falling star;
But so surpised, as none but he can tell,
Who loved so quickly, and who loved so well.
Over all his veins the wandering passion burns,
He calls her nymph, and every nymph by turns.
Her form to lovely Venus he prefers,
Or swears that Venus' must be such as hers.
She, proud to rule, yet strangely framed to teize,
Neglects his offers while her airs she plays,
Shoots scornful glances from the bended frown,
In brisk disorder trips it up and down,
Then hums a careless tune to lay the storm,
And sits, and blushes, smiles; and yields, in form.
"Now take what Jove designed (she softly cried)
"This box thy portion, and myself thy bride:"
Fired with the prospect of the double charms,
He snatched the box, and bride, with eager arms.
Unhappy man! to whom so bright she shone:
The fatal gift, her tempting self, unknown!
The winds were silent, all the waves asleep,
And heaven was traced upon the flattering deep;
But whilst he looks unmindful of a storm,
And thinks the water wears a stable form,
What dreadful din around his ears shall rise!
What frowns confuse his picture of the skies!
At first the creature man was framed alone,
Lord of himself, and all the world his own.
For him the nymphs in green forsook the woods,
For him the nymphs in blue forsook the floods;
In vain the Satyrs rage, the Tritons rave,
They bore him heroes in the secret cave.
No care destroyed, no sick disorder preyed,
No bending age his sprightly form decayed,
No wars were known, no females heard to rage,
And Poets tell us, 'twas a golden age.
When Woman came, those ills the box confined
Burst furious out, and poisoned all the wind,
From point to point, from pole to pole they flew,
Spread as they went, and in the progress grew:
The nymphs regretting left the mortal race,
And alt'ring nature wore a sickly face;
New terms of folly rose, new states of care;
New plagues, to suffer, and to please, the fair!
The days of whining, and of wild intrigues,
Commenced, or finished, with the breach of leagues;
The mean designs of well-dissembled love;
The sordid matches never joined above;
Abroad, the labor, and at home the noise,
(Man's double sufferings for domestic joys)
The curse of jealousy; expense, and strife;
Divorce, the public brand of shameful life;
The rival's sword; the qualm that takes the fair;
Disdain for passion, passion in despair --
These, and a thousand, yet unnam'd, we find;
Ah fear the thousand, yet unnam'd behind!
Thus on Parnassus tuneful Hesiod sung,
The mountain echoed, and the valley rung,
The sacred groves a fixed attention show,
The crystal Helicon forbore to flow,
The sky grew bright, and (if his verse be true)
The Muses came to give the laurel too.
But what availed the verdant prize of wit,
If Love swore vengeance for the tales he writ?
Ye fair offended, hear your friend relate
What heavy judgment proved the writer's fate,
Though when it happened, no relation clears,
It Is thought in five, or five and twenty years.
Where, dark and silent, with a twisted shade
The neighboring woods a native arbor made,
There often a tender pair for amorous play
Retiring, toy'd the ravished hours away;
A Locrian youth, the gentle Troilus he,
A fair Milesian, kind Evanthe she:
But swelling nature in a fatal hour
Betrayed the secrets of the conscious bower;
The dire disgrace her brothers count their own,
And track her steps, to make its author known.
It chanced one evening, ('it was the lover's day)
Concealed in brakes the jealous kindred lay;
When Hesiod wandering, mused along the plain,
And fixed his seat where love had fixed the scene;
A strong suspicion strait possessed their mind,
(For poets ever were a gentle kind.)
But when Evanthe near the passage stood,
Flung back a doubtful look, and shot the wood,
"Now take (at once they cry) thy due reward,"
And urged with erring rage, assault the bard.
His corpse the sea received. The dolphins bore
('It Was all the Gods would do) the corpse to shore.
Methinks I view the dead with pitying eyes,
And see the dreams of ancient wisdom rise;
I see the Muses round the body cry,
But hear a Cupid loudly laughing by;
He wheels his arrow with insulting hand,
And thus inscribes the moral on the sand.
"Here Hesiod lies: ye future bards, beware
"How far your moral tales incense the fair:
"Unlov'd, unloving, 'twas his fate to bleed;
"Without his quiver Cupid caused the deed:
"He judged this turn of malice justly due,
"And Hesiod died for joys he never knew."
SONG.
WHEN thy beauty appears,
In its graces and airs,
All bright as an angel new dropped from the sky;
At distance I gaze, and am awed by my fears,
So strangely you dazzle my eye!
But when without art,
Your kind thoughts you impart,
When your love runs in blushes through every vein;
When it darts from your eyes, when it pants in your heart,
Then I know you're a woman again.
There Is a passion and pride
In our sex (she replied)
And thus (might I gratify both) I would do:
Still an angel appear to each lover beside,
But still be a woman to you.
A SONG.
THYRSIS, a young and amorous swain,
Saw two, the beauties of the plain;
Who both his heart subdue:
Gay Caelia's eyes were dazzling fair,
Sabina's easy shape and air
With softer magic drew.
He haunts the stream, he haunts the grove;
Lives in a fond romance of love,
And seems for each to die;
'Till each a little spiteful grown,
Sabina Caelia's shape ran down,
And she Sabina's eye.
Their envy made the shepherd find
Those eyes, which love could only blind;
So set the lover free:
No more he haunts the grove or stream,
Or with a true-love knot and name
Engraves a wounded tree.
Ah Caelia! (sly Sabina cried)
Though neither love, we are both denied;
Now to support the sex's pride,
Let either fix the dart.
Poor girl! (says Caelia) say no more;
For should the swain but one adore,
That spite which broke his chains before,
Would break the other's heart.
SONG.
MY days have been so wondrous free,
The little birds that fly
With careless ease from tree to tree,
Were but as blessed as I.
Ask gliding waters, if a tear
Of mine increased their stream?
Or ask the flying gales, if ever
I lent one sigh to them?
But now my former days retire,
And I Am by beauty caught,
The tender chains of sweet desire
Are fixed upon my thought.
Ye nightingales, ye twisting pines!
Ye swains that haunt the grove!
Ye gentle echoes, breezy winds!
Ye close retreats of love!
With all of nature, all of art,
Assist the dear design;
O teach a young unpracticed heart,
To make my Nancy mine.
The very thought of change I hate,
As much as of despair;
Nor ever covet to be great,
Unless it be for her.
It Is true, the passion in my mind
Is mixed with soft distress;
Yet while the fair I love is kind,
I cannot wish it less.
ANACREONTIC.
WHEN Spring came on with fresh delight,
To cheer the soul, and charm the sight,
While easy breezes, softer rain,
And warmer suns salute the plain;
'Twas then, in yonder piny grove,
That Nature went to meet with Love.
Green was her robe, and green her wreath,
Wherever she trod, 'twas green beneath;
Wherever she turned, the pulses beat
With new recruits of genial heat;
And in her train the birds appear,
To match for all the coming year.
Raised on a bank, where daizys grew,
And vi'lets intermixed a blue,
She finds the boy she went to find;
A thousand pleasures wait behind,
Aside, a thousand arrows ly,
But all unfeather'd wait to fly.
When they met, the Dame and Boy,
Dancing Graces, idle Joy,
Wanton Smiles, and airy Play,
Conspired to make the scene be gay;
Love paired the birds through all the grove,
And Nature bid them sing to Love,
Sitting, hopping, fluttering, sing,
And pay their tribute from the wing,
To fledge the shafts that idly ly,
And yet unfeather'd wait to fly.
It Is thus, when Spring renews the blood,
They meet in every trembling wood,
And thrice they make the plumes agree,
And every dart they mount with three,
And every dart can boast a kind,
Which suits each proper turn of mind.
From the towering Eagle's plume
The generous Hearts accept their doom;
Shot by the Peacock's painted eye
The vain and airy lovers dye:
For careful dames and frugal men,
The shafts are speckled by the Hen.
The Pyes and Parrots deck the darts,
When Prattling wins the panting hearts:
When from the Voice the passions spring,
The warbling Finch affords a wing:
Together, by the Sparrow stung,
Down fall the wanton and the young:
And fledged by Geese the weapons fly,
When others love they know not why.
All this (as late I chanced to rove)
I learned in yonder waving grove.
And see, says Love, (who called me near)
How much I deal with Nature here,
How both support a proper part,
She gives the feather, I the dart:
Then cease for souls averse to sigh,
If Nature cross ye, so do I;
My weapon there unfeather'd flies,
And shakes and shuffles through the skies.
But if the mutual charms I find
By which she links you, mind to mind,
They wing my shafts, I poize the darts,
And strike from both, through both your hearts.
ANACREONTIC.
GAY Bacchus liking Estcourt's wine,
A noble meal bespoke us;
And for the guests that were to dine,
Brought Comus, Love, and Jocus.
The God near Cupid drew his chair,
Near Comus, Jocus placed;
For Wine makes Love forget its care,
And Mirth exalts a feast.
The more to please the sprightly God,
Each sweet engaging Grace
Put on some clothes to come abroad,
And took a waiter's place.
Then Cupid named at every glass
A lady of the sky;
While Bacchus swore he would drink the lass,
And had it bumper-high.
Fat Comus tossed his brimmers over,
And always got the most;
Jocus took care to fill him more,
When-e'er he missed the toast.
They called, and drank at every touch;
He filled, and drank again;
And if the gods can take too much,
It Is said, they did so then.
Gay Bacchus little Cupid stung,
By reckoning his deceits.
And Cupid mocked his stamm'ring tongue,
With all his stagg'ring gaits:
And Jocus droll'd on Comus' ways,
And tales without a jest;
While Comus called his witty plays
But waggeries at best.
Such talk soon set 'em all at odds;
And, had I Homer's pen,
I Would sing ye, how they drunk like gods,
And how they fought, like men.
To part the fray, the Graces fly,
Who make 'em soon agree;
Nay, had the furies selves been nigh,
They still were three to three.
Bacchus appeased, raised Cupid up,
And gave him back his bow;
But kept some darts to stir the cup,
Where sack and sugar flow.
Jocus took Comus' rosy crown,
And gayly wore the prize,
And thrice, in mirth, he pushed him down,
As thrice he strove to rise.
Then Cupid sought the myrtle grove,
Where Venus did recline,
And Venus close embracing Love,
They joined to rail at wine.
And Comus loudly cursing Wit,
Rolled off to some retreat,
Where boon companions gravely sit
In fat unweildy state.
Bacchus and Jocus, still behind,
For one fresh glass prepare;
They kiss, and are exceeding kind,
And vow to be sincere.
But part in time, whoever hear
This our instructive song;
For though such friendships may be dear,
They cannot continue long.
A FAIRY TALE IN THE ANCIENT ENGLISH STYLE.
IN Britain's isle and Arthur's days,
When midnight Faeries daunc'd the maze,
Lived Edwin of the green,
Edwin, I wis, a gentle youth,
Endowed with courage, sense and truth,
Though badly shaped he been.
His mountain back mote well be said
To measure height against his head,
And lift itself above:
Yet spite of all that nature did
To make his uncouth form forbid,
This creature dared to love.
He felt the charms of Edith's eyes,
Nor wanted hope to gain the prize,
Could ladies look within;
But one Sir Topaz dressed with art,
And, if a shape could win a heart,
He had a shape to win.
Edwin (if right I read my song)
With slighted passion paced along
All in the moony light:
'Twas near an old enchaunted court,
Where sportive Faeries made resort
To revel out the night.
His heart was drear, his hope was crossed,
'Twas late, 'twas far, the path was lost
That reached the neighbor-town;
With weary steps he quits the shades,
Resolved the darkling dome he treads,
And drops his limbs adown.
But scant he lays him on the floor,
When hollow winds remove the door,
A trembling rocks the ground:
And (well I ween to count aright)
At once an hundred tapers light
On all the walls around.
Now sounding tongues assail his ear,
Now sounding feet approachen near,
And now the sounds increase,
And from the corner where he lay
He sees a train profusely gay
Come pranckling over the place.
But (trust me Gentles!) never yet
Was dight a masquing half so neat,
Or half so rich before;
The country lent the sweet perfumes,
The sea the pearl, the sky the plumes,
The town its silken store.
Now whilst he gazed, a Gallant dressed
In flaunting robes above the rest,
With awful accent cried;
What Mortal of a wretched mind,
Whose sighs infect the balmy wind,
Has here presumed to hide?
At this the Swain, whose venurous soul
No fears of Magic art control,
Advanced in open sight;
'Nor have I cause of dreed, he said,
'Who view (by no presumption led)
'Your revels of the night.
''Twas grief, for scorn of faithful love,
'Which made my steps unweeting rove
'Amid the nightly dew.'
It Is well, the Gallant cries again,
We Faeries never injure men
Who dare to tell us true.
Exalt thy love-dejected heart,
Be mine the task, or ere we part,
To make thee grief resign;
Now take the pleasure of thy chance;
Whilst I with Mab my part'ner dance,
Be little Mable thine.
He spoke, and all a sudden there
Light music floats in wanton air;
The Monarch leads the Queen:
The rest their Faerie partners found,
And Mable trimly tript the ground
With Edwin of the green.
The dancing past, the board was laid,
And siker such a feast was made
As heart and lip desire;
Withouten hands the dishes fly,
The glasses with a wish come nigh,
And with a wish retire.
But now to please the Faerie King,
Full every deal they laugh and sing,
And antic feats devise;
Some wind and tumble like an ape,
And other-some transmute their shape
In Edwin's wondering eyes.
'Till one at last that Robin hight,
(Renowned for pinching maids by night)
Has hent him up aloof;
And full against the beam he flung,
Where by the back the Youth he hung
To spraul unneath the roof.
From thence, "Reverse my charm, he cries,
"And let it fairly now suffice
"The gambol has been shown."
But Oberon answers with a smile,
Content thee Edwin for a while,
The vantage is thine own.
Here ended all the phantome play;
They smelt the fresh approach of day,
And heard a cock to crow;
The whirling wind that bore the crowd
Has clapped the door, and whistled loud,
To warn them all to go.
Then screaming all at once they fly,
And all at once the tapers die;
Poor Edwin falls to floor;
Forlorn his state, and dark the place,
Was never wight in sike a case
Through all the land before.
But soon as dan Apollo rose,
Full jolly creature home he goes,
He feels his back the less;
His honest tongue and steady mind
Han rid him of the lump behind
Which made him want success,
With lusty livelyhed he talks,
He seems a dancing as he walks,
His story soon took wind;
And beauteous Edith sees the youth,
Endowed with courage, sense and truth,
Without a bunch behind.
The story told, Sir Topaz moved,
(The youth of Edith erst approved)
To see the revel scene:
At close of eve he leaves his home,
And wends to find the ruined dome
All on the gloomy plain.
As there he bides, it so befell,
The wind came rustling down a dell,
A shaking seized the wall:
Up spring the tapers as before,
The Faeries bragly foot the floor,
And music fills the hall.
But certes sorely sunk with woe
Sir Topaz sees the Elphin show,
His spirits in him die:
When Oberon cries, 'a Man is near,
'A mortal passion, cleeped fear,
'Hangs flagging in the sky.'
With that Sir Topaz (hapless youth!)
In accents fault'ring ay for ruth
Entreats them pity grant;
For als he been a mister wight
Betrayed by wandering in the night
To tread the circled haunt;
'Ah losell vile, at once they roar!
'And little skilled of Faerie lore,
'Thy cause to come we know:
'Now has thy kestrell courage fell;
'And Faeries, since a ly you tell,
'Are free to work thee woe.'
Then Will, who bears the wispy fire
To trail the swains among the mire,
The caitive upward flung;
There like a tortoise in a shop
He dangled from the chamber-top,
Where whilome Edwin hung.
The revel now proceeds apace,
Deffly they frisk it over the place,
They sit, they drink, and eat;
The time with frolic mirth beguile,
And poor Sir Topaz hangs the while
'Till all the rout retreat.
By this the stars began to wink,
They skriek, they fly, the tapers sink,
And down ydrops the knight.
For never spell by Faerie laid
With strong enchantment bound a glade
Beyond the length of night.
Chill, dark, alone, adreed, he lay,
'Till up the welkin rose the day,
Then deemed the dole was over:
But wot ye well his harder lot?
His seely back the Bunch has got
Which Edwin lost before.
This tale a Sybil-Nurse ared;
She softly strok'd my youngling head,
And when the tale was done,
'Thus some are born, my son (she cries)
'With base impediments to rise,
'And some are born with none.
'But virtue can itself advance
'To what the favorite fools of chance
'By fortune seemed designed;
'Virtue can gain the odds of fate,
'And from itself shake off the weight
'Upon th'unworthy Mind.
THE VIGIL OF VENUS.
WRITTEN IN THE TIME OF JULIUS CAESAR, AND BY SOME ASCRIBED TO CATULLUS.
"LET those love now, who never loved before;
"Let those who always loved, now love the more,"
The Spring, the new, the warb'ling Spring appears,
The youthful season of reviving years;
In Spring the Loves enkindle mutual heats,
The feathered nation chase their tuneful mates,
The trees grow fruitful with descending rain
And dressed in differing greens adorn the plain.
She comes; tomorrow Beauty's Empress roves
Through walks that winding run within the groves;
She twines the shooting myrtle into bowers,
And ties their meeting tops with wreaths of flowers,
Then raised sublimely on her easy throne
From Nature's powerful dictates draws her own.
"Let those love now, who never loved before;
"Let those who always loved, now love the more."
'Twas on that day which saw the teeming flood
Swell round, impregnate with celestial blood;
Wandering in circles stood the finny crew,
The midst was left a void expanse of blue,
There parent Ocean worked with heaving throes,
And dropping wet the fair Dione rose.
"Let those love now, who never loved before;
"Let those who always loved, now love the more."
She paints the purple year with varied show,
Tips the green gem, and makes the blossom glow.
She makes the turgid buds receive the breeze,
Expand to leaves, and shade the naked trees.
When gathering damps the misty nights diffuse,
She sprinkles all the morn with balmy dews;
Bright trembling pearls depend at every spray,
And kept from falling, seem to fall away.
A glossy freshness hence the Rose receives,
And blushes sweet through all her silken leaves;
(The drops descending through the silent night,
While stars serenely roll their golden light,)
Close 'till the morn, her humid veil she holds;
Then decked with virgin pomp the slow'r unfolds.
Soon will the morning blush: ye maids! prepare,
In rosy garlands bind your flowing hair;
It Is Venus' plant: the blood fair Venus shed,
Over the gay beauty poured immortal red;
From Love's soft kiss a sweet Ambrosial smell
Was taught for ever on the leaves to dwell;
From gemms, from flames, from orient rays of light
The richest luster makes her purple bright;
And she tomorrow weds; the sporting gale
Unties her zone, she bursts the verdant veil;
Through all her sweets the rifling lover flies,
And as he breathes, her glowing fires arise.
"Let those love now, who never loved before;
"Let those who always loved, now love the more."
Now fair Dione to the myrtle grove
Sends the gay Nymphs, and sends her tender Love.
And shall they venture? is it safe to go?
While Nymphs have hearts, and Cupid wears a bow?
Yes, safely venture, it is his mother's will;
He walks unarmed, and undesigning ill,
His torch extinct, his quiver useless hung,
His arrows idle, and his bow unstrung.
And yet, ye Nymphs, beware, his eyes have charms,
And Love that is naked, still is Love in arms.
"Let those love now, who never loved before;
"Let those who always loved, now love the more."
From Venus' bower to Delia's lodge repairs
A virgin train complete with modest airs:
'Chaste Delia! grant our suit! or shun the wood,
'Nor stain this sacred lawn with savage blood.
'Venus, O Delia! if she could persuade,
'Wou'd ask thy presence, might she ask a maid.'
Here cheerful quires for three auspicious nights
With songs prolong the pleasurable rites:
Here crowds in measures lightly-decent rove;
Or seek by pairs the covert of the grove,
Where meeting greens for arbours arch above,
And mingling flowrets strew the scenes of love.
Here dancing Ceres shakes her golden sheaves:
Here Bacchus revels, decked with viny leaves:
Here wit's enchanting God in laurel crowned
Wakes all the ravished Hours with silver sound.
Ye fields, ye forests, own Dione's reign,
And Delia, huntress Delia, shun the plain.
"Let those love now, who never loved before;
"Let those who always loved, now love the more."
Gay with the bloom of all her opening year,
The Queen at Hybla bids her throne appear;
And there presides; and there the favorite band
(Her smiling Graces) share the great command.
Now beauteous Hybla! dress thy flowery beds
With all the pride the lavish season sheds;
Now all thy colors, all thy fragrance yield,
And rival Enna's aromatic field.
To fill the presence of the gentle court
From every quarter rural Nymphs resort,
From woods, from mountains, from their humble vales,
From waters curling with the wanton gales.
Pleased with the joyful train, the laughing Queen
In circles seats them round the bank of green;
And ^lovely girls, (she whispers) guard your hearts;
'My boy, though stripped of arms, abounds in arts.
"Let those love now, who never loved before;
"Let those who always loved, now love the more."
Let tender grass in shaded alleys spread,
Let early flowers erect their painted head.
Tomorrow's glory be tomorrow seen,
That day, old Either wedded Earth in green.
The Vernal Father bid the Spring appear,
In clouds he coupled to produce the year,
The sap descending over her bosom ran,
And all the various sorts of soul began.
By wheels unknown to sight, by secret veins
Distilling life, the fruitful Goddess reigns,
Through all the lovely realms of native day,
Through all the circled land, and circling sea;
With fertile seed she filled the pervious earth,
And ever fixed the mystic ways of birth.
"Let those love now, who never loved before;
"Let those who always loved, now love the more."
'Twas she the Parent, to the Latian shore
Through various dangers Troy's remainder bore.
She won Lavinia for her warlike son,
And winning her, the Latian empire won.
She gave to Mars the maid, whose honored womb
Swelled with the Founder of immortal Rome.
Decoyed by shows the Sabin dames she led,
And taught our vigorous youth the means to wed.
Hence sprung the Romans, hence the race divine
Through which great Caesar draws his Julian line.
"Let those love now, who never loved before;
"Let those who always loved, now love the more."
In rural seats the soul of pleasure reigns;
The life of Beauty fills the rural scenes;
Even Love (if Fame the truth of Love declare)
Drew first the breathings of a rural air.
Some pleasing meadow pregnant Beauty pressed,
She laid her infant on its flowery breast,
From Nature's sweets he sipp'd the fragrant dew,
He smiled, he kissed them, and by kissing grew.
"Let those love now, who never loved before;
"Let those who always loved, now love the more."
Now Bulls over stalks of broom extend their sides,
Secure of favors from their lowing brides.
Now stately Rams their fleecy consorts lead,
Who bleating follow through the wandering shade.
And now the Goddess bids the birds appear,
Raise all their music, and salute the year:
Then deep the Swan begins, and deep the song
Runs over the water where he sails along;
While Philomela tunes a treble strain,
And from the poplar charms the listening plain.
We fancy love expressed at every note,
It melts, it warbles, in her liquid throat.
Of barbarous Tereus she complains no more,
But sings for pleasure, as for grief before.
And still her graces rise, her airs extend,
And all is silence 'till the Siren end.
How long in coming is my lovely Spring?
And when shall I, and when the Swallow sing?
Sweet Philomela cease -- Or here I sit,
And silent lose my rapturous hour of wit:
It Is gone, the sit retires, the flames decay,
My tuneful Phoebus flies averse away.
His own Amycle thus, as stories run,
But once was silent, and that once undone.
"Let those love now, who never loved before;
"Let those who always loved, now love the more."
PERVIGILIUM VENERIS.
"CRAS amet, qui numquam amavit; quique amavit, "cras amet."
Ver novum, ver jam canorum: vere natus orbis est,
Vere concordant amores, vere nubent alites,
Et nemus comam resolvit de maritis imbribus.
Cras amorem copulatrix inter umbras arborum
Implicat gazas virentes de flagello myrteo.
Cras Dione jura dicit, sulta sublimi throno.
"Cras amet, qui numquam amavit; quique amavit, "cras amet."
Tunc liquore de superno, spumeo ponti e globo,
Caerulas inter catervas, inter et bipedes equos,
Fecit undantem Dionen de maritis imbribus.
"Cras amet, qui numquam amavit; quique amavit, "cras amet."
Ipsa gemmas purpurantem pingit annum floribus,
Ipsa surgentis papillas de Favoni spiritu,
Urguet in toros tepentes; ipsa roris lucidi,
Noctis aura quem relinquit, spargit humentis aquas,
Et micant lacrymae trementes decidivo pondere.
Gutta praeceps orb parvo sustinet casus suos.
In pudorem florulentae prodiderunt purpurae.
Humor ille, quem serenis astra rorant noctibus,
Mane virgins papillas solvit humenti peplo.
Ipsa jussit mane ut udae virgins nubant rosae,
Fusae prius de cruore deque amoris osculis,
Deque gemmis, deque flammis, deque Solis purpuris.
Cras ruborem qui latebat vest tectus ignea,
Unica marito nodo non pudebit solvere.
"Cras amet, qui numquam amavit; quique amavit, "cras amet."
Ipsa Nimfas Diva luco jussit ire myrteo,
It Puer comes puellis. Nec tamen credi potest
Esse Amorem feriatum, si sagittas vexerit.
Ite Nimfae: pofuit arma, feriatus est Amor.
Jussus est inermis ire, nudus ire jussus est:
Neu quid arcu, neu sagitta, neu quid igne laederet.
Sed tamen cavete Nimfae, quod Cupido pulcer est:
Totus est inermis idem, quando nudus est Amor.
"Cras amet, qui numquam amavit; quique amavit, "cras amet."
Compari Venus pudore mittit ad te virgin.
Una res est quam rogamus, cede virgo Delia,
Ut nemus sit incruentum de ferinis stragibus.
Ipsa vellet ut venires, si deceret virginem:
Jam tribus choros videres feriatos noctibus:
Congreges inter catervas ire per saltus tuos,
Floreas inter coronas, myrteas inter casas.
Nec Ceres, nec Bacchus absunt, nec Poetarum Deus;
Decinent, et tota nox est pervigila cantibus.
Regnet in silvis Dione: to recede Delia.
"Cras amet, qui numquam amavit; quique amavit, "cras amet."
Jussit Hiblaeis tribunal stare diva floribus.
Praesens ipsa jura dicit, adsederunt Gratiae.
Hibla totos funde flores quidquid annus adtulit.
Hibla florum rumpe vestem, quantus Aennae campus est.
Ruris hic erunt puellae, vel puellae montium,
Quaeque silvas, quaeque lucos, quaeque montes incolunt.
Jussit omnis adsidere pueri matter alitas,
Jussit et nudo puellas nil amori credere.
"Cras amet, qui numquam amavit; quique amavit, "cras amet."
Et recentibus virentes ducat umbras floribus.
Cras erit qui primus ether copulavit nuptias,
Ut pater roris crearet vernis annum nubibus
In sinum maritus imber fluxit almae conjugis,
Ut foetus immixtus omnis aleret magno corpore.
Ipsa venas atque mentem permeante spiritu
Intus occultus gubernat procreatrix viribus,
Perque coelum, perque terras, perque pontum subditum,
Pervium sui tenorem seminali tramite
Imbuit, jussitque mundum nosse nascendi vias.
"Cras amet, qui numquam amavit; quique amavit, "cras amet."
Ipsa Trojanos nepotes in Latino transtulit;
Ipsa Laurentem puellam conjugem nato dedit:
Moxque Marti de sacello dat pudicam virginem.
Romuleas ipsa fecit cum Sabinis nuptias,
Unde Rames et Quirites, proque prole posterum
Romuli matrem crearet et nepotem Caesarem.
"Cras amet, qui numquam amavit; quique amavit, "cras amet."
Rura foecundat voluptas: rura Venerem sentiunt.
Ipse Amor puer Dionae rure natus dicitur.
Hunc ager cum parturiret, ipsa suscepit sinu,
Ipsa florum delicatis educavit osculis.
"Cras amet, qui numquam amavit; quique amavit, "cras amet."
Ecce, jam super genestas explicant tauri latus.
Quisque tuus quo tenetur conjugali foedere.
Subter umbras cum maritis ecce balantum gregem.
Et canoras non tacere Diva jussit alites.
Jam loquaces ore rauco stagna cygni perstrepunt,
Adsonat Terei puella subter umbram populi,
Ut putas motus Amoris ore dici musico,
Et neges queri sororem de marito barbaro.
Illa cantat: nos tacemus: quando ver venit meum?
Quando faciam ut celidon, at tacere desinam?
Perdidi Musam tacendo, nec me Phoebus respicit.
Sic Amyclas, cum tacerent, perdidit silentium.
"Cras amet, qui numquam amavit; quique amavit, "cras amet."
HOMER'S BATRACHOMUOMACHIA: OR, THE BATTLE OF THE FROGS AND MICE.
NAMES OF THE MICE.
PSYCARPAX, One who plunders granaries. Troxartas, A bread-eater. Lychomile, A
licker of meal. Pternotroctas, A bacon-eater. Lychopinax, A licker of dishes.
Embasichytros, A creeper into pots. Lychenor, A name for licking. Troglodytes,
one who runs into holes. Artophagus, Who feeds on bread. Tyroglyphus, A cheese
scooper. Pternoglyphus, A bacon scooper. Pternophagus, A bacon-eater.
Cnissodioctes, One who follows the steam of kitchens. Sitophagus, An eater of
wheat. Meridarpax, One who plunders his share.
NAMES OF THE FROGS.
PHYSIGNATHUS, One who swells his cheeks. Pelus, A name from mud. Hydromeduse,
A ruler in the waters. Hypsiboas, A loud bawler. Pelion, From mud. Seutlaeus,
Called from the beets. Polyphonus, A great babbler. Lymnocharis, One who loves
the lake. Crambophagus, Cabbage-eater. Lymnisius, Called from the lake.
Calaminthius, From the herb. Hydrocharis, Who loves the water. Borborocates,
Who lies in the mud. Prassophagus, An eater of garlic. Pelusius, From mud.
Pelobates, Who walks in the dirt. Prassaens, Called from garlic. Craugasides,
From croaking.
BATTLE OF THE FROGS AND MICE.
BOOK I.
TO fill my rising song with sacred fire,
Ye tuneful Nine, ye sweet celestial quire!
From Helicon's imbow'ring height repair,
Attend my labors, and reward my prayer.
The dreadful toils of raging Mars I write,
The springs of contest, and the fields of fight;
How threatening Mice advanced with warlike grace,
And waged dire combats with the croaking race.
Not louder tumults shook Olympus' towers,
When earth-born giants dared immortal powers.
Those equal acts in equal glory claim,
And thus the Muse records the tale of fame.
Once on a time, fatigued and out of breath,
And just escaped the stretching claws of death,
A gentle Mouse, whom Cats pursued in vain,
Fled swift-of-foot across the neighboring plain,
Hung over a brink, his eager thirst to cool,
And dipped his whiskers in the standing pool;
When near a courteous Frog advanced his head;
And from the waters, hoarse-resounding said:
What art thou, stranger? what the line you boast?
What chance has cast thee panting on our coast?
With strictest truth let all thy words agree,
Nor let me find a faithless Mouse in thee.
If worthy friendship, proffered friendship take,
And entering view the pleasurable lake:
Range over my palace, in my bounty share,
And glad return from hospitable fare.
This silver realm extends beneath my sway,
And me, their monarch, all its Frogs obey.
Great Physignathus I, from Peleus' race,
Begot in fair Hydromede's embrace,
Where by the nuptial bank that paints his side,
The swift Eridanus delights to glide.
Thee too, thy form, thy strength, and port proclaim
A sceptered king; a son of martial fame;
Then trace thy line, and aid my guessing eyes.
Thus ceased the Frog, and thus the Mouse replies.
Known to the Gods, the men, the birds that fly
Through wild expanses of the midway sky,
My name resounds; and if unknown to thee,
The soul of great Psycarpax lives in me.
Of brave Troxartas' line, whose sleeky down
In love compressed Lychomile the brown.
My mother she, and princess of the plains
Wherever her father Pternotroctas reigns:
Born where a cabin lifts its airy shed,
With figs, with nuts, with varied dainties fed.
But since our natures naught in common know,
From what foundation can a friendship grow?
These curling waters over thy palace roll;
But man's high food supports my princely soul.
In vain the circled loaves attempt to lie
Concealed in flaskets from my curious eye,
In vain the tripe that boasts the whitest hue,
In vain the gilded bacon shuns my view,
In vain the cheeses, offspring of the paile,
Or honey'd cakes, which Gods themselves regale.
And as in arts I shine, in arms I fight,
Mixed with the bravest, and unknown to flight.
Though large to mine the human form appear,
Not Man himself can smite my soul with fear.
Sly to the bed with silent steps I go,
Attempt his finger, or attack his toe,
And six indented wounds with dext'rous skill;
Sleeping he feels, and only seems to feel.
Yet have we foes which direful dangers cause,
Grim owls with talons armed, and Cats with claws,
And that false Trap, the den of silent fate,
Where Death his ambush plants around the bait:
All-dreaded these, and dreadful over the rest
The potent warriors of the tabby vest;
If to the dark we fly, the dark they trace,
And rend our heroes of the nibbling race.
But me, nor stalks, nor watrish herbs delight,
Nor can the crimson radish charm my sight,
The lake-resounding Frogs selected fare,
Which not a Mouse of any taste can bear.
As thus the downy prince his mind expressed,
His answer thus the croaking king addressed.
Thy words luxuriant on thy dainties rove,
And, stranger, we can boast of bounteous Jove:
We sport in water, or we dance on land,
And born amphibious, food from both command,
But trust thyself where wonders ask thy view,
And safely tempt those seas, I Will bear thee through:
Ascend my shoulders, firmly keep thy seat,
And reach my marshy court, and feast in state.
He said, and bent his back; with nimble bound
Leaps the light Mouse, and clasps his arms around,
Then wondering floats, and sees with glad survey
The winding banks resembling ports at sea.
But when aloft the curling water rides,
And wets with azure wave his downy sides,
His thoughts grow conscious of approaching woe,
His idle tears with vain repentance flow,
His locks he rends, his trembling feet he rears,
Thick beats his heart with unaccustomed fears;
His sighs, and chilled with danger, longs for shore:
His tail extended forms a fruitless oar.
Half-drench'd in liquid death his prayers he spoke,
And thus bemoaned him from the dreadful lake.
So passed Europa through the rapid sea,
Trembling and fainting all the venurous way;
With oary feet the bull triumphant rode,
And safe in Crete deposed his lovely load.
Ah safe at last! may thus the Frog support
My trembling limbs to reach his ample court.
As thus he sorrows, death ambiguous grows,
Lo! from the deep a water-Hydra rose;
He rolls his sanguin'd eyes, his bosom heaves,
And darts with active rage along the waves.
Confused, the monarch sees his hissing foe,
And dives, to shun the sable fates, below.
Forgetful Frog! the friend thy shoulders bore,
Unskilled in swimming, floats remote from shore.
He grasps with fruitless hands to find relief,
Supinely falls, and grinds his teeth with grief,
Plunging he sinks, and struggling mounts again,
And sinks, and strives, but strives with fate in vain.
The weighty moisture clogs his hairy vest,
And thus the Prince his dying rage expressed.
Nor thou, that fling'st me flound'ring from thy back,
As from hard rocks rebounds the shatt'ring wrack,
Nor thou shall 'scape thy due, perfidious king!
Pursued by vengeance on the swiftest wing:
At land thy strength could never equal mine,
At sea to conquer, and by craft, was thine;
But heaven has Gods, and Gods have searching eyes:
Ye Mice, ye Mice, my great avengers rise!
This said, he sighing gasp'd, and gasping died.
His death the young Lychopinax espied,
As on the flowery brink he passed the day,
Bask'd in the beams, and loiter'd life away.
Loud shrieks the Mouse, his shrieks the shores repeat;
The nibbling nation learn their hero's fate:
Grief, dismal grief ensues; deep murmurs sound,
And shriller fury fills the deafen'd ground.
From lodge to lodge the sacred Heralds run,
To fix their council with the rising sun;
Where great Troxartas crowned in glory reigns,
And winds his lengthening court beneath the plains;
Psycarpax' father, father now no more!
For poor Psycarpax lies remote from shore;
Supine he lies! the silent waters stand,
And no kind billow wafts the dead to land!
BOOK II.
WHEN rosy-singer'd morn had tinged the clouds,
Around their Monarch-Mouse the nation crowds;
Slow rose the sovereign, heaved his anxious breast,
And thus, the council filled with rage, addressed.
For lost Psycarpax much my soul endures,
It Is mine the private grief, the public, yours.
Three warlike sons adorned my nuptial bed,
Three sons, alas! before their father dead!
Our eldest perished by the rav'ning Cat,
As near my court the Prince unheedful sat.
Our next, an engine fraught with danger drew,
The portal gaped, the bait was hung in view,
Dire Arts assist the Trap, the Fates decoy,
And men unpitying killed my gallant Boy!
The last, his Country's hope, his Parent's pride,
Plunged in the lake by Physignathus, died.
Rouse all the war, my friends! avenge the deed,
And bleed that Monarch, and his Nation bleed.
His words in every breast inspired alarms,
And careful Mars supplied their host with arms.
In verdant hulls despoiled of all their beans,
The buskined warriors stalked along the plains:
Quills aptly bound, their bracing corselet made,
Faced with the plunder of a Cat they flayed:
The lamp's round boss affords their ample shield;
Large shells of nuts their covering helmet yield;
And over the region, with reflected rays,
Tall groves of needles for their lances blaze.
Dreadful in arms the marching Mice appear;
The wondering Frogs perceive the tumult near,
Forsake the waters, thick'ning form a ring,
And ask, and hearken, whence the noises spring.
When near the crowd, disclosed to public view,
The valiant chief Embasichytros drew:
The sacred herald's scepter graced his hand,
And thus his words expressed his king's command.
Ye Frogs! the Mice, with vengeance fired, advance,
And decked in armor shake the shining lance:
Their hapless Prince by Physignathus slain,
Extends incumbent on the watery plain.
Then arm your host, the doubtful battle try;
Lead forth those Frogs that have the soul to die.
The chief retires, the crowd the challenge hear,
And proudly-swelling yet perplexed appear:
Much they resent, yet much their Monarch blame,
Who rising, spoke to clear his tainted fame.
O friends, I never forced the Mouse to death,
Nor saw the gaspings of his latest breath,
He, vain of youth, our art of swimming tried,
And venurous; in the lake the wanton died.
To vengeance now by false appearance led,
They point their anger at my guiltless head,
But wage the rising war by deep device,
And turn its fury on the crafty Mice.
Your King directs the way; my thoughts elate
With hopes of conquest, form designs of fate.
Where high the banks their verdant surface heave,
And the steep sides confine the sleeping wave,
There, near the margin, clad in armor bright,
Sustain the first impetuous shocks of fight:
Then, where the dancing feather joins the crest,
Let each brave Frog his obvious Mouse arrest;
Each strongly grasping, headlong plunge a foe,
'Till countless circles whirl the lake below;
Down sink the Mice in yielding waters drowned;
Loud flash the waters; and the shores resound:
The Frogs triumphant tread the conquered plain,
And raise their glorious trophies of the slain.
He spoke no more: his prudent scheme imparts
Redoubling ardour to the boldest hearts.
Green was the suit his arming heroes chose,
Around their legs the greaves of mallows close,
Green were the beets about their shoulders laid,
And green the colewort, which the target made.
Formed of the varied shells the waters yield,
Their glossy helmets glist'ned over the field:
And tap'ring sea-reeds for the polished spear,
With upright order pierced the ambient air.
Thus dressed for war, they take the appointed height,
Poize the long arms, and urge the promised fight.
But now, where Jove's irradiate spires arise,
With stars surrounded in aetherial skies,
(A solemn council called) the brazen gates
Unbar; the Gods assume their golden seats:
The sire superior leans, and points to show
What wondrous combats mortals wage below:
How strong, how large, the numerous heroes stride!
What length of lance they shake with warlike pride!
What eager fire, their rapid march reveals!
So the fierce Centaurs ravaged over the dales;
And so confirmed, the daring Titans rose,
Heaped hills on hills, and bid the Gods be foes.
This seen, the power his sacred visage rears,
He casts a pitying smile on worldly cares,
And asks what heavenly guardians take the list,
Or who the Mice, or who the Frogs assist?
Then thus to Pallas. If my daughter's mind
Have joined the Mice, why stays she still behind?
Drawn forth by sav'ry steams they wind their way,
And sure attendance round thine altar pay,
Where while the victims gratify their taste,
They sport to please the Goddess of the feast.
Thus spoke the Ruler of the spacious skies;
But thus, resolved, the blue-ey'd maid replies.
In vain, my Father! all their dangers plead,
To such, thy Pallas never grants her aid.
My flowery wreaths they petulantly spoil,
And rob my crystal lamps of feeding oil.
(Ills following ills!) but what afflicts me more,
My veil, that idle race profanely tore.
The web was curious, wrought with art divine;
Relentless wretches! all the work was mine!
Along the loom the purple warp I spread,
Cast the light shoot, and crossed the silver thread;
In this their teeth a thousand breaches tear,
The thousand breaches skilful hands repair,
For which vile earthly dunns thy daughter grieve,
(The Gods, that use no coin, have none to give,
And Learning's Goddess never less can owe,
Neglected learning gains no wealth below.)
Nor let the Frogs to win my succor sue.
Those clamorous fools have lost my favor too.
For late, when all the conflict ceast at night,
When my stretched sinews worked with eager fight;
When spent with glorious toil, I left the field,
And sunk for slumber on my swelling shield;
Lo from the deep, repelling sweet repose,
With noisy croakings half the nation rose:
Devoid of rest, with aching brows I lay,
'Till cocks proclaimed the crimson dawn of day.
Let all, like me, from either host forbear,
Nor tempt the flying furies of the spear;
Lest heavenly blood (or what for blood may flow)
Adorn the conquest of a meaner foe.
Some daring Mouse may meet the wondrous odds,
Though Gods oppose, and brave the wounded Gods.
Over gilded clouds reclined, the danger view,
And be the wars of mortals scenes for you.
So moved the blue-ey'd Queen; her words persuade,
Great Jove assented, and the rest obeyed.
BOOK III.
NOW front to front the marching armies shine,
Haltere they meet, and form the lengthening line:
The chiefs conspicuous seen and heard afar,
Give the loud signal to the rushing war;
Their dreadful trumpets deep-mouthed hornets sound,
The sounded charge remurmurs over the ground,
Even Jove proclaims a field of horror nigh,
And rolls low thunder through the troubled sky.
First to the fight the large Hypsiboas flew,
And brave Lychenor with a javelin slew.
The luckless warrior filled with generous flame,
Stood foremost glittering in the post of fame;
When in his liver struck, the javelin hung;
The Mouse fell thundering, and the target rung;
Prone to the ground he sinks his closing eye,
And soiled in dust his lovely tresses lie.
A spear at Pelion Troglodytes cast,
The missive spear within the bosom past;
Death's sable shades the fainting Frog surround,
And life's red tide runs ebbing from the wound.
Embasichytros felt Seutlaeus' dart
Transfix, and quiver in his panting heart;
But great Artophagus avenged the slain,
And big Seutlaeus tumbling loads the plain,
And Polyphonus dies, a Frog renowned,
For boastful speech and turbulence of sound;
Deep through the belly pierced, supine he lay,
And breathed his soul against the face of day.
The strong Lymnocharis, who viewed with ire,
A victor triumph, and a friend expire;
And fiercely flung where Troglodytes fought;
With heaving arms a rocky fragment caught,
(A warrior versed in arts, of sure retreat,
But arts in vain elude impending fate;)
Full on his sinewy neck the fragment fell,
And over his eyelids clouds eternal dwell.
Lychenor (second of the glorious name)
Striding advanced, and took no wandering aim;
Through all the Frog the shining javelin flies,
And near the vanquished Mouse the victor dies.
The dreadful stroke Crambophagus affrights,
Long bred to banquets, less inured to fights,
Heedless he runs, and stumbles over the steep,
And wildly flound'ring flashes up the deep;
Lycheror following with a downward blow,
Reached in the lake his unrecover'd foe;
Gasping he rolls, a purple stream of blood
Distains the surface of the silver flood;
Through the wide wound the rushing entrails throng,
And slow the breathless carcass floats along.
Lymnisius good Tyroglyphus assails,
Prince of the Mice that haunt the flowery vales,
Lost to the milky fares and rural seat,
He came to perish on the bank of fate.
The dread Pternoglyphus demands the fight,
Which tender Calaminthius shuns by slight,
Drops the green target, springing quits the foe,
Glides through the lake, and safely dives below.
But dire Pternophagus divides his way
Through breaking ranks, and leads the dreadful day.
No nibbling prince excelled in fierceness more,
His parents fed him on the savage boar;
But where his lance the field with blood imbrued,
Swift as he moved, Hydrocharis putsu'd,
'Till fallen in death he lies, a shatt'ring stone
Sounds on the neck, and crushes all the bone.
His blood pollutes the verdure of the plain,
And from his nostrils bursts the gushing brain.
Lycopinax with Borbocaetes fights,
A blameless Frog, whom humbler life delights;
The fatal javelin unrelenting flies,
And darkness seals the gentle croaker's eyes.
Incensed Prassophagus with spritely bound,
Bears Cnissodioctes off the rising ground,
Then drags him over the lake deprived of breath,
And downward plunging, sinks his soul to death.
But now the great Psycarpax shines afar,
(Scarce he so great whose loss provoked the war)
Swift to revenge his fatal javelin fled,
And thro'the liver struck Pelusius dead;
His freckled corpse before the victor fell,
His soul indignant sought the shades of hell.
This saw Pelobates, and from the flood
Heaved with both hands a monstrous mass of mud,
The cloud obscene over all the hero flies,
Dishonours his brown face, and blots his eyes.
Enraged, and wildly sputt'ring, from the shore
A stone immense of size the warrior bore,
A load for laboring earth, (whose bulk to raise,
Asks ten degenerate Mice of modern days.)
Full on the leg arrives the crushing wound;
The Frog supportless, writhes upon the ground.
Thus flushed, the victor wars with matchless force,
'Till loud Craugasides arrests his course,
Hoarse-croaking threats precede! with fatal speed
Deep through the belly run the pointed reed,
Then strongly tugged, returned imbrued with gore,
And on the pile his reeking entrails bore.
The lame Sitophagus, oppressed with pain,
Creeps from the desperate dangers of the plain;
And where the ditches rising weeds supply
To spread their lowly shades beneath the sky,
There lurks the silent Mouse relieved from heat,
And safe embour'd, avoids the chance of fate.
But here Troxartes, Physignathus there,
Whirl the dire furies of the pointed spear:
But where the foot around its ankle plies,
Troxartes wounds, and Physignathus flies,
Halts to the pool, a safe retreat to find,
And trails a dangling length of leg behind.
The Mouse still urges, still the Frog retires,
And half in anguish of the flight expires:
Then pious ardor young Pressaeus brings,
Betwixt the fortunes of contending kings:
Lank, harmless Frog! with forces hardly grown,
He darts the reed in combats not his own,
Which faintly tinkling on Troxartes' shield,
Hangs at the point, and drops upon the field.
Now nobly towering over the rest appears
A gallant prince that far transcends his years,
Pride of his sire, and glory of his house,
And more a Mars in combat than a Mouse:
His action bold, robust his ample frame,
And Meridarpax his resounding name.
The warrior singled from the fighting crowd,
Boasts the dire honors of his arms aloud;
Then strutting near the lake, with looks elate,
To all its nations threats approaching fate.
And such his strength, the silver lakes around
Might roll their waters over unpeopled ground.
But powerful Jove, who shows no less his grace
To Frogs that perish, than to human race,
Felt soft compassion rising in his soul,
And shook his sacred head, that shook the pole.
Then thus to all the gazing powers began
The sire of Gods, and Frogs, and Mice, and Man.
What seas of blood I view! what worlds of slain!
An Iliad rising from a day's campaign!
How fierce his javelin over the trembling lakes
The black-furr'd hero Meridarpax shakes!
Unless some favoring deity descend,
Soon will the Frogs loquacious empire end.
Let dreadful Pallas winged with pity fly,
And make her Aegis blaze before his eye:
While Mars refulgent on his rattling car,
Arrests his raging rival of the war.
He ceased reclining with attentive head,
When thus the glorious God of combats said.
Nor Pallas, Jove! though Pallas take the field,
With all the terrors of her hissing shield,
Nor Mars himself, though Mars in armor bright
Ascend his car, and wheel amidst the fight;
Not these can drive the desperate Mouse afar,
Or change the fortunes of the bleeding war.
Let all go forth, all heaven in arms arise,
Or launch thy own red thunder from the skies.
Such ardent bolts as flew that wondrous day,
When heaps of Titans mixed with mountains lay,
When all the giant-race enormous fell,
And huge Enceladus was hurled to hell.
'Twas thus the Armipotent advised the Gods,
When from his throne the cloud-compeller nods,
Deep lengthning thunders run from pole to pole,
Olympus trembles as the thunders roll.
Then swift he whirls the brandished bolt around,
And headlong darts it at the distant ground;
The bolt discharged inwrap'd with lightning flies,
And rends its flaming passage through the skies,
Then Earth's inhabitants, the nibblers, shake:
And Frogs, the dwellers in the waters, quake.
Yet still the Mice advance their dread design,
And the last danger threats the croaking line,
'Till Jove, that inly mourned the loss they bore,
With strange assistants filled the frighted shore.
Poured from the neighboring strand, deformed to view,
They march, a sudden unexpected crew!
Strong suits of armor round their bodies close,
Which, like thick anvils, blunt the force of blows;
In wheeling marches turned oblique they go;
With harpy claws their limbs divide below;
Fell sheers the passage to their mouth command;
From out the flesh their bones by nature stand;
Broad spread their backs, their shining shoulders rise;
Unnumber'd joints distort their lengthened thighs;
With nervous cords their hands are firmly braced;
Their round black eye balls in their bosom placed;
On eight long feet the wondrous warriors tread;
And either end alike supplies a head.
These, mortal wits to call the Crabs, agree;
The Gods have other names for things than we.
Now where the jointures from their loins depend,
The heroes tails with sev'ring grasps they rend.
Here, short of feet, deprived the power to fly,
There, without hands, upon the field they lie.
Wrench'd from their holds, and scattered all around,
The bended lances heap the cumber'd ground.
Helpless amazement, fear pursuing fear,
And mad confusion through their host appear:
Over the wild waste with headlong flight they go,
Or creep concealed in vaulted holes below.
But down Olympus to the western seas
Far-shooting Phoebus drove with fainter rays;
And a whole war (so Jove ordained) begun,
Was fought, and ceased, in one revolving sun.
TO MR. POPE.
TO praise, yet still with due respect to praise,
A Bard triumphant in immortal bays,
The learned to show, the sensible commend,
Yet still preserve the province of the friend,
What life, what vigor, must the lines require?
What music tune them? what affection fire?
O might thy genius in my bosom shine!
Thou should not fail of numbers worthy thine,
The brightest ancients might at once agree
To sing within my lays, and sing of thee.
Horace himself would own thou do excel
In candid arts to play the critic well.
Ovid himself might wish to sing the dame
Whom Windsor Forest sees a gliding stream,
On silver feet, with annual osier crowned,
She runs for ever through poetic ground.
How flame the glories of Belinda's hair,
Made by thy Muse the envy of the fair;
Less shone the tresses Egypt's princess wore,
Which sweet Callimachus so sung before.
Here courtly trifles set the world at odds,
Belles war with Beaux, and Whims descend for Gods.
The new Machines in names of ridicule,
Mock the grave phrenzy of the Chymic fool:
But know, ye fair, a point concealed with art,
The Sylphs and Gnomes are but a woman's heart:
The Graces stand in sight; a Satyr train
Peep over their heads, and laugh behind the scene.
In Fame's fair Temple, over the boldest wits
Inshrin'd on high the sacred Virgil sits,
And sits in measures, such as Virgil's muse
To place thee near him might be fond to choose.
How might he tune the alternate reed with thee,
Perhaps a Strephon thou, a Daphnis he,
While some old Damon over the vulgar wise
Thinks he deserves, and thou deserve the prize.
Rapt with the thought my Fancy seeks the plains,
And turns me shepherd while I hear the strains.
Indulgent nurse of every tender gale,
Parent of slowrets, old Arcadia hail!
Here in the cool my limbs at ease I spread,
Here let thy poplars whisper over my head,
Still slide thy waters soft among the trees,
Thy aspins quiver in a breathing breeze,
Smile all thy valleys in eternal Spring,
Be hushed, ye winds! while Pope and Virgil sing.
In English lays, and all sublimely great,
Thy Homer warms with all his ancient heat,
He shines in council, thunders in the fight,
And flames with every sense of great delight.
Long has that Poet reigned, and long unknown,
Like monarchs sparkling on a distant throne;
In all the majesty of Greek retired,
Himself unknown, his mighty name admired,
His language failing, wrapped him round with night,
Thine raised by thee, recals the work to light.
So wealthy mines, that ages long before
Fed the large realms around with golden oar,
When choked by sinking banks, no more appear,
And shepherds only say, The mines were here:
Should some rich youth (if Nature warm his heart,
And all his projects stand informed with art)
Here clear the caves, there open the leading vein;
The mines detected flame with gold again.
How vast, how copious are thy new designs!
How every music varies in thy lines!
Still as I read, I feel my bosom beat,
And rise in raptures by another's heat.
Thus in the wood, when Summer dressed the days,
When Windsor lent us tuneful hours of ease,
Our ears the Lark, the Thrush, the Turtle blessed,
And Philomela sweetest over the rest:
The shades resound with song -- O softly tread!
While a whole season warbles round my head.
This to my friend -- and when a friend inspires
My silent harp its master's hand requires,
Shakes off the dust, and makes these rocks resound,
For fortune placed me in unfertile ground;
Far from the joys that with my soul agree,
From wit, from learning, -- far, oh far from thee!
Here moss-grown trees expand the smallest leaf,
Here half an acre's corn is half a sheaf,
Here hills with naked heads the tempest meet,
Rocks at their side, and torrents at their feet,
Or lazy lakes unconscious of a flood,
Whose dull brown Naiads ever sleep in mud.
Yet here content can dwell, and learned ease,
A friend delight me, and an author please,
Even here I sing, while Pope supplies the theme,
Show my own love, though not increase his fame.
PART OF THE FIRST CANTO OF THE RAPE OF THE LOCK. WITH A TRANSLATION IN LEONINE
VERSE, AFTER THE MANNER OF THE ANCIENT MONKS.
AND now unveiled, the Toilet stands displayed,
Each silver vase in mystic order laid.
First, robbed in white, the nymph intent adores,
With head uncovered, the Cosmetic powers.
A heavenly image in the glass appears,
To that she bends, to that her eyes she rears:
The inferior priestess, at her altar's side,
Trembling, begins the sacred rites of pride.
Unnumber'd treasures open at once, and here
The various offerings of the world appear;
From each she nicely culls with curious toil,
And decks the Goddess with the glittering spoil.
This casket India's glowing gems unlocks,
And all Arabia breathes from yonder box.
The Tortoise here and Elephant unite,
Transformed to combs, the speckled, and the white.
Here files of pins extend their shining rows,
Puffs, powders, patches, bibles, billet-doux.
Now awful beauty puts on all its arms,
The fair each moment rifes in her charms,
Repairs her smiles, awakens every grace,
And calls forth all the wonders of her face;
Sees by degrees a purer blush arise,
And keener lightnings quicken in her eyes.
The busy Sylphs surround their darling care;
These set the head, and those divide the hair,
Some fold the sleeve, while others plait the gown,
And Betty's praised for labors not her own.
ET nunc dilectum speculum, pro more retectum,
Emicat in mensa, quae splendet pyxide densa:
Tum primum lympha, se purgat candida Nympha;
Jamque sine menda, coelestis imago videnda,
Nuda caput, bellos retinet, regit, implet, ocellos.
Hac stupet explorans, seu cultus numen adorans:
Inferior claram Pythonissa apparet ad aram,
Fertque tibi caute, dicatque Superbia! laute,
Dona venusta; oris, quae cunctis, plena laboris,
Excerpta explorat, dominamque deamque decorat.
Pyxide devota, se pandit hic India tota,
Et tota ex ista transpirat Arabia cista;
Testudo hic flectit, dum se mea Lesbia pectit;
Atque elephas lent, te pectit Lesbia dente;
Hunc maculis noris, nivei jacet ille coloris.
Hic jacet et munde, mundus muliebris abunde;
Spinula resplendens aeris longo ordine pendens,
Pulvis suavis odore, et epistola suavis amore.
Induit arma ergo, Veneris pulcherrima virgo;
Pulchrior in praesens tempus de tempore crescens;
Jam reparat risus, jam surgit gratia visu^s,
Jam promit cultu, mirac'la latentia vultu.
Pigmina jam miscet, quo plus sua Purpura gliscet,
Et geminans bellis splendet mage fulgor ocellis.
Stant Lemures muti, Nymphae intentique saluti,
Hic figit Zonam, capiti locat ille Coronam,
Haec manicis formam, plicis dat et altera normam;
Et tibi vel Betty, tibi vel nitidissima Letty!
Gloria factorum temere conceditur horum.
HEALTH; AN ECLOGUE.
NOW early shepherds over the meadow pass,
And print long footsteps in the glittering grass;
The cows neglectful of their pasture stand,
By turns obsequious to the milker's hand.
When Damon softly trod the shaven lawn,
Damon, a youth from city cares withdrawn;
Long was the pleasing walk he wandered through,
A covered arbor closed the distant view;
There rests the Youth, and while the feathered throng
Raise their wild music, thus contrives a song.
Here wasted over by mild Etesian air,
Thou country Goddess, beauteous Health! repair;
Here let my breast through quivering trees inhale
Thy rosy blessings with the morning gale.
What are the fields, or flowers, or all I see?
Ah! tasteless all, if not enjoyed with thee.
Joy to my soul! I feel the Goddess nigh,
The face of Nature cheers as well as I;
Over the flat green refreshing breezes run,
The smiling dazies blow beneath the sun,
The brooks run purling down with silver waves,
The planted lanes rejoice with dancing leaves,
The chirping birds from all the compass rove
To tempt the tuneful echoes of the grove:
High funny summits, deeply shaded dales,
Thick mossy banks, and flowery winding vales,
With various prospect gratify the sight,
And scatter fixed attention in delight.
Come, country Goddess, come; nor thou suffice,
But bring thy mountain-sister, Exercise.
Called by thy lively voice, she turns her pace,
Her winding horn proclaims the finished chase;
She mounts the rocks, she skims the level plain,
Dogs, hawks, and horses, crowd her early train;
Her hardy face repels the tanning wind,
And lines and meshes loosely float behind.
All these as means of toil the feeble see,
But these are helps to pleasure joined with thee.
Let Sloth lie softning 'till high noon in down,
Or lolling fan her in the sult'ry town,
Unnerv'd with rest; and turn her own disease,
Or foster others in luxurious ease:
I mount the courser, call the deep-mouthed hounds,
The fox unkennell'd flies to covert grounds;
I lead where stags through tangled thickets tread,
And shake the saplings with their branching head;
I make the faulecons wing their airy way,
And soar to seize, or stooping strike their prey;
To suare the fish I fix the luring bait;
To wound the fowl I load the gun with fate.
It Is thus through change of exercise I range,
And strength and pleasure rise from every change.
Here beauteous Health for all the year remain,
When the next comes, I Will charm thee thus-again.
Oh come, thou Goddess of my rural song,
And bring thy daughter, calm Content, along,
Dame of the ruddy cheek and laughing eye,
From whose bright presence clouds of sorrow fly:
For her I mow my walks, I plait my bowers,
Clip my low hedges, and support my flowers;
To welcome her, this Summer seat I dressed,
And here I court her when she comes to rest;
When she from exercise to learned ease
Shall change again, and teach the change to please.
Now friends conversing my sost hours refine,
And Tully's Tusculum revives in mine:
Now to grave books I bid the mind retreat,
And such as make me rather good than great.
Or over the works of easy fancy rove,
Where flutes and innocence amuse the grove:
The native bard that on Sicilian plains
First sung the lowly manners of the swains;
Or Maro's muse that in the fairest light
Paints rural prospects and the charms of sight:
These soft amusements bring content along,
And fancy, void of sorrow, turns to song.
Here beauteous Health for all the year remain,
When the next comes, I Will charm thee thus again.
THE FLIES; AN ECLOGUE.
WHEN in the river cows for coolness stand,
And sheep for breezes seek the lofty land,
A youth, whom Aesop taught that every tree,
Each bird and insect spoke as well as he:
Walked calmly musing in a shaded way,
Where flow'ring hawthorn broke the sunny ray,
And thus instructs his moral pen to draw
A scene that obvious in the field he saw.
Near a low ditch, where shallow waters meet,
Which never learnt to glide with liquid feet,
Whose Naiads never prattle as they play,
But screen'd with hedges slumber out the day,
There stands a slender fern's aspiring shade,
Whose answ'ring branches regularly laid
Put forth their answ'ring boughs, and proudly rise
Three stories upward, in the nether skies.
For shelter here, to shun the noonday heat,
An airy nation of the Flies retreat;
Some in soft air their silken pinions ply,
And some from bough to bough delighted sly,
Some rise, and circling light to perch again;
A pleasing murmur hums along the plain.
So, when a stage invites to pageant shows,
(If great and small are like) appear the Beaux;
In boxes some with spruce pretension sit,
Some change from seat to seat within the pit,
Some roam the scenes, or turning cease to roam;
Preluding music fills the lofty dome.
When thus a fly (if what a fly can say
Deserves attention) raised the rural lay.
Where late Amintor made a nymph a bride,
Joyful I flew by young Favonia's side,
Who, mindless of the feasting, went to sip
The balmy pleasure of the shepherd's lip.
I saw the wanton, where I stooped to sup,
And half resolved to drown me in the cup;
'Till brushed by careless hands, she soared above:
Cease, beauty, cease to vex a tender love.
Thus ends the youth, the buzzing meadow rung,
And thus the rival of his music sung.
When suns by thousands shone in orbs of dew,
I wafted soft with Zephyretta flew;
Saw the clean pail, and sought the milky cheer,
While little Daphne seized my roving dear.
Wretch that I was! I might have warned the dame,
Yet sat indulging as the danger came,
But the kind huntress left her free to soar:
Ah! guard, ye Lovers, guard a mistress more.
Thus from the fern, whose high-projecting arms,
The sleeting nation bent with dusky swarms,
The Swains their love in easy music breathe,
When tongues and tumult stun the field beneath.
Black Ants in teams come darkning all the road,
Some call to march, and some to lift the load;
They strain, they labor with incessant pains,
Pressed by the cumbrous weight of single grains.
The Flies struck silent gaze with wonder down:
The busy Burghers reach their earthy town;
Where lay the burdens of a wint'ry store,
And thence unwearied part in search of more.
Yet one grave Sage a moment's space attends,
And the small city's loftiest point ascends,
Wipes the salt dew that trickles down his face,
And thus harangues them with the gravest grace.
Ye foolish Nurslings of the Summer air,
These gentle tunes and whining songs forbear;
Your trees and whispering breeze, your Grove and Love,
Your Cupid's quiver, and his mother's dove:
Let bards to business bend their vigorous wing,
And sing but seldom, if they love to sing:
Else, when the flourets of the season fail,
And thus your fenny shade forsakes the vale,
Though one would save ye, not one grain of wheat
Should pay such songsters idling at my gate.
He ceased: the Flies, incorrigibly vain,
Heard the May'r's Speech, and fell to sing again.
AN ELEGY, TO AN OLD BEAUTY.
IN vain, poor nymph, to please our youthful fight
You sleep in cream and frontlets all the night,
Your face with patches soil, with paint repair,
Dress with gay gowns, and shade with foreign hair.
If truth in spite of manners must be told,
Why really Fifty-five is something old.
Once you were young; or one, whose life's so long
She might have born my mother, tells me wrong.
And once (since Envy's dead before you dye,)
The women own, you played a sparkling eye,
Taught the light foot a modish little trip,
And pouted with the prettiest purple lip --
To some new charmer are the roses fled,
Which blew, to damask all thy cheek with red;
Youth calls the Graces there to fix their reign,
And Airs by thousands fill their easy train.
So parting Summer bids her flowery prime
Attend the sun to dress some foreign clime,
While withering seasons in succession, here,
Strip the gay gardens, and deform the year.
But thou (since Nature bids) the world resign,
It Is now thy daughter's daughter's time to shine.
With more address, (or such as pleases more)
She runs her female exercises over,
Unfurls or closes, raps or turns the fan,
And smiles, or blushes at the creature Man.
With quicker life, as gilded coaches pass,
In sideling courtesy the drops the glass.
With better strength, on visit-days, she bears
To mount her fifty flights of ample stairs.
Her mien, her shape, her temper, eyes and tongue
Are sure to conquer, -- for the rogue is young;
And all that is madly wild, or oddly gay,
We call it only pretty Fanny's way.
Let time, that makes you homely, make you sage;
The sphere of wisdom is the sphere of age.
It Is true, when beauty dawns with early fire,
And hears the flattering tongues of soft desire,
If not from virtue, from its gravest ways
The soul with pleasing avocation strays.
But beauty gone, it is easier to be wise;
As harpers better, by the loss of eyes.
Henceforth retire, reduce your roving airs,
Haunt less the plays, and more the public prayers,
Reject the Mechlin head, and gold brocade,
Go pray, in sober Norwich crape arrayed.
Thy pendent diamonds let thy Fanny take,
(Their trembling luster shows how much you shake;)
Or bid her wear thy necklace rowed with pearl,
You Will find your Fanny an obedient girl.
So for the rest, with less encumbrance hung,
You walk through life, unmingled with the young;
And view the shade and Substance as you pass
With joint endeavor trifling at the glass,
Or Folly dressed, and rambling all her days,
To meet her counterpart, and grow by praise:
Yet still sedate yourself, and gravely plain,
You neither fret, nor envy at the vain.
'Twas thus (if man with woman we compare)
The wise Athenian crossed a glittering fair,
Unmoved by tongues and sights, he walked the place,
Through tape, toys, tinsel, gimp, perfume, and lace;
Then bends from Mars's hill his awful eyes,
And What a world I never want? he cries;
But cries unheard: for Folly will be free.
So parts the buzzing gaudy crowd, and he:
As careless he for them, as they for him;
He wrapped in Wisdom, and they whirled by Whim.
THE BOOK-WORM.
COME hither, boy, we'll hunt today
The Book-Worm, ravening beast of prey,
Produced by parent Earth, at odds
(As fame reports it) with the Gods.
Him frantic hunger wildly drives
Against a thousand authors lives:
Through all the fields of wit he flies;
Dreadful his head with clust'ring eyes,
With horns without, and tusks within,
And scales to serve him for a skin.
Observe him nearly, lest he climb
To wound the bards of ancient time,
Or down the vale of fancy go
To tear some modern wretch below:
On every corner fix thine eye,
Or ten to one he slips thee by.
See where his teeth a passage eat:
We'll rouse him from the deep retreat.
But who the shelter's forced to give?
It Is sacred Virgil, as I live!
From leaf to leaf, from song to song,
He draws the tadpole form along,
He mounts the gilded edge before,
He Is up, he scuds the cover over,
He turns, he doubles, there he past,
And here we have him, caught at last.
Insatiate Brute, whose teeth abuse
The sweetest servants of the Muse.
(Nay never offer to deny,
I took thee in the fact to fly.)
His Roses nipt in every page,
My poor Anacreon mourns thy rage.
By thee my Ovid wounded lies;
By thee my Lesbia's Sparrow dies:
Thy rabid teeth have half destroyed
The work of love in Biddy Floyd,
They rent Belinda's locks away,
And spoiled the Blouzelind of Gay.
For all, for every single deed,
Relentless Justice bids thee bleed.
Then fall a Victim to the Nine,
Myself the Priest, my desk the Shrine.
Bring Homer, Virgil, Tasso near,
To pile a sacred altar here;
Hold, boy, thy band outrun thy wit,
You reached the plays that D -- s writ;
You reached me Ph -- s rustic strain;
Pray take your mortal bards again.
Come bind the victim, -- there he lies,
And here between his numerous eyes
This venerable dust I lay,
From Manuscripts just swept away.
The goblet in my hand I take,
(For the libation's yet to make)
A health to poets! all their days
May they have bread, as well as praise;
Sense may they seek, and less engage
In papers filled with party-rage.
But if their riches spoil their vein,
Ye Muses, make them poor again.
Now bring the weapon, yonder blade,
With which my tuneful pens are made.
I strike the scales that arm thee round,
And twice and thrice I print the wound;
The sacred altar floats with red,
And now he dies, and now he is dead.
How like the son of Jove I stand,
This Hydra stretched beneath my hand!
Lay bare the monster's entrails here,
To see what dangers threat the year:
Ye Gods! what sonnets on a wench?
What lean translations out of French?
It Is plain, this lobe is so unfound,
S -- prints, before the months go round.
But hold, before I close the scene,
The sacred altar should be clean.
Oh had I Sh -- ll's second bays,
Or T --! thy pert and humble lays!
(Ye pair, forgive me, when I vow
I never missed your works 'till now)
I Would tear the leaves to wipe the shrine,
(That only way you please the Nine)
But since I chance to want these two,
I Will make the songs of D -- y do.
Rent from the corpse, on yonder pin,
I hang the scales that braced it in;
I hang my studious morning gown,
And write my own Inscription down.
'This Trophy from the Python won,
'This Robe, in which the deed was done,
'These, Parnell, glorying in the feat,
'Hung on these shelves, the Muses seat.
'Here Ignorance and Hunger, found
'Large realms of wit to ravage round;
'Here Ignorance and Hunger fell;
'Two foes in one I sent to hell.
'Ye Poets, who my labors see,
'Come share the triumph all with me!
'Ye Critics! born to vex the Muse,
'Go mourn the grand Ally you lose.'
AN ALLEGORY ON MAN
A Thoughtful being, long and spare,
Our race of mortals call him Care:
(Were Homer living, well he knew
What name the Gods have called him too)
With fine mechanic genius wrought,
And loved to work, though no one bought.
This being, by a model bred,
In Jove's eternal sable head,
Contrived a shape empowered to breathe,
And be the Worldling here beneath.
The Man rose staring, like a stake;
Wondering to see himself awake!
Then looked so wise, before he knew
The business he was made to do;
That pleased to see with what a grace
He gravely showed his forward face,
Jove talked of breeding him on high,
An Under-something of the sky.
But ere he gave the mighty Nod,
Which ever binds a Poet's God:
(For which his curls ambrosial shake,
And mother Earth's obliged to quake:)
He saw old mother Earth arise,
She stood confessed before his eyes;
But not with what we read she wore,
A castle for a crown before,
Nor with long streets and longer roads
Dangling behind her, like commodes:
As yet with wreaths alone she dressed,
And trail'd a landskip-painted vest.
Then thrice she raised (as Ovid said)
And thrice she bowed her weighty head.
Her honors made, great Jove; she cried,
This Thing was fashioned from my side;
His hands, his heart, his head are mine;
Then what have thou to call him thine?
Nay rather ask, the monarch said,
What boots his hand, his heart, his head,
Were what I gave removed away?
Thy part's an idle shape of clay.
Halves, more than halves! cried honest Care,
Your pleas would make your titles fair,
You claim the body, you the foul,
But I who joined them, claim the whole.
Thus with the Gods debate began,
On such a trivial cause, as Man.
And can celestial tempers rage?
(Quoth Virgil in a later age.)
As thus they wrangled, Time came by;
(There Is none that paint him such as I,
For what the fabling Ancients sung
Makes Saturn old, when Time was young.)
As yet his Winters had not shed
Their silver honors on his head;
He just had got his pinions free
From his old sire Eternity.
A Serpent girdled round he wore,
The tail within the mouth before;
By which our Almanacks are clear
That learned Egypt meant the year.
A staff he carried, where on high
A glass was fixed to measure by,
As amber boxes made a show
For heads of canes an age ago.
His vest, for day, and night, was py'd;
A bending sickle armed his side;
And Spring's new months his train adorn;
The other seasons were unborn.
Known by the Gods, as near he draws,
They make him Umpire of the cause.
Over a low trunk his arm he laid,
(Where since his Hours a Dial made;)
Then leaning heard the nice debate,
And thus pronounced the words of Fate.
Since Body from the parent Earth,
And Soul from Jove received a birth,
Return they where they first began;
But since their Union makes the Man,
'Till Jove and Earth shall part these two,
To Care, who joined them, Man is due.
He said, and sprung with swift career
To trace a circle for the year;
Where ever since the Seasons wheel,
And tread on one another's heel.
It Is well, said Jove; and for consent
Thundering he shook the firmament.
Our umpire Time shall have his way,
With Care I let the creature stay:
Let Business vex him, Avarice blind,
Let Doubt and Knowledge rack his mind,
Let Error act, Opinion speak,
And Want afflict, and Sickness break,
And Anger burn, Dejection chill,
And Joy distract, and Sorrow kill.
'Till armed by Care, and taught to mow,
Time draws the long destructive blow;
And wasted Man, whose quick decay
Comes hurrying on before his day,
Shall only find, by this decree,
The Soul flies sooner back to me.
AN IMITATION OF SOME FRENCH VERSES.
RELENTLESS Time! destroying power
Whom stone and brass obey,
Who giv'st to every flying hour
To work some new decay;
Unheard, unheeded, and unseen,
Thy secret saps prevail,
And ruin Man, a nice machine
By Nature formed to fail.
My change arrives; the change I meet,
Before I thought it nigh.
My Spring, my years of pleasure fleet,
And all their beauties dye.
In Age I search, and only find
A poor unfruitful gain,
Grave Wisdom stalking slow behind,
Oppressed with loads of pain.
My ignorance could once beguile,
And fancied joys inspire;
My errors cherished Hope to smile
On newly-born Desire.
But now experience shows, the bliss
For which I fondly fought,
Not worth the long impatient wish,
And ardour of the thought.
My youth met Fortune fair arrayed,
(In all her pomp she shone)
And might, perhaps, have well essayed
To make her gifts my own:
But when I saw the blessings shower
On some unworthy mind,
I left the chase, and owned the Power
Was justly painted blind.
I passed the glories which adorn
The splendid courts of kings,
And while the persons moved my scorn,
I rose to scorn the things.
My manhood felt a vigorous fire,
By love increased the more;
But years with coming years conspire
To break the chains I wore.
In weakness safe, the Sex I see
With idle luster shine;
For what are all their joys to me,
Which cannot now be mine?
But hold -- I feel my Gout decrease,
My troubles laid to rest;
And truths, which would disturb my peace,
Are painful truths at best.
Vainly the time I have to roll
In sad reflection flies;
Ye fondling passions of my soul!
Ye sweet deceits! arise.
I wisely change the scene within,
To things that used to please;
In Pain, Philosophy is Spleen,
In Health, it is only Ease.
A NIGHT-PIECE ON DEATH.
BY the blue taper's trembling light,
No more I waste the wakeful night,
Intent with endless view to pore
The schoolmen and the sages over:
Their books from Wisdom widely stray,
Or point at best the longest way.
I Will seek a readier path, and go
Where Wisdom's surely taught below.
How deep yon azure dies the sky!
Where orbs of gold unnumber'd lie,
While through their ranks in silver pride
The nether crescent seems to glide.
The slumbering breeze forgets to breathe,
The lake is smooth and clear beneath,
Where once again the spangled show
Descends to meet our eyes below.
The grounds which on the right aspire,
In dimness from the view retire:
The left presents a place of graves,
Whose wall the silent water laves.
That steeple guides thy doubtful sight
Among the livid gleams of night.
There pass with melancholy state,
By all the solemn heaps of fate,
And think, as softly-sad you tread
Above the venerable dead,
"Time was, like thee they life possessed,
"And time shall be, that thou shall rest.
Those graves with bending osier bound,
That nameless heave the crumbled ground,
Quick to the glancing thought disclose
Where Toil and Poverty repose.
The flat smooth stones that bear a name,
The chissel's slender help to fame,
(Which ere our set of friends decay
Their frequent steps may wear away;)
A Middle Race of Mortals own,
Men, half ambitious, all unknown.
The marble tombs that rise on high,
Whose dead in vaulted arches lie,
Whose pillars swell with sculptured stones,
Arms, angels, epitaphs and bones,
These (all the poor remains of state)
Adorn the Rich, or praise the Great;
Who while on earth in fame they live,
Are senseless of the fame they give.
Ha! while I gaze, pale Cynthia fades,
The bursting earth unveils the shades!
All slow, and wan, and wrapped with shrouds,
They rise in visionary crowds,
And all with sober accent cry,
"Think, Mortal, what it is to die."
Now from yon black and funeral yew,
That bathes the charnel-house with dew,
Methinks I hear a Voice begin;
(Ye Ravens, cease your croaking din,
Ye tolling clocks, no time resound
Over the long lake and midnight ground)
It sends a peal of hollow groans,
Thus speaking from among the bones.
When men my scythe and darts supply,
How great a King of Fears am I!
They view me like the last of things:
They make, and then they dread, my stings,
Fools! if you less provoked your fears,
No more my spectre-form appears.
Death's but a path that must be trod,
If Man would ever pass to God:
A port of calms, a state of ease
From the rough rage of swelling seas.
Why then thy flowing sable stoles,
Deep pendent cypress, mourning poles,
Loose scarfs to fall athwart thy weeds,
Long palls, drawn herses, covered steeds,
And plumes of black, that as they tread,
Nod over the 'scutcheons of the dead?
Nor can the parted body know,
Nor wants the soul, these forms of woe:
As men who long in prison dwell,
With lamps that glimmer round the cell,
When-e'er their suffering years are run,
Spring forth to greet the glittering sun:
Such joy, though far transcending sense,
Have pious souls at parting hence.
On earth, and in the body placed,
A few, and evil years they waste:
But when their chains are cast aside,
See the glad scene unfolding wide,
Clap the glad wing, and tower away,
And mingle with the blaze of day,
A HYMN TO CONTENTMENT.
LOVELY, lasting peace of mind!
Sweet delight of human-kind!
Heavenly born, and bred on high,
To crown the favorites of the sky
With more of happiness below,
Than victors in a triumph know!
Whither, O whither art thou fled,
To lay thy meek, contented head!
What happy region do thou please
To make the seat of calms and ease?
Ambition searches all its sphere
Of pomp and state, to meet thee there.
Increasing Avarice would find
Thy presence in its gold enshrined.
The bold advent'rer ploughs his way,
Through rocks amidst the foaming sea,
To gain thy love; and then perceives
Thou were not in the rocks and waves.
The silent heart which grief assails,
Treads soft and lonesome over the vales,
Sees daisies open, rivers run,
And seeks (as I have vainly done)
Amusing thought; but learns to know
That solitude's the nurse of woe.
No real happiness is found
In trailing purple over the ground:
Or in a soul exalted high,
To range the circuit of the sky,
Converse with stars above, and know
All nature in its forms below;
The rest it seeks, in seeking dies,
And doubts at last for knowledge rise.
Lovely, lasting peace, appear!
This world itself, if thou art here,
Is once again with Eden blessed,
And man contains it in his breast.
'Twas thus, as under shade I stood,
I sung my wishes to the wood,
And lost in thought, no more perceived
The branches whisper as they waved:
It seemed, as all the quiet place
Confessed the presence of the grace,
When thus she spoke -- go rule thy will,
Bid thy wild passions all be still,
Know God -- and bring thy heart to know,
The joys which from religion flow:
Then every grace shall prove its guest,
And I Will be there to crown the rest.
Oh! by yonder mossy seat,
In my hours of sweet retreat;
Might I thus my soul employ,
With sense of gratitude and joy:
Raised as ancient prophets were,
In heavenly vision, praise, and prayer;
Pleasing all men, hurting none,
Pleased and blessed with God alone:
Then while the gardens take my sight,
With all the colors of delight;
While silver waters glide along,
To please my ear, and court my song:
I Will lift my voice, and tune my string,
And Thee, great source of Nature, sing.
The fun that walks his airy way,
To light the world, and give the day;
The moon that shines with borrowed light;
The stars that gild the gloomy night;
The seas that roll unnumber'd waves;
The wood that spreads its shady leaves;
The field whose ears conceal the grain,
The yellow treasure of the plain;
All of these, and all I see,
Should be sung, and sung by me:
They speak their Maker as they can,
But want and ask the tongue of man.
Go search among your idle dreams,
Your busy or your vain extremes;
And find a life of equal bliss,
Or own the next begun in this.
THE HERMIT.
FAR in a wild, unknown to public view,
From youth to age a reverend Hermit grew;
The moss his bed, the cave his humble cell,
His food the fruits, his drink the crystal well:
Remote from man, with God he passed the days,
Prayer all his business, all his pleasure praise.
A life so sacred, such serene repose,
Seemed heaven itself, 'till one suggestion rose;
That Vice should triumph, Virtue Vice obey,
This sprung some doubt of Providence's sway:
His hopes no more a certain prospect boast,
And all the tenor of his soul is lost:
So when a smooth expanse receives impressed
Calm Nature's image on its watery breast,
Down bend the banks, the trees depending grow,
And skies beneath with answ'ring colors glow:
But if a stone the gentle sea divide,
Swift ruffling circles curl on every side,
And glimmering fragments of a broken sun,
Banks, trees, and skies, in thick disorder run.
To clear this doubt, to know the world by sight,
To find if books, or swains, report it right;
(For yet by swains alone the world he knew,
Whose feet came wandering over the nightly dew)
He quits his cell; the pilgrim-staff he bore,
And fixed the scallop in his hat before;
Then with the sun a rising journey went,
Sedate to think, and watching each event.
The morn was wasted in the pathless grass,
And long and lonesome was the wild to pass;
But when the Southern sun had warmed the day,
A youth came posting over a crossing way;
His raiment decent, his complexion fair,
And soft in graceful ringlets waved his hair.
Then near approaching, Father, Hail! he cried;
And Hail, my Son, the reverend Sire replied;
Words followed words, from question answer flowed,
And talk of various kind deceived the road;
'Till each with other pleased, and loath to part,
While in their age they differ, join in heart:
Thus stands an aged elm in ivy bound,
Thus youthful ivy clasps an elm around.
Now sunk the sun; the closing hour of day
Came onward, mantled over with sober gray;
Nature in silence bid the world repose:
When near the road a stately palace rose:
There by the moon through ranks of trees they pass,
Whose verdure crowned their sloping sides of grass.
It chanced the noble master of the dome
Still made his house the wandering stranger's home:
Yet still the kindness, from a thirst of praise,
Proved the vain flourish of expensive ease.
The pair arrive: the liv'ry'd servants wait;
Their lord receives them at the pompous gate.
The table groans with costly piles of food,
And all is more than hospitably good.
Then led to ress, the day's long toil they drown,
Deep sunk in sleep, and silk, and heaps of down.
At length it is morn, and at the dawn of day
Along the wide canals the Zephyrs play;
Fresh over the gay parterres the breezes creep,
And shake the neighboring wood to banish sleep.
Up rise the guests, obedient to the call:
An early banquet decked the splendid hall;
Rich luscious wine a golden goblet graced,
Which the kind master forced the guests to taste.
Then pleased and thankful, from the porch they go;
And, but the landlord, none had cause of woe;
His cup was vanished; for in secret guise
The younger guest purloin'd the glittering prize.
As one who spies a serpent in his way,
Glistning and basking in the Summer ray,
Disordered stops to shun the danger near,
Then walks with faintness on, and looks with fear:
So seemed the fire; when far upon the road,
The shining spoil his wiley partner showed.
He stopped with silence, walked with trembling heart,
And much he wished, but durst not ask to part:
Murmuring he lifts his eyes, and thinks it hard,
That generous actions meet a base reward.
While thus they pass, the sun his glory shrouds,
The changing skies hang out their sable clouds;
A sound in air presaged approaching rain,
And beasts to covert scud across the plain.
Warned by the signs, the wandering pair retreat,
To seek for shelter at a neighboring seat.
'Twas built with turrets, on a rising ground,
And strong, and large, and unimprov'd around;
Its owner's temper, timorous and severe,
Unkind and griping, caused a desert there.
As near the Miser's heavy doors they drew,
Fierce rising gusts with sudden fury blew;
The nimble lightning mixed with showers began,
And over their heads loud-rolling thunder ran.
Here long they knock, but knock or call in vain,
Driven by the wind, and battered by the rain.
At length some pity warmed the master's breast,
('It Was then, his threshold first received a guest)
Slow creaking turns the door with jealous care,
And half he welcomes in the shivering pair;
One frugal faggot lights the naked walls,
And Nature's fervor through their limbs recals:
Bread of the coarsest sort, with eager wine,
(Each hardly granted) served them both to dine;
And when the tempest first appeared to cease,
A ready warning bid them part in peace.
With still remark the pond'ring Hermit viewed
In one so rich, a life so poor and rude;
And why should such, (within himself he cried)
Lock the lost wealth a thousand want beside?
But what new marks of wonder soon took place,
In every settling feature of his face!
When from his vest the young companion bore
That Cup, the generous landlord owned before,
And paid profusely with the precious bowl
The stinted kindness of this churlish soul.
But now the clouds in airy tumult fly,
The sun emerging opes an azure sky;
A fresher green the smelling leaves display,
And glittering as they tremble, cheer the day:
The weather courts them from the poor retreat,
And the glad master bolts the wary gate.
While hence they walk, the Pilgrim's bosom wrought
With all the travel of uncertain thought;
His partner's acts without their cause appear,
'Twas there a vice, and seemed a madness here:
Detesting that, and pitying this he goes,
Lost and confounded with the various shows.
Now night's dim shades again involve the sky;
Again the wand'rers want a place to lie,
Again they search, and find a lodging nigh.
The soil improved around, the mansion neat,
And neither poorly low, nor idly great:
It seemed to speak its master's turn of mind,
Content, and not for praise, but virtue kind.
Hither the walkers turn with weary feet,
Then bless the mansion, and the master greet:
Their greeting fair, bestowed with modest guise,
The courteous master hears, and thus replies:
Without a vain, without a grudging heart,
To him who gives us all, I yield a part;
From him you come, for him accept it here,
A frank and sober, more than costly cheer.
He spoke, and bid the welcome table spread,
Then talked of virtue till the time of bed,
When the grave household round his hall repair,
Warned by a bell, and close the hours with prayer.
At length the world renewed by calm repose
Was strong for toil, the dappled morn arose;
Before the pilgrims part, the younger crept,
Near the closed cradle where an infant slept,
And writhed his neck: the landlord's little pride,
O strange return! grew black, and gasp'd, and died.
Horror of horrors! what I his only son!
How looked our Hermit when the fact was done?
Not hell, though hell's black jaws in sunder part,
And breathe blue fire, could more assault his heart.
Confused, and struck with silence at the deed,
He flies, but trembling fails to fly with speed.
His steps the youth pursues; the country lay
Perplexed with roads, a servant showed the way:
A river crossed the path; the passage over
Was nice to find; the servant trod before;
Long arms of oaks an open bridge supplied,
And deep the waves beneath the bending glide.
The youth, who seemed to watch a time to sin,
Approached the careless guide, and thrust him in;
Plunging he falls, and rising lifts his head,
Then flashing turns, and sinks among the dead.
Wild, sparkling rage inflames the father's eyes,
He bursts the bands of fear, and madly cries,
Detested wretch -- but scarce his speech began,
When the strange partner seemed no longer man:
His youthful face grew more serenely sweet;
His robe turned white, and flowed upon his feet;
Fair rounds of radiant points invest his hair;
Celestial odours breathe through purpled air;
And wings, whose colors glittered on the day,
Wide at his back their gradual plumes display.
The form etherial bursts upon his sight,
And moves in all the majesty of light.
Though loud at first the pilgrim's passion grew,
Sudden he gazed, and wist not what to do;
Surprise in secret chains his word suspends,
And in a calm his settling temper ends.
But silence here the beauteous angel broke,
(The voice of music ravished as he spoke.)
Thy prayer, thy praise, thy life to vice unknown,
In sweet memorial rise before the throne:
These charms, success in our bright region find,
And force an angel down, to calm thy mind;
For this commissioned, I forsook the sky:
Nay, cease to kneel -- thy fellow servants I.
Then know the truth of government divine,
And let these scruples be no longer thine.
The Maker justly claims that world he made,
In this the right of providence is laid;
Its sacred majesty through all depends
On using second means to work his ends:
It Is thus, withdrawn in state from human eye;
The Power exerts his attributes on high,
Your actions uses, nor controuls your will,
And bids the doubting sons of men be still.
What strange events can strike with more surprise,
Than those which lately struck thy wondering eyes?
Yet taught by these, confess The Almighty just,
And where you cannot unriddle, learn to trust!
The Great, Vain Man, who fared on costly food,
Whose life was too luxurious to be good;
Who made his ivory stands with goblets shine,
And forced his guests to morning draughts of Wine,
Has, with the Cup, the graceless custom lost,
And still he welcomes, but with less of cost.
The mean, suspicious Wretch, whose bolted door,
Never moved in duty to the wandering poor;
With him I left the cup, to teach his mind
That Heaven can bless, if mortals will be kind.
Conscious of wanting worth, he views the bowl,
And feels compassion touch his grateful soul.
Thus artists melt the sullen oar of lead,
With heaping coals of fire upon its head;
In the kind warmth the metal learns to glow,
And loose from dross, the silver runs below.
Long had our pious Friend in virtue trod,
But now the child half-wean'd his heart from God;
(Child of his age) for him he lived in pain,
And measured back his steps to earth again.
To what excesses had his dotage run?
But God, to save the father, took the son.
To all but thee, in fits he seemed to go,
(And 'twas my ministry to deal the blow.)
The poor fond parent humbled in the dust,
Now owns in tears the punishment was just.
But how had all his fortune felt a wrack,
Had that false servant sped in safety back?
This night his treasured heaps he meant to steal,
And what a fund of charity would fail!
Thus Heaven instructs thy mind: this trial over,
Depart in peace, resign, and sin no more.
On sounding pinions here the youth withdrew,
The sage stood wondering as the Seraph flew.
Thus looked Elisha, when to mount on high
His master took the chariot of the sky;
The fiery pomp ascending left the view;
The prophet gazed, and wished to follow too.
The bending Hermit here a prayer begun,
"Lord! as in heaven, on earth thy will be done."
Then gladly turning, sought his ancient place,
And passed a life of piety and peace.
VISIONS, PUBLISHED IN THE SPECTATORS, etc. BY THE SAME HAND.
VISION I. SPECTATOR. No 460.
Decipimur Specie Recti -- HOR.
OUR defects and follies are too often unknown to us; nay, they are so far from
being known to us, that they pass for demonstrations of our worth. This makes
us easy in the midst of them, fond to show them, fond to improve in them, and
to be esteemed for them. Then it is that a thousand unaccountable conceits, gay
inventions, and extravagant actions must afford us pleasures, and display as to
others in the colors which we ourselves take a fancy to glory in: and indeed
there is something so amusing for the time in this state of vanity and
ill-grounded satisfaction, that even the wiser world has chosen an exalted word
to describe its enchantments, and called it THE PARADISE OF FOOLS. Perhaps the
latter part of this reflection may seem a false thought to some, and bear
another turn than what I have given; but it is at present none of my business
to look after it, who am going to confess that I have been lately amongst them
in a vision.

Methought I was transported to a hill, green, flowery, and of an easy ascent.
Upon the broad top of it resided squint-eyed ERROR, and popular OPINION with
many heads; two that dealt in sorcery, and were famous for bewitching people
with the love of themselves. To these repaired a multitude from every side, by
two different paths which lead toward each of them. Some who had the most
assuming air went directly of themselves to ERROR, without expecting a
conductor; others of a softer nature went first to popular OPINION, from whence
as she influenced and engaged them with their own praises, she delivered them
over to his government.

When we had ascended to an open part of the summit where OPINION abode, we
found her entertaining several who had arrived before us. Her voice was
pleasing; she breathed odours as she spoke: she seemed to have a tongue for
every one; every one thought he heard of something that was valuable in
himself, and expected a paradise which she promised as the reward of his merit.
Thus we were drawn to follow her, 'till she should bring us where it was to be
bestowed: and it was observable, that all the way we went, the company was
either praising themselves in their qualifications, or one another for those
qualifications which they took to be conspicuous in their own characters, or
dispraising others for wanting theirs, or vying in the degrees of them.

At last we approached a bower, at the entrance of which ERROR was seated. The
trees were thick woven, and the place where he sat artfully contrived to darken
him a little. He was disguised in a whitish robe, which he had put on, that he
might appear to us with a nearer resemblance to TRUTH: and as she has a light
whereby she manifests the beauties of nature to the eyes of her adorers, so he
had provided himself with a magical wand, that he might do something in
imitation of it, and please with delusions. This he listed solemnly, and
muttering to himself, bid the glories which he kept under enchantment to appear
before us. Immediately we cast our eyes on that part of the sky to which he
pointed, and observed a thin blue prospect, which cleared as mountains in a
Summer morning when the mists go off, and the palace of VANITY appeared to
sight.

The foundation hardly seemed a foundation, but a set of curling clouds, which
it stood upon by magical contrivance. The way by which we ascended was painted
like a rainbow; and as we went the breeze that played about us bewitched the
senses. The walls were gilded all for show; the lowest set of pillars were of
the slight fine Corinthian order, and the top of the building being rounded,
bore so far the resemblance of a bubble.

At the gate the travelers neither met with a porter, nor waited 'till one
should appear; every one thought his merits a sufficient passport, and pressed
forward. In the hall we met with several phantoms, that roved amongst us, and
ranged the company according to their sentiments. There was decreasing HONOR,
that had nothing to show in but an old coat of his ancestor's achievements:
there was OSTENTATION, that made himself his own constant subject, and
GALLANTRY strutting upon his tip-toes. At the upper end of the hall stood a
throne, whose canopy glittered with all the riches that gayety could contrive
to lavish on it; and between the gilded arms sat VANITY decked in the Peacock's
feathers, and acknowledged for another Venus by her votaries. The boy who stood
beside her for a Cupid, and who made the world to bow before her, was called
SELF-CONCEIT. His eyes had every now and then a cast inwards, to the neglect of
all objects about him; and the arms which he made use of for conquest, were
borrowed from those against whom he had a design. The arrow which he shot at
the soldier, was fledged from his own plume of feathers; the dart he directed
against the man of wit, was winged from the quills he writ with; and that which
he sent against those who presumed upon their riches, was headed with gold out
of their treasuries: he made nets for statesmen from their own contrivances; he
took fire from the eyes of ladies, with which he melted their hearts; and
lightning from the tongues of the eloquent, to inflame them with their own
glories. At the foot of the throne sat three false Graces. FLATTERY with a
shell of paint, AFFECTATION with a mirror to practice at, and FASHION ever
changing the posture of her clothes. These applied themselves to secure the
conquests which SELF-CONCEIT had gotten, and had each of them their particular
polities. FLATTERY gave new colors and complexions to all things; AFFECTATION
new airs and appearances, which, as she said, were not vulgar; and FASHION both
concealed some home defects, and added some foreign external beauties.

As I was reflecting upon what I saw, I heard a voice in the crowd, bemoaning
the condition of mankind, which is thus managed by the breath of OPINION,
deluded by ERROR, ^ir'd by SELF-CONCEIT, and given up to be trained in all the
courses of VANITY, 'till SCORN or POVERTY come upon us. These expressions were
no sooner handed about, but I immediately saw a general disorder, till at last
there was a parting in one place, and a grave old man, decent and resolute, was
led forward to be punished for the words he had uttered. He appeared inclined
to have spoken in his own defense, but I could not observe that any one was
willing to hear him. VANITY cast a scornful smile athim; SELF-CONCEIT was
angry; FLATTERY, who knew him for PLAIN-DEALING, put on a vizard, and turned
away; AFFECTATION tossed her fan, made mouths, and called him ENVY or SLANDER;
and FASHION would have it, that at least he must be ILL-MANNERS. Thus slighted
and despised by all, he was driven out for abusing people of merit and figure;
and I heard it firmly resolved, that he should be used no better wherever
they met with him hereafter.

I had already seen the meaning of most part of that warning which he had
given, and was considering how the latter words should be fulfilled, when a
mighty noise was heard without, and the door was blackned by a numerous train
of harpies crowding in upon us. FOLLY and BROKEN CREDIT were seen in the house
before they entered. TROUBLE, SHAME, INFAMY, SCORN and POVERTY brought up the
rear. VANITY, with her Cupid and Graces, disappeared; her subjects ran into
holes and corners; but many of them were found and carried off (as I was told
by one who stood near me) either to prisons or cellars, solitude, or little
company, the mean arts or the viler crafts of life. But these, added he with a
disdainful air, are such who would fondly live here, when their merits neither
matched the luster of the place, nor their riches its expenses. We have seen
such scenes as these before now; the glory you saw will all return when the
hurry is over. I thanked him for his information, and believing him so
incorrigible as that he would stay till it was his turn to be taken, I made off
to the door, and overtook some few, who, though they would not hearken to
PLAIN-DEALING, were now terrified to good purpose by the example of others: but
when they had touched the threshold, it was a strange shock to them to find
that the delusion of ERROR was gone, and they plainly discerned the building to
hang a little up in the air without any real foundation. At first we saw
nothing but a desperate leap remained for us, and I a thousand times blamed my
unmeaning curiosity that had brought me into so much danger. But as they began
to sink lower in their own minds, methought the palace sunk along with us; till
they were arrived at the due point of ESTEEM which they ought to have for
themselves; then the part of the building in which they stood touched the
earth, and we departing out, it retired from our eyes. Now, whether they who
stayed in the palace were sensible of this descent, I cannot tell; it was then
my opinion that they were not. However it be, my dream broke up at it, and has
given me occasion all my life to reflect upon the fatal consequences of
following the suggestions of VANITY.

VISION II. SPECTATOR. No 501.
HOW are we tortured with the absence of what we covet to possess, when it
appears to be lost to us! what excursions does the soul make in imagination
after it! and how does it turn into itself again, more foolishly fond and
dejected, at the disappointment! our grief, instead of having recourse to
reason, which might restrain it, searches to find a further nourishment. It
calls upon memory to relate the several passages and circumstances of
satisfactions which we formerly enjoyed; the pleasures we purchased by those
riches that are taken from us; or the power and splendor of our departed
honors; or the voice, the words, the looks, the temper, and affections of our
friends that are deceased. It needs must happen from hence, that the passion
should often swell to such a size as to burst the heart which contains it, if
time did not make these circumstances less strong and lively, so that reason
should become a more equal match for the passion, or if another desire which
becomes more present did not overpower them with a livelier representation.
These are thoughts which I had, when I fell into a kind of vision upon this
subject, and may therefore stand for a proper introduction to a relation of it.

I found myself upon a naked shore, with company whose afflicted countenances
witnessed their conditions. Before us flowed a water deep, silent, and called
the river of TEARS, which issuing from two fountains on an upper ground,
encompassed an island that lay before us. The boat which plied in it was old
and shattered, having been sometimes overset by the impatience and haste of
single passengers to arrive at the other side. This immediately was brought to
us by MISFORTUNE who steers it, and we were all preparing to take our places,
when there appeared a woman of a mild and composed behavior, who began to
deter us from it, by representing the dangers which would attend our voyage.
Hereupon some who knew her for PATIENCE, and some of those too who 'till then
cried the loudest, were persuaded by her, and returned back. The rest of us
went in, and she (whose goodnature would not suffer her to forsake persons in
trouble) desired leave to accompany us, that she might at least administer some
small comfort or advice while we sailed. We were no sooner embarked but the
boat was pushed off, the sheet was spread; and being filled with sighs, which
are the winds of that country, we made a passage to the farther bank through
several difficulties of which t of us seemed utterly regardless.

When we landed, we perceived the island to be strangely over-cast with fogs,
which no brightness could pierce, so that a kind of gloomy horror sat always
brooding over it. This had something in it very shocking to easy tempers,
insomuch that some others, whom PATIENCE had by this time gained over, left us
here, and privily conveyed themselves round the verge of the island to find a
ford by which she told them they might escape.

For my part, I still went along with those who were for piercing into the
center of the place; and joining ourselves to others whom we found upon the
same journey, we marched solemnly as at a funeral, through bordering hedges of
rosemary, and through a grove of yew-trees, which love to over-shadow tombs and
flourish in churchyards. Here we heard on every side the wailings and
complaints of several of the inhabitants, who had cast themselves
disconsolately at the feet of trees; and as we chanced to approach any of
these, we might perceive them wringing their hands, beating their breasts,
tearing their hair, or after some other manner visibly agitated with vexation.
Our sorrows were heightened by the influence of what we heard and saw, and one
of our number was wrought up to such a pitch of wildness, as to talk of hanging
himself upon a bough which shot temptingly across the path we traveled in;
but he was restrained from it by the kind endeavors of our abovementioned
companion.

We had now gotten into the most dusky silent part of the island, and by the
redoubled sounds of sighs, which made a doleful whistling in the branches, the
thickness of air which occasioned faintish respiration, and the violent
throbbings of heart which more and more affected us, we found that we
approached the GROTTO OF GRIEF. It was a wide, hollow, and melancholy cave,
sunk deep in a dale, and watered by rivulets that had a color between red and
black. These crept slow, and half congealed amongst its windings, and mixed
their heavy murmur with the echo of groans that rolled through all the passages.
In the most retired part of it sat the DOLEFUL BEING herself; the path to her
was strewed with goads, stings, and thorns; and the throne on which she sat was
broken into a rock with ragged pieces pointing upwards for her to lean upon. A
heavy mist hung above her, her head oppressed with it reclined upon her arm:
thus did she reign over her disconsolate subjects, full of herself to
stupidity, in eternal pensiveness, and the profoundest silence. On one side of
her stood DEJECTION just dropping into a swoon, and PALENESS wasting to a
skeleton; on the other side were CARE inwardly tormented with imaginations, and
ANGUISH suffering outward TROUBLES to suck the blood from her heart in the
shape of VULTURES. The whole vault had a genuine dismalness in it, which a few
scattered lamps, whose blueish flames arose and sunk in their urns, discovered
to our eyes with increase. Some of us fell down, overcome and spent with what
they suffered in the way, and were given over to those tormenters that stood on
either hand of the presence; others, galled and mortified with pain, recovered
the entrance, where PATIENCE, whom we had left behind, was still waiting to
receive us.

With her (whose company was now become more grateful to us by the want we had
found of her) we winded round the grotto, and ascended at the back of it, out
of the mournful dale in whose bottom it lay. On this eminence we halted, by her
advice, to pant for breath; and listing our eyes, which till then were fixed
downwards, felt a sullen sort of satisfaction, in observing through the shades
what numbers had entered the island. This satisfaction, which appears to have
ill nature in it, was excusable, because it happened at a time when we were too
much taken up with our own concern, to have respect to that of others; and
therefore we did not consider them as suffering, but ourselves as not suffering
in the most forlorn estate. It had also the groundwork of humanity and
compassion in it, though the mind was then too deeply engaged to perceive it;
but as we proceeded onwards it began to discover itself, and from observing
that others were unhappy, we came to question one another, when it was that we
met, and what were the sad occasions that brought us together. Then we heard
our stories, we compared them, we mutually gave and received pity, and so by
degrees became tolerable company.

A considerable part of the troublesome road was thus deceived; at length the
openings among the trees grew larger, the air seemed thinner, it lay with less
oppression upon us, and we could now and then discern tracts in it of a lighter
greyness, like the breakings of day, short in duration, much enlivening, and
called in that country GLEAMS OF AMUSEMENT. Within a short while these gleams
began to appear more frequent, and then brighter and of a longer continuance;
the SIGHS that hitherto filled the air with so much dolefulness, altered to the
sound of common breezes, and in general the horrors of the island were abated.

When we had arrived at last at the ford by which we were to pass out, we met
with those fashionable mourners who had been ferried over along with us, and
who being unwilling to go as far as we, had coasted by the shore, to find the
place, where they waited our coming; that by showing themselves to the world
only at that time when we did, they might seem also to have been among the
troubles of the grotto. Here the waters, that rolled on the other side so deep
and silent, were much dried up, and it was an easter matter for us to wade over.

The river being crossed, we were received upon the further bank by our friends
and acquaintance, whom COMFORT had brought out to congratulate our appearance
in the world again. Some of these blamed us for staying so long away from them,
others advised us against all temptations of going back again; every one was
cautious not to renew our trouble, by asking any particulars of the journey;
and all concluded, that in a case of so much affliction, we could not have made
choice of a fitter companion than PATIENCE. Here PATIENCE, appearing serene at
her praises, delivered us over to COMFORT. COMFORT smiled at his receiving the
charge; immediately the sky purpledon that side to which he turned, and double
day at once broke in upon me.

VISION III. GUARDIAN. No 56.
Quid mentem traxisse polo, quid profuit altum
Erexisse caput? pecudum si more pererrant.
CLAUD.
I Was considering last night, when I could not sleep, how noble a part of the
creation Man was designed to be, and how distinguished in all his actions above
other earthly creatures. From whence I fell to take a view of the change and
corruption which he has introduced into his own condition, the grovelling
appetites, the mean characters of sense, and wild courses of passions, that
cast him from the degree in which Providence had placed him, the debasing
himself with qualifications not his own, and his degenerating into a lower
sphere of action. This inspired me with a mixture of contempt and anger; which,
however, was not so violent as to hinder the return of sleep, but grew confused
as that came upon me, and made me end my reflections with giving mankind the
opprobrious names of inconsiderate, mad and foolish.

Here methought, where my waking reason left the subject, my fancy pursued it
in a dream; and I imagined myself in a loud soliloquy of passion, railing at my
species, and walking hard to get rid of the company I despised; when two men
who had overheard me made up on either hand. These I observed had many
features in common, which might occasion the mistake of the one for the other
in those to whom they appear single, but I, who saw them together, could easily
perceive, that though there was an air of severity in each, it was tempered with
a natural sweetness in the one, and by turns constrained or tussled by the
designs of malice in the other.

I was at a loss to know the reason of their joining me so briskly, when he
whose appearance displeased me most, thus addressed his companion. Pray,
brother, let him alone, and we shall immediately see him transformed into a
Tiger. This struck me with horror, which the other perceived, and pitying my
disorder, bid me be of good courage, for though I had been savage in my treatment
of mankind, (whom I should rather reform than rail against) he would, however,
endeavor to rescue me from my danger. At this I looked a little more cheerful,
and while I testified my resignation to him, ve saw the angry brother sling
away from us in a passion for his disappointment. Being now left to my friend,
I went back with him at his desire, that might know the meaning of those words
which so affrightted me.

As we went along, to inform you, says he, with whom you have this adventure,
my name is REPROOF and his REPROACH, both born of the same mother, but of
different fathers. TRUTH is our common parent. FRIENDSHIP. who saw her, fell in
love with her, and she being pleased with him, he begat me upon her; but a
while after ENMITY lying in ambush for her, became the father of him whom you
saw along with me. The temper of our mother enclines us to the fame sort of
business, the informing mankind of their faults; but the differing complexions
of our fathers make us differ in our designs and company. I have a natural
benevolence in my mind which engages me with friends, and he a natural
impetuosity in his, which casts him among enemies.

As he thus discoursed he came to a place where there were three entrances into
as many several walks, which lay beside one another. We passed into the
middlemost, a plain, strait, regular walk, set with trees, which added to the
beauty of the place, but did not so close their boughs over head as to exclude
the light from it. Here as we walked I was made to observe, how the road on one
hand was full of rocks and precipices, over which REPROACH (who had already
gotten thither) was furiously driving unhappy wretches; the other side was all
laid out in gardens of gaudy tulips, amongst whose leaves the serpents
wreathed, and at the end of every grassy walk the enchantress FLATTERY was
weaving bowers to lull souls asleep in. We continued still walking on the
middle way, 'till we arrived in a building in which it terminated. This was
formerly erected by TRUTH for a watch tower, from whence she took a view of the
earth, and, as she saw occasion, sent out REPROOF, or even REPROACH, for our
reformation. Over the door I took notice that a face was carved with a heart
upon the lips of it, and presently called to mind that this was the ancients
emblem of SINCERITY. In the entrance I met with FREEDOM OF SPEECH and
COMPLAISANCE, who had for a long time looked upon one another as enemies; but
REPROOF has so happily brought them together, that they now act as friends and
fellow-agents in the same family. Before I ascended up the stairs, I had my
eyes purified by a water which made me see extremely clear, and I think they
said it sprung in a pit, from whence (as Democritus had reported) they formerly
brought up TRUTH, who had hid herself in it. I was then admitted to the upper
chamber of prospect, which was called THE KNOWLEDGE OF MANKIND; here the window
was no sooner opened but I perceived the clouds to roll off and part before me,
and a scene of all the variety of the world presented itself.

But how different was mankind in this view, from what it used to appear!
methought the very shape of most of them was lost; some had the heads of Dogs,
others of Apes or Parrots, and in short, wherever any one took upon him the
inferior and unworthy qualities of other creatures, the change of his soul
became visible in his countenance. The strutting pride of him who is endued
with brutality instead of courage, made his face shoot out in the form of a
Horse's; his eyes became prominent, his nostrils widened, and his wig untying
flowed down on one side of his neck in a waving mane. The talkativeness of
those who love the ill nature of conversation made them turn into assemblies of
Geese, their lips hardened into bills by eternal using, they gabbled for
diversion, they hissed in scandal, and their ruffles falling back on their
arms, a succession of little feathers appeared, which formed wings for them to
flutter with from one visit to another. The envious and malicious lay on the
ground with the heads of different sorts of Serpents, and not endeavoring to
erect themselves, but meditating mischief to others, they sucked the poison of
the earth, sharpened their tongues to stings upon the stones, and rolled their
trains unperceivably beneath their habits. The hypocritical oppressors wore the
faces of Crocodiles, their mouths were instruments of cruelty, their eyes of
deceit; they committed wickedness, and bemoaned that there should be so much of
it in the world; they devoured the unwary, and wept over the remains of them.
The covetous had so hooked and worn their fingers by counting interest upon
interest, that they converted to the claws of Harpies, and these they still
were stretching out for more, yet seemed unsatisfied with their acquisitions.
The sharpers had the looks of Camelions; they every minute changed their
appearance, and fed on swarms of Flies which fell as so many Collies amongst
them. The bully seemed a dunghill Cock, he crested well, and bore his comb
aloft; he was beaten by almost every one, yet still sung for triumph; and only
the mean coward pricked up the ears of a Hare to fly before him. Critics were
turned into Cats, whose pleasure and grumbling go together. Fopes were Apes in
embroidered jackets. Flatterers were curled Spaniels, sawning and crouching.
The crafty had the face of a Fox, the slothful of an Ass, the cruel of a Wolf,
the ill-bred of a bear, the leachers were Goats, and the gluttons Swine.
Drunkenness was the only vice that did not change the face of its professors
into that of another creature; but this I took to be far from a privilege, for
these two reasons; because it sufficiently deforms them of itself, and because
none of the lower ranks of beings is guilty of so foolish an intemperance.

As I was taking a view of these representations of things, without any more
order than is usual in a dream, or in the confusion of the world itself, I
perceived a concern within me for what I saw; my eyes began to moisten, and as
if the virtue of that water with which they were purified was lost for a time,
by their being touched with that which arose from a passion, the clouds
immediately began to gather again, and close from either hand upon the prospect
I then turned toward my guide, who addressed himself to me after this manner.
You have seen the condition of mankind when it descends from its dignity; now
therefore guard yourself from that degeneracy by a modest greatness of spirit
on one side, and a conscious shame on the other. Endeavor also with a
generosity of goodness to make your friends aware of it; let them know what
defects you perceive are growing upon them; handle the matter as you see
reason, either with the airs of severe or humourous affection; sometimes
plainly describing the degeneracy in its full proper colors, or at other times
letting them know that if they proceed as they have begun, you give them to
such a day or so many months to turn Bears, Wolves, or Foxes, etc. Neither
neglect your more remote acquaintance, where you see any worthy and susceptible
of admonition; expose the beasts whose qualities you see them putting on, where
you have no mind to engage with their persons. The possibility of their
applying this is very obvious: the Egyptians saw it so clearly, that they made
the pictures of animals explain their minds to one another instead of writing;
and indeed it is hardly to be missed, since Aesop took them out of their mute
condition, and taught them to speak for themselves with relation to the actions
of mankind.

VISION IV. GUARDIAN. No 66.
THERE is a set of mankind, who are wholly employed in the ill-natured office
of gathering up a collection of stories that lessen the reputation of others,
and spreading them abroad with a certain air of satisfaction. Perhaps, indeed,
an innocent and unmeaning curiosity, a desire of being informed concerning
those we live with, or a willingness to prosit by reflection upon the actions
of others, may sometimes afford an excuse, or sometimes a defense, for
inquisitiveness; but certainly it is beyond all excuse, a transgression against
humanity, to carry the matter further, to tear off the dressings, as I may say,
from the wounds of a friend, and expose them to the air in cruel fits of
diversion; and yet we have something more to bemoan, an outrage of an higher
nature, which mankind is guilty of when they are not content to spread the
stories of folly, frailty and vice, but even enlarge them, or invent new ones,
and blacken characters that we may appear ridiculous, or hateful to one
another. From such practices as these it happens, that some feel a sorrow, and
others are agitated with a spirit of revenge; that scandals or lies are told,
because another has told such before; that resentments and quarrels arise, and
injuries are given, received, and multiplied, in a scene of vengeance.

All this I have often observed with abundance of concern; and having a perfect
desire to further the happiness of mankind, I lately set myself to consider the
causes from whence such evils arise, and the remedies which may be applied.
Whereupon I shut my eyes to prevent distraction from outward objects, and a
while after shot away, upon an impulse of thought, into the WORLD OF IDEAS,
where abstracted qualities became visible in such appearances as were agreeable
to each of their natures.

That part of the country, where I happened to light, was the most noisy that I
had ever known. The winds whistled, the leaves rustled, the brooks rumbled, the
birds chatter'd, the tongues of men were heard, and the echo mingled something
of every sound in its repetition, so that there was a strange confusion and
uproar of sounds about me. At length, as the noise still increased, I could
discern a man habited like a herald (and as I afterward understood) called
NOVELTY, that came forward proclaiming a solemn day to be kept at the house of
COMMON FAME. Immediately behind him advanced three nymphs, who had mostrous
appearances. The first of these was CURIOSITY, habited like a virgin, and
having an hundred ears upon her head to serve in her inquiries. The second of
these was TALKATIVENESS, a little better grown, she seemed to be like a young
wife, and had an hundred tongues to spread her stories. The third was
CENSORIOUSNESS, habited like a widow, and surrounded with an hundred squinting
eyes of a malignant influence, which so obliquely darted on all around, that it
was impossible to say which of them had brought in the informations she boasted
of. These, as I was informed, had been very instrumental in preserving and
rearing COMMON FAME, when upon her birthday she was shuffled into a crowd, to
escape the search which TRUTH might have made after her and her parents.
CURIOSITY found here there, TALKATIVENESS conveyed her away, and CENSORIOUSNESS
so nursed her up, that in a short time she grew to a prodigious size, and
obtained an empire over the universe; wherefore the POWER, in gratitude for
these services, has since advanced them to her highest employments. The next
who came forward in this procession was a light damsel, called CREDULITY, who
carried behind them the lamp, the silver vessel with a spout, and other
instruments proper for this solemn occasion. She had formerly seen these three
together, and conjecturing from the number of their ears, tongues and eyes,
that they might be the proper Genii of ATTENTION, FAMILIAR CONVERSE, and OCULAR
DEMONSTRATION, she from that time gave herself up to attend them. The last who
followed were some who had closely muffled themselves in upper garments, so
that I could not discern who they were; but just as the soremost of them was
come up, I am glad, says she, calling me by my name, to meet you at this time,
stay close by me, and take a strict observation of all that passes. Her voice
was sweet and commanding, I thought I had somewhere heard it; and from her, as
I went along, I learned the meaning of every thing which offered.

We now marched forward through the ROOKERY OF RUMORS, which flew thick and with
a terrible din all around us. At length we arrived at the house of COMMON FAME,
where a hecatomb of REPUTATIONS was that day to fall for her pleasure. The
house stood upon an eminence, having a thousand passages to it, and a thousand
whispering holes for the conveyance of found. The hall we entered was formed
with the art of a music chamber for the improvement of noises. REST and SILENCE
are banished the place. STORIES of different natures wander in light flocks all
about, sometimes truths and lies, or sometimes lies themselves clashing against
one another. In the middle stood a table painted after the manner of the
remotest Asiatic countries, upon which the lamp, the silver vessel, and cups of
a white earth, were planted in order. Then dried herbs were brought, collected
for the solemnity in moonshine, and water being put to them, there was a
greenish liquor made, to which they added the flower of milk, and an extraction
from the canes of America, for performing a libation to the infernal POWERS OF
MISCHIEF. After this, CURIOSITY, retiring to a withdrawing-room, brought forth
the VICTIMS, being to appearance a set of small waxen images, which she laid
upon the table one after another. Immediately TALKATIVENESS gave each of them
the name of some one, whom for the time they were to represent; and
CENSORIOUSNESS stuck them all about with black pins, still pronouncing at every
one she stuck, something to the prejudice of the persons represented. No sooner
were these rites performed, and incantations uttered, but the sound of a
speaking trumpet was heard in the air, by which they knew the Deity of the
place was propitiated and assisting. Upon this the sky grew darker, a storm
arose, and murmurs, sighs, groans, cries, and the words of grief or resentment
were heard within it. Thus the three Sorceresses discovered, that they, whose
names they had given to the images, were already affected with what was done to
them in essigy. The knowledge of this was received with the loudest laughter,
and in many congratulatory words they applauded one another's wit and power.

As matters were at this high point of disorder, the muffled lady, whom I
attended on, being no longer able to endure such barbarous proceedings, threw
off her upper garment of RESERVE, and appeared to be TRUTH. As soon as she had
confessed herself present, the speaking trumpet ceased to sound, the sky
cleared up, the storm abated, the noises which were heard in it ended, the
laughter of the company was over, and a serene light, till then unknown to the
place, was diffused around it. At this the detected Sorceresses endeavored to
escape in a cloud which I saw began to thicken about them, but it was soon
dispersed, their charms being controuled and prevailed over by the superior
Divinity. For my part I was exceedingly glad to see it so, and began to
consider what punishments she would inflict upon them. I fancied it would be
proper to cut off CURIOSITY'S ears, and six them to the eaves of the houses, to
nail the tongue of TALKATIVENESS to Indian tables, and to put out the eyes of
CENSORIOUSNESS with a flash of her light. In respect of CREDULITY I had indeed
some little pity, and had I been judge, she might, perhaps, have escaped with a
hearty reproof.

But I soon found that the discerning Judge had other designs, she knew, them
for such as will not be destroyed entirely while mankind is in being, and yet
ought to have a brand and punishment affixed to them that they may be avoided.
Wherefore she took a seat for judgment, and had the Criminals brought forward
by SHAME ever blushing, and TROUBLE with a whip of many lashes, two phantoms
who had dogged the Procession in disguise, and waited till they had an
authority from TRUTH to lay hands upon them. Immediately then she ordered
CURIOSITY and TALKATIVENEES to be fettered together, that the one should never
suffer the other to rest, nor the other ever let her remain undiscovered. Light
CREDULITY she linkt to SHAME at the tormenter's own request, who was pleased to
be thus secure that her prisoner should not escape; and this was done partly
for her punishment, and partly for her amendment. CENSORIOUSNESS was also in
like manner begged by TROUBLE, and had her assigned for an eternal companion.
After they were thus chained with one another, by the judge's order, she drove
them from the presence to wander for ever through the world, with NOVELTY
stalking before them.

The cause being now over, she retreated from sight within the splendour of her
own glory, which leaving the house it had brightned, the sounds that were
proper to the place began to be as loud and consused as when we entered, and
there being no longer a clear distinguished appearance of any objects
represented to me, I returned from the excursion I had made in fancy.

VISION V.
WHATEVER industry and eagerness the modern discoverers have shown for the
knowledge of new countries, there yet remains an ample field in the creation to
which they are utter strangers, and which all the methods of traveling
hitherto invented, will never bring them acquainted with. Of this I can give a
very particular instance in an accident which lately happened to me.

As I was on the 6th of this instant, being February 1715, walking with my eyes
cast upward, I fell into a reflection on the vast tracts of air which appeared
before me as uninhabited. And wherefore, said I to myself, should all this
space be created? can it only be for an odd bird to fly through, as now and
then a man may pass a desert? Or are there also kingdoms with their particular
polities and people of a species which we know nothing of, ordained to live in
it?

It was in this manner I continued my thought, when my feet forsook the level,
and I was insensibly mounted in the air, till I arrived at a footing as firm
and level as what I had left. But with what surprise did I find myself among
creatures distinct from us in shape and customs?

The inhabitants are of a small stature, below those which history describes
for Pigmies. The tallest of them exceed not fourteen or fifteen inches, and the
least are hardly three. This difference proceeds only from their growth before
they are brought to light; for after we never observe them to grow, unless it
please their parents, who have this uncommon method of enabling them: they
recall them to the womb, where having been for some time, they receive an
addition to their bulk, then go back to their houses, and continue at a stand
as they did before. The experiment has been often tried with success, but some
have suffered extremely by undergoing it.

Their skins are like the ancient Britain, all drawn over with a variety of
figures. The color made use of for this end, is generally black. I have indeed
observed in some of the religious, and lawyers of the country, red here and
there intermingled, though not so commonly of late. They tell me too, they often
used to paint with all colors; and I visited two or three of the old
inhabitants, who were adorned in that fashion: but this is now disused, since
the new inventions, by which the use of a black fountain that belongs to that
country, is rendered more useful and serviceable.

The Clothes in which they go clad, are the skins of beasts; worn by some
plain, by others with figure: wrought upon them. Gold is also made use of by
some, to beautify their apparel; but very seldom silver, unless, as buckles are
by us, for fastening the garment before. I have seen some of them go like
seamen in thin blue shirts, others like Indians in a party-colored loose kind
of apparel, and others who they told me were the Politicians of the country, go
about stark naked.

The manner of dressing them is this: at first when they come into the world,
they have a suit given them, which if it do not fit exactly, is not, as with
us, fitted up again, but the children are in a cruel manner cut and squeezed to
bring them to its proportion. Yet this they seem not much to regard, provided
their principal parts are not affected. When the dress is thus settled on them,
they are clad for life, it being seldom their custom to alter it, or put it
off: in short, they live in it night and day, and wear it to rags rather than
part with it, being sure of the same torture, and a greater danger if they
should be dressed a second time. I have further taken notice, that they delight
to go open breasted, most of them showing their bosoms speckled. Some Lawyers
indeed wear them quite white, perhaps for distinction sake, or to be known at a
distance. But the finest show is among the beaux and ladies, who mightily
affect something of gold, both before and behind them.

Food I never saw them eat; they being a people, who, as I observed, live in
air: their houses are all single and high, having no back rooms, but frequently
seven or eight stories, which are all separate houses above one another. They
have one gate to their city, and generally no doors to their houses; though I
have sometimes seen them have particular doors, and even made of glass, where
the inhabitants have been observed to stand many days, that their fine apparel
may be seen through them. If at any time they lie down, which they do when they
come from their habitations (as if coming abroad were their greatest fatigue)
they will lie together in heaps without receiving hurt: though the soundest
sleep they get, is when they can have dust enough to cover them over.

The females amongst them are but few, nothing being there produced by a
marriage of sexes. The males are of a different strength or endowment of parts,
some having knowledge in an extreme degree, and others none at all; yet at the
same time, they are mighty pretenders to instruct others. Their Names, (for as
many as would discover them to me) I observed to be the very same as ours are
upon earth; I met a few who made theirs a mystery, but why, I am yet to learn.
They are so communicative, that they will tell all the knowledge they boast, if
a stranger apply himself to their conversation: and this may be worth his
while, if he considers that all languages, arts, and sciences, are professed
amongst them. I think I may say it without vanity, that I knew a certain
Talisman, with proper figures and characters inscribed, whereby their greatest
people may be charmed, brought to reside with a man, and serve him like a
familiar in the conduct of life.

There is no such thing as fighting amongst them, but their controversies are
determined by words, wherein they seldom own themselves conquered, yet proceed
no further than two or three replies: perhaps indeed two others take up their
neighbor's quarrel, but then they desist too after the same manner; sometimes
however, blows have ensued upon their account, though not amongst them: in such
a case they have descended to inspire mankind with their sentiments, and chosen
champions from among us, in order to decide it.

The time of their life is very different, some die as soon as born, and others
in their youth; some get a new lease of life by their entering into the womb
again, and if any weather it out to a hundred years, they generally live on to
an extreme age. After which it is remarkable, that instead of growing weaker as
we do, by time, they increase in strength, and become at last so confirmed in
health, that it is the opinion of their country, they never can perish while
the world remains.

The sicknesses which may take them of, besides what happens from their natural
weakness of body, are of different sorts. One is over-moisture, which affecting
their mansions; makes them lose their complexions, become deformed, and rot
away insensibly: this is often obviated by their not keeping too much within
doors. Another is the Worms, which prey upon their bowels: if they be maimed by
accidents, they become like us, so far useless; and that maim will some time or
other be the occasion of their ruin. However, they perish by these means only
in appearance, and like spirits, who vanish in one place, to be seen in
another. But as men die of passions, so Disesteem is what the most nearly
touches them; then they withdraw into holes and corners, and consume away in
darkness. Or if they are kept alive a few days by the force of Spices, it is
but a short reprieve from their perishing to eternity; without any honor, but
that instead of a burial, a small pyre of Past should be erected over them,
while they, like the ancient Romans, are reduced to ashes. N. B. This Vision is
to be understood of a Library of Books.


THE LIFE OF ZOILUS: AND HIS REMARKS ON HOMER'S BATTLE OF THE FROGS AND MICE.
VIDE QUAM INIQUI SUNT DIVINORUM MUNERUM AESTIMATORES, ETIAM QUIDAM PROFESSI
SAPIENTIAM. SENECA.
PREFACE.
HAVING some time ago heard, that the Translation of HOMER'S ILIAD would be
attempted, I resolved to confer with the gentleman who undertook it. I found
him of a tall presence, and thoughtful countenance, with his hands folded, his
eyes fixed, and his beard untrimm'd. This I took to be a good omen, because he
thus resembled the Constantinopolitan statue of Homer which Cedrenus describes;
and surely nothing could have been liker, had he but arrived at the character
of age and blindness. As my business was to be my introduction, I told him how
much I was acquainted with the secret history of Homer; that no one better
knows his own horse, than I do the camel of Bactria, in which his soul resided
at the time of the Trojan wars; that my acquaintance continued with him, as he
appeared in the person of the Grecian poet; that I knew him in his next
transmigration into a peacock; was pleased with his return to manhood, under
the name of Ennius at Rome; and more pleased to hear he would soon revive under
another name, with all his full luster, in England. This particular knowledge,
added I, which sprung from the love I bear him, has made me fond of a
conversation with you, in order to the success of your translation.

The civil manner in which he received my proposal encouraging me to proceed, I
told him, there were arts of success, as well as merits to obtain it; and that
he, who now dealt in Greek, should not only satisfy himself with being a good
Grecian, but also contrive to hasten into the repute of it. He might therefore
write in the title page, TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL GREEK, and select a motto
for his purpose out of the same language. He might obtain a copy of verses
written in it to prefix to the work; and not call the titles of each book, the
first, and second, but ILIAD ALPHA, and BETA. He might retain some names which
the world is least acquainted with, as his old translator Chapman uses
Ephaistus instead of Vulcan, Baratrum for Hell; and if the notes were filled
with Greek verses, it would more increase the wonder of many readers. Thus I
went on; when he told me smiling, I had shown him indeed a set of arts very
different from merit, for which reason, he thought, he ought not to depend upon
them. A success, says he, founded on the ignorance of others, may bring a
temporary advantage, but neither a conscious satisfaction, nor future fame to
the author. Men of sense despise the affectation which they easily see through,
and even they who were dazzled with it at first, are no sooner informed of its
being an affectation, but they imagine it also a veil to cover imperfection.

The next point I ventured to speak on, was the sort of poetry he intended to
use; how some may fancy, a poet of the greatest fire would be imitated better
in the freedom of blank verse, and the description of war sounds more pompous
out of rhyme. But, will the translation, said he, be thus removed enough from
prose, without greater inconveniences? what transpositions is Milton forced to,
as an equivalent for want of rhyme, in the poetry of a language which depends
upon a natural order of words? And even this would not have done his business,
had he not given the fullest scope to his genius, by choosing a subject upon
which there could be no hyperboles. We see (however he be deservedly
successful) that the ridicule of his manner succeeds better than the imitation
of it; because transpositions, which are unnatural to a language, are to be
fairly derided, if they ruin it by being frequently introduced; and because
hyperboles, which outrage every lesser subject where they are seriously used,
are often beautiful in ridicule. Let the French, whose language is not copious,
translate in prose; but ours, which exceeds it in copiousness of words, may
have a more frequent likeness of sounds, to make the unison or rhyme easier; a
grace of music, that atones for the harshness our consonants and monosyllables
occasion.

After this, I demanded what air he would appear with? whether antiquated, like
Chapman's Version, or modern, like La Motte's Contraction. To which he
answered, by desiring me to observe what a painter does who would always have
his pieces in fashion. He neither chooses to draw a beauty in a ruff, or a
French-head; but with its neck uncovered, and in its natural ornament of hair
curled up, or spread becomingly so may a writer choose a natural manner of
expressing himself which will always be in fashion, without affecting to borrow
an odd solemnity and unintelligible pomp from the past times, or humouring the
present by falling into its affectations, and those phrases which are born to
die with it.

I asked him, lastly, whether he would be strictly literal, or expatiate with
further licenses? I would not be literal, replies he, or tied up to line for
line in such a manner wherein it is impossible to express in one language what
has been delivered in another. Neither would I so expatiate, as to alter my
Author's sentiments, or add others of my own. These errors are to be avoided on
either hand, by adhering not only to the word, but the spirit and genius of an
author; by considering what he means, with what beautiful manner he has
expressed his meaning in his own tongue, and how he would have expressed
himself, had it been in ours. Thus we ought to seek for Homer in a version of
Homer: other attempts are but transformations of him; such as Ovid tells us,
where the name is retained, and the thing altered: this will be really what you
mentioned in the compliment you began with, a transmigration of the Poet from
one country into another.

Here ended the serious part of our conference. All I remember further was,
that having asked him, what he designed with all those editions and comments I
observed in his room he made answer, that if any one, who had a mind to find
fault with his performance, would but stay 'till it was entirely finished, he
should have a very cheap bargain of them.

Since this discourse, I have often resolved to try what it was to translate in
the spirit of a writer, and at last, chose THE BATTLE OF THE FROGS AND MICE,
which is ascribed to Homer; and bears a nearer resemblance, to his Iliad, than
the Culex does to the Acneid of Virgil. Statius and others think it a work of
youth, written as a prelude to his greater poems. Chapman thinks it the work of
his age, after he found men ungrateful; to show he could give strength, lineage
and fame as he pleased, and praise a Mouse as well as a Man. Thus, says he, the
Poet professedly flung up the world, and applied himself at last to hymns. Now,
though this reason of his may be nothing more than a scheme formed out of the
order in which Homer's works are printed, yet does the conjecture that this
poem was written after the Iliad, appear probable, because of its frequent
allusions to that poem; and particularly that there is not a Frog or a Mouse
killed, which has not its parallel instance there, in the death of some warrior
or other.

The poem itself is of the Epic kind; the time of its action the duration of
two days; the subject (however its nature frivolous, or ridiculous) raised, by
having the most shining words and deeds of Gods and Heroes accommodated to it:
and while other poems often compare the illustrious exploits of great men to
those of brutes, this always heightens the subject by comparisons drawn from
things above it. We have a great character given it with respect to the fable
in Gaddius de Script non Eccles. It appears, says he, nearer perfection than
the Iliad, or Odysses, and excels both in judgment, wit, and exquisite texture,
since it is a poem perfect in its own kind. Nor does Crusius speak less to its
honor, with respect to the moral, when he cries out in an apostrophe to the
reader; Whoever you are, mind not the names of these little animals, but look
into the things they mean; call them men, call them kings, or counselors, or
human polity itself, you have here doctrines of every sort. And indeed, when I
hear the Frog talk concerning the Mouse's family, I learn, equality should be
observed in making friendships; when I hear the Mouse answer the Frog, I
remember, that a similitude of manners should be regarded in them; when I see
their councils assembling, I think of the bustles of human prudence: and when I
see the battle grow warm and glorious, our struggles for honor and empire
appear before me.

This piece had many imitations of it in antiquity, as the sight of the Cats,
the Cranes, the Starlings, the Spiders, etc. That of the Cats is in the
Bodleian library, but I was not so lucky as to find it. I have taken the
liberty to divide my translation into books (though it be otherwise in the
original) according as the fable allowed proper resting-places, by varying its
scene, or nature of action: this I did, after the example of Aristarchus and
Zenodotus in the Iliad. I then thought of carrying the grammarians example
further, and placing arguments at the head of each, which I framed as follows,
in imitation of the short ancient Greek inscriptions to the Iliad, BOOK I. In
ALPHA, the ground Of the quarrel is found. BOOK II. In BETA, we The council
see. BOOK III. Dire GAMMA relates The work of the fates.


But as I am averse from all information which lessens our surprise, I only
mention these for a handle to quarrel with the custom of long arguments before
a poem. It may be necessary in books of controversy or abstruse learning, to
write an epitome before each part; but it is not kind to forestal us in the
work of fancy, and make our attention remiss, by a previous account of the end
of it.

The next thing which employed my thoughts was the heroes names. It might
perhaps take off somewhat from the majesty of the poem, had I cast away such
noble sounds as, Physignathus, Lycopinax, and Crambophagus, to substitute
Bluffcheek, Lickdish and Cabbage-eater in their places. It is for this reason I
have retained them untranslated: however, I place them in English before the
poem, and sometimes give a sfort character extracted out of their names; as in
Polyphonus, Pternophagus, etc. that the reader may not want some light of their
humor in the original.

But what gave me a greater difficulty was, to know how I should follow the
poet, when he inserted pieces of lines from his Iliad, and struck out a
sprightliness by their new application. To supply this in my translation, I
have added one or two of Homer's particularities; and used two or three
allusions to some of our English poets who most resemble him, to keep up some
image of this spirit of the original with an equivalent beauty. To use more,
might make my performance seem a cento rather than a translation, to those who
know not the necessity I lay under.

I am not ignorant, after all my care, how the world receives the best
compositions of this nature. A man need only go to a painter's, and apply what
he hears said of a picture to a translation, to find how he shall be used upon
his own, or his author's account. There one spectator tells you, a piece is
extremely fine, but he sets no value on what is not like the face it was drawn
for; while a second informs you, such another is extremely like, but he cares
not for a piece of deformity, though its likeness be never so exact.

Yet notwithstanding all which happens to the best, when I translate, I have a
desire to be reckoned amongst them; and I shall obtain this, if the world will
be so good-natured as to believe writers that give their own characters: upon
which presumption, I answer to all objections beforehand, as follows:

When I am literal, I regard my author's words; when I am not, I translate in
his spirit. If I am low, I choose the narrative style; if high, the subject
required it. When I am enervate, I give an instance of ancient simplicity; when
affected, I show a point of modern delicacy. As for beauties, there never can
be one found in me which was not really intended; and for any faults, they
proceeded from too unbounded fancy, or too nice judgment, but by no means from
any defect in either of those faculties.

THE LIFE OF ZOILUS.
Pendentem volo Zoilum videre. MARTIAL.
THEY who have discoursed concerning the nature and extent of criticism, take
notice, that editions of authors, the interpretations of them, and the judgment
which is passed upon each, are the three branches into which the art divides
itself. But the last of these, that directs in the choice of books, and takes
care to prepare us for reading them, is by the learned Bacon called the Chair
of the Critics. In this chair (to carry on the figure) have sat Aristotle,
Demetrius Phaleraeus, Dionysius Halicarnassensis, Cicero, Horace, Quintilian,
and Longinus; all great names of antiquity, the censors of those ages which
went before, and the directors of those that come after them, with respect to
the natural and perspicuous manners of thought and a expression, by which a
correct and judicious genius may be able to write for the pleasure and profit
of mankind.

But whatever has been advanced by men really great in themselves, has been
also attempted by others of capacities either unequal to the undertaking, or
which have been corrupted by their passions, and drawn away into partial
violences: so that we have sometimes seen the province of Criticism usurped, by
such who judge with an obscure diligence, and a certain dryness of
understanding, incapable of comprehending a figurative style, or being moved by
the beauties of imagination; and at other times by such, whose natural
moroseness in general, or particular designs of envy, has rendered them
indefatigable against the reputation of others.

In this last manner is ZOILUS represented to us by antiquity, and with a
character so abandoned, that his name has been since made use of to brand all
succeeding critics of his complexion. He has a load of infamy thrown upon him,
great, in proportion to the fame of HOMER, against whom he opposed himself: if
the one was esteemed as the very residence of wit, the other is described as a
profligate, who would destroy the temple of Apollo and the Muses, in order to
have his memory preserved by the envious action. I imagine it maybe no
ungrateful undertaking to write some account of this celebrated person, from
whom so many derive their character; and I think the life of a Critic is not
unseasonably put before the works of his Poet, especially when his censures
accompany him. If what he advances be just, he stands here as a censor; if
otherwise, he appears as an addition to the poet's fame, and is placed before
him with the justice of antiquity in its sacrifices, when, because such a beast
had offended such a deity, he was brought annually to his altar to be slain
upon it.

ZOILUS us was born at Amphipolis a city of Thrace, during the time in which
the Macedonian empire flourished. Who his parents were, is not certainly known;
but if the appellation of Thracian Slave, which the world applied to him, be
not merely an expression of contempt, it proves him of mean extraction. He was
a disciple of one Polycrates a sophist, who had distinguished himself by
writing against the great names of the ages before him; and who, when he is
mentioned as his master, is said to be particularly famous for a bitter
accusation or invective against the memory of Socrates. In this manner is
ZOILUS set out to posterity, like a plant naturally baneful, and having its
poison rendered more acute and subtle by a preparation.

In his person he was tall and meagre, his complexion was pale, and all the
motions of his face were sharp. He is represented by Aelian, with a beard
nourished to a prodigious length, and his head kept close shaved, to give him a
magisterial appearance: his coat hung over his knees in a slovenly fashion; his
manners were formed upon an aversion to the customs of the world. He was fond
of speaking ill, diligent to sow dissension, and from the constant bent of his
thought, had obtained that sort of readiness for slander or reproach, which is
esteemed wit by the light opinion of some, who take the remarks of ill nature,
for an understanding of mankind, and the abrupt lashes of rudeness for the
spirit of expression. This, at last, grew to such a height in him, that he
became careless of concealing it; he threw off all reserves and managements in
respect of others, and the passion so far took the turn of a frenzy, that being
one day asked, why he spoke ill of every one? It is (says he) because I am not
able to do them ill, though I have so great a mind to it. Such extravagant
declarations of his general enmity made men deal with him as with the creature
he affected to be; they no more spoke of him as belonging to the species he
hated; and from henceforth his learned speeches or fine remarks could obtain no
other title for him, but that of THE RHETORICAL DOG.

While he was in Macedon he employed his time in writing, and reciting what he
had written in the schools of sophists. His oratory (says Dionysius
Halicarnassensis) was always of the demonstrative kind, which concerns itself
about praise or dispraise. His subjects were the most approved authors, whom he
chose to abuse upon the account of their reputation; and to whom, without going
round the matter in faint praises or artificial insinuations, he used to deny
their own characteristics. With this gallantry of opposition did he censure
Xenophon for affectation, Plato for vulgar notions, and Isocrates for
incorrectness. Demosthenes, in his opinion, wanted fire, Aristotle subtilty,
and Aristophanes humor. But, as to have reputation was with him a sufficient
cause of enmity, so to have that reputation universal, was what wrought his
frenzy to its wildest degree; for which reason it was HOMER with whom he was
most implacably angry. And certainly, if envy choose its object for the power
to give torment, it should here (if ever) have the glory of fully answering its
intentions; for the Poet was so worshipped by the whole age, that his Critic had
not the common alleviation of the opinion of one other man, to concur in his
condemnation.

ZOILUS however went on with indefatigable industry in a voluminous work, which
he entitled, THE (...), or CENSURE OF HOMER: 'till having at last finished it,
he prepares to send it into the world with a pompous title at the head,
invented for himself by way of excellency, and thus inserted after the manner
of the ancients.

ZOILUS, the scourge of HOMER, writ this against that lover of fables. Thus did
he value himself upon a work, which the world has not thought worth
transmitting to us, and but just left a specimen in five or six quotations,
which happen to be preserved by the commentators of that Poet against whom he
writ it. If any one be fond to form a judgment upon him from these instances,
they are as follows: IL. 1. He says, HOMER is very ridiculous (a word he was
noted to apply to him) when he makes such a God as APOLLO employ himself in
killing dogs and mules. IL. 5. HOMER is very ridiculous in describing DIOMEDES'
helmet and armor, as sparkling, and in a blaze of fire about him; for then why
was he not burned by it? IL. 5. When IDAEUS quitted his fine chariot, which was
entangl'd in the fight, and for which he might have been slain, the Poet was a
fool for making him leave his chariot, he had better have run away in it. IL.
24. When ACHILLES makes PRIAM lie out of his tent, lest the Greeks should hear
of his being there, the Poet had no breeding, to turn a king out in that
manner. OD. 9. The Poet says, ULYSSES lost an equal number out of each ship.
The Critic says, that is impossible. OD. 10. He derides the men who were turned
into swine, and calls them HOMER'S poor little blubbering pigs. The first five
of these remarks are found in DIDYMUS, the last in LONGINUS.


Such as these are the cold jests and trifling quarrels, which have been
registered from a composition, that (according to the representation handed down
to us) was born in envy, lived a short life in contempt, and lies for ever
buried with infamy.

But, as his design was judged by himself wonderfully well accomplished,
Macedon began to be esteemed a stage too narrow for his glory; and Egypt, which
had then taken learning into its patronage, the proper place where it ought to
diffuse its beams, to the surprise of all whom he would persuade to reckon
themselves hitherto in the dark, and under the prejudices of a false
admiration. However, as he had prepared himself for the journey, he was
suddenly diverted for a while by the rumor of the Olympic games, which were at
that time to be celebrated. Thither he steered his course, full of the memory
of Herodotus, and others who had successfully recited in that large assembly;
and pleased to imagine he should alter all Greece in their notions of wit
before he left it.

Upon his arrival, he found the field in its preparation for diversion. The
chariots stood for the race, carved and gilded, the horses were led in costly
trappings, some practiced to wrestle, some to dart the spear, (or whatever they
designed to engage at) in a kind of flourish beforehand: others were looking
on, to amuse themselves; and all gaily dressed, according to the custom of
those places. Through these did ZOITUS move forward, bald-headed, bearded to
the middle, its a long sad-colour'd vestment, and inflexibly stretching forth
his hands filled with volumes rolled up to a vast thickness: a figure most
venerably slovenly! able to demand attention upon account of its oddness. And
indeed, he had no sooner fixed himself upon an eminence, but a crowd flocked
about him to know what he intended. Then the Critic casting his eyes on the
ring, opened his volume slowly, as considering with what part be might most
properly entertain his audience. It happened, that the games at Patroclus'
obsequies came first into his thought; whether it was that he judged it
suitable to the place, or knew that he had fallen as well upon the games
themselves, as upon HOMER for celebrating them, and could not resist his
natural disposition to give mankind offense. Every one was now intently
fastened upon him, while he undertook to prove, that those games signified
nothing to the taking of Troy, and therefore only furnished an impertinent
Episode: that the fall of the lesser Ajax in cow dung, the squabble of the
chariot-race, and other accidents which attend such sports, are mean or
trifling: and a world of other remarks, for which he still affirmed HOMER to be
a fool, and which they that heard him took for studied invectives against those
exercises they were then employed in. Men who frequent sports, as they are of a
cheerful dispostion, so are they lovers of poetry: this, together with the
opinion they were affronted, wrought them up to impatience and further
licenses: there was particularly a young Athenian gentleman, who was to run
three chariots in those games, who being an admirer of HOMER, could no longer
contain himself, but cried out, What in the name of CASTOR have we here, ZOILUS
from Thrace? and as he said it, struck him with a chariot-whip. Immediately
then a hundred whips were seen curling round his head; so that his face,
naturally deformed, and heightened by pain to its utmost Caricatura, appeared
in the midst of them, as we may fancy the visage of Envy, if at any time her
snakes rise in rebellion to lash their mistress. Nor was this all the
punishment they decreed him, when once they imagined he was ZOILUS: the
Scyronian rocks were near 'em, and thither they hurried him with a general cry,
to that speedy justice which is practiced at places of diversion.

It is here, that, according to SUIDAS, the critic expired. But we following
the more numerous testimonies of other authors, conclude he escaped either by
the lowness of those rocks whence he was thrust, or by bushes which might break
his fall; and soon after following the courses of his first intention, he set
sail for Egypt.

Egypt was at this time governed by Ptolemy Philadelphus, a prince passionately
fond of learning, and learned men; particularly an admirer of HOMER, to
adoration. He had built the finest library in the world, and made the choicest,
as well as most numerous collection of books. No encouragements were wanting
from him to allure men of the brightest genius to his court, and no time
thought too much which he spent in their company. From hence it is that we hear
of ERATOSTHENES and ARISTOPHANES, those universal scholars, and candid judges
of other men's performances: CALLIMACHUS, a poet of the most easy, courteous
delicacy, famous for a poem on the cutting of Berenice's hair, and whom OVID so
much admired as to say, It was reason enough for him to love a woman, if she
would but tell him he exceeded CALLIMACHUS; THEOCRITUS, the most famous in the
pastoral way of writing; and among the young men, ARISTARCHUS and APOLLONIUS
RHODIUS, the one of whom proved a most judicious critic, the other a poet of no
mean character.

These and many more filled the court of that munificent prince, whose liberal
dispensations of wealth and favor became encouragements to every one to exert
their parts to the utmost; like streams which flow through different sorts of
soils, and improve each in that for which it was adapted by nature.

Such was the court when ZOILUS arrived; but before he entered Alexandria, he
spent a night in the temple of Isis, to enquire of the success of his
undertaking; not that he doubted the worth of his works, but his late
misfortune had instructed him, that others might be ignorant of it. Having
therefore performed the accustomed sacrifice, and composed himself to rest upon
the hide, he had a vision which foretold of his future fame.

He found himself sitting under the shade of a dark yew, which was covered with
hellebore and hemlock, and near the mouth of a cave, where sat a monster, pale,
wasted, surrounded with snakes, fost'ring a cockatrice in her bosom; and
cursing the sun, for making the work of the deities appear in its beauty. The
sight of this bred fear in him; when she subddenly turning her sunk eyes, put
on a hideous kind of a loving grin, in which he discovered a resemblance to
some of his own features. Then turning up her snakes, and interlacing them in
the form of a turbant, to give him less disgust, thus she addressed herself: Go
on, my son, in whom I am renewed, and prosper in thy brave undertakings on
mankind: assert their wit to be dullness; prove their sense to be folly; know
truth only when it is on thy own side; and acknowledge learning at no other
time to be useful. Spare not an author of any rank or size; let not thy tongue
or pen know pity; make the living feel thy accusations; make the ghosts of the
dead groan in their tombs for their violated fame. But why do I spend time in
needless advice, which may be better used in encouragement? Let thy eyes
delight themselves with the future recompense which I have reserved for thy
merit. Thus spoke the monster, and shrieked the name of ZOILUS: the shades, who
were to bear the same name after him, became obedient; and the mouth of the
cave was filled with strange supercilious countenances, which all crowded to
make their appearance. These began to march before him with an imitation of his
mien and manners: some crowned with wild sorrel, others having leaves of dead
bays mingled amongst it; whilst the monster still described them as he passed,
and touched each with a livid track of malignant light, that shot from her eye,
to point where she meant the description. They (says she) in the chaplets of
wild sorrel, are my writers of prose, who erect scandal into criticism: they
who wear the withered bay with it, are such who write poems, which are
professedly to answer all rules, and be left for patterns to men of genius.
These that follow shall attack others, because they are excelled by them. The
next rank shall make an author's being read, a sufficient ground of opposition.
Here march my grammarians, skilled to torture words; there my sons of
sophistry, ever ready to wrest a meaning. Observe how faint the foremost of the
procession appear; and how they are now lost in yonder mists, which roll about
the cave of oblivion! this shows, it is not for themselves that they are to be
known; the world will consider them only as managing a part of thy endowments,
and so know them by thy name while they live, that their own shall be lost for
ever. But see how my cave still swarms! how every age produces men, upon whom
the preservation of thy memory devolves. My darling, the fates have decreed it!
thou art ZOILUS, and ZOILUS shall be eternal. Come, my serpents, applaud him
with your hisses, that is all which now can be done; in modern times, my sons
shall invent louder instruments, and artificial imitations; noises which drown
the voice of merit, shall furnish a concert to delight them. Here she arose to
clasp him in her arms, a strange noise was heard, the critic started at it, and
his vision forsook him.

It was with some confusion, that he lay musing a while upon what he had seen;
but reflecting, that the Goddess had given him no answer concerning his success
in Egypt, he strengthened his heart in his ancient self-love and enmity to
others, and took all for an idle dream born of the fumes of indigestion, or
produced by the dizzy motion of his voyage. In this opinion, he told it at his
departure to the priest, who admiring the extraordinary relation, registered it
in hieroglyphics at Canopus.

The day when he came to Alexandria was one on which the king had appointed
games to APOLLO and the MUSES, and honors and rewards for such writers as
should appear in them. This he took for a happy omen at his entrance, and, not
to lose an opportunity of showing himself, repaired immediately to the public
theater; where, as if every thing was to favor him, the very first accident
gave his spleen a diversion, which we find at large in the proem of the seventh
book of VITRUVIUS. It happened that when the poets had recited, six of the
judges decreed the prizes with a full approbation of all the audience. From
this, Aristophanes alone dissented, and demanded the first prize for a person
whose bashful and interrupted manner of speaking made him appear the most
disgustful: for he (says the judge) is alone a poet, and all the rest reciters;
and they who are judges, should not approve thefts, but writings. To maintain
his assertion, those volumes were produced from whence they had been stoll'n:
upon which, the king ordered them to be formally tried for theft, and dismissed
with infamy; but placed Aristophanes over his library, as one, who had given a
proof of his knowledge in books. This passage ZOILUS often afterward repeated
with pleasure, for the number of disgraces which happened in it to the
pretenders in poetry; though his envy made him still careful not to name
Aristophanes, but a judge in general.

However, criticism had only a short triumph over poetry, when he made the next
turn his own, by stepping forward into the place of reciting. Here he
immediately raised the curiosity, and drew the attention of both king and
people: but, as it happened, neither the one nor the other lasted; for the
first sentence where he had registered his own name, satisfied their curiosity;
and the next, where he offered to prove to a court so devoted to HOMER, that he
was ridiculous in every thing; went near to finish his audience. He was
nevertheless heard quietly for some time, till the king seeing no end of his
abusing the prince of philological learning, (as Vitruvius words it) departed
in disdain. The judges followed, deriding his attempt as an extravagance which
could not demand their gravity; and the people taking a license from the
precedent, hooted him away with obloquy and indignation. Thus ZOILUS failed at
his first appearance, and was forced to retire, stung with a most impatient
sense of public contempt.

Yet notwithstanding all this, he did not omit his attendance at court on the
day following, with a petition that he might be put upon the establishment of
learning, and allowed a pension. This the king read, but returned no answer: so
great was the scorn he conceived against him. But ZOILUS still undauntedly
renewed his petitions, 'till PTOLEMY, being weary of his persecution, gave him
a flat denial. HOMER, (says the prince) who has been dead these thousand years,
has maintained thousands of people; and ZOILUS, who boasts he has more wit than
he, ought not only to maintain himself, but many others also.

His petitions being thrown carelessly about, were fallen into the hands of men
of wit, whom, according to his custom, he had provoked, and whom it is unsafe
to provoke if you would live unexpos'd. I can compare them to nothing more
properly, than to the Be, a creature winged and lively, fond to rove through
the choicest flowers of nature, and blessed at home among the sweets of its own
composition: not ill-natured, yet quick to revenge an injury; not wearing its
sting out of the sheath; yet able to wound more sorely than its appearance
would threaten. Now these being made personal enemies by his malicious
expressions, the court rung with petitions of ZOILUS transvers'd; new petitions
drawn up for him; catalogues of his merits, supposed to be collected by
himself; his complaints of man's injustice set to a harp out of tune, and a
hundred other sports of fancy, with which their epigrams played upon him. These
were the ways of writing which ZOILUS hated, because they were not only read,
but retained easily, by reason of their spirit, humor, and brevity; and
because they not only make the man a jest upon whom they are written, but a
farther jest, if he attempt to answer them gravely. However, he did what he
could in revenge, he endeavored to set those whom he envied at variance among
themselves, and invented lies to promote his design. He told Eratosthenes, that
Callimachus said, his extent of learning consisted but in a superficial
knowledge of the sciences; and whispered Callimachus, that Eratosthenes only
allowed him to have an artful habitual knack of versifying. He would have made
Aristophanes believe, that Theocritus rallied his knowledge in editions, as a
curious kind of trifling; and Theocritus, that Aristophanes derided the
rustical simplicity of his shepherds. Though of all his stories, that which be
most valued himself for, was his constant report, that every one whom he hated
was a friend to ANTIOCHUS king of Syria, the enemy of PTOLEMY.

But malice is unsuccessful when the character of its agent is known: they grew
more friends to one another, by imagining, that even what had been said, as
well as what had not, was all of ZOILUS'S invention; and as he grew more and
more the common jest, their derision of him became a kind of life and cement to
their conversation.

Contempt, poverty, and other misfortunes had now so assaulted him, that even
they who abhorred his temper, contributed something to his support, in common
humanity. Yet still his envy, like a vitiated stomach, converted every kindness
to the nourishment of his disease; and 'twas the whole business of his life to
revile HOMER, and those by whom he himself subsisted. In this humor he had
days, which were so given up to impatient ill nature, that he could neither
write any thing, nor converse with anyone. These he sometimes employed in
throwing stones at children; which was once so unhappily returned upon him,
that he was taken up for dead: and this occasioned the report in some authors,
of his being stoned to death in Egypt. Or, sometimes he conveyed himself into
the library, where he blotted the name of HOMER wherever he could meet it, and
tore the best editions of several volumes; for which the librarians debarred
him the privilege of that place. These and other mischiefs made him universally
shunned; nay, to such an extravagance was his character of envy carried, that
the more superstitious Egyptians imagined they were fascinated by him, if the
day were darker, or themselves a little heavier than ordinary; some wore sprigs
of rue, by way of prevention; and others, rings made of the hoof of a wild ass
for amulets, lest they should suffer, by his fixing an eye upon them.

It was now near the time, when that splendid temple which PTOLEMY built in
honor of HOMER, was to be opened with a solemn magnificence: for this the men
of genius were employed in finding a proper pageant. At last, they agreed by
one consent, to have ZOILUS, the utter enemy of HOMER, hanged in effigy; and
the day being come, it was on this manner they formed the procession. Twelve
beautiful boys, lightly habited in white, with purple wings representing the
HOURS, went on the foremost: after these, came a chariot exceeding high and
stately, where sat one representing APOLLO; with another at his feet, who in
thig pomp sustained the person of HOMER: Apollo's laurel had little gilded
points, like the appearance of rays between its leaves; HOMER's was bound with
a blue sillet, like that which is worn by the priests of the Deity: Apollo was
distinguished by the golden harp he bore; Homer, by a volume, richly beautified
with horns of inlaid ivory, and tassels of silver depending from them. Behind
these came three chariots, in which rode nine damsels, each of them with that
instrument which is proper to each of the Muses; among whom, CALLIOPE, to give
her the honor of the day, sat in the middle of the second chariot, known by
her richer vestments. After these marched a solemn train aptly habited, like
those sciences which acknowledge their rise or improvement from this Poet. Then
the men of learning who attended the court, with wreaths, and rods or scepters
of laurel, as taking upon themselves the representation of Rhapsodists, to do
honor, for the time, to HOMER. In the rear of all was slowly drawn along an
odd carriage, rather than a chariot, which had its sides artfully turned, and
carved so as to bear a resemblance to the heads of snarling mastiffs. In this
was borne, as led in triumph, a tall image of deformity, whose head was bald,
and wound about with nettles for a chaplet. The tongue lay lolling out, to show
a contempt of mankind, and was fork'd at the end, to confess its love to
detraction. The hands were manacled behind, and the fingers armed with long
nails, to cut deep through the margins of authors. Its vesture was of the paper
of Nilus, bearing inscribed upon its breast in capital letters, ZOILUS THE
HOMERO-MASTIX; and all the rest of it was scrawl'd with various monsters of
that river, as emblems of those productions with which that critic used to fill
his papers. When they had reached the temple, where the king and his court were
already placed to behold them from its galleries, the image of ZOILUS was hung
upon a gibbet, there erected for it, with such loud acclamations as witnessed
the people's satisfaction. This being finished, the HOURS knocked at the gates;
which flew open, and discovered the statue of HOMER magnificently seated, with
the pictures of those cities which contended for his birth, ranged in order
around him. Then they who represented the Deities in the procession, laying
aside their ensigns of divinity, ushered in the men of learning with a sound of
voices, and their various instruments, to assist at a sacrifice in honor of
APOLLO and his favorite HOMER.

It may be easily believed, that ZOILUS concluded his affairs were at the
utmost point of desperation in Egypt; wherefore, filled with pride, scorn,
anger, vexation, envy, (and whatever could torment him) except the knowledge of
his unworthiness) he flung himself aboard the first ship which left that
country. As it happened, the vessel he sailed in was bound for Asia Minor, and
this landing him at a port the nearest to Smyrna, he was a little pleased
amidst his misery to think of decrying HOMER in another place where he was
adored, and which chiefly pretended to his birth. So incorrigible was his
disposition; that no experience taught him anything which might contribute to
his ease and safety.

And as his experience wrought nothing on him, so neither did the accidents,
which the opinion of those times took for ominous warnings: for, he is reported
to have seen, the night he came to Smyrna, a venerable person, such as HOMER is
described by antiquity, threatening him in a dream; and in the morning he found
a part of his works gnawed by Mice, which, says Aelian, are of all beasts the
most prophetic; insomuch. that they know when to leave a house, even before its
fall is suspected. Envy, which has no relaxation, still hurried him forward;
for it is certainly true that a man has not firmer resolution from reason, to
stand by a good principle, than obstinacy from perverted nature, to adhere to a
bad one.

In the morning as he walked the street, he observed in some plates
inscriptions concerning HOMER, which informed him where he lived, where he had
taught school, and several other particularities which the Smyrneans glory to
have recorded of him; all which awakened and irritated the passions of ZOILUS.
But hit temper was quite overthrown, by the venerable appearance which he saw,
upon entering the Homereum: which is a building composed of a library, porch,
and temple erected to HOMER. Here a phrenzy seited him which knew no bounds; he
raved violently against the Poet, and all his admirers; he trampled on his
works, he spurned about his commentators, he tore down his busts from the
niches, threw the medals that were cast of him out of the windows, and passing
from one place to another, beat the aged priests, and broke down the altar. The
cries which were occasioned by this means brought in many upon him; who
observed with horror how the most sacred honors of their city were profaned
by the frantic impiety of a stranger; and immediately dragged him to punishment
before their magistrates, who were then sitting. He was no sooner there, but
known for ZOILUS by some in court, a name a long time most hateful to Smyrna;
which, as it valued itself upon the birth of HOMER, so bore more impatiently
than other places, the abuses offered him. This made them eager to propitiate
his shade, and claim to themselves a second merit by the death of ZOILUS;
wherefore they sentenced him to suller by fire, as the due reward of his
desecrations; and ordered, that their city should be purified by a lustration,
for having entertained so impious a guest. In pursuance to this sentence, he
was led away with his compositions born before him by the public executioner:
then was he fastened to the stake, prophesying all the while how many should
arise to revenge his quarrel; particularly, that when Greek should be no more a
language, there shall be a Nation which will both translate HOMER into Prose,
and contract him in Verse. At last, his compositions were lighted to set the
pile on fire, and he expired sighing for the loss of them, more than for the
pain he suffered: and perhaps too, because he might foresee in his prophetic
rapture, that there should arise a poet in another nation, able to do HOMER
justice, and make him known amongst his people to future ages.

Thus died this noted critic, of whom we may observe from the course of the
history, that as several cities contended for the honor of the birth of HOMER,
so several have contended for the honor of the death of ZOILUS. With him
likewise perished his great work on the ILIAD, and the ODYSSE; concerning which
we observe also, that as the known worth of HOMER'S poetry makes him survive
himself with glory; so the bare memory of ZOILUS'S criticism makes him survive
himself with infamy. These are deservedly the consequences of that Ill Nature
which made him fond of detraction; that Envy, which made him choose so
excellent a character for its object; and those partial Methods of Injustice,
with which he treated the object he had chosen.

Yet how many commence critics after him, upon the same unhappy principles? How
many labor to destroy the monuments of the dead, and summon up the great from
their graves to answer for trifles before them? how many, by
misrepresentations, both hinder the world from favoring men of genius, and
discourage them in themselves; like boughs of a baneful and barren nature, that
shoot across a fruit-tree; at once to screen the sun from it, and hinder it by
their droppings from producing any thing of value? but if these who thus follow
ZOILUS, meet not the same severities of fate, because they come short of his
indefatigableness, or their object is not so universally the concern of
mankind; they shall nevertheless meet a proportion of it in the inward trouble
they give themselves, and the outward contempt others fling upon them: a
punishment which every one has hitherto felt, who has really deserved to be
called a ZOILUS; and which will always be the natural reward of such men's
actions, as long as ZOILUS is the proper name of Envy.

ZOILUS's REMARKS.
Ingenium magni livor detrectat amici,
Quisquis et ex illo, Zoile, nomen habes.

I MUST do my Reader the justice, before I enter upon these NOTES of ZOILUS, to
inform him, that I have not in any author met this work ascribed to him by its
title, which has made me not mention it in the LIFE. But thus much in general
appears, that he wrote several things besides his censure on the ILIAD, which,
as it gives ground for this opinion, encourages me to offer an account of the
Treatise.

Being acquainted with a grave gentleman who searches after Editions, purchases
Manuscripts, and collects Copies, I applied to him for some Editions of this
Poem, which he readily obliged me with. But, added he, taking down a paper, I
doubt I shall discourage you from your translation, when I show this work,
which is written upon the original, by ZOILUS, the famous adversary of HOMER.
ZOILUS! said I with surprise; I thought his works had long since perished. They
have so, answered he, all, except this little Piece, which has a PREFACE
annexed to it accounting for its preservation. It seems, when he parted from
Macedon, he left this behind him where he lodged, and where no one entered for
a long time, in detestation of the odiousness of his character, 'till Maevius
arriving there in his travels, and being desirous to lie in the same room,
luckily found it, and brought it away with him. This the author of the PREFACE
imagines the reason of Horace's wishing Maevius, in the 10th EPODE, such a
shipwreck as HOMER describes; as it were with an eye to his having done
something disadvantageous to that Poet. From Maevius, the piece came into the
hand of Carbilius Pictor, (who, when he wrote against Virgil, called his book,
with a respectful imitation of ZOILUS, the AENEIDOMASTIX) and from him into the
hands of others who are unknown, because the world applied to them no other
name than that of ZOILUS, in order to sink their own in oblivion. Thus it ever
found some learned philologist or critic, to keep it secret from the rage of
HOMER's admirers; yet not so secret, but that it has still been communicated
among the LITERATI. I am of opinion, that our great SCALIGER borrowed it, to
work him up when he writ so sharply against Cardan; and perhaps Le Clerc too,
when he proved Q. Curtius ignorant of every particular branch of learning.

This formal account made me give attention to what the book contained; and I
must acknowledge, that whether it be his, or the work of some grammarian, it
appears to be writ in his spirit. The open profession of enmity to great
genius's, and the fear of nothing so much as that he may not be able to find
faults enough, are such resemblances of his strongest features, that any one
might take it for his own production. To give the world a notion of this, I
have made a collection of some REMARKS, which most struck me, during that short
time in which I was allowed to peruse the Manuscript.

THE REMARKS OF ZOILUS UPON HOMER'S BATTLE OF THE FROGS AND MICE.
Page 43. Ver, 1.

TO FILL MY RISING SONG.] As Protagoras the sophist found fault with the
beginning of the ILIAD, for its speaking to the Muse rather with an abrupt
command, than a solemn invocation; so I, says ZOILUs, done the other hand find
fault with him for using any invocation at all before this poem, or any such
trifles as he is the author of If he must use one, Protagoras is in the right;
if not, I am: this I hold for true criticism, notwithstanding the opinion of
Aristotle against us. Nor let any one lay a stress on Aristotle in this point;
he alas! knows nothing of Poetry but what he has read in HOMER; his rules are
all extracted from him, or founded in him. In short, HOMER'S works are the
examples of Aristotle's precepts; and Aristotle's precepts the methods HOMER
wrought by. From hence it is to be concluded as the opinion of this Critic,
that whoever would entirely destroy the reputation of HOMER, must renounce the
authority of Aristotle beforehand. The rules of building may be of service to
us, if we design to judge of an edifice, and discover what may be amiss in it
for the advantage of future artificers; but they are of no use to those who
only intend to overthrow it utterly.

After the word [SONG,] in the first line the original adds, [WHAT I HAVE
WRITTEN IN MY TABLETS.] These words, which are dropped in the translation as of
no consequence, the great ZOILUS has thought fit to expunge; asserting for a
reason, without backing it with farther proof, That tablets were it not of fo
early invention. Now, it must be granted, this manner of proving by affirmation
is of an extraordinary nature; but however it has its end with a set of readers
for whom it is adapted. One part of the world knows not with what assurance
another part can express itself. They imagine a reasonable creature will not
have the face to say any thing which has not some shadow of reason to support
it; and run implicitly into the snare which is laid for goodnature, by these
daring authors of definitive sentences upon bare assertion.

Page 43. Ver. 15. WHOM CATS PURSUED.] The Greek word here expressly signifies a
Cat: ZOILUS, whom Perizonius follows, affirms, It was Weezels which the Mouse
fled from; and then objects against its probability. But it is common with one
sort of Critics, to show an author means differently from what he really did;
and then to prove, that the meaning which they find out for him is good for
nothing.

Page 44. Ver. 7. IF WORTHY FRIENDSHIP.] In this proposal begins the moral of
the whole piece, which is, that hasty, ill-founded, or unnatural friendships
and leagues, will naturally end in war and discord. But ZOILUS, who is here
mightily concerned to take off from HOMER all the honor of having designed a
moral, asserts on the other hand, That the Poet's whole intent was to make a
Fable; that a Fable he has made, and one very idle and trifling; that many
things are ascribed to HOMER, which poor HOMER never dreamed of; and he who
finds them out, rather shows his own parts than discovers his author's
beauties. In this opinion has he been followed by several of those Critics, who
only dip into authors when they have occasion to write against them: and yet
even these shall speak differently concerning the writers, if the question be
of their own performances; for to their own works they write Prefaces, to
display the grandness of the moral, regularity of the scheme, number and
brightness of the figures, and a thousand other excellencies, which if they did
not tell, no one would ever imagine. For others, they write Remarks, which tend
to contract their excellencies within the narrow compass of their partial
apprehesion. It were well if they could allow such to be as wise as themselves,
whom the world allows to be much wiser; but their being naturally friends to
themselves, and professedly adversaries to some greater genius, easily accounts
for these different manners of speaking. I will not leave this note, without
giving you an instance of its practice in the great JULIUS SCALIGER: he has
been free enough with HOMER in the Remarks he makes upon him; but when he
speaks of himself, I desire my reader would take notice of his modesty; I give
his own words, Lib. 3. Poet. Cap. 112. In Deum Patrem Hymnum cum scriberemus,
tanquam rerum omnium conditorem, ab orbis ipsius creatione ad nos nostraque
usque duximus. -- In quo abduximus animum nostrum a corporis carcere ad liberos
campos contemplationis, quae me in illum transformaret. Tum autem sanctissimi
Spiritus ineffabilis vigor ille canto ardore celebratus est, ut cum lenissimis
numeris esset inchoatus Hymnus, repentino divini Ignis impetu conslagravit.

Page 45. Ver. 7. THE CIRCLED LOAVES.] ZOILUS here finds fault with the mention
of loaves, tripes, bacon and cheese, as words below the dignity of the EPIC, as
much (says he) as it would be to have opprobrious names given in it. By which
expression we easily see, he hints at the first book of the ILIAD. Now, we must
consider in answer, that it is a Mouse which is spoken of, that eating is the
most appearing chatacteristic of that creature, that these foods are such as
please it most; and to have described particular pleasures for it in any other
way, would have been as incongruous, as to have described a haughty loud anger
without those names which it throws out in its fierceness, and which raise it
to its pitch of phrenzy. In the one instance you still see a Mouse before you,
however the Poet raises it to a man; in the other, you shall see a man before
you; however, the Poet raises him to a Demi-God. But some call that LOW, which
others call NATURAL. Every thing has two handles, and the critic who sets
himself to censure all he meets, is under an obligation still to lay hold on
the worst of them.

Page 46. Ver. 1. BUT ME, NOR STALKS.] In this place ZOILUS laughs at the
ridiculousness of the Poet, who (according to his representation) makes a
prince refuse an invitation in heroics, because he did not like the meat he was
invited to. And, that the ridicule may appear in as strong a light to others as
to himself, he puts as much of the speech as concerns it into burlesque airs,
and expressions. This is indeed a common trick with Remarkers, which they
either practice by precedent from their master ZOILUS, or are beholden for it
to the same turn of temper. We acknowledge it a fine piece of satire, when
there is folly in a passage, to lay it open in the way by which it naturally
requires to be exposed: do this handsomely, and the author is deservedly a jest
(...), on the contrary, you dress a passage which was not originally foolish,
in the highest humor of ridicule, you only frame something which the author
himself might laugh at, without being more nearly concerned than another render.

Page 47. Ver. 1. SO PASSED EUROPA] This simile makes ZOILUS, who sets up for a
professed enemy of Fables, to exclaim violently. We had, says he, a Frog and a
Mouse hitherto, and now we get a Bull and a Princess to illustrate their
actions: when will there be an end of this Fabling-folly and Poetry, which I
value myself for being unacquainted with? O great POLYCRATES, how happily have
thou observe?d in thy accusation against SOCRATES, That whatever he was before,
he deserved his poison when he began to make verses! Now, if the question be
concerning HOMER'S good or bad Poetry, this is an unqualifying speech, which
affords his friends just grounds of exception against the Critic. Wherefore be
it known to all present and future Cenfors, who haver, or shall presume to
glory, in an ignorance of Poetry, and at the same time take upon them to judge
of Poets, that they are in all their degrees for evere excluded the post they
would usurp. In the first place, they who know neither the use, nor practice of
the art; in the second, they who know, it but by halves, Who have hearts
insensible of the beauties of Poetry, and are however able to find fault by
rules; and thirdly, they who, when they are capable of perceiving beauties and
pointing out defects, are still so ignorant in the nature of their business, as
to imagine the province of Criticism extends itself only on the side of
dispraise and reprehension. How could any one at this rate be seen with his
proper balance of perfection and error? or what were the best performances in
this indulgence of ill nature, but as apartments hung with the deformities of
humanity, done by some great hand, which are the more to be abhorred, because
the praise and honor they receive, results from the degree of uneasiness, to
which they put every temper of common goodness?

Page 47. Ver. 28. YE MICE, YE MICE.] The ancients believed that heroes were
turned into Demigods at their death; and in general, that departing fouls have
something of a sight into futurity. It is either this notion, or a care which
the Gods may take to abate the pride of insulting adversaries, which a Poet
goes upon, when he makes his leaders die foretelling the end of those by whom
they are slain. ZOILUS however is against this passage. He says, That every
character ought to be strictly kept; that a general ought not to invade the
character of a prophet, nor a prophet of a general. He is positive, that
nothing should be done by any one, without having been hinted at in some
previous account of him. And this he asserts, without any allowance made either
for a change of states, or the design of the Gods. To confirm this observation,
he strengthens it with a quotation out of his larger work on the ILIAD, where
he has these words upon the death of HECTOR: How foolish is it in HOMER to make
HECTOR (who through the whole course of the ILIAD had made use of HELENUS, to
learn the will of the Gods) becomes prophet just at his death? Let every one be
what he ought, without falling into those parts which others are to sustain in
a poem. This he has said, not distinguishing rightly between our natural
dispostions and accidental offices. And this he has said again, not minding,
that though it be taken from another book, it is still from the same author.
However, vanity loves to gratify itself by the repetition of what it esteems,
to be written with spirit, and even when we repeat it ourselves, provided
another hears us. Hence has he been followed by a magisterial set of men who
quote themselves, and swell their new perfomances with what they admire in
their former Treatises. This is a most extraordinary knack of arguing, whereby
a man can never want a proof, if he be allowed to become an authority for his
own opinion.

Page 48. Ver. 16. AND NO KIND BILLOW.] How impertinent is this case of pity,
says ZOILUS, to bemoan, that the prince was not tossed toward land: It is
enough he lost his life, and there is an end of his suffering where there is an
end of his feeling. To carry the matter farther, is just the same foolish
management as HOMER has shown in his ILIADS, which he spins out into forty
trifles beyond the death of HECTOR. But the Critic must allow me to put the
renders in mind, that death was not the last distress the Ancients believed was
to be met upon earth. The last was the remaining unbury'd, which had this
misery annexed, that while the body was without its funeral-rites in this
world, the soul was supposed to be without rest in the next. which was the case
of the Mouse before us. And accordingly the AJAX of SOPHOCLES continues after
the death of its hero more than an act, upon the contest concerning his burial.
All this ZOILUS knew very well: but ZOILUS is not the only one, who disputes
for victory rather than truth. These foolish, to show how much they can write
against an author. They act unfairly, that they may be sure to be sharp enough;
and trifle with the reader, in order to be voluminous. It is needless to wish
them the return they deserve: their disregard to candor is no sooner
discovered, but they are for ever banished from the eyes of men of sense, and
condemned to wander from stall to stall, for a temporary refuge from that
oblivion which they cannot escape.

Page 49. Ver. 1. OUR ELDEST PERISHED.] ZOILUS had here taken the
recapitulation of those misfortunes which happened to the Royal Family, as an
impertinence that expatiates from the subject; though indeed there seems nothing
more proper to raise that sort of compassion, which was to inslame his audience
to war. But what appears extremely pleasant is, that at the same time he
condemns the passage, he should make use of it as an opportunity, to fall into
an ample digression on the various kinds of Mousetraps, and display that minute
learning which every Critic of his sort is fond to show himself master of. This
they imagine is tracing of knowledge through its hidden veins, and bringing
discoveries to daylight, which time had covered over. Indefatigable and useless
mortals! who value themselves for knowledge of no consequence, and think of
gaining applause by what the reader is careful to pass over unread. What did
the disquisition signify formerly, whether Ulysses's Son, or his Dog, was the
elder? or how can the account of a Vesture, or a Player's Masque, deserve that
any should write the bulk of a treatise, or others read it when it is written?
A vanity, thus poorly supported, which neither affords pleasure nor profit, is
the unsubstantial amusement of a dream to ourselves, and a provoking occasion
of our derision to others.

Page 49. Ver. 15, 16. QUILLS APTLY BOUND -- FACED WITH THE PLUNDER OF A CAT
THEY FLAYED.] This passage is something difficult in the original, which gave
ZOILUS the opportunity of inventing an expression, which his followers
conceitedly use when any thing appears dark to them. This, say they, let
Phoebus explain; as if what exceeds their capacity must of necessity demand
oracular interpretations, and an interposal of the God of Wit and Learning. The
basis of such arrogance is the opinion they have of that knowledge they ascribe
to themselves. They take Criticism to be beyond every other part of learning,
because it gives judgment upon books written in every other part. They think in
consequence, that every Critic must be a greater Genius than any Author whom he
censures; and therefore if they esteem themselves Critics, they set enthroned
Infancy at the head of Literature. Criticism indeed deserves a noble Elogy,
when it is enlarged by such a comprehensive learning as Aristotle and Cicero
were masters of; when it adorns its precepts with the consummate exactness of
Quintilian, or is exalted into the sublime sentiments of Longinus. But let not
such men tell us they participate in the glory of these great men, and place
themselves next to PHOEBUS, who, like ZOILUS, entangle an author in the
wrangles of grammarians, or try him with a positive air and barren imagination,
by the set of rules they have collected out of others.

Page 50. Ver. 1. YE FROGS! THE MICE.] At this speech of the Herald's, which
recites the cause of the war, ZOILUS is angry with the Author, for not finding
out a cause entirely just; for, says he, it appears not from his own Fable,
that Physignathus invited the prince with any malicious intention to make him
away. To this we answer, 1st, That it is not necessary in relating facts to
make every war have a just beginning. 2dly, This doubtful cause agrees better
with the moral, by showing that ill-founded leagues have accidents to destroy
them, even without the intention of parties. 3dly, There was all appearance
imaginable against the frogs; and if we may be allowed to retort on our
adversary the practice of his posterity, there is more humanity in an hostility
proclaimed upon the appearance of injustice done us, than in their custom of
attacking the works of others as soon as they come out, purely because they are
esteemed to be good. Their performances, which could derive no merit from their
own names, are then sold upon the merit of their antagonist: and if they are so
sensible of fame, or even of envy, they have the mortification to remember, how
much by this means they become indebted to those they injure.

Page 50. Ver. 21. WHERE HIGH THE BANKS.] This project is not put in practice
during the following battle, by reason of the fury of the combatants: yet the
mention of it is not impertinent in this place, forasmuch as the probable face
of success which it carties with it tended to animate the Frogs. ZOILUS however
cannot be so satisfied; It were better, says he, to cut it entirely out; nor
won'd HOMER be the worse if half of him were served in the same manner; so,
continues he, they will find it, whoever in any country, shall hereafter
undertake so odd a task, as that of translating him. Thus Envy finds words to
put in the mouth of Ignorance; and the time will come, when Ignorance shall
repeat what Envy has pronounced so rashly.

Page 51. Ver. 13. AND TAP'RING SEA-REEDS.] If we here take the reed for that
of our own growth, it is no spear to match the long sort of needles with which
the Mice had armed themselves; but the cane, which is rather intended, has its
splinters stiff and sharp, to answer all the uses of a spear in battle. Nor is
it here to be lightly past over, since ZOILUS moves a question upon it, that
the Poet could not choose a more proper weapon for the Frogs, than that which
they choose for themselves in a defensive war they maintain with the serpents
of Nile. They have this stratagem, says Aelian, to protect themselves; they
swim with pieces of cane across their mouths, of too great a length for the
breadth of the serpents throats; by which means they are preserved from being
swallowed by them. This is a quotation so much to the point, that I ought to
have ushered in my Author with more pomp to dazzle the reader. ZOILUS and his
followers, who seldom praise any man, are however careful to do it for their
own sakes, if at any time they get an author of their opinion: though indeed it
must be allowed, they still have a draw-back in their manner of praise, and
rather choose to drop the name of their man, or darkly hint him in a
periphrasis, than to have it appear that they have directly assisted the
perpetuating of any one's memory. Thus, if a Dutch Critic were to introduce for
example MARTIAL, he would, instead of naming him, say, INGENIOSUS ILLE
EPIGRAMMATICUS BILBILICUS. Or, if one of our own were to quote from among
ourselves, he would tell us how it has been remarked in the works of a learned
Writer, to whom the world is obliged for many excellent productions, etc. All
which proceeding is like boasting of our great friends, when it is to do
ourselves an honor, or the shift of dressing up one who might otherwise be
disregarded, to make him pass upon the world for a responsible voucher to our
own assertions.

Page 51. Ver. 17. BUT NOW WHERE JOVE'S.] At this fine Episode, in which the
Gods are introduced, ZOILUS has no patience left him to remark; but runs some
lines with a long string of such expressions, as "Trifler, Fabler, Liar,
foolish, impious," all which he lavishly heaps upon the Poet. From this knack
of calling names, joined with the several arts of finding fault, it is to be
suspected, that our ZOILUS'S might make very able libellers, and dangerous men
to the government, if they did not rather turn themselves to be ridiculous
censors: for which reason I cannot but reckon the state obliged to men of wit;
and under a kind of debt in gratitude, when they take off so much spleen,
turbulency, and ill nature, as might otherwise spend itself to the detriment of
the public.

Page 52. Ver. 5. IF MY DAUGHTER'S MIND.] This speech, which Jupiter speaks to
Pallas with a pleasant kind of air, ZOILUS takes gravely to pieces; and
affirms, It is below Jupiter's wisdom, and only agreeable with HOMER'S folly,
that he should borrow a reason for her assisting the Mice from their attendance
in the temple, when they waited to prey upon those things which were sacred to
her. But the air of the speech rendering a grave answer unnecessary; I shall
only offer ZOILUS an observation in return for his. There are upon the stone
which is carved for the apotheosis of HOMER, figures of Mice by his footstool,
which, according to Cuperus, its interpreter, some have taken to signify this
Poem; and others those Critics, who tear or vilify the works of great men. Now
if such can be compared to Mice, let the words of ZOILUS be brought home to
himself and his followers for their mortification. That no one ought to think
of meriting in the state of learning only by debasing the best performances,
and as it were preying upon those things which should be sacred in it.

Page 52. Ver. 13. IN VAIN MY FATHER.] The speech of Pallas is disliked by
ZOILUS, because it makes the Goddess carry a resentment against such
inconsiderable creatures; though he ought to esteem them otherwise when they
represent the persons and actions of men, and teach us how the Gods, disregard
those in their adversities who provoke them in prosperity. But, if we consider
Pallas as the patroness of learning, we may by an allegorical application of
the Mice and Frogs, find in this speech two sorts of enemies to learning; they
who are maliciously mischievous, as the Mice; and they who are turbulent
through ostentation, as the Frogs. The first are enemies to excellency upon
principle; the second accidentally by the error of self-love, which does not
quarrel with the excellence itself, but only with those people who get more
praise than themselves by it. Thus, though they have not the same perverseness
with the others, they are however drawn into the same practices, while they
ruin reputations, lest they should not seem to be learned; as some women turn
prostitutes, lest they should not be thought handsome enough to have admirers.

Page 54. Ver. 5. THEIR DREADFUL TRUMPETS.] Upon the reading of this, ZOILUS
becomes full of discoveries. He recollects, that Homer makes his Greeks come to
battle with silence, and his Trojans with shouts; from whence he discovers,
that he knew nothing of trumpets. Again, he sees, that the hornet is made a
trumpeter to the battle; and hence he discovers, that the line must not be
HOMER'S. Now had he drawn his consequences fairly, he could only have found by
the one, that trumpets were not in use at the taking of Troy; and by the other,
that the battle of Frogs and Mice was laid by the Poet for a later scene of
action than that of the ILIAD. But the boast of discoveries accompanies the
affectation of knowledge; and the affectation of knowledge is taken up with a
design to gain a command over the opinions of others. It is too heavy a task
for some Critics to sway our rational judgments by rational inferences; a
pompous pretense must occasion admiration, the eyes of mankind must be obscured
by a glare of pedantry, that they may consent to be led blindfold, and permit
that an opinion should be dictated to them without demanding that they may be
reasoned into it.

Page 54. Ver. 24. BIG SEUTLAEUS TUMBLING.] ZOILUS has happened to brush the
dust of some old manuscript, in which the line that kills SEUTLAEUS is wanting.
And for this cause he fixes a general conclusion, that there is no dependence
upon any thing which is handed down for HOMER'S, so as to allow it praise;
since the different copies vary amongst themselves. But is it fair in ZOILUS,
or any of his followers, to oppose one copy to a thousand? and are they
impartial who would pass this upon us for an honest balance of evidence? When
there is such an inequality on each side, is it not more than probable that the
number carry the author's sense in them, and the single one its transcriber's
errors? It is folly or madness of passion to be thus given over to partiality
and prejudices. Men may flourish as much as they please concerning the value of
a newfound edition, in order to bias the world to particular parts of it; but
in a matter easily decided by common sense, it will still continue of its own
opinion.

Page 56. Ver. 17. WITH BORBOCAETES FIGHTS] Through the grammatical part of
ZOILUS'S work he frequently rails at HOMER for his dialects. "These," says he
in one place, the Poet made use of because he could not write pure Greek; and
in another, they strangely contributed to his fame, by making several cities
who observed something of their own in his mixed language, contend for his
being one of their natives. Now since I have here practiced a license in
imitation of his, by shortning the word BORBOCAETES a whole syllable, it seems
a good opportunity to speak for him where I defend myself. Remember then, that
any great genius, who introduces Poetry into a language, has a power to polish
it, and of all the manners of speaking then in use, to settle that for Poetical
which he judges most adapted to the art. Take notice too, that HOMER has not
only done this for necessity, but for ornament, since he uses various dialects
to humor his sense with sounds which are expressive of it. Thus much in behalf
of my Author to answer ZOILUS: as for myself, who deal with his followers, I
must argue from necessity, that the word was stubborn and would not ply to the
quantities of an English Verse, and therefore I altered it by the Dialect we
call Poetical, which makes my line so much smoother, that I am ready to cry
with their brother LIPSIUS, when he turned an O into an I, Vel ego me amo, vel
me amavit Phoebus quando hoc correxi. To this let me add a recrimination upon
some of them: As 1st, such as choose words written after the manner of those
who preceded the purest age of a language, without the necessity I have
pleaded, as regundi for regendi, perduit for perdidit, which restoration of
obsolete words deserves to be called a Critical License or Dialect. 2dly, Those
who pretending to verse without an ear, use the Poetical Dialect of
Abbreviation, so that the lines shall run the rougher for it. And 3dly, those
who presume by their Critical Licenses to alter the spellings of words; an
affectation which destroys the etymology of a language, and being carried on by
private hands for fancy or fashion, would be a thing we should never have an
end.

Page 59. Ver. 13. NOR PALLAS, JOVE!] I cannot, says ZOILUS, reflect upon this
speech of Mars, is where a Mouse is opposed to the God of War, the Goddess of
Valor, the thunder of Jupiter, and all the Gods at once, but I rejoice to
think that PYTHAGORAS saw HOMER'S soul in hell, hanging on a tree, and
surrounded with serpents, for what he said of the Gods. Thus he who hates
Fables answers one with another, and can rejoice in them when they flatter his
envy. He appears at the head of his squadron of Critics, in the full spirit of
one utterly devoted to a party; with whom truth is a lie, or as bad as a lie,
when it makes against him; and false quotations, pass for truth, or as good as
truth, when they are necessary to a cause.

Page 61. Ver. 11. AND A WHOLE WAR.] Here, says ZOILUS, is an end of a very
foolish Poem, of which by this time I have effectually convinced the world, and
silenced all such for the future, who, like HOMER, write Fables to which others
find Morals, characters whose justness is questioned, unnecessary digressions,
and impious episodes. But what assurance can such a ZOILUS have, that the world
will ever be convinced against an established reputation, by such people whose
faults in writing are so very notorious? who judge against rules, affirm
without reasons, and censure without manners? who quote themselves for a
support of their opinions, found their pride upon a learning in trifles, and
their superiority upon the claims they magisterially make? who write of
beauties in a harsh style, judge of excellency with a lowness of spirit, and
pursue their desire to decry it with every artifice of envy? There is no
disgrace in being censured, where there is no credit to be favored. But, on
the contrary, Envy gives a testimony of some perfection in another; and one who
is attacked by many, is like a hero whom his enemies acknowledge for such, when
they point all the spears of a battle against him. In short, an author who
writes for every age, may even erect himself a monument of those stones which
Envy throws at him: while the Critic who writes against him can have no fame
because he had no success; or if he fancies he may succeed, he should remember,
that by the nature of his undertaking he would but undermine his own
foundation; for he is to sink of course, when the book which he writes against,
and for which alone he is read, is lost in disrepute or oblivion.

THE END OF MR. PARNELL'S WORKS, AS PUBLISHED BY MR. POPE.
ADVERTISEMENT.
The following VARIATIONS are taken from a MS. communicated by a Gentleman of
Taste in Ireland; and are published as a Specimen of Mr. POPE'S Alterations of
the Verses of his Friend, such as he has himself given of his own Verses, in
the latest Editions of his Works.

ALTERATIONS IN HESIOD.
P. [POPE'S EDITION. M. [MANUSCRIPT.
Page 2. Ver. 26.

P. Where mingled whiteness glowed with softer red.
M. Where lovely whiteness glowed with mingling red.
Page 4. After Ver. 14. the MS. reads thus:

Whatever shining gemms the Nymphs by land,
What orient pearl the Nymphs by sea command.
-- After Ver. 20. reads thus:

Fine links in golden chains for bracelets hung,
Gay buckles sparkling round about the tongue,
And brazen pins, a numerous aid on earth,
From whence new turns of fashion find a birth;
But chief the mirror --
Page 5. After Ver. 2. the MS. reads thus:

On which dissembled Nature seemed to yield
Her painted gardens in a silken field,)
-- Ver. 24.

P. Women have time to sacrifice to pride.
M. Not born to labor Women live to pride.
In the manuscript, at the end of every six lines through the whole Song of the
Fates, the two first lines of it come in as a burden.

Page 7. After Ver. 10. the MS. reads thus:

For Women pained to conquer when they yield,
But keep from empire while they keep the field:
-- Ver. 16.

P. The fatal gift, her tempting self unknown!
M. The faithless gift, her faithless self unknown!
-- After Ver. 22. reads thus:

What rocks, what shelves within her bosom hide,
Ah! where the wrecks are frequent leave to ride.
Page 8. Ver. 13.

P. The days of whining, and of wild intrigues,
M. The days of whining court, the wild intrigues,
-- After Ver. 18. reads thus:

Expense on fashions though the wealth decay,
Though still we see the danger, fret, and pay;
The curse of jealousy; the curse of strife;
-- After Ver. 2^. reads thus:

As men who sailing touch on Libyan land,
See brinded Panthers scour the desert sand,
Fierce Wolves and Tigers wandering swains engage,
And scaly Dragons fill the realm with rage;
If still the distant breaks are heard to roar,
Much what they view they dread, and fear for more.
Page 10. Ver. 8.

P. And thus inscribes the moral on the sand.
M. And thus the point reversing graves the sand.
SONG.
Page 12. The MS. reads thus:

THYRSIS, a young and amorous swain,
Saw two, the beauties of the plain,
And both their charms prepared a chain,
And both his heart subdue;
Gay Caelia's eyes appeared so fair,
They dazzl'd, while she pulled the snare;
Sabina's easy shape and air
With softer magic drew.
He haunts the stream, he haunts the grove,
Wherever the friendly rivals rove,
Lives in a fond romance of love,
And seems for each to dye;
'Till each a little spiteful grown,
They make their faults to Thyrsis known,
Sabina Caelia's shape run down,
And she Sabina's eye.
Their envy made the shepherd find
Those eyes which love could only blind,
Thus both the chains of both unbind,
And set the lover free:
No more he haunts the grove or stream,
The flowery walk of either dame,
Or with a true-love knot and name,
Engraves a wounded tree, etc.
IN THE BOOK-WORM.
Page 78. After Ver. 28. the MS. reads thus:

The monster issues from the wood
That boasts the gallant Nisus' blood;
From leaf, etc.
-- After Ver. 24. reads thus:

Around my temples laurel bind,
But leave that azure silk behind,
I Will have my fillet flame with red,
To suit a sacrificer's head.
Bring Homer, Virgil, Tasso near,
To pile a sacred altar here;
Now Spencer, Milton, Dryden lift,
Row, Steel, Pope, Addison and Swift,
Hold boy, thy hand out-runs thy wit,
You reached the plays that Dennis writ:
You reached me Phillip's, etc.
Page 79. After Ver. 28. the MS. reads thus:

Come bind the victim, but forbear
To turn his throat to upper air,
That posture suits the Gods above,
This earth the Muses often love,
And now I think they are not gone,
They live with Pope and Addison.
So -- as I would the savage lies, etc.
Page 80. After Ver. 6. the MS. reads thus:

It foams with wine, upon the beast
I pour a drop, and drink the rest, etc.
-- After Ver. 10. reads thus:

Here Is fame to Pope, and wealth to Steel,
And all to Addison he will,
May Garth have practice, Congreve sight,
May Row get many a full third night;
Be gentle Gay's and Tickel's lot
At least as good as Budgell got;
But if their riches, etc.
-- After Ver. 14, reads thus:

Devoted wretch! thy mischief past
Has made this point of time thy last,
-- After Ver. 16. reads thus:

Beneath the native mail I run,
He bleeds, he bleeds, the work is done;
-- After Ver. 18. reads thus:

M. Go reach thy sounding harp my boy,
And Io Paean! sing for joy.
How like, etc.
IN THE NIGHT-PIECE ON DEATH.
Page 90. Ver. 11, 12.

P. Time was, like thee they life possessed,
And time shall be, that thou shall rest.
M. Time was, like thee they life possessed,
And thou like them shall sink to rest.
Page 92. After Ver. 6. the MS. reads thus:

Nor count we death a cause to grieve,
But dying when to vice we live.
-- Ver. 13.

P. On earth, and in the body placed,
A few, and evil years they waste.
M. Confined to flesh, and placed beneath,
A few, and evil years they breathe.
IN THE HERMIT.
Page 96. Ver. 5.

M. His goods a glass to measure human breath,
The books of wisdom, and the spade of death.
Page 98. Ver. 17, 18.

P. Fresh over the gay parterres the breezes creep,
And shake the neighboring wood to banish sleep.
M. With fresh'ning airs over gay parterres they creep,
And shake the rustling groves to banish sleep.
Page 101. Ver. 1.

P. Now night's dim shades again involve the sky.
M. When dusky twilight bid the night prepare,
To light with radiant drops the dark'ning air;
Page 102. Ver. 1.

Instead of HELL'S BLACK JAWS, the MS. has HELL'S DEEP JAWS.

-- Ver. 25, 26.

P. The form etherial bursts upon the sight,
And moves in all the majesty of light.
M. So when the sun his dazzling splendor shrowds,
Yet just begins to break the veiling clouds;
A bright effulgence at the first is seen,
But shorn of beams, and with a mist between,
Soon the full glory bursts upon the sight,
And moves in all the majesty of light.
Page 103. Ver 3.

M. So loud through rocks the tumbling waters stray,
Then glide beneath the fall unheard away.
-- Ver. 13, 14, 15.

P. The Maker justly claims that world he made.
In this the right of Providence is laid;
Its sacred Majesty, etc.
M. Eternal God the world's foundations laid,
He made what is, and governs what he made,
His sacred Majesty, etc.
THE FOLLOWING POEMS ARE PUBLISHED FROM THE MANUSCRIPT FROM WHICH THE FOREGOING
VARIATIONS WERE TAKEN.
BACCHUS: OR, THE VINES OF LESBOS.
AS Bacchus ranging at his leisure,
(lo Bacchus! king of pleasure)
Charmed the wide world with drink and dances,
And all his thousand airy fancies;
Alas! he quite forgot the while
His favorite vines in Lesbos isle.
The God returning ere they died,
Ah! see my jolly Fawns, he cried,
The leaves but hardly born are red,
And the bare arms for pity spread;
The beasts afford a rich manure,
Fly, my boys, and bring the lure,
Up the mountains, down the vales;
Through the woods, and over the dales;
For this, if full the clusters grow,
Your bowls shall doubly overflow.
So cheered, with more officious haste
They bring the dung of every beast,
The loads they wheel, the roots they bare,
They lay the rich manure with care,
While often he calls to labor hard,
And names as often the red reward.
The plants revive, new leaves appear,
The thick'ning clusters load the year;
The season swiftly purple grew,
The grapes hung dangling deep with blue.
A vineyard ripe a day serene
Now calls them all to work again;
The Fawns through every furrow shoot
To load their flaskets with the fruit;
And now the vintage early trod,
The wines invite the jovial God.
Strew the roses, raise the song,
See the master comes along!
Lusty Revel joined with Laughter,
Whim and Frolic follow after.
The Fawns beside the vatts remain
To show the work, and reap the gain.
All around, and all around
They sit to riot on the ground,
A vessel stands amidst the ring,
And here they laugh, and there they sing;
Or rise a jolly jolly band,
And dance about it hand in hand;
Dance about, and shout amain,
Then sit to laugh and sing again.
But, as an ancient author sung,
The vine manured with every dung,
From every creature strangely drew,
A tang of brutal nature too;
'Twas hence in drinking on the lawns
New turns of humor seized the Fawns.
Here one was crying out, by Jove!
Another, fight me in the grove;
This wounds a friend, and that the trees;
The Lion's temper reigned in these.
Another grins and leaps about,
And keeps a merry world of rout,
And talks impertinently free;
And twenty talk the same as he:
Chatt'ring, airy, idle, kind:
These take the Monkey-turn of mind.
Here one who saw the nymphs that stood
To peep upon them from the wood,
Steals off, to try if any maid
Be lagging late beneath the shade;
While loose discourse another raises
In naked Nature's plainest phrases;
And every glass he drinks enjoys
With change of nonsense, lust and noise;
Mad and careless, hot and vain,
Such as these the Goat retain.
Another drinks and casts it up,
And drinks and wants another cup,
Solemn, silent, and sedate,
Ever long and ever late,
Full of meats and full of wine;
This takes his temper from the swine.
Here some who hardly seem to breathe,
Drink and hang the jaw beneath,
Gaping, tender, apt to weep;
Their natures altered by the sheep.
'Twas thus one autumn all the crew
(If what the Poets sing be true)
While Bacchus made the merry feast
Inclined to one or other beast;
And since it is said for many a mile
He spread the vines of Lesbos isle.
ELYSIUM.
IN airy fields, the fields of bliss below,
Where woods of myrtle set by Maro grow;
Where grass beneath, and shade diffused above,
Refresh the fever of distracted love:
There at a solemn tide, the beauties slain
By tender passion, act their fates again:
Through gloomy light that just betrays the grove,
In Orgyes all disconsolately rove;
They range the reeds, and over the poppies sweep,
That nodding bend beneath their load of sleep;
By lakes subsiding with a gentle face,
And rivers gliding with a silent pace,
Where kings and swains, by ancient authors sung,
Now changed to flowerets, over the margin hung:
The self-admirer, white Narcissus, so
Fades at the brink, his picture fades below;
In bells of azure, Hyacinth arose,
In crimson painted young Adonis glows;
The fragrant Crocus shone with golden flame,
And leaves inscribed with Ajax' haughty name.
A sad remembrance brings their lives to view,
And with their passion makes their tears renew;
Unwinds the years, and lays the former scene,
Where after death, they live for deaths again.
Lost by the glories of her lover's state,
Deluded Semele bewails her fate,
And runs, and seems to burn, the flames arise,
And fan with idle furies as the flies.
The lovely Caenis, whose transforming shape
Secured her honor from a second rape,
Now moans the first, with ruffl'd dress appears,
Feels her whole sex return, and bathes with tears.
The jealous Procris wipes a seeming wound,
Whose trickling crimson dies the bushy ground,
Knows the sad shaft, and calls before she go,
To kiss the favorite hand that gave the blow.
Over a feigned Ocean's rage the Sestian Fair
Holds a dim taper from a tower of air;
A noiseless wind assaults the wavering light,
The beauty tumbling, mingles with the night.
Where curling shades for rough Leucate rose,
With love distracted tuneful Sappho goes;
Sings to mock-cliffs a melancholy lay,
And with a Lover's leap affrights the sea.
The sad Eriphyle retreats to moan
What wrought her husband's death, and caused her own;
Surveys the glittering veil, the bribe of fate,
And tears the shadow, but she tears too late.
In thin design and airy picture fleet
The tales that stain the Royal House of Crete:
To court a lovely bull Pasiphae flies,
The snowy phantom feeds before her eyes;
Lost Ariadne raves, the thread she bore
Trails on unwinding as she walks the shore;
And desperate Phaedra seeks the lonely groves
To read her guilty letter while she roves;
Red shame confounds the first, the second wears
A starry crown, the third a halter bears.
Fair Laodamia mourns her nuptial night
Of love defrauded by the thirst of fight;
Yet for another as delusive cries,
And dauntless sees her hero's ghost arise.
Here Thisbe, Canace, and Dido stand
All armed with swords, a fair but angry band;
This sword a lover owned, a father gave
The next, the last a stranger chanced to leave.
And there even she, the Goddess of the grove,
Joined with the phantom Fairs, affects to rove,
As once for Latmos she forsook the plain,
To steal the kisses of a slumbering swain;
Around her head a starry fillet twines,
And at the front a silver crescent shines.
These, and a thousand, and a thousand more,
With sacred rage recall the pangs they bore,
Strike the deep dart afresh, and ask relief,
Or sooth the wound with softening words of grief.
At such a tide unheedful Love invades
The dark recesses of the madding shades,
Through long descent he fans the fogs around,
His purple feathers as he flies resound,
The nimble Beauties crouding all to gaze,
Confess the common troubler of their ease;
Though dulling mists and dubious day destroy
The fine appearance of the fluttering boy,
Though all the pomp that glitters at his side,
The golden belt, the clasp and quiver hid,
And though the torch appear a gleam of white
That faintly spots and moves through haizy night;
Yet still they know the God, the general foe,
And threatening lift their airy hands below.
As mindless of their rage he slowly sails
On pinions cumber'd in the misty vales;
(Ah! fool to light) the nymphs no more obey,
Nor was this region ever his to sway;
Cast in a deepen'd ring they close the plain,
And seize the God reluctant all in vain.
From hence they lead him where a myrtle stood,
The saddest myrtle in the mournful wood,
Devote to vex the God, 'twas here before
Hell's awful empress soft Adonis bore,
When the young hunter scorned her graver air,
And only Venus warmed his shadow there.
Fixed to the trunk the tender boy they bind,
They cord his feet beneath, his hands behind;
He mourns, but vainly mourns his angry fate,
For Beauty still relentless acts in hate;
Though no offense be done, no judge be nigh,
Love must be guilty by the common cry;
For all are pleased, by partial passion led,
To shift their follies on another's head.
Now sharp Reproaches ring their shrill alarms,
And all the Heroines brandish all their arms,
And every Heroine makes it her decree,
That Cupid suffer just the same as she;
To fix the desperate halter one essayed;
One seeks to wound him with an empty blade;
Some headlong hang the nodding rocks of air,
They fall in fancy, and he feels despair;
Some toss the hollow seas around his head,
(The seas that want a wave afford a dread)
Or shake the torch, the sparkling fury flies,
And flames that never burned, afflict his eyes.
The groaning Myrrha bursts her rinded womb,
And drowns his visage in the moist perfume;
While others, seeming mild, advise to wound
With hum'rous pains, by sly derision found;
That prickling bodkins teach the blood to flow,
From whence the roses first begin to glow;
Or in the flames to singe the boy prepare,
That all should choose by wanton fancy where.
The lovely Venus, with a bleeding breast,
She too securely through the circle pressed,
Forgot the parent, urged his hasty fate,
And spurred the female rage beyond debate;
Over all her scenes of frailty swiftly runs,
Absolves herself, and makes the crime her son's;
That clasped in chains with Mars she chanced to lie,
A noted fable of the laughing sky;
That from her Love's intemp'rate heat began
Sicanian Eryx, born a savage man;
The loose Priapus, and the monster-wight
In whom the sexes shamefully unite.
Nor words suffice the Goddess of the Fair,
She snaps the rosy-wreath that binds her hair,
Then on the God who feared a fiercer woe,
Her hands unpitying dealt the frequent blow;
From all his tender skin, a purple dew
The dreadful scourges of the chaplet drew;
From whence the rose by Cupid tinged before,
Now doubly tinged, flames with luster more.
Here ends their wrath; the parent seems severe,
The strokes unfit for little Love to bear;
To save their foe the melting beauties fly,
"And cruel mother! spare thy child, they cry;
To Love's account they placed their deaths of late,
And now transfer the sad account to fate;
The mother pleased beheld the storm assuage,
Thanked the calm mourners, and dismissed her rage.
Thus Fancy once in dusky shade expressed,
With empty terrors worked the time of rest,
Where wretched Love endured a world of woe,
For all a Winter's length of night below;
Then soared, as sleep dissolved, unchain'd away,
And through the port of Ivory reached the Day.
TO DR. SWIFT.
Urged by the warmth of sacred friendship's flame,
But more by all the wonders of thy fame,
By all those offsprings of thy learned mind,
In judgment solid, as in wit refined;
Resolved I sing, though laboring up the way
To reach my theme -- O Swift! accept my lay.
Rapt by the force of thought, and raised above,
Through Contemplation's airy fields I rove,
Where powerful Fancy purifies my eye,
And lights the beauties of a brighter sky,
Fresh paints the meadows, bids green shades ascend,
Clear rivers wind, and opening plains extend;
Then fills its landscape through the varied parts
With Virtues, Graces, Sciences and Arts,
Superior forms, of more than mortal air,
More large than mortals, more serenely fair:
And there two chiefs, the guardians of thy name,
Contend to raise thee to the point of fame.
Ye future times! -- I heard the silver sound,
I saw the Graces form a circle round;
Each where she fixed attentive seemed to root,
And all but Eloquence herself was mute.
High over the throng I saw the Goddess rise,
Free to the breeze her upper garment flies;
By turns within her eye the passions burn,
The softer passions languish in their turn;
Upon her lips convincing Proof resides,
Through all her speech Persuasion melting glides;
A golden crown confessed her high command,
And waving Action gently graced her hand.
Out of her bosom, where the treasure lay,
She drew thy labors to the blaze of day,
Then gazed, and read the charms she could inspire,
And taught the listening audience to admire.
How strong thy flight! how large thy grasp of thought!
How just thy schemes! how regularly wrought!
How sure you wound when ironies deride!
Which must be seen, yet feign to turn aside;
How far uncommon, with an air of ease,
How nicely taking are thy turns of praise!
Fame wants no words to make the Patriot shine,
But yet, to choose the best, must borrow thine:
What public spirit in thy works appears!
What rolling language fills the ravished ears!
Where Nature all her force of writing shows,
Where Art concealing Art with Nature goes.
She ceased. Applause attended on the close;
Then Poetry her sister art arose,
Her fairer sister, born in deepest ease,
Not made so much for business as to please;
Upon her cheeks sits beauty ever young,
The soul of music warbles on her tongue,
Bright in her eyes a pleasing ardour glows,
And from her heart the sweetest temper flows;
A laurel-wreath adorns her curling hair,
And binds their order to the dancing air;
She shakes the colors of her radiant wing,
While from the spheres she takes her pitch to sing.
Thrice happy Genius his! whose works have hit
The lucky point of business and of wit;
They seem like showers which April months prepare
To call the flowery glories up to air;
The drops descending make the varied bow,
And while they fall for profit, dress for show.
To me retiring often he finds relief
From slow consuming care, and pining grief;
From me retreating often he gives to view
What eases care, and grief in others too.
Ye fondly grave! be wise enough to know,
Life never unbent is but a life of woe.
I Will gently steal you from your toils away,
Where balmy winds, and scents ambrosial play,
Where on the banks, as crystal rivers flow,
They teach immortal Amaranths to grow;
Then from the wild indulgence of the scene,
Restore your tempers strong for toils again.
She ceased. Soft Music trembled in the wind,
And sweet Delight diffused, through every mind:
The little Smiles which still the Goddess grace,
Sportive arose, and run from face to face.
But chief --
A gentle band their eager joys express:
Here Friendship asks, and Love of Merit longs
To hear the Goddesses renew their songs;
There great Benevolence to Men is pleased;
These own their SWIFT, and grateful hear him praised.
You gentle band! you well may bear your part,
You reign Superior Graces in his heart.
O SWIFT! if Friendship's warm yet lasting flame,
If Love of Merit have to praise a claim;
If just esteem from every temper flows
To crown a tender sense of human woes;
These fair returns are thine: nor could thou lie
Unknown alive, nor wilt unlovely dye.
Or if high fame be life, (and well we know,
That Bards and Heroes have esteemed it so)
Thou can not all expire; thy Works will shine
To future times, and Life in Fame be thine.
PIETY: OR, THE VISION.
'TWAS when the night in silent sable fled,
When cheerful morning sprung with rising red,
When dreams and vapors leave to crowd the brain,
And best the Vision draws its heavenly scene;
'Twas then, as slumbering on my couch I lay,
A sudden splendour seemed to kindle day,
A breeze came breathing in a sweet perfume,
Blown from eternal gardens, filled the room;
And in a void of blue, that clouds invest,
Appeared a daughter of the realms of rest;
Her head a ring of golden glory wore,
Her honored hand the sacred volume bore,
Her raiment glittering seemed a silver white,
And all her sweet companions sons of light.
Strait as I gazed my fear and wonder grew,
Fear barred my voice, and wonder ^ix'd my view,
When lo! a cherub of the shining crowd
That sailed as guardians in her azure cloud,
Fanned the soft air and downward seemed to glide,
And to my lips a living coal applied;
Then while the warmth on all my pulses ran,
Diffusing comfort, thus the maid began.
'Where glorious mansions are prepared above,
'The seats of Music, and the seats of Love,
'Thence I descend, and PIETY my name,
'To warm thy bosom with celestial flame,
'To teach thee praises mixed with humble prayers,
'And tune thy soul to sing seraphic airs;
'Be thou my bard.' A vial here she caught,
(An angel's hand the crystal vial brought)
And as with awful sound the word was said,
She poured a sacred unction on my head,
Then thus proceeded. 'Be thy muse thy zeal,
'Dare to be good, and all my joys reveal;
'While other pencils flattering forms create,
'And paint the gaudy plumes that deck the great;
'While other pens exalt the vain delight,
'Whose wasteful revel wakes the depth of night;
'Or others softly sing in idle lines,
'How Damon courts, or Amaryllis shines;
'More wisely thou select a theme divine;
''Tis Fame's their recompense, it is Heaven is thine.
'Despise the fervours of unhallowed fire,
'Where wine, or passion, or applause inspire,
'Low restless life, and ravings born of earth,
'Whose meaner subjects speak their humble birth;
'Like working seas, that when loud Winters blow,
'Not made for rising, only rage below:
'Mine is a great, and yet a lasting heat,
'More lasting still, as more intensely great,
'Produc'd where prayer, and praise, and pleasure breathe,
'And ever mounting whence it shot beneath.
'Unpaint the Love that hovering over beds,
'From glittering pinions guilty pleasure sheds,
'Restore the color to the golden mines
'With which behind the feathered idol shines;
'To flow'ring greens give back their native care,
'The rose and lily never his to wear;
'To sweet Arabia send the balmy breath,
'Strip the fair flesh, and call the phantom Death;
'His bow be sabled over, his shafts the same,
'And fork and point them with eternal flame.
'But urge thy powers, thine utmost voice advance,
'Make the loud strings against thy fingers dance,
''Tis Love that angels praise, and men adore,
''Tis Love Divine that asks it all and more:
'Fling back the gates of ever-blazing day,
'Pour floods of liquid light to gild the way,
'And all in glory wrapped, through paths untrod,
'Pursue the great unseen descent of GOD!
'Hail the meek VIRGIN, bid the CHILD appear,
'The CHILD is GOD! and call him JESUS here;
'He comes; but where to rest? a manger's nigh,
'Make the GREAT BEING in a manger lie;
'Fill the wide skies with angels on the wing,
'Make thousands gaze, and make ten thousands sing:
'Let men afflict him, men he came to save,
'And still afflict him, 'till he reach the grave;
'Make him resigned, his loads of sorrow meet,
'And me, like Mary, weep beneath his feet;
'I'll bathe my tresses there, my prayers rehoarse,
'And glide in flames of love along thy verse.
'Hah! while I speak, I feel my bosom swell,
'My raptures smother what I long to tell!
''Tis GOD! a present GOD! through cleaving air
'I see the throne! I see the JESUS there!
'Plac'd on the right; he shows the wounds he bore!
'(My fervours often have won him thus before)
'How pleased he looks! my words have reached his ear,
'He bids the gates unbar, and calls me near.'
She ceased. The cloud on which she seemed to tread,
Its curls unsolded, and around her spread;
Bright angels waft their wings to raise the cloud,
And sweep their ivory lutes, and sing aloud;
The scene moves off, while all its ambient sky
Is tuned to wondrous music, as they fly;
And soft the swelling sounds of music grow,
And faint their softness, till they fail below.
My dow^y sleep the warmth of Phoebus broke,
And while my thoughts were settling, thus I spoke;
Thou beauteous Vision on the soul impressed,
When most my reason would appear ^o rest!
'Twas sure with pencils dipped in various lights
Some curious angel limn'd thy sacred sights;
From blazing suns his radiant gold he drew,
White moons the silver gave, and air the blue.
I Will mount the roving wind's expanded wing,
And seek the sacred hill, and light to sing;
('It Is known in Jewry well) I Will make my lays,
Obedient to thy summons, sound with praise.
But still I fear, unwarm'd with holy flame,
I take for truth the flatt'ries of a dream;
And barely wish the wondrous gift I boast,
And faintly practice what deserves it most.
"Indulgent LORD! whose gracious love displays
Joys in the light, and fills the dark with ease;
Be this, to bless my days, no dream of bliss,
Or be, to bless my nights, my dreams like this.
ECSTACY.
THE fleeting joys, which all affords below,
Work the fond heart with unavailing show.
The wish that makes our happier life complete,
Nor grasps the wealth, nor honors of the great,
Nor loosely sails on Pleasure's easy stream,
Nor gathers wreaths from all the groves of Fame.
Weak man! who charms to these alone confine,
Attend my prayer, and learn to make it thine.
"From thy rich throne, where circling trains of
Make day that is endless infinitely bright,
Thence, Heavenly Father! thence with mercy dart
One beam of brightness to my longing heart,
Dawn through the mind, drive Error's clouds away,
And still the rage in Passion's troubled sea;
That the poor banished soul, serene and free,
May rise from earth to visit heaven and thee.
Come Peace Divine, shed gently from above,
Inspire my willing bosom, wondrous Love!
Thy purpl'd pinions to my shoulders tie,
And point the passage where I want to fly.
But whither, whither now! what powerful fire
With this blessed influence equals my desire?
I rise, or Love the kind deluder reigns,
And acts in fancy such enchanted scenes,
Earth lessening flies, the parting skies retreat,
The fleecy clouds my waving feathers beat;
And now the sun and now the stars are gone;
Yet still methinks the spirit bears me on,
Where tracts of ether purer blue display,
And edge the golden realm of native day.
O strange enjoyment of a bliss unseen!
O ravishment! O sacred rage within!
Tumultuous pleasure, raised on peace of mind,
Sincere, excessive, from the world refined!
I see the light that veils the throne on high,
A light unpierc'd by man's impurer eye;
I hear the words that issuing thence proclaim,
"Let God's attendants praise his awful name;"
Then heads unnumber'd bend before the shrine,
Mysterious seat of Majesty Divine!
And hands unnumber'd strike the silver string,
And tongues unnumber'd Hallelujah sing.
See, where the shining seraphim appear,
And sink their decent eyes with holy fear;
See flights of angels all their feathers raise,
And range the orbs, and as they range they praise;
Behold the great Apostles joyful met,
And high on pearls of azure ether set;
Behold the Prophets full of heavenly fire
With wandering fingers wake the trembling lyre;
And hear the Martyrs tune; and all around
The church triumphant makes the region sound;
With harps of gold, with boughs of ever-green,
With robes of white, the pious throngs are seen;
Exalted anthems all their hours employ,
And all is music, and excess of joy.
Charmed with the sight I long to bear a part,
The pleasure flutters at my ravished heart.
Sweet saints and angels of the heavenly quire!
If Love has warmed me with celestial fire,
Assist my words, and as they move along,
With Hallelujah crown the burdened song.
Father of all above and all below!
O great beyond expression! --
No bounds thy knowledge, none thy power confine,
For power and knowledge in their source are thine:
Around thee glory spreads her golden wing.
Sing, glittering angels, Hallelujah sing.
Son of the Father! first begotten Son,
Ere the short meas'ring line of time begun!
The world has seen thy works, and joy'd to see
His bright effulgence manifest in thee.
The world must own thee Love's unfathomed spring.
Sing, glittering angels, Hallelujah sing.
Proceeding Spirit! equally divine,
In whom the Godhead's full perfections shine;
With various graces, comforts unexprest,
With holy transports you refine the breast,
And earth is heavenly where your gifts you bring.
Sing, glittering angels, Hallelujah sing.
But where is my rapture? where my wondrous heat?
What interruption makes my bliss retreat?
This world's got in, the thought of t'other's crossed,
And the gay picture's in my fancy lost.
With what an eager zeal the conscious soul
Would claim its seat, and soaring pass the pole?
But our attempts these chains of earth restrain,
Deride our toil, and drag us down again.
So from the ground aspiring meteors go,
And ranked with planets, light the would below;
But their own bodies sink them in the sky,
When the warmth's gone that taught them how to fly.
FINIS.

