THE FAIR HIBERNIAN.

VOL. II.

THE FAIR HIBERNIAN.

What Ignorance shall think, or Malice say,
To me are Trifles, -- if the knowing few,
Who can see Faults, but can see Beauties too,
Applaud that Genius which themselves partake.
IN TWO VOLUMES. VOLUME THE SECOND.

LONDON: PRINTED BY JOHN CROWDER, FOR G. G. J. AND J. ROBINSON,
PATERNOSTER ROW M,DCC,LXXXIX.

THE FAIR HIBERNIAN.
TO MRS. CHETWYND. -- IRELAND.
GRANVILLE-PARK.
I HAVE just met the most vexatious disappointment I ever experienced: it puts
me out of all manner of patience. I am totally exhausted already, with
dissembling a cheerfulness in which my heart cannot take the least share, and
concealing a melancholy that almost overwhelms me. I had comforted myself with
the hopes of a speedy release from this insupportable restraint. Next week was
fixed for our departure; but Mrs. Domville has taken it into her head to desire
lady Lucy's attendance on an approaching occasion, so that we shall probably be
detained above a month.

Sure, of all the longings peculiar to her situation, this is one of the most
unreasonable, and the most provoking. How can lady Lucy, who has never been in
a similar situation, be of any service to her? But it is I that am unreasonable;
yes, and illnatured too -- What can be more soothing than the presence of such
a friend, in the hours of sickness and danger?

Lady Lucy, though desirous of being with her sister, would, on my account,
have declined staying; but I could not think of taking any advantage of her
very obliging consideration for me. After the civilities I have received from
every branch of the Domville family, I could not avoid paying them so slight --
or, to speak more truly, what must have appeared to them so slight -- a
compliment, without an unpardonable degree of rudeness and ingratitude. I was
obliged to promise, not to let my. uncle come for me, or Mr. Domville would
have insisted on leaving me with you, and coming back again for lady Lucy: --
distressing kindness!

All the Linfield family leave this place tomorrow; lady Linfield, I believe,
because she does not love the country, which, at this season, is astonishing.
Lady Lucy goes pour remplir les fonctions de sa charge aupres de madame
Domville. The gentlemen must attend their ladies.

The duke, and lady Carysbrook -- whose kindness frequently reminds me of
another and dearer aunt -- insist upon my residing at Granville-park while I
stay in England; which I willingly consented to. Lord and lady Linfield profess
-- and, I have reason to think, with sincerity -- that this is a point they
would not have yielded to any body but my grandfather.

I like this arrangement much better than returning to London; for several
reasons, which you will easily guess: -- one of them, and not the weakest, is,
that I shall be removed from lady Mary Webster; who was teazingly importunate
with me, to tell her who Miss Ormsby's intended husband was. She said, it was
but an act of justice, of common humanity, to let him know her character.
Neither justice, nor humanity, dictated the resolve; -- 'twas malice, and
revenge, for imaginary wrongs. What! ruin a young lady's reputation and
happiness, on slight, very slight, suspicions! I would not be concerned in it,
though ever so indirectly, for millions! Let souls like lady Mary's stoop to
such actions!

If I would barely let her know his name, she solemnly protested mine should
never be brought into question. She would keep her word, I doubt not; she could
have no temptation to break it: but I have been taught to adhere to what I
think right, from much higher motives than the fear of censure, or even than
the hope of praise.

I believe I have acted properly; yet, I own to you, madam, I am far from being
easy. I am tortured with solicitude for Sir Edward's happiness. I cannot
suppress my fears, although I know they spring only from too creative an
imagination, and, alas! too tender a heart: I should hate myself, if a want of
candor to Miss Ormsby had any share in forming them. But this cruel subject!
-- how came I to touch on it? Begin with what I will, I insensibly fall into
it. This is greatly trespassing on your indulgence, my generous friend.

Let us talk of something else.

In my last, I attempted a description of this fine place. I deferred giving
you any account of its inhabitants, till I should be able to judge of them with
more accuracy and certainty than I could pretend to do from first impressions;
for to penetrate immediately into people's characters, belongs only to those
who are blessed with a great deal of natural sagacity, joined to a thorough
knowledge of the world.

I have formed an opinion of the Sedley family on a short acquaintance, which I
fancy a long one would not induce me to change. I have studied them -- both my
uncle and you compliment me with penetration -- commencons.

The duke of Granville is far from being unamiable in his private character. He
is an affectionate, careful, and indulgent parent; readily forgiving slight
faults, though -- as my poor mother had too good reason to know -- absolutely
inexorable with regard to great ones. He is a warm friend, a kind master, a
generous landlord, and a liberal benefactor to the poor. His excessive pride
does not appear in his deportment to people that are extremely his inferiors;
to them he is generally mild, and sometimes even condescending: to his equals
-- by equals, you may suppose I cannot exactly mean such only as boast a title,
birth, and fortune, great as his own; I use that term with respect to him, to
signify all those who have a decided right to keep the first company; to such
-- he is very polite and easy; but he is most forbiddingly haughty to persons
in genteel middling life; which -- par parenthese, and by your leave, ambition
-- I take to be the happiest state in the world. Inferiors of this class, his
grace cannot suffer for a moment to forget their distance. At his own table
only -- and there they are seldom invited -- he relaxes a little, and treats
them with a moderate degree of complaisance. In mixed company, he preserves an
air of reserved stateliness, softened, however, by good-breeding, of which he
has a large share. He is certainly vindictive; but not often so to those whom
he has not once loved. His public character is not only good, but great:
unsuspectedly disinterested; unquestionably impartial; a firm supporter of the
just prerogatives of the crown; and a zealous asserter of the liberties of the
subject.

Lady Carysbrook is a sweet, worthy woman; amiable in every relation of life;
adored in her own family, and respected and beloved by every body that has the
happiness to know her. In a word, did I speak of her to any other person, I
should say -- she is like my aunt Chetwynd.

During the nine years she has been a widow, she has resided entirely with the
duke.

Her eldest child, lord Carysbrook, is now on his travels; so I can say nothing
more of him, than, that if he merits the fine thing his sisters say of him, he
is worthy of such a mother.

Lady Alicia Sedley is turned of eighteen; middle-sized, has a very good
person, and an exceedingly graceful air. Her face is not beautiful, yet
wonderfully pleasing: "The body charms, because the soul is seen."

That soul is fraught with every gentle, endearing virtue, that can adorn her
sex. -- She has all that touching softness, that dear complacency, that I love
in Mrs. Wentworth.

Lady Fanny is two years younger: the prettiest little creature imaginable; --
extremely lively, indeed even to giddiness, though she is by no means deficient
in good sense. Her vivacity makes her much more shewy and entertaining in a
large company, than her sister's diffidence will allow her to be; but in a
family circle, or a tete-a-tete, lady Alicia shines most.

Robert Sedley is about thirteen, and remarkable tall and manly for that age.
He is, in all respects, the finest boy I ever saw. I hope you will not think me
partial in this decision, when I tell you he is my lover. -- He pays me
compliments, with an elegance of expression, that is really surprising in such
a child. If I stand, he flies to reach me a chair: at the tea-table, he will
attend me himself, if there were ever so many servants in the room: when we
walk, he gathers flowers, makes them in a bouquet, puts them to his lips or
breast, and presents them to me with an air -- quand on parle du loup, on en
voit la queue: -- Robert is at my elbow. I must walk -- so fine a day -- every
body in the garden --. I bid you a hasty farewell, my dear aunt; for, though I
have made the best bargain I could, I assure you, I am obliged to give the
monkey two kisses, to purchase time enough to subscribe myself,

Your VALERIA O'BRYEN.

To the RIGHT HON. LADY METHUEN. -- POPLAR-HILL.
HERMITAGE.
O, I AM dying, Louisa! -- my brother is in a fever. For the love of Heaven,
come to me. -- Hold -- I forgot your situation; -- do not, by any means, think
of coming: but tell Lord Methuen, his friend is ill -- dangerously ill.

I thank you for your information and counsel; but I am not able to take the
least step in the affair at present, terrified and distracted as I am with
apprehensions for a life, of ten thousand times greater moment to me than my
own: -- my own! frivolous comparison! -- life has long since lost its value to
me: I regard it not as a blessing, for which I ought to be thankful -- and, O,
forgive me, Heaven, if this be ingratitude -- but rather as a misfortune, which
it is my duty to bear with resignation.

How forcibly does Edward's situation call to my remembrance, a hapless
wanderer from his friends and country -- from his imprudent, innocent, wretched
wife! -- suffering, amongst strangers, all that the united pains of mind and
body could inflict. Perhaps he wanted care; -- his poor Harriet was not
permitted to attend him; he had no sister, no wife, no tender female friend to
sooth his dying pillow! -- Torturing retrospect! -- unavailing sorrow! Would
that I could forget the past, and look only forward -- and I fear it is with
too much impatience I do look forward -- to that happy period, when my glad
spirit will be allowed to shake off the bonds of its earthly captivity, and
seek my Henry in the regions of bliss: -- there, I trust, we shall meet: --
alas! I cannot form an idea of a Heaven without him.

My friend, my much esteemed friend, pardon these fruitless and involuntary
lamentations: it is peculiarly ungenerous to trouble you with them.

I again entreat you; forgive me. I never had less command over myself than at
present. I feel as if some great misfortune threatened me. Gracious, and
Omnipotent BEING! spare my brother to me! -- O spare my brother! -- and if it
be thy pleasure that I should be depressed by a heavier weight of misery,
condescend -- in mercy condescend -- to adopt some other mode of chastisement.
-- Presumptuous prayer!

Adieu. -- I am blinded with tears.

HARRIET WENTWORTH.

To the RIGHT HON. LADY METHUEN. -- POPLAR-HILL.
HERMITAGE.
I HAVE been about half an hour here; and, late as it is, dispatch Stephen, to
let you know our dear Marchmont is not worse: but, alas! I dare not so far
flatter myself, or you, as to say he is better. Something must be done: if the
cause is not removed, how shall the effects cease? Allons, donc, un coup de
desespoir. -- I shall go to Jephsonlodge tomorrow: if the girl has a spark of
generosity, I shall blow it to a flame. Or, perhaps, it would be better to
address myself to the father; or to lady Conway -- Heaven direct me! I know not
what to do. I wish the perturbation of my spirits had allowed me to consult
with you before I left Poplar-hill. Such is the excess of Mrs. Wentworth's
affliction, I don't know how to speak to her about any thing. -- But I am
keeping the man, and saying nothing to the purpose.

Let our prayers for our much loved friend ascend together to the throne of
mercy. -- O, may they be heard!

Yours, most tenderly, METHUEN.

To the RIGHT HON. LADY METHUEN. -- POPLAR-HILL.
HERMITAGE.
I AM inexpressibly alarmed: -- Sir Edward's fever is increased. I cannot help
thinking he is in great danger; though doctor Howard says he will do well. I
have a high opinion of this gentleman's skill in his profession; but, alas! he
knows not Sir Edward's case: his mind is still more feverish than his body.

The unfavourable symptoms that have appeared this morning, I, with severe
compunction, impute to my own imprudence last night. Having, with extreme
difficulty, prevailed on Mrs. Wentworth -- whose delicate constitution unfits
her for the office of a nurse -- to retire to rest, I took my place by my dear
friend's bed. He lay very quiet: I endeavored to suppress a cough for fear of
disturbing him; he perceived it, and spoke to me. I thought you had been
asleep, said I.

"Asleep! my dear Methuen," said he, calmly; I expect my next sleep to be my
last. Make every person leave the room; I wish to speak with you.

I ordered away his valet de chamber and nurse-tender; and begging him not to
exert his voice, or talk on any subject that might discompose him, desired to
know what he would say to me.

Why should you give me this caution? -- Of what consequence would it be, were
I to shorten my life by a few worthless hours?

For God's sake, my dear Edward, do not give way to this despondency: your life
is not in any danger.

"I am sorry," answered he, you should think it necessary to talk to me in this
manner. I do not fear death: it is an object of terror only to the vicious, or
the weak; or, at least, to the happy. I trust you will not class me with either
of the two first mentioned; and you cannot assign me a place amongst the last.
-- Death is pleasing to me, when I consider it as the only means by which I can
avoid fulfilling my fatal engagement. Do not think me ungenerous in allowing
myself to talk thus. Miss Ormsby deserves a better husband; -- but, ah! I have
no heart to give her. The too lovely Valeria! -- for her only would I live; and
it is for her I die. Yes, Methuen, I am persuaded I am on my deathbed; and
while I have strength and reason sufficient, I would wish to settle my affairs.

His words, his manner, pierced my inmost soul. I threw myself on my knees; I
would have spoken, but could not command utterance. He pressed one of my hands
in his -- My dear Augustus! my tender, faithful friend! I did not expect less
affection from you; but I looked for more firmness. I see I afflict you: -- two
or three words more, and I have done. I want to have my will drawn, as speedily
as possible. Mrs. Wentworth is richer than she wishes to be; Monsieur de
Villemar will make ample provision for Miss Marchmont: -- I therefore think
myself at liberty to dispose of my fortune; and am determined to give myself
the satisfaction of leaving the Marchmont estate to Miss O'Bryen. I have
considered the matter maturely, and do not think it can any way hurt her
character to accept it. My other little estate, and my house in London, I must
present to your Arthur. Hold, Methuen, seeing my lips move, this is a very
trifling testimony of my friendship; and I am going to exact an important one
of yours, and your lady's -- Take care of my poor sister. I leave her under
your protection. Console her: let her not feel that she has lost a brother. --
I dare not think on what she will suffer. Dear, unfortunate Harriet! -- His
eyes filled with tears; he raised them to Heaven: -- Merciful God! support and
comfort her!

We were seasonably interrupted by doctor Howard. He felt his patient's pulse,
and reprimanded me, in a whisper, for my indiscretion.

I retired to a corner of the room, and gave vent to my insuppressible sorrow.
Sir Edward's valet came over to me: -- "M-m-my lord," said he, stammering, "is
my dear master -- ". He was not able to finish his question. I squeezed the
honest fellow's hand, and shook my head. He burst into tears, and turned away
from me. If such is the grief of his servant, what can, what ought I to feel?
His sister too -- I am convinced she could not survive him a week.

But a ray of hope, my Louisa, breaks through the thick gloom that surrounds
me. -- If Miss Ormsby is not the meanest and basest of her sex, my visit to her
must have the desired effect. I have just ordered my chaise; and will step in
and see my friend once more before I go.

Farewell, my dearest love. I shall write to you again when I return.

METHUEN.

To the RIGHT HON. LADY METHUEN. -- POPLAR-HILL.
HERMITAGE.
O, LOUISA, this man is bent on his own destruction -- solicitous for ruin!

As soon as I had sent off my messenger to you, I went to his chamber; and
having staid there for some time, wished the doctor good morning as I was going
out. Edward unfortunately overheard me, and almost throwing himself out of
bed, eagerly cried, "Where are you going, my lord?" Unprepared to answer this
sudden question, I only replied, that I should be back in a few hours. He made
a motion with his hand to me to draw nearer to him. I obeyed. "Dear Methuen,"
said he, grasping my hand, and speaking in a low voice, I know that nothing
could tempt you to leave me in this extremity, but the hope of being of service
to me. Tell me, were you not this moment going to some of the Ormsby family, or
to Miss O'Bryen? -- Your silence convinces me you were. But I entreat you --
pardon me if I say, I command you -- to do no such thing. Do you imagine I
could meanly barter my honor for my life? -- You ought to have known me
better. You shall not stir from this spot, till you have sworn to me to
relinquish a project, which nothing but the excess of your friendship to me
could excuse your forming. -- 'Twas in vain for me to contend.

And now, dear Louisa, how shall I support myself? Unable to assist my friend
-- almost hopeless of his recovery -- and should he recover, it will be only to
be miserable for the rest of his days. This is too heavy a tax upon my
happiness; -- great as it is, it will not bear it.

He has mentioned his will to me this morning again. I have sent for the
lawyer. Heaven knows I am very ill able to give the necessary directions.

I am mistaken in my opinion of Miss O'Bryen, if this rich legacy will afford
her any satisfaction. And, I am sure, I would much rather my son should never
have an estate, than obtain one in this manner. I express myself imperfectly: I
would give -- pardon me if I hurt your maternal tenderness -- but, by the
powers that made me! I would give the sweet boy's life itself, to save my
friend!

Philip's name need not be mentioned in the will, as he has lived but a short
time with Sir Edward; but I swear, by the faithful tears I saw him shed, he
shall never be obliged to serve another master.

--

Let us talk no more of sorrow, of wills, or death: -- I have happy, surprising
news for you. Just now a servant brought a letter for Sir Edward, which he
insisted upon delivering into his own hand; but being repeatedly assured he
could have no access to him, consented to leave it with Mrs. Wentworth. As I
thought the letter must be of importance, and probably required an immediate
answer, I persuaded her to open it; a liberty, which certainly nothing but her
brother's condition could warrant. -- Read the following, and by your own
astonishment judge of our's.

TO SIR EDWARD MARCHMONT, BART. -- HERMITAGE.
DOVER-STREET.
Although I am a total stranger to you, sir, I feel myself interested in your
welfare, by a kind of fellowship in distress; and am glad it is in my power to
save you from a connection, which could yield you nothing but infamy and woe.
-- Miss Ormsby is a mean, artful, and wicked woman, who basely betrays your
confidence and love, and meditates the deepest wound upon your honor. But her
own letter will characterize her better than I can do. Should a blind passion
induce you to question its authenticity, I am ready to inform you by what means
it came into my possession.

I am, with great respect, etc. MARY WEBSTER.


In this letter was enclosed one from Miss Ormsby to lady Conway, of which I
send you a transcript.

What a specious jilt is that vile Ormsby! -- what a finished hypocrite! She
has thoroughly attained what is the very masterpiece of cunning -- the art of
hiding itself. My surprise at her discovered baseness, can only be equalled by
my indignation. To what a creature was Marchmont about to unite himself! And
was it to gratify a low-minded ambition, and to be a convenient cloak to a most
infamously criminal amor, that my invaluable friend would have sacrificed a
tender and violent passion, for as deserving and lovely a woman as lives? I
cannot think of it with patience. I reflect on his danger and deliverance, with
the same mixed sensation of uneasy joy and half-extinguished fear, with which a
man looks back on a precipice, from the brink of which he has just escaped.

I think these letters should be instantly -- though very cautiously --
communicated to Sir Edward, I fear the emotions they may excite may hurt him. I
will consult with doctor Howard; I will tell him every thing: no regard is due
to the character of that creature. How I execrate her! Thank God! thank God! my
friend has escaped her. Honor now permits -- commands him to break with her.
Yet should this discovery come too late! -- My joy would be extravagant, did
not this dreadful apprehension temper it. But I trust, that Supreme Justice
will not suffer him to die a martyr to the nobleness of his own sentiments.
Louisa, he will live! -- he will be happy! -- my heart is filled with trembling
gladness.

With what contemptuous pity do I read the latter part of Miss Ormsby's letter!
It is very expressive of the secret tortures that must ever wait on the most
prosperous wickedness. What despicable lines are these! -- Heigh-ho! -- how
melancholy the stillness of the night makes one! The family are all asleep. I
hate silence. I wish I slept in one of the street rooms. -- Poor wretch!
Louisa, my sensible, my chaste, my all-adorable Louisa! could you have had a
notion of clamorous voices and rattling carriage wheels, being preferred to
silence and contemplation?

How effectually do people destroy their own peace of mind, when, by a vicious
conduct, they subject themselves to the low necessity of deceiving others!
thereby doing much more harm to themselves, than ever the deceit can do to any
body else. Miss Ormsby, though she thinks her crimes beyond the possibility of
discovery, and her schemes beyond the reach of disappointment, dreads -- she
knows not what; starts at her own shadow, and finds nameless terrors in the
gloom and silence of the night. Had Sir Edward become the dupe of her
artifices, and discovered too late that he had lost both happiness and honor,
though to preserve the latter he nobly resigned the former; yet, conscious
integrity would still have supported his honest soul! and a thousand bright
reflections would have broken the impending cloud of woe.

If all be not right within, how vainly do we endeavor to enjoy what we call
pleasure! -- how poorly do we shrink from the lightest touch of mental pain!

"Almighty Virtue! it is to thee we owe
"Our zest for pleasure, and our balm for woe."
Our felicity depends almost entirely on the rectitude of our own hearts. Then,
while we are daily complaining of the miseries of life, what do we, but tacitly
reproach ourselves? The sting of misfortune, indeed, is sharp; but if it be not
poisoned by the hand of vice, the wound it gives may easily be healed. Let a
man put on the "armor of righteousness," and the arrows of misfortune will
drop at his feet: but if he will go forth to battle, naked and defenseless, he
must bear the punishment justly due to his rashness and obstinacy.

My beloved, you will excuse me, if my reflections have wandered from my
subject: for their seriousness, I do not apologize; I know you would not think
yourself obliged to me if I did.

My courier is ready; and I hasten to conclude, that I may not withold this
interesting intelligence from you a moment. Hope with me, that this very
fortunate incident will produce all the good effects it seems to promise.

Yours, for ever, METHUEN.

To the RIGHT HON. LADY METHUEN. -- POPLAR-HILL.
HERMITAGE.
DOCTOR Howard and I held a consultation yesterday evening; -- (perhaps, my
dear, you did not before know that I was one of the faculty) -- he thought it
expedient that my medicine should be administered immediately. Wanting,
however, the consummate skill of the physician, and the happy self-confidence
of the empiric, I deliberated in anxious fearfulness. Often did I hold out to
my patient the cup of joy; and as often drew back my hand, and withheld the
hazardous recipe. I watched by him for several hours, in the most uneasy state
of mind possible to be imagined. About twelve o'clock he awoke, a good deal
refreshed, from a sleep of near three hours; the first he has had since his
illness. He pulled back the curtain -- My dear Augustus, why will you sacrifice
your health to me in this manner? For God's sake, go to bed. Where is my
sister? -- Sure she is not up too?"

I answered "No"; which, by the by, was false.

The doctor looked at me with meaning, and took Philip out of the room.

I drew my chair close to the bed; and feeling his pulse -- "You are better, my
dear Marchmont."

"Are you turned physician?" said he, with a faint smile.

Yes; and, with God's help, will do more for you than doctor Howard has been
able to do.

I observe you use the quack's prudent proviso -- with God's help.

"Don't put the quack upon me, sir;" -- rearing up my head as proudly as if it
had been adorned by the huge faculty wig; -- I Would have you to know, I pretend to
be a physician of more eminence than Howard himself: he applies his remedies
only to the body, -- I heal the mind.

He looked at me wistfully: Sure, my lord, you have not -- But it is impossible,
after the solemn promise you made me.

I will not clear myself from this half accusation, as I think you must have
too favorable an opinion of me, to suppose me capable of breaking my word. But
could no hand except mine, think you, loose your heavy chains?

He replied, with a look of calm despair, Yes; the hand of death: -- and that,
I hope --.

Hush! for mercy's sake! As I hope to be merry for the rest of my days, you
have almost broken my heart already.

How strangely you talk! Where is the sensibility, the tenderness, that
distinguishes my friend?

Totally exhausted: and now I Am resolved to be gay, and you shall be so too.
Why, man, I Have news for you will set you on your legs in three days time.

"I cannot conceive," said he, sighing, that you should have any thing to tell
me, capable of reconciling me to life.

Would not happiness reconcile you to it?

Happiness! Alas! it is flown for ever.

You are mistaken; it flew away, indeed, but you have overtaken it; and, I
doubt not, will shortly be able to clip its wings.

If you have really any agreeable intelligence for me, I entreat you tell it,
without all this gaiety; which, excuse me if I say, is a little ill-timed.

By no means so. Ought the messenger of joy to wear the livery of sorrow? I
have two letters here; -- taking them from my pocket -- I wish I dare read them
to you: -- but you will be all emotion; raise your fever; and Howard will come
in just now, and shake his big wig at me.

"What letters are they?"

You shall know presently: but first let me ask you, -- have you fortitude
enough to bear the loss of your mistress?

"My Valeria?" cried he, with extreme eagerness.

Not your Valeria; but Miss Ormsby: you have lost her for ever.

"Is the poor girl dead?" demanded he, much surprised.

"No. She is dead to you, though."

"Then," said he, hastily, I hope somebody has run away with her.

"Very lover-like, upon my word!" observed I, laughing.

Dear Methuen, do not trifle with my impatience.

I read the letters to him; first telling him their contents, that I might not
surprise him. The generosity that peculiarly marks his character, appeared in
its sull luster: -- he called Miss Ormsby's letter to her sister, a forgery;
until he had compared it with her handwriting, which put the matter out of
doubt. He framed excuses for her: said, that Webster was undoubtedly some
artful, low-minded fellow, who by the force of personal allurements, and
perhaps by too frequent opportunities of conversing with her, might have stolen
into her heart when she was young and inexperienced; and whilst immature reason
yet wanted strength to hold the reins of passion, had taken a base advantage of
her weakness and love. He added, that large allowances were to be made for her
renewing her connexions with her lover, though married: -- her reputation being
absolutely in his power, her love for him violent, and a second breach of
chastity much more difficult to withstand than the first; the consciousness of
worth was extinct, and modesty and pride, the two great safeguards of female
honor, weakened; with regard to him, perhaps wholly subdued. Notwithstanding
these effusions of humanity, he was overjoyed, enraptured, at his unexpected
deliverance; though too severe to himself, and too indulgent to others, he
blamed himself for being so. "What a wretch I am," cried he, to rejoice at an
incident so full of horror! I might say, with the devil in Milton -- Evil, be
thou my good.

I forbore to answer him, lest the length of our conversation should fatigue
him too much. He lay silent and quiet a good while; but the agitation of his
mind was easily discernible in his speaking countenance: at length, giving a
spring, as by the impulse of sudden passion, he tossed the bed clothes off his
shoulders, and catching fast hold of both my hands, -- O Methuen, if my Valeria
--. He wanted breath to proceed. I entreated him to be composed; and
endeavored to make him sensible, that his recovery depended entirely on
himself.

Although I was obliged to leave his thoughts at full liberty on this subject,
I was determined to fetter his tongue; and ringing the bell, soon brought in
the attentive Philip; and a little after him, the doctor.

Sir Edward peremptorily insisted on my taking some rest; giving, at the same
time, a like command to his valet; but the affectionate creature protesting --
I believe with much less truth than good nature -- that he had been in bed
great part of the day, he was permitted to stay; and I reluctantly withdrew:
but I could not think of sleep till I had given you this recital.

Bon soir, ma chere Louise: ou, pour mieuxdire, bon jour, for it is three
o'clock.

Heaven be praised! he is somewhat better this morning. The doctor says his
disorder has taken a favorable turn. It is observed, that physicians generally
make the worst of their patient's distemper, in order to give the greater
opinion of their skill in curing it: -- this good-natured son of Galen, au
contraire, has been all along endeavoring to persuade us, that Sir Edward was
in a less dangerous way than he really was. I believe Mrs. Wentworth would have
been, by this time, as ill as her brother, if Howard had not kept up her
spirits, by the most confident assurances of his recovery. However, he now
agrees with me, in thinking the most unhappy consequences might have ensued
from the vexation of his mind. My sanguine hopes of him, said he, arose from my
ignorance of the original cause of his illness. I should have thought it
strange, if four and twenty, and a sound constitution, could not have overcome
such a fever: but as he has so lively an imagination, and was absolutely
determined to die, there is no saying what might have happened, But now, my
lord, added he, with a benevolent smile, that I may reasonably presume I have
his imagination on my side, and that he is wise enough to be determined-to
live, my life for his, he will be able to visit his mistress before this day
three weeks.

I shall always think myself obliged to this good man, for the constant
attendance he has paid here: to which, I am convinced, he was prompted more by
a sincere esteem for his patient, than by any view to interest.

Marchmont wanted to consult with his sister and me, on the most proper way of
breaking off the treaty with Mr. Ormsby, without injuring the young lady. We
both advised him not to perplex himself with the affair at present: the family
has already been informed of his severe indisposition: -- nothing more need be
done till he is well.

He then begged Mrs. Wentworth, or me, to write a line of acknowledgment to
lady Mary Webster; carefully avoiding therein to make unnecessary reflections
on Miss Ormsby. I said, if he pleased, I would go to lady Mary; as I was very
curious to know how she got Miss Ormsby's letter. My proposal was readily
assented to; accordingly I go to London this evening; sleep at my own house
there tonight; wait on her ladyship in the morning; and return to Hermitage to
dinner.

Ever your faithful METHUEN.

To the RIGHT HON. LADY METHUEN. -- POPLAR-HILL.
LONDON.
I HAVE discharged my commission a merveilles! Ecoutez.

I passed the evening with my worthy friend, dean Domville. We were quite en
famille; no company but lady Lucy Domville and myself. I enquired of her
ladyship for the Hibernian beauty. She smiled at the epithet. "I wish," said
she, lady Enmore heard you; it would delight her. When Miss O'Bryen went to
France, they at first called her, by way of distinction, La belle Angloise; but
lady Enmore, with a kind of national pride, insisted upon its being changed
into -- Irlandoise.

I asked what stay Miss O'Bryen made in England.

"I really cannot exactly say, my lord," she replied; she and I go together: my
stay depends on my sister, looking archly at Mrs. Domville; and my fair friend
has now gotten a nursery of her own.

"I heard she was at Granville-park," said I. I hope none of that family is
indisposed?

"They are very well," she answered; but her countrywoman and mine, lady Mary
Webster, is extremely ill. She requested I would write to Miss O'Bryen to come
to her; which I did yesterday evening. I had a note from her this morning. She
tells me the duke of Granville will not suffer her to leave him; but the whole
family will come to town this evening, on purpose to give her an opportunity of
attending lady Mary.

I was agreeably surprised to find lady Lucy knew this lady, and threw out some
questions concerning her as indirectly as I could; though, I dare say,
notwithstanding my caution, she thought me very impertinently curious. The
information I drew from her, is, in substance, as follows: -- Lady Mary Webster
is daughter to the late earl Enmore, whose title became extinct at his death.
He left every thing to his wife, except her own fortune of ten thousand pounds,
which was settled on lady Mary. -- Lady Enmore took her daughter and Miss
O'Bryen to France with her last summer. A little time after the latter came
over here, lady Mary left France -- entirely against her mother's approbation
and consent -- with Mr. Webster; a man destitute of birth, fortune, or
character: "who must have married her" said lady Lucy, "only with interested
views; as her manners and conversation are not engaging, and her person ugly,
even to deformity. Her mother has not yet received her into favor; and I
suppose never will. I fancy," added she, "lady Enmore will make Miss O'Bryen
her heir, for she is excessively fond of her. I wish heartily that she may;
though, I am sure, Valeria herself does not wish it."

Lady Mary is much obliged to your ladyship, said I.

"O, my lord," putting up her lip, if you knew what a disagreeable creature it
is!

"And so," said the dean, because the one is handsome, and the other ugly --.

"It is not that, brother," interrupted she; but if you were as well acquainted
with the nobleness of my friend's mind as I am, I am certain you would join
with me in wishing her as much distinguished by fortune, as she is by birth,
understanding, beauty, and accomplishments.

We all joined in her just panegyric: the dean did so in the following words:

I esteem Miss O'Bryen as much as I admire her; and yet, if I were a single
man, I should be very sorry to be her lover.

"Why so?" demanded Mrs. Domville. I don't think she has any thing of the
insolence of a beauty.

"Still," he replied, I could not bear the consciousness of inferiority; the
fear of being thought presumptuous; the despair of gaining her; and the
mortification of seeing her surrounded by more deserving lovers.

"However," said lady Lucy, your anxieties would be of short duration: Valeria
is too generous to trifle in these cases. But you would have a bad chance of
succeeding, I can tell you: to my knowledge, she has refused great matches.
Indeed, it cannot be expected that we beauties" -- affecting to look grave --
should be as easily won as other women. The language of admiration when seldom
heard, and only from one or two particular persons, affects the heart
wonderfully: but those, to whom every mouth has addressed it, from their very
cradles, become at length totally insensible to it.

This conversation naturally threw me into reflections on my friend's affairs,
and excited a fear that Miss O'Bryen might not countenance his addresses. This
very disagreeable apprehension threw a gloom over my mind, and probably over my
behavior, though my friends were too polite to let me see they took notice of
it. When I left the dean's, and got into my own solitary house, and still more
solitary bed, my thoughts reverted to this subject: after considering the
matter a good while, I determined to call on the young beauty in the morning.
Be she as obdurate as she may, thought I, surely she will not be able to refuse
the finest fellow in England, who is actually and literally dying for her. The
more I ruminated on my project, the more I approved it: I could say more in his
favor, than he could well do himself. I could represent his connection with
the unworthy Ormsby, more to his advantage than he could allow himself to do:
-- au pis aller, my interposition could do no hurt; if it did not forward his
suit, at least it could not retard it, or be any way detrimental to him.

Accordingly, I went to the duke of Granville's this morning, and desired to
know if I might have the honor to see Miss O'Bryen. I was shown into a
parlour, and sent up my name, She came down immediately -- out of breath --
evidently trembling -- quite discomposed -- Je n'en augur ai pas mal. I
determined to conquer her heart -- don't be alarmed, Louisa; only to conquer it
for Marchmont -- par un coup de main. I approached her with a dejected air: --
It Is on a very melancholy occasion, dear Miss O'Bryen, that I give you this
trouble. The blush that confusion had spread over her face on her entrance,
vanished; she became quite pale. I led her to a seat; and cruelly resolved to
pursue my advantage. You will pardon me, madam, if I enter abruptly into the
occasion of my visit? She bowed her head. "Sir Edward Marchmont," resumed I,
loves you to distraction: he did so from the first moment he beheld you. An
engagement, into which he had been very artfully drawn, obliged him to conceal
his passion; the restraint has thrown him into a violent fever; -- he is dying!
-- She fainted. I caught her in my arms, and pulled the bell with violence. A
servant came in, and seeing her condition, ran up stairs, without waiting for
any orders. In a moment the room was filled; the duke, lady Carysbrook, her two
daughters, and a number of servants of both sexes, flew to her assistance. I
carried her to a window; -- Granville snatched her from me, and supported her
himself. He gazed on her with tenderness and concern; and glancing on me a
regard of mingled scorn, anger, and curiosity -- Who the devil are you, sir? --
What is the matter with her? -- What have you done to her? I made no answer to
these uncivil and peremptory interrogatories; but employed myself in throwing
up the sash, and internally cursing my well-meant stratagem.

Lady Carysbrook administered drops, cold water, etc. with a countenance full
of anxiety.

Lady Alicia Sedley wept; and held one of her cousin's snowy hands pressed in
both her own, of scarce inferior whiteness.

Lady Fanny seemed frightened out of her wits; ran up and down the room;
jostled the servants; spilt a basin of water, and broke a bottle of hartshorn.

At last, the lovely cause of all this bustle, opened her fine eyes; fixed them
languishingly on me, and held out her hand. I kissed it with ardour; I loved
her for her sensibility; I loved her still more, because my friend was the
object of that sensibility. The duke looked at me again: -- Bless me! exclaimed
he, Pray, are you not lord Methuen? I bowed my answer. "I am afraid, my lord,"
said he, I have treated you with indignity: I beseech you to excuse me: I really
did not recollect your face; and my granddaughter's fit, surprised and
frightened me so much, I was not master of my temper.

I assured him there was no occasion for apologies; and begged, that when the
young lady was sufficiently recovered, I might be permitted to speak a few
words to her, on a subject that was not likely to discompose her: if he
pleased, it should be in presence of one of the ladies.

He nodded a doubtful assent; and ordered the servants to retire.

The first use she made of her returning senses, was to thank his grace, with
the utmost sweetness, for his attention to her. He kissed her; placed her on a
chair, and sat down by her, his arm enclosing her elegant waist. He whispered
to her: I suppose to ask, if she chose to converse with me; for I heard her
answer, Yes, my lord, if it be agreeable to you. He then requested I would be
kind enough to spend the day with him: lady Carysbrook seconded the invitation.
I thanked them, but said it was out of my power, as I was indispensibly obliged
to leave town immediately, to attend the sick room of a dear friend.

After a few compliments on both sides, he wished me a good morning; and
desiring the young ladies to take care of their cousin, took lady Carysbrook
out with him.

Lady Alicia took her grandfather's seat; I placed myself on the other side of
Miss O'Bryen; and was preparing to tell her Edward's true situation, when she
turned to me with a deep sigh, What can I do, my lord? -- What would you have
me do? Your friend is engaged. But tell him, said she, laying her trembling
hand on my arm, tell him, though I cannot be his, he shall never have the
mortification of seeing me another's. Her vermillion lips grew pale, and
quivered as she spoke: a flood of tears prevented her fainting again: she
leaned on the gentle Alicia's bosom. -- Admire, Louisa, her extraordinary, her
delicate and disinterested offer! -- Don't you love this girl? -- "Charming
woman!" cried I, with transport. Justly, most justly, does lady Lucy Domville
call you generous and noble-minded. Permit me thus, and I put one knee to the
ground, to express Edward's obligations to you.

Lady Fanny started up, and caught hold of me, -- Rise, for pity's sake: I have
a mortal aversion to all tragedy scenes. I arose, secretly despising her
levity; but the tears that sparkled in her pretty eyes, half recovered my good
opinion. She drew a chair, and sitting down beside me, with a familiar and not
unpleasing air, -- Now explain this matter to me, my lord. I understand no more
of it than this: -- a gentleman, you call Edward, loves Valeria, and is
engaged; she promises, because she cannot marry him, not to marry any body
else. It is very unjust, in my opinion, both of you and the gentleman; and,
excuse me, -- shaking the powder out of her hair -- very like the dog in the
manger, to exact such a sacrifice from her; and very romantic in her to make
it. To live single! -- shaking her head again -- "to die an old maid! -- ".

"Fie, Fanny!" said her sister; is this a subject for raillery?

With a view to spare Miss O'Bryen, I addressed myself to lady Fanny. It would
make me so unhappy, madam, said I, that you should think my conduct censurable,
that I must beg your attention while I fully explain the whole affair: -- I
presume you have seen Sir Edward Marchmont?

Yes, in public; but I am not acquainted with him. He is delightfully handsome;
and I have heard him very advantageously spoken of. One might have compassion
enough to marry him; but not to take a vow of celibacy for his sake.

"Nor would he," I answered, desire any woman to make him such a sacrifice, as
you just now properly called it.

But proceed, my lord; you were going to tell me something.

Before Miss O'Bryen came to England, Sir Edward Marchmont made proposals of
marriage to a young lady of seeming worth; solely induced thereto by the belief
that she loved him. Though as well formed to feel, as to inspire, the tenderest
of all passions, he had a strange -- and, as he has since found, ill-grounded
opinion of the insensibility of his heart: -- mistaken gratitude taught him to
give a faint preference to the lady in question, and that was all he thought
himself capable of doing. He saw Miss O'Bryen! -- the discernment that made him
so nice in his choice, and had hitherto secured him from the sex, now only
enabled him the better to discover her exquisite merit. A novice in love, he
attributed his new' feelings to just admiration, and deserved friendship, till
his affections were too far gone ever to be recalled.

Lady Fanny repeated the following lines of a song: -- "Les coeurs a l'amour
rebels,
"Tot ou tard sentent ses feux."


I hope you will experience the truth of the observation, said lady Alicia, for
your impertinent interruption. Pray go on, my lord.

I continued -- Honor, that refinement of aggregated virtues, which never held
a more unlimited sway than in Sir Edward's breast, directed him to choose a life
of misery, rather than take the smallest step to free himself from an
engagement, which the lady gave him every reason to suppose was necessary to
her happiness. At length the wedding day was fixed, and the violence of
conflicting passions increased. The near and certain prospect of complete
wretchedness could not shake his resolution; but it brought on a fever.
Actuated by despair, he shunned not -- he courted death; and the continued
perturbation of his mind, added hourly strength to his disorder; 'till Heaven
itself -- I will say so -- interposed. The injured wife of a man, to whom my
friend's intended bride had shown unbounded favor, sent him a letter written
by her, and addressed to her sister: -- Miss O'Bryen will be pleased to read
these letters, while I tell you their contents. You will excuse my suppressing
names, as Marchmont would not forgive my exposing the young lady.

La belle Irlandoise took the papers with an air of confusion and surprise, and
went over to a window. When I perceived she had done reading them, I approached
her. -- "Amazing! absolutely amazing!" said she, in a low voice, as she gave me
back the papers: but can your lordship be certain that letter was really
written by Miss Ormsby?

I assured her there was not the least room to doubt it. The similarity of her
behavior to Edward's, on the same occasion, struck me.

Lady Alicia joined us. You will excuse us, said she to Miss O'Bryen, if we
leave you; it is time to dress; you know we have some visits to make before
dinner. Without waiting for an answer from her, she turned to me -- Our
acquaintance, my lord, has commenced rather whimsically; yet I flatter myself
it will be durable: and I shall ever remember this day with particular
complacency. Be assured, your company must always give the highest pleasure to
every individual of this family; and your friends -- you understand me --
smiling, may be certain of the best welcome in our power to give.

I made a suitable return to her considerate politeness; and she retired with
her sister.

I then begged Miss O'Bryen's forgiveness for the alarm I had occasioned her;
heartily telling her my motives for it. -- "In short," said I, I feared, that
accustomed only to refuse, a common plea would not suffice to move you: yet I
told you no more than would have been true two days ago. Now, thank God! he is
recovering, and I trust will soon be out of danger.

She sighed gently, as I concluded. My lord, said she, you compliment me too
highly on the side of beauty; but allow me to say, you do me not justice in
other respects: -- why should you suppose me hard-hearted? Never did I hear a
sigh, to which the sigh of sympathy did not unbidden rise; nor saw a tear, I
answered not with tears. Believe me, I am above coquetry; and would neither
basely excite a vain expectation, nor ungenerously delay a favor I meant to
grant. -- Here, Louisa, here is the language of a noble heart! This girl is
worthy of my friend.

I conversed with her above an hour, with all the ease of friendship. I spoke
of Miss Ormsby, without scrupling to censure her as she deserves. Her beautiful
rival forbore to pass any judgment on her; in which she certainly was extremely
right; as it did not belong to virtue to excuse, nor to the delicacy of her own
situation to condemn her.

She treated lady Mary's misconduct with much more tenderness than lady Lucy
had done: said, though she might be blamed for her imprudent marriage, she was
greatly to be pitied in its event. It was hard, she should not find a friend in
him, to whom she sacrificed all her friends.

I asked what was her ladyship's disorder. -- She could not tell; as lady Lucy
had not particularly informed her, and she had not yet seen her, it being very
late when she came to town the preceding evening; but she believed her in the
last stage of a consumption.

I told her of my message, which I requested her to deliver for me, as I
supposed I could not be permitted to see lady Mary. She promised to do so; and
likewise to indulge the curiosity I expressed with regard to Miss Ormsby's
letter, if it should be in her power.

I took my leave with reluctance, though well satisfied, you may believe, with
my success. How shall I rejoice my friend's heart! How does my own already
rejoice in the anticipation of his happiness!

I must conclude, for my dinner waits. It will be the most uncomfortable meal I
ever sat down to, for I am quite alone. I believe I should go to my servants'
table, if I did not think my presence would be a disagreeable restraint on them.

In order to have time to write to you, I sent to let Mrs. Wentworth know I
could not be with her till evening.

I hope to return to you in a few days. In the mean time, continue to write to
me, and always tell me how you are: you mention your own health as slightly, as
if it was not the most important subject to me you could possibly speak on: but
I hear from the servants that you are quite well. God preserve you, my angel!

Embrace your bold boy for me.

METHUEN.

TO MRS. CHETWYND, -- IRELAND.
LONDON.
I PAY such close attendance to the unhappy lady Mary, that I have scarcely a
moment to myself; otherwise I should be much to blame for being four days
silent, as I think -- I flatter myself -- you must be impatient and uneasy to
hear how Sir Edward does. Praised be God, he is better!

I enclose you letters I received from him, and my affectionate friend, Mrs.
Wentworth, the day after I saw lord Methuen. -- No, excuse me; I send Mrs.
Wentworth's letter, and a copy of her brother's. -- Don't laugh at me, dear
aunt.

I am sure you will admire the delicacy of his style. How few men, situated as
he is, -- for, doubtless, lord Methuen told him every thing -- would express
himself thus delicately! -- with such timid respect!

I have written to him, and not without tenderness; since I reproved him for
endangering his health by writing to me, and forbad him the use of his pen till
he is well enough to leave his bed.

I believe I need not vindicate my behahaviour throughout this assair to you. I
know you are no friend to coquetry. Indeed, wherefore should not I, certain
that I possess his affections, and unconscious of offense, entirely conside in
him, who conducted himself with such nice honor toward a woman he did not
love; and still wishes, and studies, to promote her happiness, after receiving
the grossest injury and affront it was possible for her to offer him?

I think, madam, I never was so oddly encompassed with pleasures and sorrows as
I am at present: -- one copious source of pleasure I need not point out.
Another, which I derive from the extreme kindness of my grandfather (he will
always have me call him so), and his family, is likewise sufficiently obvious.
I am extremely happy too, that my wishes for Miss Marchmont are answered: she
tells me, that the amiable marquis de St. Clair has declared himself her lover.
She has imposed on him a probation of two months: in his particular
circumstances, it was both delicate and prudent to do so. I question not,
however, he will find means to persuade her to shorten the time. She writes to
me with that warm and cordial friendship, which subsisted between us before our
little rivalry; and which, I feared of late, was in a great measure
extinguished on her side. She was unjust; but I blamed human nature -- not Miss
Marchmont; and with a secret satisfaction repeated those very fine lines, --
"Ne vous informez point de leur reconnoissance;
"Il est grand, il est beau de fair des ingrats."


In seeking Leonora's advantage, I found my own: the path of rectitude, I have
ever experienced, leads to felicity. -- O may I always tread it! I endeavored
to secure her happiness, and Heaven took care of mine. So much for my
pleasures: -- you may be sure I mean my lately acquired ones, as I do not
mention my dear uncle or you.

My sorrows are -- first, an anxious solicitude, a thousand tender fears for
Sir Edward's health. Secondly, and lastly -- how few people could so easily
reckon up their sorrows! -- a sincere affliction on lady Mary's account. Her
chief physician took me aside yesterday, and honestly told me his attendance
was quite unnecessary; the lady was beyond the power of medicine; might linger
out a few weeks, but never could recover. I begged of him to continue his
visits, notwithstanding; and asked if he did not think it expedient she should
be informed of her danger. He shook his head, and said she was very despondent
already; but as there were absolutely no hopes, I might do as I pleased. I have
a poor opinion of the efficacy of a repentance extorted only through the fear
of death; and imagine, that a dying person is far from being capable of
properly settling even worldly affairs; for as the soul, in its embodied state,
must have the expression of its powers modified by the nature of the organs
through which it acts, it is clear, that any disorder in the nice mechanism of
the body, must affect the action of the soul. Yet, though every body confesses
the necessity of preparing for an event which cannot be prevented, --
unhappily, there are but too many who love to postpone all consideration of it:
therefore, I think it extremely wrong in a by-stander to conceal the certain
approach of death: it is cruelty, at least it is very ill-judged compassion. It
is not probable that either spiritual or temporal concerns will be
advantageously settled at this very awful period, when the vigor both of mind
and body is broken: but if it be possible they can be settled at all, people
should have a chance given them for doing it. With the permission of lady
Mary's physician, I undertook the most painful and melancholy office I ever
executed. She seemed greatly alarmed; though she said she expected it. On the
whole, however, she behaved with fortitude; called death a refuge from
calamities worse than death; calamities which she had brought on herself. She
mentioned her mother with tenderness; lamented her alienation from her; and
severely lamented her own disobedience, which she considered as the cause of
her subsequent misfortunes, having thereby incurred the displeasure of the
Almighty. -- She appeared, altogether, in a frame of mind very suitable to her
state.

I ventured to ask, if she chose to see Mr. Webster. Her placidity was no more;
-- she bit her lips -- called him a villain, who had basely betrayed, and
ungratefully sacrificed her: loaded Miss Ormsby with execrations -- not to say
curses. I shuddered; but as I perceived her passions were just then too strong
to combat, I did not attempt. However, I have since taken occasion to drop a
few gentle hints on the necessity of forgiving injuries.

I suppose her unworthy husband, and his -- I must add unworthy -- mistress,
are still at Jephson-lodge. Both of them, I believe, are as yet ignorant of the
discovery that has been made. Apropos -- You are desirous, I presume, to know
how lady Mary came by the important letter, that has done so much harm to
herself, and so much good to some others: -- lady Conway, who, it seems, is
extremely giddy and careless, left her cabinet open: her maid searched it out
of curiosity; found that letter amongst other papers; which having read, she
mischievously brought to lady Mary, who, you may imagine, handsomely rewarded
this fatal service.

--

Lady Lucy Domville has just been with me. She hears from her mother, that lady
Enmore is returned to Ireland. I request you will immediately inform her of her
daughter's situation. I am sure her forgiveness -- for I make no doubt of her
granting it -- will be very soothing to lady Mary. If she holds to her
purposes, her heart is not so good as I have hitherto thought it: tell her I
say so. I know by her answer to my pleadings for lady Mary, she is displeased
with me; but I am certain she loves, and -- allow me to add -- respects me; and
would be very sorry I should not think well of her. She says I am the most
sophistical reasoner she ever knew. My arguments might not have been quite
convincing, but I heartily wish she had allowed herself to be persuaded by
them; for I am sure the remembrance of her severity to her daughter, will give
her pain as long as she lives.

I have another commission for you, madam. -- My uncle suspects something
particular, from your concealing my letters from him, contrary to your wonted
custom. I entreat you will tell him every thing: and, dear, dear aunt, dispose
him to think favorably of Sir Edward.

To my great satisfaction, he is already approved by the duke, who is well
acquainted with his character. He took an opportunity of throwing out some
oblique hints with regard to lord Methuen's visit: I blushed -- looked out of
the window -- then on the ground -- counted my fingers --; at last told him, I
thought it contrary to my duty to keep any thing of importance from his
knowledge; and taking his hand, though without daring to raise my eyes to his
face, -- "Dear sir," said I, will you excuse my speaking, and lady Alicia shall
tell you all? His eyes glistened at what he called, my sweet simplicity: he
pressed me close to his breast, giving me the most flattering and endearing
appellations.

The dear old man sends every day to enquire about Sir Edward. Today, when the
servant returned, his grace read the card aloud, as usual: the little wicked
lady Fanny said, with an air of gravity, You don't know, my lord, what a vile
Irish tone Miss O'Bryen has in reading, though you don't perceive it in her
speaking -- only make her read that card.

I don't know in what tone I might have read it; but I am afraid my voice would
have been none of the steadiest. I suppose I looked a little foolish; for lady
Alicia, who cannot bear to see any body suffer the slightest pain for a moment,
immediately said, -- Come, Valeria, is it not time for us to go to lady Mary?
You may believe I willingly complied. You must know, madam, she often
accompanies me to see my unfortunate patient: -- her gentle heart is open to
every distress.

Lady Carysbrook wanted to send her own maid -- who is an elderly woman, and
has lived with her a long time -- to take care of poor lady Mary, who has
nobody about her that can be supposed any way attached to her. I refused the
offer, as I knew it would be inconvenint to my aunt to want her; and the
nurse-tender seems very careful and orderly. I have, however, placed my Eleanor
with her, who is extremely good-natured, and will do every thing she can for
her, for my sake.

Lady Alicia comes to propose our spending an hour with lady Mary before
supper. She desired me to give her love to you: -- I smiled: -- she repeated
her request; and says she will love good people, whether they are personally
known to her or not; -- she may safely, for every good person must love her.

Adieu, my best and dearest friend, adieu.

VALERIA O'BRYEN.

TO MISS ORMSBY. -- JEPHSON-LODGE.
LONDON.
I HAVE told you a thousand times that Webster would be your ruin: -- but I
forget it is you that are to scold me. -- My vile carelessness! We must fix on
some plan: -- to qualify you for it, I shall give you a detail of very
disagreeable particulars. My father and Sir James went yesterday morning to see
Sir Edward Marchmont, which they would have done sooner, had they been certain
his fever was not epidemical. They were received with frozen civility by lord
Methuen: Mrs. Wentworth did not appear. His lordship said, Sir Edward was
better, but not well enough to see them; and coldly thanked them, in his name,
for the honor of their visit. He had not the politeness to ask either for you
or me; but said, slightly, he hoped Mrs. Ormsby was well. My father professed
much concern, that the honor which had been intended his family, had been so
disagreeably deferred. The insolent peer took no manner of notice of this; but,
with a wonderful sang froid, resumed a political subject he had before
introduced. He made them take wine, and some refreshments, but did not ask them
to stay to dinner, though it was pretty late. My father is monstrously huffed;
but Sir James seems to think nothing about the matter: -- he, you know, is one
of those dull, easy, mortals, whom it is difficult to vex, and impossible to
please.

I was to spend the evening at Mrs. Hilton's rout; and took it into my head
that some rings, I seldom wear on account of their slightness, would look well
enough amongst my others,; but having sought them in vain, I was obliged to go
without them.

I disengaged myself from the card-table after playing one pool of quadrille,
in order to flirt with Frank Preston. As we chatted together, an officer came
up to him; perhaps to take a nearer view of me. Well, Bathurst, said my beau,
give an account of yourself. Where were you rambling today? I called at your
lodgings, and they told me you had gone out of town. The smart widow, to be
sure --.

No, upon my honor: I did not see the lady you hinted at these three days. I
confess, however, I was at the house of a rich, handsome young widow; but I
went there to see her brother, Sir Edward Marchmont.

I pricked up my ears.

"How is he?" asked Preston: Is he able to see company?

"He keeps his room still," returned the other; and I suppose admits only
particular friends.

Now, Hannah, it is plain he saw major Bathurst, though he was denied to our
gentlemen; and if there was not -- to borrow my eloquent Sir James's phrase --
something extraordinary in the wind, it is to be imagined, he would have
considered your father and brother-in-law as his particular friends. But you
have not heard the worst yet, I can tell you. This morning -- Lord knows how I
came to be so careful -- I renewed my search for the rings, but without effect.
The uneasiness my suivante discovered, while I ransacked my drawers, etc. for
them, induced me to suspect she had stolen them. I called to mind having
forgotten my keys on my toilette, about ten days ago, when I dined at my
father's; and being alarmed for the safety of a little cabinet, wherein I keep
things of most value -- as jewels, money, papers -- I ran to see if the enemy
had carried their depredations so far. I missed, besides the rings, ten or
twelve guineas, some gold pocket-pieces, my grandfather's picture, and that of
the reverend gentlewoman, his wife. As to the pictures, if the wench had been
contentented with taking them, I should not have cared a farthing, though they
were set in gold, which, I presume, was the reason of her stealing them; it
could not be for their extraordinary beauty, I am certain. -- How proud my poor
grandfather would have been, had somebody, in the spirit of prophecy, foretold
what was to befall his picture in the latter days! Little did he think that a
fair oue would venture her neck to possess herself of it. I Will answer for it,
no woman went such lengths in his favor, during his life. The Lord send Harris
a husband as old and as ugly, to punish her for her dishonesty. -- But I was
going to say, that, though willing to indulge my maid with the pictures, I did
not much relish the loss of the rest. I was frightened lest the creature had
had the curiosity to look at my letters: there were some from -- you may guess
who; -- no harm in a little flirtation, Hannah; -- I found these in a place by
themselves, and they did not appear to have been touched. I presently missed
the letter you wrote to me the night before you went to Jephson-lodge. I don't
exactly remember its contents, but I am sure they were of a nature not to bear
my lady Harris's inspection. After tumbling up and down for it a great while,
to no purpose, I called her up, and abruptly charged her with robbing me;
threatening to send her to jail. She denied the fact; and said, if I had lost
any thing, there were other servants in the house as liable to be suspected for
the theft as she. Accordingly, I assembled the female part of my family, and
began a general examination. They unanimously avowed their innocence: one of
them offered to give her oath she had not been in the room; which was echoed by
all the rest, except one of the chambermaids, who said she had been in the
room, but would swear she had stolen nothing. Harris frowned at her. It
instantly struck me, this girl knew something of the affair; and thinking, as
she is a young, country simpleton, she would be easily wrought upon, I took her
into another room, and there protested I should send her to jail that moment,
if she did not tell me the whole truth. She fell upon her knees; cried
bitterly; made strong protestation of honesty, and so forth; and, begging me to
have mercy on her, confessed that she had gone into my chamber by accident that
evening, and saw Mrs. Harris reading a letter, standing at my cabinet, which
was open: her laughing over it, it seems, excited Deborah's curiosity, which
the other gratified, by reading it to her. I questioned her concerning it; and
from the confusion of her answers, had the satisfaction to find she did not
rightly comprehend it. She affirmed, she did not know of my maid's taking any
thing but that letter. I eagerly asked what had been done with it. She
hesitated: I placed the formidable jail before her eyes once more. She
acknowledged, that Harris had told her in confidence, that she had disposed of
it to a lady, who had given her a great deal of money for it. -- "What was the
lady's name?" She did not remember it. Was it lady Mary Webster? "It was." I
was beside myself with rage. Only think what a malicious action it was in the
treacherous wretch! I forced her keys from her, and in a little box, in one of
her drawers, found the pocket-pieces, rings, and pictures. I demanded my money.
She said I owed her as much wages; which I believe was true: so after venting
my rage on her, as far as impotent words could do it, I turned her away: and
very merciful I was, to let her come off so easily.

What is now to be done, Hannah? I am convinced lady Mary -- she is certainly
capable of it -- has done you some ill office with Sir Edward: perhaps sent him
the very letter. You know lord Methuen and he are prodigiously intimate: what
was known to one, would not long be a secret to the other; and, without his
lordship had some good reason for it, I cannot believe he would have treated my
father and Sir James as he did; for he is confessedly exceedingly well-bred.

Can you think on any scheme, whereby to extricate yourself from this terrible
dilemma? You may depend on my bearing any part in it you please to allot me. --
Could we contrive to disavow the letter, and make the whole appear the effect
of lady Mary's malice, and groundless jealousy? She will soon be out of a
condition to contradict us: she is given over; -- there is consolation for you!

I don't know what part to recommend to you. I think it is well worth your
while to go great lengths to secure a husband of Marchmont's consequence: but
do not advance a step without being sure of your ground: he is penetrating;
and, take my word for it, has not passion enough for you to blind him. His
demure sister, I suppose, would be consulted; and women find out women's
artifices much more easily than men do. I dread, too, lord Methuen's cool
judgment.

If you think he is irrecoverably lost -- and, not to flatter you, I fear he is
-- all you can do, is to invent some plausible story to deceive my father, and
throw yourself on Sir Edward's generosity to countenance it; for if he
discovers your intrigue with Webster, you are utterly undone: and I don't see
how he can well avoid discovering it, as he will be under the necessity of
making a sufficient apology for breaking off a match, which was on the point of
being concluded. O, that horrid fever! Nothing ever was so mal a propos. Had it
seized him one week later, you would have been lady Marchmont. A separation
would have been the worst that could have happened; and that is often a very
desirable thing.

I suppose poor Mr. Webster is piteously grieved for his lady's illness. I hope
you are humane enough to endeavor to comfort him. It Is really melancholy, that
such a beautiful woman should be cut off in the bloom of life.

Happen what may, it is my advice to you, never think of taking Webster for
better for worse: ambition and prudence -- though they seldom give the same
counsel -- equally oppose it. He is meanly born; and, enter nous, our blood
wants a little refining; on one side at least. His wife's fortune -- you know
he has nothing else -- will not entitle him to yours: and, depend on it, he
would soon run through both. Besides, as you can never expect that my father
will consent to your making such an alliance, you must wait till his death,
which is probably a distant event. Add to all this, Webster will not have any
respect for you, or confidence in you, after the experience he has had of your
character: -- excuse this free remark. Be guided by me; set your cap at some
sober, leaden-pated fellow, with a good estate, over whom your beauty will
secure you an easy dominion. Retain Webster, since he is so agreeable to you:
and if you conduct yourself with common prudence, you have such a gentle,
innocent, sanctified appearance, you will never be suspected.

O ciel! what a letter is here! the longest I ever wrote. I expect you to thank
me for it. It puts me in mind of my boarding-school correspondence with Burton,
when I

" -- Bid him still adieu, yet added more." Let me know what you intend to do,
that I may have my lesson.

My compliments to Bab Jephson: tell her, her wicked eyes have done a world of
mischief amongst the beaux: -- pierced poor Hammond's heart through and
through. Seriously, he professes himself violently smitten with her. She need
not doubt his veracity, for every acre of his estate is mortgaged; and no lover
is so passionate, as he

"Who burns for love and money too." These young widows have great attractions.
Cupid never misses his mark, when he takes "His stand
"Upon a widow's jointure land."


Heigh-ho! for a crape fan, to ogle the fellows through.

EMILY CONWAY.

TO MISS ORMSBY. -- JEPHSON-LODGE.
MADAM, HERMITAGE.
THE uncommon nature of the subject whereon I am obliged to trouble you, will,
I hope, be a competent excuse for me, if I should seem wanting in that delicacy
and respect which is due from my sex to yours. I will not fatigue you with any
other preface but this necessary one.

A letter of yours, to lady Conway, was sent to me by a person, with whom I
have no manner of connection. I see by it, that I am not so happy as to possess
your affection; I must, therefore, beg leave to decline the honor to which I
had aspired. -- As I know not in what way it would be most agreeable to you I
should declare my intentions to Mr. Ormsby, I request you will take the conduct
of that matter on yourself. I rely on your having the kindness to represent my
procedure as little to my disadvantage as circumstances may admit.

I enclose you your letter, madam, as I cannot think of retaining it; and
imagine it will be more to your satisfaction to destroy it yourself, than if I
were to do so. -- What it may have suffered before it came to me, I am ignorant
of, and cannot be answerable for; but since that period, assure yourself,
nothing has happened to it that need give you uneasiness; though, I confess, it
has passed through a greater number of hands than I could wish. -- When it
arrived here, I was so dangerously ill, that Mrs. Wentworth and lord Methuen
would not deliver it; but, with a freedom their friendship fully authorized,
they opened it. My lord judged it proper that a thing of such importance should
be made known to me; and apprehending that the agitation of mind it would
excite, might have bad consequences, he consulted with my physician; an
indiscretion, of which nothing but the excess of his fears for me could have
made him guilty. I have since exacted a promise of secrecy from doctor Howard;
and, it is my opinion, you may very confidently depend on it. The letter has
not been seen by any other than the persons I have mentioned, except a young
lady of distinguished honor, and unequalled generosity.

With the sincerest good wishes for your future happiness,

I am, madam, etc. etc. EDWARD MARCHMONT.

TO MRS. CHETWYND. -- IRELAND.
LONDON.
AH! madam, lady Enmore's maternal tenderness rekindles too late. Her
unfortunate daughter cannot be made sensible of her pardon and affection. She
is totally deprived of recollection and reason. She neither eats, nor speaks,
nor moves; -- knows nobody, and takes not the least notice of any thing that is
done about her. In short, she appears bereft of every faculty of mind and body:
she is not dead, but I can scarcely say she is alive.

I am extremely glad lady Enmore did not come here; though sorry it was
indisposition that prevented her. Let her by no means think of undertaking the
journey: -- her presence can avail nothing, for lady Mary has every help, and
all the attendance that could be procured for her; and her situation is by much
too shocking for the eye of a parent to behold.

I directed lady Mary's maid to write to her master: -- the following is his
answer, word for word: --

I cannot go to town. Take care of your lady; and call in a physician, if it
should be necessary.

FREDERIC WEBSTER.


Soon will this insolent and cruel wretch enjoy the fortune of her, whom he has
murdered, without the heavy encumbrance of a hated wife. Perhaps I am too
severe, in saying he has murdered her, as she had strong symptoms of a decay,
long before they were married: that he has shortened her life, however, by some
months -- or, it may be, years -- is a circumstance that will not admit of
doubt. The poor creature, I fear, cannot hold out much longer: I ought not to
have said, I fear; for, in her dreadful state, it is rather the part of
humanity to wish to hasten, than retard her death.

I am so much fatigued and dispirited, that I really am not able to write to
lady Enmore. You say she is in your neighborhood; -- you will please to bear
her these sorrowful tidings. The soothing gentleness of your manners, admirably
fits you to perform these sorts of melancholy offices; and I know the goodness
of your heart ever leads you to seek them.

I thank you ten thousand times, for the warmth of your congratulations on a
certain subject: they are just such as I expected from the kindest friend, and
best natured woman in the world. My dear uncle, too! -- and did he weep over my
letters? -- As I read yours, I took his picture from my bosom, and pressed it
to my lips; shedding on it soft tears of affection and gratitude. How many of
his unfeeling sex would have sneered at the girl's folly, and made a sport of
her sufferings? But he happily unites female delicacy of sentiment, and
tenderness of heart, to manly firmness and intrepidity.

I am delighted with your account of Sir Francis O'Bryen: he is worthy of the
noble name he bears. My uncle was quite right -- as he always is -- in
declining his very generous offer with regard to me. As to the jewels, I see no
necessity for my accepting any, and wish I might be excused; but as he is so
earnest, and you seem to think there would be a disobliging formality in my
continuing to refuse them, I shall take a few rings, or pins, or something not
exceeding the value of one hundred pounds.

I cannot answer your question concerning the chevalier du Mornai: I never
heard of him before the last letter I received from my uncle. If your
mentioning Mrs. Wentworth's name in so slight a manner, was really the cause of
his disorder, there must certainly be something extraordinary in the affair. I
suppose, by O'Bryen's immediately retiring with him, he is in his confidence. I
agree with you in thinking he must be a lover of Mrs. Wentworth's. -- Possibly
he may have seen her at Paris, where she has spent several months. His
attachment could hardly have commenced since her widowhood; as, during that
period, she has lived in almost a monastic seclusion from the world. If our
conjectures are well founded, he is highly deserving of pity and esteem, for so
constant and unfortunate a passion. I Will ask Harriet about him the next time I
see her. I am not afraid of giving her any disturbance: -- du Mornai may love
her; but she, I am convinced, never did, nor ever will, love any other than the
man whom she has lost for ever.

I had a billet yesterday from the charming invalid: he begged I would permit
him to wait on me this day; but, as I had secret information from Mrs.
Wentworth that his health was not sufficiently re-established, I thought proper
to curb his impatience; and have put off his visit till next week.

I should write to you two hours longer, my dear aunt, if I had time; but it is
near our breakfast hour, and I must scribble a few lines to mon petit soupirant
at Granvillepark. This is acting en coquette, I think, to correspond with two
lovers at a time.

Robert says, he languishes to see me -- by my absence, the trees have lost
their verdure, the birds their melody -- in short, the fair face of summer
never was so deformed before; not even by the iron hand of hoary winter.

May each returning season bring health and peace to my maternal friend!

VALERIA O'BRYEN.

TO MRS. CHETWYND. -- IRELAND.
LONDON.
WILL you, madam, permit Alicia Sedley to address a few lines to you, for your
niece, who is at present engaged in the very difficult task of informing lady
Enmore of her daughter's death? Valeria and I have sat together this hour,
weeping over the remembrance of the sad scene we have been so recently
witnesses of; and lamenting the hard fate of this most unhappy woman.

Miss O'Bryen, my mother, and I, spent some part of this morning with lady
Mary, without perceiving any alteration in her. As we sat at dinner, a message
came from Miss O'Bryen's maid -- who has attended her ladyship since we came to
town -- informing us, that she was much better within the last half hour; had
spoken several times, and, for the most part, very rationally. Impatient to
behold this happy change, my cousin and I drove to Doverstreet, the moment we
could disengage ourselves from the table. On approaching the bed, our too
sanguine hopes immediately subsided: the wildness of her eyes was the only
visible alteration in the death-like appearance our patient had so long worn.
She would have stretched out her hand to Valeria, but could not, from extreme
weakness. "It is as you told me," said she; "I am just going."

"What shall we do, Valeria?" whispered I, in great terror. Had we not better
dispatch a messenger to Mr. Bailly? -- my grandfather's domestic chaplain,
madam, who had before administered the sacrament, and frequently read prayers
to her ladyship. We instantly sent to him, and to her two physicians.

Miss O'Bryen then placed herself on a chair that stood at the head of the bed,
and drawing back the curtain a little, was going. to speak; when lady Mary
cried out -- My mother too! -- my own mother to refuse ever to see me! And even
--. The remainder of the sentence was so inarticulately pronounced, I could not
understand it.

Your mother has entirely forgiven you. -- She charged me to assure --.

Lady Mary, without attending to her, exclaimed -- Webster! you cruel,
treacherous villain! --. And immediately afterward -- Hannah Ormsby! Hannah
Ormsby! may everlasting curses --.

Valeria, with her usual presence of mind, prevented her finishing this horrid
imprecation: -- instantly rising, and assuming a tone of authority, that was
quite necessary to restrain her fury, -- What are you doing? said she: do you
know that a few minutes hence you may be called to account for your sins -- and
dare you add this black one to their catalogue? Is this obeying his precepts,
who taught us to love, and pray for our enemies? Pardon those that have injured
you, if you would be pardoned yourself. Your earthly parent has forgiven you;
-- in like manner may your heavenly father pardon all your transgressions! So
saying, she knelt, and with that air of humility, which becomes the creature
when addressing the creator -- joined to a dignity and solemnity, that must
have commanded the reverence of any person who had the least remains of reason,
-- she prayed aloud. I was inexpressibly awed, and knelt likewise, as did the
women that were in the room. A faint, but fearful, shriek issued from the bed:
we all started up, except Miss O'Bryen. I flew to her: -- terrified, lest the
unfortunate lady, in her madness, should attempt to hurt her. In my fright I
forgot her debility. The first look I gave at her, almost petrified me with
horror. Nothing can be conceived more frightful, than the quick and wild
rollings of her sunk eyes, and the dreadful distortions of her ghastly face. I
am amazed my lovely friend had the courage to remain so near her. She shrunk
not from the bedside, but continued to kneel by her: -- now gazing on her with
fast-falling tears of compassion; then raising her eyes and clasped hands to
Heaven, her lips moved tremblingly, as in fervent prayer. Perceiving I could
scarcely stand, and that I supported myself by holding the curtain, she arose,
and insisted upon my allowing her Eleanor to attend me home. I refused to leave
her. During this friendly contest Mr. Bailly arrived; and one of the
physicians, who declared his patient to be in the last agonies, and led us both
into another room. In about an hour after they told us she was dead. As soon as
we had a little recovered from this shock, Miss O'Bryen, with the assistance of
lady Mary's maid, locked all the apartments, which it was not necessary for the
convenience of the servants should remain open; and leaving the keys in her
ladyship's dressing room, and locking the door, and setting a seal on it, she
enclosed the key in a letter she made the waitingwoman write to Mr. Webster,
and which she sent to him by one of our footmen, before we quitted the
melancholy house.

I shall now dismiss a subject, so little calculated to please either the
imagination or the heart. If my being so circumstantial, has been tedious and
disagreeable, it is Valeria, by whose desire I was so, that must be blamed for
it.

I cannot conclude, without expressing the earnest desire I have to be ranked
amongst the happy number you honor with your acquaintance. I would aspire to
more -- to your friendship. Miss O'Bryen paints your character in colors so
engagingly amiable, it is impossible not to love you; and nothing, you know, is
more natural than to seek a return of affection, however destitute one may be
of any just claim to it.

I hope my grandfather's present fondness for Valeria -- which from the
steadiness of his temper, and her uncommon merit, I am persuaded must endure --
will obliterate the remembrance of past unkindnessess, and extinguish the
animosity that has so long -- and, I may add, so causelessly -- subsisted
between the O'Bryen and Sedley families.

Assure Mr. Chetwynd of my respect.

I am, Madam, With the most perfect esteem, Your obedient, etc. ALICIA SEDLEY.

To the RIGHT HON. LADY METHUEN. -- POPLAR-HILL.
HERMITAGE.
NO more of your soft reproaches, my lovely Louisa. I fly to you. I shall be in
my chaise tomorrow, as soon as Phoebus ascends his chariot; and before he
takes his night's draught of seawater -- a potation I shall not much envy him
-- I expect to drink a social cup of tea with my angel: and when the god
reposes himself on Thetis's bosom! -- my charming Louisa! -- But I have done.
Allow me some merit in thus breaking off my bold parallel.

As I would not have the shadow of a frown remain on that dear brow when we
meet, I must repeat to you the cause of my stay at Hermitage. -- Edward, by
means of his vigorous constitution, and great flow of animal spirits, has, I
thank God! recovered as fast as it was reasonable to expect he could, from so
violent a fit of illness; but his brisk and sanguine temper ill brooked such
slow advances to health. Ever since my conference with Miss O'Bryen, he has
imagined himself quite well; and would hardly submit to be treated en malade.
He wanted to go to London before we thought it safe for him to leave his room.
As soon as he was permitted to take the air, he renewed his resolution, and
persisted in it with a degree of obstinacy not natural to him. He attributed
his sister's opposition to the timidity of her sex, and the apprehensiveness of
her temper, increased by her excessive affection for him. She observed, that he
paid more regard to my remonstrances, and begged me not to leave him till he
was perfectly recovered. Ill would it have suited my friendship for them both,
not to have complied with her desire.

I have told you all this before, my love; and yet you almost blame me for
staying from you. I thank you for this petulance: I would not have you unmoved
by my absence, however necessary. I am too fond to be always reasonable myself;
and I cannot suffer you to be a bit wiser, in this respect, than I am. Your
general superiority, I behold not without jealousy, -- yet with pride, and with
pleasure. When I hear a man declare -- and many such declarations have I heard
-- that he would not marry a lady of distinguished talents, I regard him as a
conceited blockhead: no matter whether a learned, or an illiterate one. A man
of understanding would, assuredly, prefer a sensible and agreeable companion,
to a silly, or an insipid one: he that would choose the reverse, is a puppy; and
never intends to treat his wife with that respect which her station, and even
her sex, entitles her to; and which he ought to pay for his own sake, if
incapable of being actuated by a more generous motive. Puffed up with the
imagined superiority of his own sex -- and, at the same time, aukwardly
conscious that he does not himself possess it -- he would fear to have a wife's
understanding set in contrast to his own shallowness. Blinded, or misled by
vanity, he either does not, or will not, perceive how much it is in a sensible
woman's power to supply her husband's deficiencies. He sees not that the
connection is so close, the union of interests so perfect, that the merit of
one party must reflect luster on the other.

Our education gives us a certain superiority over the fair sex; but they, on
the other hand, possess a superiority of a much higher nature -- the noble
superiority of virtue! In some things they are above us, in others on a level
with us; in others again sweetly inferior: on the whole then, my dear Louisa,
balancing one qualification against another, I am of opinion that there is
nearly an equality of merit between the sexes; and I am very sure that he will
never find happiness in matrimony -- that is, in its native soil -- who will
not consider his wife as his equal, his companion, and his friend. Love soon
languishes and dies away, when it is not supported and cherished by friendship;
and though a mutual regard can certainly subsist between persons of very
different capacities, yet equality, though constituted -- and perhaps it would
be best it should be constituted -- by different qualities, is indispensibly
necessary to true and consummate friendship. The warmest, the tenderest, the
most delightful, and the most durable affection, is the delicious melange of
love and friendship: they strengthen each other; love enlivens friendship, and
friendship refines love. Happy the man who has judiciously chosen his life's
companion! -- who finds the mistress and the friend united! In a word -- for I
cannot suppress the fond boast -- thrice happy Methuen!

It is with inexpressible pleasure I reflect on my dear Marchmont's being soon
to enter on a state of felicity similar to my own. His affairs are in the best
train imaginable. He wrote to Miss O'Bryen some days ago, to obtain permission
to visit her. I immediately protested against his rashness in venturing abroad
so soon. Mrs. Wentworth, with the most tender and earnest importunity, besought
him not to go. But, my sweet sister, cried he, pulling her on his knee, I must
go. How can you have the cruelty thus to compel me to contradict you? Oh! if
you knew the half of what I feel --, putting her hand to his heart. As to
Methuen, I will not listen to him; because I am sure, if he were in my
circumstances, he would act just as I do. What a tardy wretch Miss O'Bryen
might think me! -- a frosty-spirited fellow, as I remember lady Conway once
called me. Besides, I don't expose myself to any danger; I am perfectly well;
look at me, Harriet? -- Have I the least appearance of a sick man, except this
vile robe de chamber?

"A compromise, Edward," said I; you may go to town, provided you wear that
robe de chamber.

"O! not for a thousand pounds!"

"And so you will throw it off," said Mrs. Wentworth, almost crying; and I know
what will be the consequence; -- you will get cold, and relapse. My dear
brother," putting her arms round his neck, why will you be so obstinate?

He looked so much distressed, that I pitied him; and, winking significantly at
his sister, gave it as my opinion, that he might go, if he would wear two
waistcoats, two pair of stockings, and something extraordinary about his neck.
He was charmed with my expedient; and ran up stairs to write.

"Ah! my lord," said Mrs. Wentworth, why did you interpose? He was just going
to consent.

I thoroughly satisfied her, by explaining my intention; which was, that she
should secretly write to Miss O'Bryen, to forbid his coming. Accordingly our
hasty lover was politely, and -- both as to the intention and the manner --
kindly repulsed. She desired him to wait till the end of this week; -- no
disputing her sovereign will; -- he was obliged to submit.

The ardently wished-for time draws near. He sent yesterday to let the duke of
Granville know, he should do himself the honor to wait on him tomorrow. His
grace returned a very polite card, requesting the favor of his company to
dinner. -- You will suppose the invitation very agreeable; so, in fact, it was;
yet he will not accept it, but prefers dining at his own house. Are you not
amazed? But the cause is still more surprising than the effect: -- Mrs.
Wentworth accompanies him. Her fear that he will not take sufficient care of
himself, is her sole motive for going. Nothing, I believe, but the passionate,
and well-merited love she bears him, could have induced the lovely recluse ever
again to visit the gay metropolis. I wish she could contrive to shake off a
little of her melancholy there; but I only wish, I do not in the least expect
it. Never did I see so deep, and fixed a sorrow; -- such calm despair. How am I
pained, my Louisa, when I behold this amiable young creature a prey to
never-ending grief; and consider that my fatal imprudence was -- in a great
measure, if not solely -- the cause of her sufferings! Yet how far is her noble
mind from resenting the involuntary injury! -- from disclaiming the friendship
that has undone her! -- O, blind, mis-judging Wentworth! how could you suspect
such an angelic woman? And where did your imagination find the colors that
drew me such a villain; for your own heart -- yes, unfortunate man! my
honored, and much-lamented foe! your own heart -- was good and generous, and,
as much as mine, above such wickedness? But why, my love, do I thus
unnecessarily distress you, by calling to your remembrance an event that has
occasioned so much affliction to us both.

I will write no more, for this subject has made me sad, and I do not wish to
make you so. If I had sufficient command over myself, I should never make you
the partner of my griefs; but my heart is so open to you, that it communicates
all its feelings without distinction or reserve. Joy is not joy till I have
shared it with you; and sorrow loses its name, when you become my comforter.
Say, by what generous art is it, you thus, in sweet partition, augment all my
joys, and steal my every sorrow? -- Thou dear source of all my happiness! --
farewell. Tomorrow I shall clasp you to a heart that beats but for you.

METHUEN.

TO LORD METHUEN. -- POPLAR-HILL.
LONDON.
HUMAN bliss is never without alloy, says the moralist. The observation is
just; I subscribe to it with a sigh. Doubtless, this is a right disposition of
things: were it otherwise, we should be apt to place our affections wholly on
the happiness of this world, without reflecting on its immense disproportion to
that of Heaven: and, God knows, this is what we are but too much inclined to do
already. -- "Mavelous!" you exclaim: a sermon, instead of the gay flights I
expected from him! What the deuce sets the fellow a preaching? -- Why, my dear
Methuen, I should this moment be the happiest man in the world, if I could wrap
myself up in my own enjoyments, without suffering for the afflictions of
others. How abominably I express myself! What a nonsensical supposition! No;
the man who feels not for the distresses of others, cannot be happy himself: --
and God forbid that he could! -- Selfish happiness! -- there is no such thing:
I cannot even frame an idea of it. And great, poignant as the anguish is, with
which my heart mourns my lovely sister's woe, I would not barter the dear,
painful sympathy -- I will not say for insensibility, I would not barter it --
for happiness.

My spirits are at present in a pretty exact equilibrium; though inclining, I
believe, to melancholy: for if, on the one side, I am powerfully elated by my
flattering reception at the duke of Granville's; on the other, I am strongly
depressed by what I have seen my poor Harriet suffer this day. 'T was above
three years, you know, since she had been in London before. When she left this
city, it was to attend the deathbed of a loved and honored parent; a
consideration which, alone, would have been but too affecting to so feeling a
mind: but here, she last saw her adored, ill-fated husband! This was too much
for her to support. I endeavored all the way to divert her thoughts, as much
as possible, from dwelling on such melancholy subjects. She was in tolerable
spirits till we came near town; her cheerfulness then gradually subsided. I
forced her to taste some wine, I had ordered into the chaise on purpose to give
her; and caused the postillion to drive faster, hoping that the quick motion
would in some degree enliven her; or, at least, serve to disturb her
reflections. At length the tears, she had no longer power to suppress, gushed
from her sweet eyes. I put my arms round her, and laid her lovely face on my
breast, without attempting to comfort her, otherwise than by joining my tears
to here is. I was several times apprehensive of her fainting.

I made Bernard take a great round about, to avoid driving through the street
in which my brother Wentworth had resided. At last the carriage stopped at my
door; and I supported, or rather carried, the dear mourner into a parlour.

I knew not what to say to her: a melancholy speech might have increased her
sorrow; and I felt, that a sprightly one would have insulted it. I judged it
best to strive to keep her from thinking at all. I brought her up stairs, made
her walk up and down the dining room, with drawing room, etc. -- asked her
opinion of this, or that piece of painting, or furniture. I neither expected,
nor waited for an answer: -- all I wanted, was to hurry the dear creature a
little.

Will you think me a phlegmatic lover, my dear friend, when I own to you, that
thus employed, I almost forgot my engagement? Harriet reminded me of it. I was
extremely unwilling to leave her; and, feigning a headache, would have sent an
apology: but she saw through my little deception, and insisted on my going, in
such a manner, as showed me she would be distressed by my persisting to stay
with her. -- I went.

As I enquired for the duke, I was shown into his study. He received me, not
only with civility, but kindness. We had chatted together above ten minutes,
before I could find courage enough to -- hope Miss O'Bryen was well; not that
there was any thing in the duke's deportment, or quality, that intimidated me.
He does not appear to me that haughty man you think him; and if he were, his
arrogance would be much apter to inspire me with contempt than awe. I have been
used to converse with men of rank; and though I should think myself highly
blameable, if wanting in due respect to them, -- I should despise myself, were
I suffer that respect to degenerate into an awkward and uneasy fear. I do not
consider myself so far beneath even a duke, that it need at all dazzle my eyes
to look up to him. There a is point of elevation, which places a man on a
certain degree of equality, with any rank below that of a sovereign prince. In
short, my backwardness to pay this necessary compliment to my charming girl,
arose entirely from the difficulty I find in pronouncing her name. You smile,
-- you examine the construction of the syllables: O'Bryen! -- O'Bryen! -- a
very easy name. Yes, Methuen, very easy to you, perhaps; but the most difficult
in the world to me. At last, however, I contrived to stammer out this
formidable name. His grace thanked me: replied, she was very well; and, rising,
said he would conduct me up stairs: -- I must introduce you to my family, Sir
Edward. I have two other granddaughters that I am very proud of, I assure you;
though I don't tell you, they are as handsome as Miss O'Bryen. There is not an
old fellow in England, added he, smiling, can boast three such granddaughters.
You are quite in the right, thought I, if the two I have not seen, be any way
equal to her I have.

O, how my heart fluttered as I walked up stairs! But why need I take your
lordship any further. Your imagination will present you with the interview. You
will easily fancy me introduced to the agreeable lady Carysbrook, and her two
daughters; whom, by the way, I should have thought fine women, had they chosen
their company a little more judiciously: but they need not be ashamed to yield
to the superiority of the loveliest creature in the universe. You will imagine,
my low, obsequious bow, to the divine mistress of my foul, instead of the
rapturous embrace my panting heart would have dictated: but with this bow, I
entreat you, connect not the attitude of Hudibrass, nor the compliment with
which he opens his speech: -- "Madam, I do, as is my duty,
"Honor the shadow of your shoe-tie."


You will imagine, too, the rose usurping the lily's place, on the most
beautiful face, the most seducing bosom, that ever the fair-proportioning hand
of nature formed. Her fine black eyes half-raised, sparkling through their long
silken lashes; whilst her harmonious voice, in sweetly trembling accents,
expressed her pleasure at my recovery.

Half an hour had elapsed in general conversation, on indifferent subjects,
when a number of visitors came in; a circumstance that pleased me, as I have
remarked people usually fall into parties in large companies; and I had
already, in imagination, placed myself on the sofa between lady Fanny Sedley
and Miss O'Bryen. The timidity inseparable from a love like mine, still
withheld me, when a smart military figure put an end to my deliberation, by
seizing the object of it. I am ashamed to tell you how much this disappointment
vexed me: and, you may believe, my chagrin was in no small degree increased,
when I saw the captain, determined to draw every advantage from his post,
laying close siege to my little fortress. I arose; leaned over the back of the
sofa, and sighed: that sigh passed not unheard, nor unpitied; -- she turned to
me instantly, with a look of expressive sweetness: -- Shall we make room for
you, Sir Edward? Then offering a pair of scissars to the captain, she said,
with an air half pleasant, half contemptuous, -- Here, Sir, will you cut the
cotton of lady Fanny's knotting?

Her ladyship, laughing, praised her cousin's judgment in the employment she
had chosen for him; protesting, that nothing could better suit his delicate,
white fingers. His vanity interpreted this piece of irony into a compliment;
and, bowing with a self-satisfied air, he moved nearer to lady Fanny: while I,
to my unspeakable pleasure, sat down between him and Miss O'Bryen. I began a
most delicious and interesting tete a tete with her; which, however, he had so
far his revenge of me, as to interrupt every moment.

Pray, ladies, were you at Drury Lane last night? said he.

"No, Sir."

Bless me! you had the greatest loss -- The elegant colonel Bibton sat in one
of the front boxes. You have seen him, I suppose, madam? to Miss O'Bryen.

"Never, Sir."

Then you have a great pleasure to come. He is a perfect Adonis! -- looking
sideways into a large pier-glass. -- The finest eyes! -- surveying himself
again -- "The whitest teeth too!" -- stealing another look.

Miss O'Bryen, smiling, repeated the following lines from Waller: -- "And when
she would another's praise indite,
"Is by her glass instructed how to write."


Lady Fanny pointed her satire more directly and severely: -- If yonder officer
could speak, said she, pointing to the glass, he would certainly tell us,
captain Wilson is much handsomer this colonel Bibton.

A half coxcomb would have been out of countenance; but on our little warrior's

" -- brow, shame was ashamed to sit." Vanity was his weapon, offensive and
defensive, his sword and shield; and did not more surely expose him to the
attacks of derision, than effectually preserve him from being wounded by them.
He was so completely stupefied by conceit, that the raillery of the ladies,
instead of hurting, slattered him: -- "Pardonez moi, mesdames;" bowing
affectedly; very inferior, indeed, to colonel Bibton. In which probably he
spoke the truth, though he neither believed it himself, nor intended we should.
He then, with a very bad grace, pronounced some disqualifying speeches; in
which, by the way, vain people always abound. We punished him -- and I think
very properly -- by not contradicting him.

I am not very certain whether his behavior should be attributed to stupidity
or assurance: most likely, indeed, it was the result of both. It would be
equally unjust and ill-natured, to call impudence the companion of dullness;
but I may fairly assert, that an impudent fellow is generally deficient in
understanding; and must, of necessity, be entirely devoid of that delicate
mental feeling we call sentiment.

The captain soon became tired of undervaluing himself to so little purpose;
and, by way of changing the subject, asked lady Fanny what use she made of her
knotting. She replied, It would answer for several purposes; -- leaning a
little forward, and looking, with an archness not to be described, full in my
charming Valeria's face, she added, I design this to trim Miss O'Bryen's
wedding-gown.

Surely, her ladyship did here, in some measure, sacrifice both her delicacy
and goodnature to her vivacity. I pitied my blushing fair; but her distress
was of too delicate a nature to admit of consolation from me: I could only
increase her consusion by appearing to observe it. I turned away my admiring
eyes, and began to talk to Wilson. However inattentive I might seem to the
incident, I felt it! -- Augustus, how bewitchingly handsome she looked! -- How
lovely are those effusions of modesty! How little did women of fashion know
their own interest, when they banished blushes from the beau monde!

The recollection of my dear sister's situation, obliged me to tear myself from
my charmer's side. I whispered to her my intention, and its motive. "I leave
you," said I, "surrounded with admirers -- " for by this time two or three
gentlemen had gathered round her, with such an air of attention, of interest,
that my fond, jealous heart, regarded them as rivals: -- I leave you surrounded
with admirers, -- O promise me that you will not listen to any of them, when I
go away.

"How can I make you such a promise?" demanded she, with a smile. I looked at
her with beseeching fondness: -- she had the goodness to add, -- My ear may
listen, but my heart shall not.

The duke followed me to the door, and, in an obliging manner, expressed his
regret at my declining to spend the day with him. -- "I must be paid with
interest," said he, for relinquishing that claim. I shall expect to see you
often, and without ceremony: come to us en ami. I thanked him in suitable
terms, and took my leave.

On my return home, I had the satisfaction to see Harriet had assumed an air of
tranquillity: but, alas! her swollen eyes told me, it was bought with many
tears.

Here is Philip come in, for the third time, to undress me. I have not the
conscience to keep him waiting any longer. I told him to go to bed before, but
he would not. Ever since my indisposition, it is he that is master, not I. I
must not do this, nor wear that: -- but a moment ago, he had the assurance to
tell me, he would complain to Mrs. Wentworth of my sitting up so late. Upon my
word, I am finely documented between my sister and my servant. Don't you think
I shall be handsomely tutored by the time I come into Miss O'Bryen's hands? If
the dear creature has a mind to tyrannize, I shall have my lesson of obedience
pat.

I have really a great regard for this goodnatured, officious Philip; and
consider myself highly indebted to him for his affectionate behavior. The care
he took of me during my illness, shall neither be forgotten, nor unrewarded.
That illness, I shall always remember with peculiar satisfaction and
thankfulness; as it was made the instrument to deliver me from a connection,
which I can never think of without horror.

O this tormenting valet of mine --

Adieu. My love to lady Methuen: -- comment se port elle? I would have you
translate port literally. Again adieu, my loved and faithful friend.

EDWARD MARCHMONT.

TO LORD METHUEN. -- POPLAR-HILL.
LONDON.
HOW does the thick, smoaky air of London agree with me, you ask: --
Surprizingly well; I am quite recovered within the few days I have passed here.
However, I believe I owe much more to the society, than to the air of the
place. I am every day at the duke of Granville's; and every day, with delight,
read my welcome in my Valeria's sparkling eyes. I am really in danger of
becoming the vainest coxcomb alive: -- to be distinguished by such an angelic
creature! -- a woman so superior to all other women! -- O, she is " -- all that
wish can claim,
"Chaste passion clasp, and rapture name."


To be preferred to such a number of rivals! -- many of them my superiors! --
Apropos; -- jealous fellow, as you call me, I was right with respect to lord
Wardour. The duke told me yesterday, that his lordship had requested permission
to pay his addresses to Miss O'Bryen. Heavens! how coldly some men can act in
these affairs! I should never have thought of asking such a permission. I told
the duke so. He said, smiling, Then I ought, in justice, to have preferred lord
Wardour's suit to yours. To own the truth, however, I believe my influence,
had I been inclined so to exert it, would have signified very little. Valeria
is extremely gentle: but I am mistaken if she be not, at the same time,
extremely steady.

I took advantage of our being on this subject, to hint a desire to know, if I
was to receive Miss O'Bryen from his grace, or Mr. Chetwynd. After a pause,
during which he appeared disturbed, he replied, -- To deal frankly with you,
Sir Edward, I have no title to an authority over her, though she is my
granddaughter. Mr. Chetwynd has been a father to her, as such she regards him:
to him, therefore, you are to apply. Valeria's mother, as you must have heard,
married against my consent: my resentment -- and in that, perhaps, I was to
blame -- descended to her. It was my fixed resolution to consider her as a
stranger to my blood. I saw her -- heard her -- and my resolution vanished. She
is an irresistible creature.

I am sure, if my looks were true to my heart, they gave a full assent to his
observation.

"I suppose, my dear sir," continued the duke, you know that Sir William
O'Bryen died in debt, and left his daughter --.

"Enough, my lord." cried I, with impatience; I would not choose to receive a
fortune with her.

"And yet you should receive one," answered he, had not Sir William, like the
haughty man he was, made it the condition of his last blessing to his daughter,
that she should never receive any thing from me. The restriction, however,
extends not to her children --. -- I had actually the grace to redden at the
mention of children. He laughed at me; but quickly resuming his gravity, went
on to tell me, that he would settle an estate in Nottinghamshire, worth about a
thousand a year, on her eldest son; and twenty thousand pounds on her younger
children; that he would appoint me trustee, and put me into possession on my
marriage.

Don't think me too romantic, Augustus, when I tell you, I am almost vexed to
find she will bring me a fortune. But, perhaps, she will not think proper to
accept her grandfather's offer. For my own part, I see little or no difference
between his giving her a fortune in this manner, and the more usual one. It is
in this light I have represented the matter to Mr. Chetwynd. I should be very
glad to know her own opinion; but it would be altogether indelicate to speak to
her on the subject.

I am to have the honor to accompany the duke's family to Granville-park
tomorrow. It is no small addition to my satisfaction, that my sister is to be
of the party. It was with difficulty she was prevailed on to go: the dear,
romantic creature, loves to indulge her sorrows in retirement; and seems to
think there would be a sort of impiety, in enjoying any of the pleasures of
that world, of which her Henry is no longer an inhabitant. Lady Carysbrook, and
lady Alicia Sedley, have quite won my heart by their attention to her. They
appear to compassionate her exceedingly, although they are ignorant of the
peculiar nature of her misfortunes; and, with the rest of the world, believe
Mr. Wentworth's quarrel with you arose from a political dispute.

The Granville family pass this day at the duke of Avon's. My divine Valeria,
and lady Alicia, have promised Mrs. Wentworth to sup with her. It grows late: I
begin to fear something may have happened to prevent their coming: I sicken at
the thought. I shall see her tomorrow, to be sure; but I expected to see her
tonight, and I cannot bear to be disappointed. My watch lies by me on the
table, -- I look more on it than on my paper.

How soon do you think, Methuen, I may expect an answer from Mr. Chetwynd? I
sent my letter to him by express. Have I, do you imagine, any room to dread his
disapprobation? Perhaps he is ambitious: he may have promised his interest to
some competitor of higher rank, or larger fortune; and her gratitude and
affection to him may -- Away with these apprehensions -- The thought of losing
her is death to me.

Ah! -- she is come!

Mrs. Wentworth desires your company in the drawing room, sir.

By Jupiter, the fellow has electrified me.

EDWARD MARCHMONT.

TO LORD METHUEN. -- POPLAR-HILL.
GRANVILLE-PARK.
WHEN I carried off my mistress in triumph, from all the young noblesse and
beaux of London, I sittle thought what a formidable rival I was to encounter in
the country. Certainly nothing less than a duel can decide the contest.
Remember, I engage you for my second.

Imagine, if you can, what must have been my astonishment, confusion, jealousy,
and rage, when, on our arrival here the other day, a young gentleman flew into
my Valeria's open arms, hung round her snowy neck, and imprinted a hundred
kisses on her enchanting lips.

"Hold, master Sedley," cried I, do not quite smother her, I entreat you.

"Pray, sir," demanded he, turning about with great quickness, are you most
careful of the lady, or jealous of me? -- My sweet Valeria! again embracing
her, I cannot tell you how much I longed to see you. Shut your eyes a moment,
if you please -- she did so: yes, you are every bit as handsome as you were
before you went to town.

Could not you see that she was handsome, asked his mother, unless she shut her
eyes?

I saw it very plainly, madam; I am not quite blind, I assure you: but her eyes
are so bright, they dazzle mine; and I could not see if she was entirely and
exactly as beautiful now, as when she went away.

"Upon my word, Robert," said the duke, you have early applied yourself to
learn the important art of complimenting.

"I think," said Mrs. Wentworth, he is already as good a proficient, as some
who seem to have made that art the chief study of their lives.

"A future mignon de couchette!" whispered I to lady Carysbrook, who stood
smiling at her son's gallantry.

The little, busy, impertinent rogue, has some way or other found out my
attachment to Miss O'Bryen; and you can have no notion how troublesome he
contrives to make himself to me: he is continually interrupting our
conversations, placing himself between us, and snatching from me the pleasure
of rendering her many of those little, trifling, nameless services, which are
so delightful to an enamoured heart to perform.

--

My sister has just now surprised me exceedingly: -- she has received letters
from France, which inform her that Miss Marchmont is going to be married to the
marquis de St. Clair; -- the very man, whose suit to Miss O'Bryen she so
earnestly forwarded. It is really very extraordinary. I must go and talk to
Harriet about it.

--

She has annihilated me! This St. Clair -- this happy St. Clair! -- was the
favored lover of Miss O'Bryen; sacrificed to her friendship for Miss
Marchmont. Did she love him then? -- Perhaps she still loves him: -- the
supposition distracts me: it is -- it must be false. Have I not reason to
flatter myself, I hold a place in her affections? -- and if St. Clair was ever
dear to her, could she have forgotten him in so short a time? Or, rather, could
she -- generous as she is -- have resigned him to another? -- Could she, on my
sister's account, have destroyed at once his happiness and her own? -- Are the
rights of friendship more tender, more sacred, than those of love?

My friend, I am disturbed -- extremely disturbed. I cannot content myself with
the second place in her heart; no, not in any sense the second place: I would
be loved first, and best. She is my first love; and the eye that pierces the
inmost recesses of the soul, only sees how dear she is to mine, -- with what an
excess of passion I dote on her.

She walks at this moment under my window -- She looks up -- that look invites
my attendance -- I will go to you, my angel.

O, that I could tell her the anxiety of my mind! -- but that I never will -- I
must not -- dare not do. It might distress her; and that I would not do for
worlds. It might lead to a confirmation of my suspicions; and that, too, I
could not bear.

Write to me, Augustus: tell me that she does not love St. Clair -- that I only
am dear to her -- that you saw her weep -- faint for me. Recall that gay dream
which charmed my senses. O, must all my bright hopes be thus clouded in an
instant! -- It is insupportable!

EDWARD MARCHMONT.

TO MISS O'BRYEN. -- GRANVILLE-PARK.
POPLAR-HILL.
WILL my dear Miss O'Bryen allow me, once more, to trouble her on Sir Edward
Marchmont's account? -- Read his letter, which I enclose. -- I do not think it
a breach of trust to communicate it, without his knowledge, to a person who has
a much dearer interest in his heart, than I can boast of.

You need not be told, that my motive for acting in this manner, is to give you
an opportunity of relieving my friend from an uneasiness, that a very refined
mind only could feel from such a cause. Nature wrought Marchmont's soul almost
too delicate to bear the finishing touches of love; -- that master-polisher of
the mind, has refined his to a nicety. There is a part of the world -- and that
not the smallest part -- to whom that nicety would appear unaccountable, if not
censurable or ridiculous; but if Miss O'Bryen does not both understand and
approve it, I have greatly mistaken her character.

I am convinced you do not at present -- and I am strongly inclined to believe
you never did -- entertain any sentiments for the marquis de St. Clair, that
can interfere with the wishes of the gentleman you now favor. Whatever may be
the case, my procedure can occasion you no embarrassment; as I give you my
honor, my writing to you shall ever be a profound secret, unless you choose to
divulge it.

I will not apologize for this, or any other trouble, my attachment to Sir
Edward has prompted me to give you. I hope you think the cause of sufficient
importance to excuse the effects. Besides, I shall soon have a sort of claim to
your friendship; which, believe me, I shall consider as one of the highest
advantages I derive from Sir Edward's.

I am, madam, with the truest respect, and -- permit me to add -- affection,

Your very obedient servant, METHUEN.

TO LORD METHUEN. -- POPLAR-HILL.
GRANVILLE-PARK.
METHUEN, I thank you a thousand times. She loves me! -- me only! I am happy
beyond expression.

Last night, when I retired to my apartment, I had no inclination to go to bed;
so dismissed my servant, and extinguished the candles, preferring the fairer
light of Cynthia, who shone full into my windows. It came into my head to take
a walk in the garden. My chamber opens to a gallery, from which there is a
staircase, that leads into it. I feared the door would be locked at that time
of night, but had the satisfaction to find it open. I strayed up and down the
walks for some time, wrapped in a pleasing reverie. I admired the moonbeams
shooting through the trees, and playing tremblingly over the water. At length,
I became weary of the folitary scene; and, casting a wistful eye toward the
house, sighed to myself -- What a paradise, if she was here! I went into a
little arbor, to indulge my contemplations; but was soon roused by the noise
of passing feet: they stopped; and I presently heard my Valeria say, Let us go in
here, Harriet, if you are not afraid of taking cold.

My heart beat as if it would have forced itself a passage through my breast to
meet her.

Harriet came in first. "Don't be frightened, sister," said I. She screamed,
notwithstanding.

"What is the matter?" demanded her lovely companion, rushing in.

"Nothing, my soul!" answered I, eagerly pressing her hand to my breast.

Indeed, brother, you startled me exceedingly, Why, in the name of wonder, are
you not in bed?

May he not ask the same question, in his turn? said Miss O'Bryen.

"He may," replied Mrs. Wentworth; and I Will leave you to answer it, for I Am
afraid of sitting here. You will find me on yonder gravel walk.

"We will go with you," cried Miss O'Bryen, hastily.

"We will not," whispered I. Harriet went away without minding her.

I drew her to the seat: -- my bold, yet trembling arm, encircling her. Are you
afraid of being alone with me? asked I.

With a softened voice, she answered -- No, indeed, Sir Edward, I am not; and I
am glad I have met you, for I could not find an opportunity, the whole evening,
of conversing with you on a subject -- on a subject, that I don't know how to
introduce.

I was very desirous to know what subject she meant; but wished first to
familiarize her to me, as I may say, by a little longer conversation, that she
might speak with more ease and freedom. "Well," said I, you may first tell me,
as my sister desired, what kept you up so late.

Because I could not sleep, while you suffered any anxiety on my account. --
You have no cause to be uneasy, Sir Edward: believe me, I neither do, nor ever
did, love the marquis de St. Clair.

"Heavens! madam:" exclaimed I, in the utmost surprise, how could you find out
I was uneasy? I did not hint the matter even to my sister; nor to any person,
but a friend, who is not used to betray me.

"Lord Methuen has written to me," said she: but do not call this betraying
you; it deserves a very different epithet. It Is fit that ordinary minds should,
in dull safety, run the circle custom has marked out: but when a person unites
such a heart as lord Methuen's, to such a head, -- he is above rules, and must
be allowed to move a little eccentrically.

You did not need her pretty apology, my dear Augustus. I immediately discerned
the whole force of this tour d'ami.

"Tell me, my life," cried I, tell me, sincerely, did you never love St. Clair?

Never, upon my honor. I will conceal nothing from you, Sir Edward. -- I had a
tender friendship for him; -- a friendship you will allow me still to retain. Had
not our better stars divided us, I cannot absolutely assert, that his charms
and merit might not in time have made some impression on me; as my affections
were entirely disengaged, and I liked him better than any man I then knew.

I can never, never thank you sufficiently, my Valeria, for this kindness --
this condescension -- this amiable ingenuity. Now, thou most angelic woman!"
straining her to my beating heart, complete my bliss! -- say, O, deign to say,
that you love your adoring Marchmont.

Imagine with what rapture I listened, while, in half-formed accents, she
pronounced my happiness! I kissed -- but half repulsed, yet unreproved, with
ecstasy I kissed -- her balmy lips! Wild with transport, I leaned my forehead on
her bosom! -- the softest, fairest bosom, that ever heaved to the emotions of a
feeling heart! -- She sprang from me: -- "Come," says she, "Mrs. Wentworth will
get cold."

Both her own health, and my sister's, were too precious to me, to suffer me to
endanger them, by seeking to detain her.

I attended them to the foot of the stairs, but would have forborne entering the
house with them, lest, if any of the servants were still up, and should chance
to see us, they might make impertinent observations on the incident; but
neither of the ladies would allow me to stay out any longer.

I went to bed, but my thoughts were so much engaged, I was not able -- nor,
indeed, willing -- to sleep till daybreak: then the soft god strewed his
poppies over my pillow; and my delighted fancy flew back to the charming night.
Again I beheld my Valeria's matchless form; while the moon shone resplendent
over our heads, and not a zephyr breathed upon the trees.

It was near eleven before Philip could find in his heart (that was his phrase)
to awaken me: -- one would think the fellow knew my dreams.

I found all the family assembled in the parlour, except the duke, who usually
breakfasts in his own apartment. My lovely fellow-rakes had just made their
appearance; the rest of the ladies had been down stairs a good while: upon
which, lady Fanny -- who, I think, always finds something unlucky to say --
remarked, that one would imagine we three had been sitting up together. A
conscious blush overspread the finest features in the world.

"Fanny," said lady Carysbrook, it must be confessed you are the farthest from
envy of any woman breathing, or you would not take such delight in heightening
Miss O'Bryen's beauty.

I don't at all deserve your ladyship's compliment, returned she, for I am far
from thinking a blush the least improvement to any body.

"I don't know," said Mrs. Wentworth, whether it may, or may not, be an
advantage to the complexion. I admire it, as the sign of a quick and delicate
sensibility.

Lady Fanny briskly replied, And I -- excuse me, Mrs. Wentworth -- dislike it,
as a sign of rustic simplicity.

"Thank you for that, my dear," said Miss O'Bryen, bowing and smiling.

Nay, upon my honor, I neither did, nor could mean to reflect on you: your
good-breeding cannot be questioned. I assure you, I have often wondered how you
could contrive to unite so much ease to so much modesty. One would imagine,
that a person of your qualifications, who had constantly frequented polite
company, would be inclined rather to err on the side of assurance than
bashfulness.

Lady Alicia was of opinion, that there were many occasions, on which a blush
was beautiful and becoming; but said, she would readily condemn what the French
called a mauvaise honte.

If your ladyship chooses to adopt the French expression, said I, I would humbly
counsel you, not to allow it the same latitude the French do: limit its
signification as much as possible; or your opinion perhaps may -- though I am
convinced your conduct never will -- encroach on the borders of modesty. Allow
me to say, that bashfulness -- or, if you please, mauvaise honte -- is, in your
sex, much more amiable and engaging, than the least tendency to the opposite
quality.

"You speak very justly, sir," said lady Carysbrook: modesty is certainly a
woman's chief ornament; and even an excess of it, is at least pardonable. Men,
indeed, require some assurance --.

"O, an infinity, madam!" interrupted I, gaily, for if we don't show ourselves,
the ladies will never be at the pains to draw us out. But, for us, -- we do not
love to have a woman's perfections too obvious; there is a pleasure in the
search after them, we do not willingly forego. It is an universal maxim amongst
you, ladies, that men do not much prize what they obtain very easily. You do
not judge amiss: we love a little difficulty; -- but you mistake the matter
widely, when you make a mean and despicable coquetry the source of our
difficulties: -- a man must, in that case, either give up the pursuit, or his
reason. It is sweet, retiring modesty, that prompts us to follow; -- modesty,
the most distinguishing and lovely characteristic of your charming sex, that
must ever enhance your value to us.

"I would, by all means," said lady Fanny, have a woman modest; yet, I think,
every body must allow, that bashfulness often makes one appear in a very
disadvantageous light.

"Do not think so," I answered: -- Though bashfulness may sometimes obscure the
full glare of your charms, the effect is as agreeable, as shade to the light of
a fine picture: or, I might better compare it to -- the gauze with which you
cover your bosoms --, looking archly at here is; -- and you know very well, that
though we love to draw aside the veil ourselves, we should be highly disgusted
if you attempted to do it for us." She colored, and called me impertinent.
"You ought to thank me," said I, for you never looked handsomer in your life.
If you are wise, you will not quarrel with blushes. To tell you a secret, lady
Fanny, -- there is no man that does not feel a certain sensation, of mingled
admiration and love, at the blush of a fine woman.

I must this moment bid you adieu, and attend the young ladies, who are going
to take an airing on horseback.

EDWARD MARCHMONT.

TO SIR EDWARD MARCHMONT, BART. -- ENGLAND.
CHETWYND VILLA.
SIR Edward, you have as much romance as a girl of fifteen; and I like you for
it. I do love the romantic; their hearts are warmed by the fire of their
imaginations. Let cold, unerring reason, hold unresisted sway in the becalmed
breast of the philosopher: -- passion, generous passion, must animate the heart
of that man, I could wish to call my friend. The virtues require a warm soil;
-- I never knew them flourish in a cold bosom. If the heart does not burn at
twenty, I shiver to think, what a frozen lump it will become at forty. If there
be a young fellow in the world that could write coolly about such a girl as
Valeria, he deserves to be hanged: or I Would burn the rascal, and supply the want
of inward, by outward heat.

I am a romantic fellow myself: indeed, you might have guessed as much; -- we
are seldom forward to praise a qualification that we do not possess -- or, at
least, that we do not imagine we possess -- ourselves. I married a woman, whose
fortune was much superior to mine; but I loved her with the most disinterested
tenderness: -- had the wealth of the Indies been mine, I should have laid it at
her feet.

My wife is a generous, romantic woman, who gave me her hand with ten thousand
pounds, when I had nothing but a curacy, and some uncertain expectations of
church preferment, which I have since partly realized.

I give you this sketch of our characters, to induce you the more readily to
accede to our opinion, with respect to the duke's proposal. We do no think
there can be any sufficient reason to oppose his doing justice to his late most
amiable daughter, in the persons of her grandchildren: we do not think that, if
Sir William O'Bryen himself was alive, he would object to it. When he, on his
deathbed, became sensible that his extravagance had ruined his child, he
feared she might have recourse to the duke of Granville's protection; and no
wonder that his pride was so severely wounded, at the thought of leaving her
dependent on a man, who had always treated him with such unjust contempt. But
here the case is widely different; and the duke has little cause to triumph, in
being permitted to settle on Sir William's grandchildren, what his daughter
would not accept, and -- I thank God! -- does not need.

Allow me to tell you, sir, that I exceedingly approve your naming a jointure,
rather than offering me carte blanch, as a person of ordinary generosity would
have done. Very sensible you must have been, that I neither could nor would
have demanded so large a jointure. I admire, likewise, the delicacy wherewith
you hint your knowledge of Miss O'Bryen's not having a fortune: in that,
however, you are mistaken. -- Lady Enmore -- who is now at my house, and whose
paternal affection for Valeria gives her a right to know every thing that
concerns her -- insists on presenting her with five thousand pounds on the
approaching occasion; and will secure to her the possession of a very
considerable estate, at her decease. Mrs. Chetwynd and I must likewise give her
five thousand pounds at present; and which ever of us is the survivor, will
certainly leave the remainder of our fortune to her.

I am not yet so much of an old man, as not to know what must be your present
impatience. I promise you shall meet no unnecessary delays on my part. Mrs.
Chetwynd and I are every day in anxious expectation of Miss O'Bryen's return:
-- I presume you have not employed your time so ill, as not to have already
obtained permission to escort her. My dear Sir Edward, we shall receive you as
our friend -- as our son.

It would give me particular pleasure, if Mrs. Wentworth could be prevailed on
to favor us with her company. I need not say how much Mrs. Chetwynd desires
it, as she is herself writing to Mrs. Wentworth on that subject.

Now since I am so ready to give you my Valeria -- the noblest gift that could
possibly be presented to any man -- I hope you will not so ill requite my
generosity, as to snatch her from me immediately. -- Don't be alarmed; I am not
going to raise any obstacles to delay your union; but I must insist on your
staying three or four months afterward. This is a point that I will not -- I
mean that I cannot -- give up; for it is already almost a year since I have
seen my darling girl; and I imagine you must know the value of her society too
well, to wonder that I prize it as one of the first blessings of my life.

I was just going to conclude, when casting my eye over the paper, it struck me
that I ought first to make some apology for this letter, which is certainly the
most unceremonious that ever was written on such a subject: -- not a word of
the honor of your alliance, and so forth. The truth is my best excuse -- I
already love you; and affection with me, ever banishes ceremony, though I hope
not politeness and attention.

I am, With equal respect and esteem, Yours, CHARLES CHETWYND.

TO LORD METHUEN. -- POPLAR-HILL.
GRANVILLE-PARK.
VOUS vous trompez, mon ami; I am not at all jealous of lord Osmore. Far from
doing me any injury, he has really been of essential service to me: my Valeria,
before, received my attentions with complacency, and discouraged those of
others; but ever since his lordship came to Granville-park, she has treated me
with a preference so marked, as to keep all other lovers -- even the aspiring
Osmore himself -- at a distance.

I was very near quarrelling with lady Fanny Sedley this evening: -- as I was
walking with her and Miss O'Bryen, I was pouring out my grateful heart in
acknowledgments to the latter, for her generous and considerate behavior with
respect to lord Osmore. Lady Fanny interrupted me, by saying, something
peevishly, I declare, Marchmont, you are the stupidest fellow I ever knew: I
shall absolutely die with ennui. For Heaven's sake, do you think this
conversation can be any entertainment to me?

"Pardon me," said I, smiling, I am very inconsiderate. I protest, I never
thought of asking myself the question whether it was, or was not. This, you will
say, was not a very polite speech: but nobody thinks of treating lady Fanny
with much ceremony. People that say free things -- especially if they are as
good-humoured as she is -- will always have free things said to them. She
really is not bold, but her unguarded vivacity destroys all dignity of
character. Now, my Valeria, with all the ease even of a Parisian education,
preserves, in her sprightliest moments, a delicate reserve, that at once
inspires respect and tenderness. -- But I wander.

"Rude creature!" said lady Fanny, in reply to me: lord Osmore would not have
spoken to me in this manner for the world; and yet I believe he is as fond of
Miss O'Bryen, and as indifferent to me, as you can be.

My charming girl said, with some warmth, lord Osmore's politeness differs from
Sir Edward's, more in kind than in degree: -- the one is acquired by education,
and perfected by habit; the other evidently flows originally from the heart,
and is but methodized -- if I may so express it -- by an acquaintance with the
polite world.

"You make nice distinctions," replied her ladyship; but, for my part, if I
find a person polite, I shall never trouble my head to enquire, whether it be
the result of nature or education. Say what you will against lord Osmore, he is
a man quite to my taste: and, positively, I am monstrously angry with you for
using him so cruelly as you do.

"Indeed, lady Fanny," said I, gravely, "I am not at all obliged to you for
this."

"Don't mind the madcap," said Miss O'Bryen.

Vain wretch! do I depreciate you, by praising Osmore?

Not in the least; your ladyship mistakes me entirely: you are extremely
welcome to praise him, but not to recommend him to Valeria's favor.

"I did not do so."

You complain of that cruelty to him, which is certainly kindness to me; and,
vice versa, kindness to him would be cruelty to me.

Not at all: she might be kind enough to you both.

O, madam, if that be your way of thinking --. I stopped suddenly. I believe I
was going to say something too expressive of the contempt I at that moment felt
for her.

"My dear Fanny," said Miss O'Bryen, you are not a coquette: both your
understanding and your heart, are too good to suffer you to be one. Why, then,
do you thus allow your ungoverned sprightliness to lead you to affect a
character so contemptible? Detestable as affectation is, there may be some
sense in endeavoring to appear possessed of any praiseworthy quality; though
there would be much more, in striving really to acquire it: -- but what can be
more wretchedly silly, than to affect to be unamiable?

"How charming it is," I exclaimed, to hear such language flowing from the rosy
lips of youth and beauty! May reason and virtue, added I, affectionately
kissing her hand, ever have such an advocate!

"Now," cried lady Fanny, to be even with you both for this fine lecture, I
shall, in my turn, find fault with you, Valeria.

Find fault with her! How? -- where? -- what?

Ha! ha! ha! I dare say you do not think she has any faults at all.

"I do not, upon my honor!" I replied, with emphasis.

Why, to be just, she has less than most people, or conceals them better; yet I
could point you out a capital one; and that is in her conduct to lord Osmore
and yourself. If she dislikes him, she ought to refuse him, without letting him
see it is for you he is refused: by acting as she does, she puts herself more
in your power than is consistent with prudence.

I was excessively hurt. My dear Valeria saw that I was; and, with a look of
tender confidence, she laid her hand on mine: that little action, that sweet
look, spoke more forcibly than words.

Her ladyship resumed her discourse: -- If any thing should happen to prevent
your union, it would be an irreparable disadvantage to Miss O'Bryen, to have
thus publicly favored you.

What disadvantage can it be to her, to be known to have some consideration for
a man, who loves her almost to idolatry? Should your cruel supposition be
realized, yet she would have no mortification to fear on that account; -- I
would publish my passion for her to the world -- devote my life to her!

Very fine! But suppose she chose to marry some other gentleman, -- how would
he --.

"Ah! no more," said Miss O'Bryen; "I cannot bear to hear you talk thus."

"Indeed, Valeria," replied the provoking creature, Sir Edward himself would
value you more, if you treated him with a prudent reserve.

This is past enduring, madam: -- how can you pretend to know my mind? I assure
you, if any thing could lessen Miss O'Bryen in my esteem, or induce me
knowingly to forget here is, it would be her changing that endcaring frankness,
wherewith she at present honors me, for that meanly suspicious prudence you
would inculcate. As she has never, I flatter myself, had the least reason to
doubt my sincerity and honor, a reserved behavior to me, could be dictated
only by a very cold heart; and a cold heart, I am sure, never was a good one.
Believe me, I should despise myself, were I ungenerous enough to attempt to
take a liberty with any lady, which I should think the worse of her for
suffering; -- and her I love, is the last woman on earth I could think of with
indelicacy.

"Still," said she, I must insist on it, ladies and gentlemen do not enter into
these engagements on equal terms.

"One would think," said my Valeria, you were talking of the dispositions for a
battle.

No, madam; but she is striving to make dispositions for a battle. I thank her
for it.

"Really, child," addressing herself to Miss O'Bryen, you ought to consider,
that if your uncle Chetwynd should withhold his consent, or --.

"Or what?" demanded I, angrily.

Or if Sir Edward should forsake you, you may probably be obliged to lead apes;
whereas, he can get a wife when he pleases.

"Whatever," said I, are your ladyship's designs, happily for me, you have
avowed fentiments so opposite to the delicacy and nobleness of Miss O'Bryen's,
that I am not at all afraid you will be able to prevail against me.

"Valeria," said she, I Will be affronted with you these seven years to come, if
you don't revenge me for this cutting rebuke. -- Show him my advice has some
effect on you.

Excuse me, my dear: so far from interfering in your behalf, I must tell you,
that I think his reproof almost as just as it is severe. When lady Fanny acts
up to her character, she will find no person more ready to defend her interests
than I; but when she chooses to sink so much beneath it, she is no longer the
lady Fanny that I love.

"This," said I, is the best solution of personal identity I ever heard: -- and
remember, lady Fanny, whenever you act thus perversely, I shall consider you as
a different person.

"On that footing," answered she, let our dispute end: -- I shall be myself
again, as I see we are near the house; for, I give you my word, all I said was
only for the sake of taking part in the conversation, which otherwise you would
not have permitted me to do. When I have the misfortune to fall into the
company of lovers, I always quarrel with them, or set them a quarrelling with
one another; -- it is the only way a third person can avoid being totally
insignificant. -- Well, are we friends, Sir Edward?

No, I Will not forgive you this week. And I Will complain of you to lady Alicia
the moment we go in.

Fort bien, Monsieur; then I shall look on you as my declared enemy this whole
week; and accordingly, play you all the mischievous tricks I can think of.

No, no; let us be friends: I am half afraid of you, since I find you can be so
spiteful. I would not, for any consideration, be at enmity with you while lord
Osmore stays.

"Oh!" cried she, it is the most delightful thing imaginable, to have two
lovers; they keep each other in such excellent order. When a man has no rival,
he assumes so many saucy or negligent airs, there is no bearing him. If ever I
have one over, and cannot get a fellow for him, I Will certainly discard him: I
would rather go barefooted, than walk with one shoe.

We shook hands in token of perfect amity; but the moment we returned to the
drawing room, the little urchin found means to set me down to piquet with the
duke. I told her in a whisper, I considered this as an absolute breach of our
new-made treaty of peace. "With all my heart:" returned she; you may begin
hostilities as soon as you dare.

When I was released from the card-table, I stepped up to lord Osmore, and
begging him to humor whatever I should say to lady Fanny, I went over to her,
and in a low voice entreated her to walk to the other end of the room with me:
quite unsuspicious of my design, she complied; and I lead her directly to
Osmore. You see, my lord, I keep my promise with you, in giving you an
opportunity to thank this lady for the very favorable sentiments, I have this
evening been so fortunate as to discover, she entertains for you. She looked
quite surprised and confounded.

"I have not words," said Osmore, to express the sense I have of your
ladyship's goodness.

Indeed, my lord, I -- I -- The deuce take you, Marchmont!

Be not displeased, madam; I was too much the friend of both parties, to
conceal a secret, that was so necessary to your happiness, and so conducive to
his lordship's, to have mutually known.

"I declare I could beat you," cried she, in a violent pet.

I answered with profound gravity, I should be miserable if I thought your
ladyship was really offended at my officious zeal.

"And I," said Osmore, shall be the most unhappy of men, should she have the
cruelty to doubt --

"I assure you, my lord," interrupted she, this is all a jest of Sir Edward's:
for which, I promise him, shaking her head threateningly at me, I will be
sufficiently revenged.

She will be as good as her word, I dare say.

"Madam," replied I, I understand you perfectly; nobody is quicker at taking a
hint: -- but be persuaded, I have served you without any view to interest: I
don't desire the least return, upon my honor.

That I believe, indeed! but if I make you not an ample one, -- I give you
leave to make a similar declaration for me, to every gentleman of my
acquaintance.

"Generous creature!"

"Most generous!" echoed his lordship; I am overpowed with gratitude -- I have
not language -- This kind partiality was as little expected, as deserved.

"Sure," said she, it is not possible you can believe any thing, this
abominable, malicious wretch, has told you? My lord, I must let you know how
this matter comes about --

"I comprehend your meaning exactly:" said I; you would have me leave you with
him. I am gone -- bowing.

"Stay," she cried; You are mighty penetrating tonight. -- Stay, when I desire
you.

Madam, I obey the reiterated command with pleasure: I easily see why it is
given; -- you would have me spare your blushes, by making this delicate
explanation for you. -- My lord as we walked together this evening --

Be silent, you vile, provoking animal!

-- Your lordship's name being accidentally mentioned; she --

O there is no stopping the wretch! Don't listen to him, Osmore: go away, I
entreat you.

"I dare not disobey your ladyship," and leaving her, was bending his steps to
the upper end of the room, where was metal more attractive, -- la belle O'Bryen
at work with lady Alicia.

"Now," said I to lady Fanny, this action is more against you, than any thing I
could have told him.

"O come back, my lord!" exclaimed she, quite frightened.

He obeyed.

"Ah!" cried I, how weak are our resolutions when the heart is in a certain
situation!

"You Will set me mad," said she; flying away from us over to the working-table;
where she received no better consolation than being heartily laughed at. --
Every body enjoys a joke against lady Fanny; the little chit is so very apt to
be merry at other people's expense, that she has as many enemies as a minister
of state.

But do I intend to go to bed tonight? It is just three o'clock.

Always yours, EDWARD MARCHMONT.
I forgot to tell you, that your friend, dean Domville's lady is safely
delivered of a fine boy; to the great joy -- as the newspapers will inform you
-- of that noble family: -- which, by the bye, might soon be extinct on the
part of the two elder brothers.



TO MISS O'BRYEN. -- ENGLAND.
CHETWYND VILLA.
SO, Mrs. Wentworth denies all knowledge of the Chevalier du Mornai: --
strange! -- That he knows her too well, I am sufficiently convinced. --
Something that happened this morning, increases my curiosity and surprise: --
Sir Francis O'Bryen and the chevalier, breakfasted here. The conversation
turned on Mrs. Hervey: -- I believe you remember seeing her at the earl of
Melmont's -- she lost her husband about three months ago; her grief was so
extravagant, as to put her friends in fear of her attempting to destroy
herself: however, she changed her mind; and was last week married to a Mr.
Walsh; a man every way her inferior. -- Sir Francis made many gay observations
on her conduct; and in his usual lively way, went on to say, that women never
lament the loss of the husband, but the want of a husband.

"I hope," said Mr. Chetwynd, it will soon be in my power to introduce you to a
lady, in whose favor you will be obliged to give up that notion. What do you
think, Francis, of a beautiful widow of two and twenty, with an immense
fortune, devoting herself to solitude and celibacy?

Faith! Sir, it is very extraordinary; so much so, that I am sure it cannot last
long. -- You said that you expected the lady here?

"Yes; very soon."

"Then, uncle," tapping him on the knee, "she is the very woman for me."

"You do not know her," said I, or you would respect her sorrows.

Your pardon, madam, I have done. Only -- her name?

"Harriet Wentworth."

A chocolate cup dropped from du Mornai's hand upon the floor: and faintly
exclaiming, "my God!" he fell back in his chair. He remained for some minutes
insensible. As soon as he recovered, he made some excuses -- awkwardly enough,
I thought -- for the trouble he supposed he had given: said, that his health
was bad; and he was subject to these sudden fits. -- Yes, thought I, when Mrs.
Wentworth is spoken of.

Certainly, my dear Valeria, this is a most mysterious and perplexing affair. I
feel extremely for the poor chevalier. I am persuaded, he is deeply unhappy. On
a nearer acquaintance, I find him exceedingly amiable. His abord is so very
cold, that it almost freezes one; but by degrees the reserve wears off, and
allows you to pay due esteem to his worth, -- He speaks English remarkably well
for a foreigner; indeed, quite as well as a native. He generally preserves a
thoughtful and gloomy silence; but when he chooses to talk, his conversation --
though always grave -- is uncommonly sensible and entertaining.

Don't you think it was something extraordinary in him, to cry out, "my God!"
should he not rather have said, mon Dieu? In a sudden and violent agitation of
the mind, it is most natural and customary to use one's own language.

I cannot get this man out of my head: but I would not have you mention him to
Mrs. Wentworth any more, lest it might prevent her coming here; and I earnestly
wish to see her.

The moment I received yours, I wrote to lady Alicia. Her desire of
accompanying you is extremely obliging; and the ready acquiescence of the duke
and lady Carysbrook, is very flattering both to you and us.

Hasten your return, my lovely child. I long mightily to know your Sir Edward.
Mr. Chetwynd is charmed with his letter, which he justly calls, a noble one.

Lord Melmont's coach coming up the avenue. -- Adieu, ma tres chere amie; Je
vous embrasse.

CAROLINE CHETWYND.

TO LORD METHUEN. -- POPLAR-HILL.
GRANVILLE-PARK.
LORD Osmore left us this morning. The precipitance of his departure was, I
believe, partly occasioned by a whimsical little incident I will recount to
you: -- Chancing to rise this morning earlier than usual, I intended to take a
ramble before breakfast; but finding it rained, I changed my mind, and the door
of the breakfast-parlour standing open -- I stroled in. My Valeria alone --
standing at a window, writing carelessly with a pencil on the margin of a
newspaper. -- I stole behind her. -- She had written' "Valeria O'Bryen," and
under it, "Valeria Marchmont." -- I caught the betwitching charmer in my arms.
"Oh! Sir Edward!" Then hastily, and in extreme confusion, she would have
effaced the pretty scribble. I pulled her away; embracing her with transport.
She hid her lovely, blushing face on my shoulder; I pressed my lips to her
forehead; -- and in that very moment, who should enter the room but lord
Osmore! as the devil, or his evil genius, would have it. What a sight for him!
it pains me to reflect on what he must have suffered. At the time however, I
felt only for my Valeria; -- I gave her a pretense to retire, by saying aloud,
Tell me, you forgive me; and I Will not detain you any longer.

"I thank you," said she, in a low voice; and hurried away.

Assuming an air of unconcern, I said, "Your lordship is an early riser this
morning."

So are you, Sir, I perceive. I believe we rise early from a very different
cause: -- you are too happy, I am too miserable, to sleep.

I did not choose to understand this speech seriously; to answer it with
raillery, was repugnant to my feelings; -- I was silent; and he,
malheureusement, walked over to the window at which Miss O'Bryen had stood. He
instantly saw my name joined to hers; and retreated two steps, with a look of
surprise and anguish.

Let me take away my impertinent scribble, said I, putting the paper in my
pocket: I wish I had been wise enough to do so before she saw it.

He made some indistinct apology of "Letters to write" -- and left me.

I amused myself with a book, till the family assembled to breakfast: when lord
Osmore declared he must return to London immediately, on business of
importance. Accordingly, he took his conge: and I have now no declared rival,
except master Robert; of whom I should be extremely jealous if he was ten years
older.

A letter from Ireland -- How my heart beats!

--

With fearful impatience I broke its seal: -- from Mr. Chetwynd; -- fully
answerable to my warmest wishes. -- I must seek my fairest!

EDWARD MARCHMONT.

TO LORD METHU N. -- POPLAR-HILL.
MARCHMONT-HOUSE.
I HAVE this moment been favored with yours; and am surprised you should
think me capable of treating you with so much neglect: no, be assured, my dear
Augustus, I had not the least intention of leaving England without seeing you.

As you say, I must have a great deal of courage to venture to attend my
Hibernian belle to Ireland. If one of her countrymen does not blow my brains
out, or run me through the body, I shall have a worse opinion of the gallantry
of the nation, than I have hitherto entertained. And yet, after all the fine
women those tall Irishmen have carried away from us, it would ill suit their
characteristical generosity, to grudge an Englishman one beauty.

I write this from Marchmont-house; where I am at present employed in making
some alterations and arrangements, which will render this fine old seat more
worthy of its future mistress. I am almost certain the little improvements I am
making will please her; for during our sweet intercourse of unreserved
friendship at the duke's, I studied her taste; and found it -- which most
agreeably flattered me -- perfectly similar to my own.

I must tell you some news, I have heard from good authority since I came down
here: -- Miss Ormsby, my old flame -- though, Lord knows, she never warmed me
much -- is going to be married to Sir Peter Ball; a poor city knight; who, I
suppose, is very glad there should be a mutual participation of his title and
her fortune. I think knights are quite her game: yet I would fain think, we are
not easier taken in, than any other set of men. You see she is determined to be
a lady at any rate; and that, as Sir Peter is considerably on the wrong side of
fifty, must, I presume, be her principal inducement to wed him. I am afraid it
would not be very uncharitable to conjecture, by his age, that Mr. Webster is
not to lose any thing by the match.

"Vieillards qui deviendrez maris,
"Mettez bien vos lunettes."
Poor Sir Peter! Whenever I call to mind some late occurrences, I find myself
exceedingly inclined to compassionate any man I think in danger of Acteon's
fate. A propos -- Pray, my lord, is it not a little surprising, that the
goddess of chastity, and ladies who are not, Heaven knows, very famous for that
virtue, -- should have fixed upon the same mode of punishing our hapless sex?

I have another piece of intelligence to communicate: you perceive I am quite a
news-monger today: -- Sir James Conway has let his estate here to Mr.
Domville; who, ever since his marriage, has been fluctuating between Ireland,
France, and England. I find he intends to settle here; so I shall exchange a
very undesirable neighbor, for a very agreeable one.

The two days I have been obliged to spend here, have appeared to me
insufferably tedious. The day is, undoubtedly, three times as long here as at
Granvillepark. -- I go to London tomorrow; where I expect to discharge as much
business in one day, as would take me up four, at another time. Then away to
Granville-park -- which has more charms for me, at present, than any other
place in the world. From that I shall go to Poplar-hill: I believe my sister
will accompany me; as I am sure she is desirous to see lady Methuen before our
excursion to Ireland, which is fixed for next week. I was afraid she would not
have consented to undertake this little voyage: but her gentle temper could not
withstand Mrs. Chetwynd's pressing invitation, which was equally friendly and
polite; joined to Miss O'Bryen's persuasive eloquence, and my earnest
solicitations. -- It would have thrown a shade of regret over my joys, to have
left this sweet, melancholy creature, unprotected and alone. -- If my love for
my Valeria could admit of any heightening, it would receive it from her
tenderness to this dear, unfortunate fister; who hangs about my heart, in a
manner I cannot describe. How closely does pity tie the band of friendship!

Tell my dear lady Methuen, I long to see whether your daughter or Arthur has
grown most, since I was at Poplar-hill: there was then, I remember, a powerful
emulation between them; though their ambition was somewhat differently
directed; she aiming entirely at bulk, and he chiefly at height.

O, Methuen, how opposite is my present situation, to that in which I last
visited your amiable family! Crooked and thorny was my path to happiness; but I
have arrived at it! Praised be the Hand that led me! May the same mighty and
merciful Hand pour its best blessings on the head of that dear friend, whose
feeling and generous heart equally participates my afflictions and my joys!

EDWARD MARCHMONT.

TO LORD METHUEN. -- ENGLAND.
CHETWYND VILLA.
THIS is my third letter from Ireland: you see you are getting deep into debt:
I warn you, you will find me a most merciless creditor. My first from Dublin, I
presume, you have received by this time. -- The ladies are perfectly recovered
of their little fatigue: and we are all as well and as happy as possible at
Chetwyndvilla.

Our agreeable fellow - travelers, Mr. Domville and lady Lucy, are still at
lord Melmont's house in Dublin; but are tomorrow expected at Firdale, a seat
of his lordship's, within six or seven miles of this place.

I am charmed with my future relations: -- they already treat me as their
friend -- as their son. -- With Mrs. Chetwynd I am almost as much in love, as
with her beautiful niece. She is still extremely agreeable in her person,
though I suppose she must be about forty. Her understanding is very good; and
her conversation and manners evidently show a perfect knowledge of the grand
monde. But what principally attracts me, is the affectionate sensibility of her
heart; which is easily discernible to the most superficial observer. There is a
tenderness -- an air of interest, in her behavior to any person in distress,
that is unspeakably pleasing and amiable: I have seen tears in her eyes as she
surveyed my sister; to whom her whole behavior -- as, indeed, that of every
individual of this family -- is assiduously attentive and obliging.

Mr. Chetwynd is a sensible, and most worthy man. His temper is warm, even to
enthusiasm. The fire of the man is catching; -- I frequently feel my heart glow
as I converse with him. -- From this warmth of disposition proceed most of his
virtues, and all his faults: here I may justly apply a line of that character,
so admirably drawn by Goldsmith,

-- Even his failings lean to virtue's side. He can hardly behave with common
civility to a man he despises; he would scorn to take off his hat to a
scoundrel, though he lolled in a coach adorned by a coronet; -- but he would
kneel in the dirt to kiss the hand of an honest man in rags. -- Do not figure
to yourself a sour cynic, snarling at the world: -- no man is more ready to
overlook any errors that do not flow from the depravity of the mind. He is
polite, frank, hospitable, sprightly, and good-humoured; enjoying the world
freely, but enjoying it with reason and innocence; and quarrelling as much with
the meanness, as with the sinfulness of vice. In short, I never yet knew a
heart, every way so totally uncorrupted by five-and-forty years commerce with
the world.

Such are the parents of my Valeria, -- for it is in that light she considers
them; and most gladly shall I render them the duty and affection of a son. They
absolutely dote on their niece -- How should they do otherwise? -- They treat
her in such a manner, that I am seriously surprised she is not as vain as she
is lovely. And perhaps it was well for her she did not lose her real parents,
till her mind had acquired sufficient solidity to resist the attacks of vanity.
Yet she was but seventeen, when she came under the guardianship of Mr. Chetwynd
and his lady; -- a most dangerous period in life, to a woman of her uncommon
beauty: she has now lived with them near four years, -- and is it not amazing,
that their incessant flattery, their unbounded indulgence, joined to the
universal admiration, has not quite turned her head? Yet is she not the most
modest, the most unassuming of women? Can I ever enough admire the excellence
of her judgment, the steadiness of her mind? -- It has been observed, that
wherever nature is lavish of personal beauties, she is extremely sparing of
mental ones; -- or perhaps we might as well say, that the former have a natural
tendency to destroy the latter, by laying open the youthful mind to the
destructive, the almost resistless power of vanity: -- and how very rarely do
we see united, as in Miss O'Bryen, -- every grace, every charm of person and
mind? There is none like her -- "Nature, full of grace,
"Made only one, and having made her, swore,
"In pity to mankind, to make no more."


And that one -- O my exulting heart! -- that most perfect work of nature, was
made for me!

Philip to dress my hair for dinner. -- I fancy your are not displeased with
him for the interruption.

--

Congratulate me, Augustus: -- my happiness is fixed at the distance of a
fortnight.

Fourteen tedious days! -- Is not the charmer cruel, to delay my bliss so long?
Yet, I assure you, if Mr. Chetwynd had not been warmly my friend, she would
have put me off a whole month.

--

Sir Francis O'Bryen -- cousin-german to the loveliest of women -- dined here
today. I like him much. He is an agreeable, elegant fellow, of two or three
and twenty. A great favorite of his uncle Chetwynd's; which is a powerful
recommendation to me. -- I regretted that he did not bring the chevalier du
Mornai with him: -- I suppose you recollect what I told you I had heard from my
Valeria concerning that gentleman.

Mr. Chetwynd asked for the chevalier: -- Sir Francis replied, that he hoped he
was well; he had been at Cork these ten days.

Lady Enmore -- did not I tell you in my last she was at Chetwynd-villa? --
repeated with some surprise, At Cork! What could have carried him to such a
distance? -- Eighty miles hence: Is it not?

"Thereabouts," answered Mr. Chetwynd: Pray, Sir Francis, has the chevalier any
acquaintance there?

None, Sir. -- He went to see the place.

It surprises me exceedingly, my lord, that such a man, as Sir Francis appears
to be, should allow his friend -- a stranger and a foreigner -- to travel
alone. But perhaps he went with a party. However, it is certainly no concern of
mine; and rather impertinent in me to trouble my head about the matter.

O! I must throw away my pen -- I cannot write in this room -- what is worse, I
cannot sleep in it -- Yet there is but one in the house I would exchange it for
-- the very one, which, by its vicinity, puts it out of my power to rest in
this. The partition wall is so thick, I cannot hear the least noise; -- but the
very idea of her being in the next room! -- Come, sweet Morpheus; bear away
that cruel partition! -- Observe my inconsistency -- I tell you first I cannot
sleep, then immediately begin to invoke the god of dreams: -- I give you leave
to laugh at me. Since the Hibernian air has such an effect on me already, in a
short time you may expect to hear me sing.

"Since the first time I saw her, I took no repose,
"But sleep half the day, etc.
After all, I am not so very inconsistent; for what are a lover's thoughts but
waking dreams? -- Not very clear, however, that it is Morpheus inspires those
waking dreams.

Adieu: it is time for me to go to bed; -- you see I am almost dreaming already.

EDWARD MARCHMONT.

TO THE CHEVALIER DU MORNAI. -- CORK.
O'BRYEN CASTLE.
HEAVENS! my dear du Mornai, leave Ireland! -- As you prize my friendship do
not think of it. Why this sudden resolve? And why so soon revoke your promise
of spending the winter with me? You do not care to see her -- Well, she will
not follow you to Cork, I warrant. But I will, as soon as I possibly can; which
will be in a day or two. In the mean time, seek amusement, banish thought,
banish care. I hope you find the families, to whom my letters introduced you,
agreeable. When I join you, we will take a tour through some parts of this
island; and I will show you whatever it produces most worthy your observation.

I have been to pay mes devoirs to Miss O'Bryen. An amazing fine woman! -- I
wish you could see her: unmeaning wish! with all her attractions, she would be
an uninteresting object to you. -- I take it strongly into my head, that she is
the cause of Sir Edward Marchmont's visit to Ireland; for I don't think he knew
either my uncle or aunt Chetwynd before he came, and his whole behavior to her
is most tenderly and respectfully assiduous. His eyes follow her with a fond --
nay, a jealous attention; they languish as she retires, and sparkle at her
approach. -- Enter nous, if I did not absolutely despair of supplanting such a
man as this Sir Edward, I should find myself exceedingly inclined to feel
something more than friendship for this beautiful relation.

There is another young lady at Chetwynd-villa -- besides one I will not
mention to you -- who is assez jolie, and very pleasing: her name is Sedley,
daughter to the late lord Carysbrook; the same relation to Miss O'Bryen on her
mother's side, that I am on her father's.

Shall I, or shall I not, say any thing of -- By what name shall I call her to
you? -- Pale; but extremely lovely -- An air of touching sadness -- Dressed in
doleful black --.

"A Venus rising from a sea of jet." O woman -- woman, thou art deceitful! Who
could look in Mrs. Wentworth's face, and not pronounce that tender sorrow, the
result of suffering innocence, rather than repenting guilt? -- But enough on a
subject I ought not to have introduced at all.

Adieu, mon cher chevalier: amusez vous; soyez gai.

FRANCIS O'BRYEN.

TO SIR FRANCIS O'BRYEN, BART. -- O'BRYEN-CASTLE.
CORK.
PALE! sad! in mourning! -- O, Sir Francis, how this description melts my soul!
-- But fool -- fool that I am! it is not for the wretched Henry she is pale,
sad, or in mourning: for him, even the mockery of woe, is by this time laid
aside. If she be melancholy, it is because, perhaps, she is forsaken by --. His
name shall not stain my paper.

Pardon my weakness; I cannot write -- I cannot think on any other subject. In
vain does my reason recall the insufferable wrongs she has done me: and time,
that should have effaced my love, has only lulled my resentment to sleep. -- O
cruel Harriet! false, ungrateful woman! to what endless -- to what unspeakable
misery, have you doomed a man, who, while he thought you innocent, would have
shed his heart's dearest drops for you! Nay, by Heaven! I would do so at this
moment!

I am almost ashamed to confess to you, I have been so weak as to write to her
in my feigned character. I have disguised my hand -- vain caution! I have
doubtless no place in her remembrance.

I told her -- that I had seen her at Paris with lady Marchmont: that I there
imbibed for her a passion, which marked my future days with woe. -- I had been
married by my father, when I was extremely young, to a woman for whom I never
had the least affection: this unfortunate engagement put it out of my power to
declare my love for her. Respecting her virtue --

Her virtue! -- O 'twas profaning the facred name -- Yet she has more
perfections, and fewer faults, than many who have not her frailty. -- But of
what account are a woman's virtues, if chastity be not amongst the number? It Is
that which brightens and refines all the rest: without it, every other virtue
under the sun cannot render a woman amiable; and with it, she can hardly ever
be thoroughly contemptible.

-- I said -- that respecting her virtue, I shunned her sight; and determined
to impose on myself an eternal silence. About a year after this, my wife died;
and resolving to go immediately to England, I waited on Monsieur de Villemar,
and requested he would favor me with a recommendatory letter to Sir George
Marchmont. He informed me Miss Marchmont was already married! -- This dreadful
and unexpected stroke was near depriving me of my existence. I quitted my
friends and country: rambled over most part of Europe; hopeless of happiness,
and wholly regardless of life. -- At Rome I contracted a friendship with Sir
Francis O'Bryen; by whose solicitations I was induced to come to Ireland:
Heaven directing my steps! for here I learned she was again free. -- I
concluded with earnestly entreating permission to throw myself at her feet.

Such, in brief, was the purport of an address, every way calculated to sooth
the vanity of her sex. It agrees very well with the disorder, the mention of
her fatal name excited in me; and of which, I doubt not, she has been informed.
-- The real agitation of my mind, and the mixture of truth contained in this
fiction -- gives, I think, an air of sincerity to the whole.

You will ask me why I wrote: -- I cannot tell you; I had no sort of purpose to
answer by it; I was actuated by an impulse I could not resist. If she rejects
du Mornai, it will not be for me, he is rejected; but for the cursed murderer
of my peace and honor. If she grants the permission I affect so much to desire
-- do not think I could be so meanly irresolute, as to make myself known to
her. -- I do not wish to upbraid her -- Alas! I could not upbraid her -- Her
presence would be more dreadful to me, than mine could be to her. -- I
acknowledge, with shame I acknowledge, I love her still; yet, do me the justice
to believe, that no consideration could induce me to renew my connexions with
her. No, my friend; lovely as she is, I should

" -- scorn the person, where I doubt the heart." And could I -- which I never
could -- depend on the stability of that heart, -- yet the delicacy of my love
is mortally wounded; -- I never could be happy.

I am inexpressibly impatient for an answer to my ill-judged and unnecessary
letter; although that answer, of whatsoever nature it may be, cannot, in any
degree, alleviate, or even alter my misery. -- Pity me, dear O'Bryen: pity, and
despise me not. You have never felt the all-subduing power of love; you know
not to what various inconsistencies it prompts us; -- great then will be your
candor, if you can excuse the weakness of your unfortunate friend.

I should entreat you not to come here, if I did not know, by experience, how
impossible it is to dissuade you from any thing that is good-natured. Come, my
dear Sir Francis: but expect not that I can join you in parties, either of
pleasure or improvement: -- I have no taste for pleasure; and to what purpose
should I seek to improve my mind? There is none I wish to please; the world is
to me a desert.

You must not insist on the performance of my promise: when I gave it, I could
not foresee its consequences. I cannot remain in a place where there is a
probability -- a bare possibility -- of again seeing her, I must for ever love,
and will for ever shun.

In whatsoever place or circumstances I may drag on the remains of a hated
existence -- be assured, I shall always conserve the liveliest remembrance of
your generous friendship.

DU MORNAI.

TO THE CHEVALIER DU MORNAI. -- CORK.
O'BRYEN-CASTLE.
MY heart is penetrated with your distress. My dear Chevalier, you shall not
go: -- I cannot support the thought of your rambling about the world, a
joyless, friendless, unconnected being; perhaps wanting even the necessaries of
life. And can I be happy while you are miserable? Can I riot in abundance while
you want? No, du Mornai; you know not my honest heart, if you think I can. --
The world, you say, is to you a desert; -- you cannot, therefore, have a
particular liking to any place; then why not fix your residence in Ireland? The
only obstacle will soon be removed; she is but on a visit; -- and this
preference is due to my affection, though not to my merit. -- You shall never
go: we will live together; we will have but one house, one purse, one heart. If
my vivacity is disagreeable to you -- I can, and will suppress it: I will be
serious, melancholy -- any thing, to please and sooth you.

It was not my intention to make you this proposal, until time had rendered --
as I flattered myself it would -- my friendship and society dearer to you; that
you might, of consequence, be the less able to reject an offer I so
passionately wish you to accept: but your precipitance, of necessity, hurries
me. -- If you deny me -- I shall think you one of the proudest, and most
hardhearted of men: if you comply -- I swear to you, my dear chevalier, I shall
consider your condescending to be indebted to me, as the highest obligation
that can possibly be conferred on me.

For God's sake, du Mornai, let me hear no more apologies for your feelings: --
I more than excuse -- I admire

" -- The graceful weakness of your heart." In me, behold not a cold, unfeeling
censor, but a warm and sympathetic friend. And yet, my friend, allow me gently
to observe, that love or honor must be conquered: -- the first, I fear, is
unconquerable; the last I dare not advise you to combat. I do not presume to
offer my counsel in a case so very delicate: I shall never recommend to my
friend -- no, nor to my enemy -- a conduct which I think I ought not to pursue
myself; and on the other hand, I shall never take upon me to censure any man
for acting, as I might perhaps myself do, in his circumstances.

I am sure it was hard for my business to prosper within the last fortnight;
for I have cursed by the hour every thing that has kept me from you. The affair
which, you know, principally detained me, is yet unfinished; but that, and
every thing, shall give way to friendship: nothing shall prevent my going to
Cork tomorrow.

FRANCIS O'BRYEN.

TO THE CHEVALIER DU MORNAI. -- CORK.
CHETWYND-VILLA.
I AM pained, Monsieur, to be obliged to convey to you my sister's sentiments.
To well have I known the agonizing pangs of hopeless love, not to feel the
deepest compassion for any man condemned to bear them. I respect, I love, and I
lament, the noble constancy of your unfortunate passion. Would to Heaven it was
in my power, in any degree, to soften the wound my unwilling hand must give! If
the manner of a refusal can console -- be consoled, chevalier: -- Mrs.
Wentworth rejects, but she insults you not; she refuses you steadily; but it is
with gratitude, it is with tears. -- She cannot love; her heart was buried in
the grave of her husband! A husband, who, as her brother I would say, deserved
her not: but as a man -- bound to allow for the frailties incident to humanity
-- I can pardon his errors, and grieve for his misfortunes.

You merit Mrs. Wentworth's friendship; -- but let the confidence she allows me
to repose in you, evince that she withholds it not: -- the enclosed I may call
a history of her misfortunes: it was written by Miss O'Bryen for Mrs. Chetwynd.
I need only add to it, that by the prudence of my most amiable friend, lord
Metheun, -- these melancholy transactions were kept from the public knowledge:
the world -- ever prone to look on the dark side of things -- would not have
believed that a woman, so perfectly innocent, could be so very unfortunate. I
do not pretend to acquit her wholly of the charge of imprudence: but very
slight was the fault; and such as a woman of a less unsuspecting heart, with
half her understanding, might have avoided: the fault, I repeat, was trivial;
and the punishment severe, indeed! -- Whilst the fair mourner weeps incessant
for her Henry -- you, chevalier, I am persuaded, will drop a generous tear to
the misfortunes of both.

I think so highly of your delicacy, and imagine you must have so good an
opinion of Mrs. Wentworth's, that after you have read these papers, I will not
suppose it necessary to tell you, that you must not expect time can make any
change in your favor.

I am, Monsieur, With the greatest esteem, Your most obedient, etc. EDWARD
MARCHMONT.

TO LORD METHUEN. -- ENGLAND.
CHETWYND VILLA.
GRACIOUS Heaven! my dear friend, what an amazing tale have I to unsold! --
Should I tell you that Harry Wentworth lives, -- will you not believe that I
rave, or that I mock you? Yet, I have received a letter from him within this
half hour. It is impossible to describe the emotion the perusal of it gave me.
With what aftonishment, what tumultuous joy -- joy checked by doubt -- did I
regard it! My head grew dizzy; and my behavior, I believe, was absolutely
frantic. By an impulse almost involuntary, I flew to the dear partner of my
soul: -- her soothing softness has, in some degree, composed my agitated
spirits; yet still my heart beats strangely, and my blood seems to circulate in
an unusual way. -- I was in my own chamber when the letter was brought to me;
and having heard Miss O'Bryen enter here is, without reflecting on the boldness
and impropriety of such an intrusion --

The carriage waits -- Imagine with what impatience I go to embrace my
long-lost brother.

I shall request my Valeria to add a few lines, and seal this. -- She knows
that I have already told you every thing relative to this pretended Frenchman's
addresses to my sister.

--

I esteem myself singularly fortunate, to have at once an opportunity of
testifying my sense of the favors I have received from lord Methuen, conveying
pleasure to him, and obliging Sir Edward Marchmont. -- Your lordship will lose
by the change of your correspondent. -- But it would be unpardonable to tire
you with tedious apologies, instead of entering immediately on a subject so
interesting to you. Where am I to take it up? Let me see. -- At my own room
door, I think. -- I had just sat down to write to Miss Marchmont, when I heard
a hasty tap at my door. "Come in, Sir," said I, supposing it was my uncle; and
rising, I walked toward the door: -- I was extremely surprised to see it
opened by Sir Edward. He clasped me in his arms without speaking a word: he was
in violent disorder; and changed color every instant. My God! cried I, what is
the matter? -- You are ill! -- O sit here -- I led him to a large elbow-chair
as I spoke: he sat down, and placed me beside him; saying, with great emotion,
O, Valeria! my sister -- He laid an open letter on my lap; and burst into
tears. -- I cannot express how much he frightened me: -- Harriet had gone out a
little before to take the air with lady Enmore; -- an over-turned carriage, and
broken limbs, were the first ideas that rose in my mind; -- I grasped his hand
in speechless terror. -- I have discomposed you, my love, said he: How could I
be so thoughtless? But how, at such a moment, could I be otherwise? -- You
shall not see this yet. He would have taken away Mr. Wentworth's letter -- I
snatched it eagerly -- What a sudden transition from affliction to joy! -- But,
my lord, it will be a great deal more to the purpose, to give you some account
of the letter itself, than to attempt to tell the effect it had, either on
myself or on Sir Edward. -- It is written in a style I cannot do justice to:
irregular, elevated, warm, and pathetic. After most passionately lamenting the
pain his unworthy suspicions occasioned to his Harriet -- severely condemning
himself, for giving way to thoughts so injurious to her -- earnestly begging
his brother's forgiveness -- and generously praising the candor of the writer
of the little narrative Sir Edward so fortunately sent to him -- he proceeds to
applaud your lordship's behavior in your unhappy duel: he says, you in the
gentlest, though most intrepid manner, ineffectually demanded what cause of
offense you had given; and refused to fight, until provoked by the most
opprobrious language. -- When you fell bleeding and senseless to the ground, he
thought you dead; yet still animated by a furious resentment, he was going to
stab you through the heart; but every feeling of the man and the gentleman,
rising against so base an action, he threw away the bloody sword with horror,
and precipitately quitted the place.

He embarked on board a merchant ship bound to Cadiz; taking with him bills on
that city to the amount of about two thousand pounds: this sum he thought would
be sufficient for a year or two; and his melancholy imagination naturally
enough suggested, that he could not survive his misfortunes beyond that time.

He was received with all the friendship he expected by Don Juan d'Almagro; to
whom he disclosed the secret cause of his voluntary exile. The jealous,
haughty, vindictive temper of the Spaniard, highly approved his conduct; and
confirmed him in his resolution of estranging himself for ever from England. --
Sir Edward's enquiry embarrassed them very much: neither were willing to
acknowledge the truth; both scorned a lie; and Don Juan's politeness rejected
the idea of leaving the letter unanswered. An accident at length determined
them; and induced them to adopt as wild a scheme as ever a romantic brain
suggested: truth, they relunctantly obliged to give way to a supposed
necessity. -- Mr. Wentworth's servant was thrown from his horse, and died in a
few days after of his bruises and a fever, which was their consequence. During
his illness, he expressed so strong a concern at the thought of being buried in
a foreign country, that his master humanely promised, that if he died he would
be at the expense of having him conveyed to England. The sequel is easily
imagined: -- Mr. Wentworth, to put a final stop to the enquiries of his
friends, thought fit to make the corpse pass for his own; and dictated to Don
Juan that letter, which drew so many tears from the fairest eyes in England.
This strange deceit was not easily detected: the body of a person dying in such
circumstances would be expected to be altered and disfigured; and this man,
though unlike him in bulk and complexion, was about his age, nearly of the same
stature, had some resemblance in his features, and hair of the same color.

Some time after this, from a restlessness of disposition, he left Cadiz; and,
as he himself phrased it, when he wrote in his assumed character to Mrs.
Wentworth -- rambled over most part of Europe, hopeless of happiness, and
wholly regardless of life.

Passing one night through the streets of Rome, he saw a young gentleman
leaning his back against a wall, defending himself with great bravery against
three men. Our generous unfortunate immediately drew his sword, in aid of the
person who fought so unequal a combat: -- the dastardly assassins were soon put
to flight. -- Mr. O'Bryen -- for you will guess it was he -- thanked his
deliverer in the warmest terms. -- You owe me nothing, returned Mr. Wentworth
gravely: I am happy to have assisted to preserve your life; and only wish I had
been fortunate enough to have lost my own.

Ah! Signior, I fear you are unhappy: if by my fortune, my friendship, my life
itself, I can render you any service, freely command me.

My misfortunes are not of a nature to admit of remedy. At present, however, I
think of nothing but your safety: allow me to attend you.

Such an incident as this naturally led to an intimacy between them. O'Bryen
was of a temper too grateful and generous, not to seek to return so great an
obligation: but the reserve of the man he wished to oblige, put it out of his
power to do more than endeavor to divert a melancholy, of which he knew not
the cause. Though Mr. Wentworth's mind was soured by misfortune, he could not
long be insensible to such attention; -- the most perfect friendship was
quickly founded on the strong basis of mutual worth and mutual gratitude: the
fullest confidence soon succeeded. They became inseparable companions; visited
several places in Italy together; and when Sir John O'Bryen's death called home
his son, he found means to persuade his friend to accompany him: though not
without much difficulty; and after repeatedly urging the improbability of his
being known, under the disguise of a Frenchman, in a kingdom where he had never
been; especially as his perfect knowledge of the French nation and language
gave him no room to apprehend suspicion.

You know all the rest, my lord; -- I have only to tell you, that Mr. Wentworth
and Sir Francis O'Bryen left Cork immediately on the receipt of Sir Edward's
letter, and late last night returned to O'Bryen castle; where Sir Edward is now
gone. -- I presume he will return tonight, as the distance is not more than
eight miles.

It is well Mrs. Wentworth happened to be abroad this morning: -- our excessive
joy might have betrayed more than it would be proper for her yet to know. I
dread the consequences of a full discovery: -- but we must be cautious, and
hope the best.

I will bid you adieu, and return to my letter to Miss Marchmont: -- now, what
a joyful letter! -- How peculiarly happy am I to be able to convey pleasure to
three such persons, as your lordship, lady Methuen, and Miss Marchmont; To give
happiness is, certainly, to feel it in a very superior degree: then, am not I
highly favored by fortune, in having such an addition made to my own happiness?

Make my affectionate compliments acceptable to lady Methuen.

I have the honor to be Your Lordship's Obliged and attached friend, VALERIA
O'BRYEN.

To the Right Honorable LADY METHUEN. -- ENGLAND.
CHETWYND-VILLA.
O MY dear lady Methuen, my heart is strangely agitated! They tell me that my
Henry lives! Is it -- can it be possible?

There is here -- I mean in this neighborhood -- a gentleman, who professes to
entertain for me a passion, I as little desire as deserve. I always disliked
second marriages; I thought they betrayed a want of delicacy; -- but ever since
I have been a widow, I have abhorred them; I have almost thought them criminal.
I blush that any man should love me: I do not, somehow, think myself at liberty
-- I am sure, at least, my heart is not free -- to receive addresses of this
nature; they even strike me with a kind of horror. I pity Du Mornai; and yet
inconsistently hate him: unjust and ungenerous that I am, to hate a man only
because I have done him an injury! -- I, however, allowed my brother to impart
to him the circumstances that attended the loss of my husband. O, my friend, I
blot the last sentence with my tears. No woman ever loved a husband more
tenderly, more ardently, nor more delicately, than I did; and yet my unjust, my
cruel -- but still dear, ever-to-be-lamented Henry, could think me false! Alas!
-- my bursting heart! -- he dying thought me so! Ye powers! that I should live
to have my virtue suspected! and that too, by the man whom, next to Heaven, I
esteemed and loved!

I am writing in the most incoherent manner -- I meant to have told you, that
my brother has been to visit Monsieur du Mornai; the morning after he returned,
he told me -- after many pauses, hints, and much circumlocution -- that the
chevalier was of opinion, that Mr. Wentworth is still alive; and had only made
use of an artifice -- which might, he said, be easily managed -- to induce us
to believe him dead. To my infinite surprise, my brother himself, and all my
friends here, agree in thinking this conjecture founded on probability. They
say a great deal in support of this opinion; -- they particularly urge the
congruity of such a procedure in Mr. Wentworth, with his abrupt departure from
England, and earnest request to my father and brother never to make any enquiry
after him. -- What, Louisa, do you think of all this? For my part, I know not
what to believe. I am perplexed and anxious beyond measure. I am a thousand
times more miserable than ever. -- Can Sir Edward, do you imagine, have heard
any thing concerning Mr. Wentworth, which he fears to impart to me immediately?
I know his tender consideration for me -- But from what quarter should he
receive such intelligence? It Is, however, extremely unlikely that this
Chevalier du Mornai should have so much more penetration than every body else.
-- I distract myself with conjectures -- My soul is on the rack.

--

Yes, Louisa, Edward certainly knows something which he chooses not to
communicate: I have told him that he does; -- he did not deny it; but squeezing
my hand, said, If I conceal any thing from my dear Harriet, I trust she is no
stranger to the motive of that concealment. I should have importuned him, had
not the entrance of lady Alicia Sedley put an end to our conversation. I like
not to talk on this subject before her or lady Enmore; though I find my brother
has made them acquainted with all my affairs; Was it right, my dear lady
Methuen, to make them my confidants without my leave? This behavior is not
consonant to his usual delicacy; -- it must mean something.

Write to me immediately, my friend: tell me, do you think it possible that my
Henry lives? -- Why will not they tell me all they know? There is no bearing
this torturing suspense.

Lady Enmore is obliged to go to Dublin for a few days; -- the wedding is
deferred till her return; a compliment, to which her generous friendship for
Miss O'Bryen certainly entitles her: yet I fancy Sir Edward paid it with
reluctance.

I am interrupted by Mrs. Chetwynd. I am not allowed to be a moment alone.
However, Mrs. Chetwynd can never be an intruder to me: I love her from my soul;
and could with pleasure join Edward and Valeria when they call her mother, as
they both frequently do.

Farewell.

Most truly yours, HARRIET WENTWORTH.

TO LORD METHUEN. -- ENGLAND.
CHETWYND-VILLA.
I AM this moment honored with your lordship's very polite letter. Some people
cannot bear encouragement: -- see, what an encroacher I am! I no sooner learn
that you tolerate one letter, than I commence another. However, it is at Sir
Edward's desire. Not that the saucy fellow has yet a right to command me; but
as my day of power will -- alas! -- be very short, it is politic to use it
generously, in order to set him a good example.

Now, my lord, prepare yourself to read one of the longest letters that ever
was written. -- Your friend has told you all the artifices we have been obliged
to use with his sister, during the last fortnight. We were tortured to behold
the disquietude occasioned by the suspense we excited; yet none of us dared to
speak out. Mr. Wentworth has, if possible, suffered more than her: -- his
impatience to behold her could have been checked only by his fears.

When I arose yesterday morning, I sent, as usual, to enquire how Mrs.
Wentworth had passed the night. Her woman came to me, and told me, she feared
her lady would absolutely destroy herself, by giving way to so violent an
anxiety; that she had been up the greatest part of the night; one time throwing
herself on her bed, or walking slowly about the room, she silently wept; then
moving with a quicker pace, she beat her breast, and threw out many
expressions, denoting the severest anguish of mind.

I went to her chamber immediately. I met Sir Edward at the door. I have been
with poor Harriet, said he. -- Indeed, he had no need to tell me so; I saw by
his tearful eyes where he had been. -- "What shall I do?" added he: my heart
bleeds for her.

"Have you told her nothing more," asked I, "than she knew before?"

I have not. I was several times going to speak; but had not the courage. O,
Valeria, should I tell her all, perhaps -- he stopped; -- it was, as a feeling
writer says, "a perhaps not to be borne."

"In my opinion, Sir Edward," said I, no hazard can be greater, than that of
suffering her to remain much longer in her present state of mind. It is four
days since you told her that Du Mornai saw Mr. Wenworth in Italy, since the
time she believed him dead: consequently, she has now accustomed herself to
think him alive: -- it is time she should know more: and more she shall know,
if you give me leave.

I do. -- Yet, my dear creature, consider. -- "I will not be discouraged,"
cried I, abruptly quitting him.

I found his sister, as I expected, in tears. I sat down by her. I must scold
you, Harriet, I am angry with you.

"What have I done?"

You have been careless of your health: you have sat up almost all night.

I could not sleep. It is impossible for me to rest either by day or night.

And why impossible? Are you not most unreasonable? While you were entirely
without hope, you combated your afflictions; you were calm, though unhappy:
now, when you know certainly that Mr. Wentworth lives, you abandon yourself to
grief.

"I know he did live: but, oh:" cried she, weeping afresh, how do I know that
he lives still? In what part of the world am I to seek him?

You will know all in time: -- has not your brother written to his friends in
Italy?

Yes, yes; he has written: -- I knew the time he would have gone. But I am
unreasonable: pardon me.

"I cannot pardon you." The tears I had with much difficulty restrained before,
fell from my eyes in spite of me. I understand your hint very well," added I;
but I swear to you, my cruel friend, were matters situated, as you suppose, I
should be the first to persuade him to go. If leaving me was an obstacle, I
would go with him.

Forgive me; I knew not what I said; -- I did not intend to wrong either his
friendship or yours. But what did you say, Valeria? If matters were, as I
suppose -- What meant my friend?

I am afraid to tell you. You can bear nothing with equanimity but despair.

For God's sake! if you know any thing of my husband, do not hide it from me!
O, my friend -- my sister! throwing her arms round my neck -- if you know any
thing of my Henry, do not hide it from me!

What would you that I should tell you?

"Is he living? Where is he?"

Mark me then, Harriet -- he undoubtedly is living; and in perfect health. --
She sunk down on her knees, and silently raised her hands and eyes to Heaven,
with a look of transport and gratitude unutterable. I did not attempt to move
her from a position that so well became her situation; but hastily mixing some
sal-volatile with water, I gave her a glass of it: she drank it almost
mechanically: and thinking she would choose to be alone, I left the room.

Knowing how uneasy Sir Edward would be till he saw me, I flew to the
breakfast-parlour; -- he met me at the door, with open arms, and looks of
anxious enquiry. I recounted my proceedings; and had the pleasure to receive
his approbation.

My aunt observing that she should not be left long alone, I was returning to
her apartment, when I met her in the hall. She affectionately embraced and
thanked me. But, Valeria, you only half answered my question -- Where is he?

"I cannot tell you."

"Good God!" she exclaimed, with the most disappointed air; you cannot tell! --
How then do you know if he is living?

You misunderstand me; I did not mean that I could not, but -- excuse me --
that I would not as yet inform you. Let me see you easy and cheerful till after
dinner, and upon my honor I will then tell you in what prince's dominions he
is.

"Were I treated thus," said she, by any person of whose goodnature I could
entertain the least doubt, I should unavoidably accuse them of playing with my
misery.

You would be most unjust if you thought so of me. Be assured, my Harriet, if I
did not fear to overpower you with joy, I should with rapture gratify you.

"Your motive is kind, indeed," returned she; but the conduct resulting from it
is most cruel.

My uncle hearing us in the hall, came out, and took us both into the parlour.

The dear sufferer made visible efforts to appear cheerful till the expiration
of the stated time. -- As soon as the servants were withdrawn after dinner, she
turned to me, as I sat by her; -- Now, Valeria, have I not been patient? Do I
not deserve to be pitied?

Sir Edward left his seat, and leaned on the back of her chair; -- his
intelligent countenance speaking what he felt for her.

Her expression filled my eyes with tears: -- "Indeed, Harriet," said I, you
do. -- Ask your question.

"Where is he?" demanded she eagerly.

He is in the dominions of the King of --.

"Dare I guess England?"

"You are right."

"O merciful Heaven!" cried she, clasping her hands together; is he then in
England? This is expected happiness indeed! Well might you fear to overpower me
with joy! O Valeria! falling on my bosom -- are you sure my Henry is in England?

The sweet, extravagant creature proposed setting out for Dublin instantly;
that she might be ready to embrace the first opportunity of returning to
England.

"Sure" said my uncle, you would not go till you have seen the chevalier du
Mornai; -- 'twas entirely by his means you have recovered Mr. Wentworth; --
your thanks are certainly due to him.

Well, Sir, I Will write them. I would not see him on any account.

"Pardon me, madam," he replied, I believe you ought.

She did not contend with him; but addressed herself to my aunt: Favor me with
your advice, my dear Mrs. Chetwynd: I will follow it implicitly. Think you not
there would be an indelicacy in my receiving a visit from him? Should I not be
wanting in what I owe Mr. Wentworth?

I saw my aunt was perplexed for an answer; and particularly as she could not
but approve her refusing to see her imaginary lover: -- to disembarrass her, I
said, that I thought Mrs. Wentworth judged perfectly right with regard to
Monsieur: "But indeed, Harriet," added I, I cannot so readily approve of your
going to England. It is certainly Mr. Wentworth's business to come to you. And
he will do so, the moment he obtains your permission; for lord Methuen has
explained to him every thing he unhappily misunderstood.

"And is he then convinced -- " of my innocence, she would have said, but
delicacy and tears joined to break the sentence.

"My excellent Valeria!" whispered Sir Edward tenderly; and he had the
assurance to kiss my cheek. But why do I tell you this? I forget I am not
writing to my aunt Chetwynd.

"Your brother," resumed I, will write to him immediately. Not a word, my dear
Harriet; for she was opening her lips to speak -- you must not write a line to
him.

I must, I must: wherefore should I wear the appearance of a resentment I do
not feel? You speak from the feelings of a single woman; -- I would act from
those of a wife.

"I do not want you," said I, to resent an error that brought its own
punishment with it: yet, for reasons you will yourself approve, when you come
to consider the matter dispassionately. -- I entreat you, leave it to Sir
Edward to write.

And I, my dearest sister, request that you will allow yourself to be directed,
in this affair, by Miss O'Bryen's counsel. -- I will tell my brother that you
wished to write. He put his arms round her: -- tears trembled in his fine eyes:
-- I know, my gentle sister, our conduct has a strange, and even a barbarous
appearance to you: but I beseech you to rely on our friendship: -- in a short
time you will be convinced of the propriety of our measures.

I thought it would not be amiss to endeavor to give the conversation a gayer
turn: -- "Go to your place, Sir Edward," said I, and take your wine. As soon as
the servants have dined I Will call for the coach; for be it known to you, ladies
and gentlemen, we are all to drink tea with lady Melmont this evening.

"With all my heart," cried my uncle.

"I shall go and write my letter then," said Sir Edward.

"Very well," said I, you have nothing else to do, for you are as well dressed
as possible. So are you, Sir. Mrs. Wentworth and Mrs. Chetwynd, you are quite
elegant. Now, do you three go and take a turn in the garden till the carriage
is ready. -- Lady Alicia, I don't like your cap; it does not become you; you
must change it. -- How am I?" going to the glass" -- passablement bien; but I
must mend my hair a little. -- Lady Alicia, you shall dress at lord Uvedon's:
-- Mr. Melmont for me. If the fine Miss Stanley be there still -- Sir Edward
shall have his choice of her, or lady Anne Melmont.

"Were there ever such airs?" said my aunt, smiling.

"Upon my word, madam," cried lady Alicia, I think she takes a great deal too
much upon her.

"I think so too," said Mr. Chetwynd; but as it must be confessed her commands
are very reasonable, we had better submit. Allons mesdames, presenting one hand
to Mrs. Wentworth and the other to my aunt, We were ordered to walk in the
garden. They obeyed with a very good grace; and we three ran up stairs to our
several employments.

On our way to Firdale, Mrs. Wentworth pressed to know the occasion of her
husband's return to England -- how he came to an eclaircissement with lord
Methuen, etc. -- As I could not refuse to satisfy a curiosity so very natural
and reasonable, I was obliged to acknowledge how far I had deceived her; and
fairly discovered to her the whole truth; only concealing his being at
O'Bryen-castle, as I imagined it would too much discompose her to know he was
so near her, so as I had already been compelled to tell her so many lies, I
easily stretched my conscience a little further, and said he was at Cork.

Her boundless joy was expressed more by tears than words.

She leaned upon my shoulder for near a quarter of an hour without speaking:
then suddenly raising her head, she cried, Dear Valeria, may I depend on what
you tell me now? I could not forbear to smile at her well-grounded doubts of my
veracity; and maliciously drew in my aunt and lady Alicia to confirm my
falsehood, by appealing to them for the truth of what I said.

"How soon," asked Mrs. Wentworth, her eyes flashing fire -- how soon may I
expect to see him?

"Courage, my fair friend," replied Mrs. Chetwynd; he will certainly be with
you tomorrow evening.

A lively red overspread her lovely face, but instantly gave way to a
death-like paleness: -- we let down the coach windows for air; which, with the
application of lady Alicia's eau de luce, prevented her fainting, and, happily,
she was quite recovered by the time we reached Firdale.

Our gentlemen, who rode, arrived some time before us: a very fortunate
circumstance; for almost the first persons they saw, as they entered the
drawing room, were our quondam Chevalier and Sir Francis O'Bryen. The former
took an opportunity of whispering to his brother, an earnest enquiry for his
Harriet. Sir Francis, guessing their subject, joined them: Well, Sir Edward,
said he, when shall I see my friend happy.

He answered, "Very soon."

"Soon let it be," returned he, unless you would choose to have him become a
mere statue: he is little different from one at present, except the not being
quite so passive. The poor fellow is conscious he is but bad company, for you
cannot conceive any thing more difficult than to get him to stir from home.

"How, my dear O'Bryen," cried Mr. Wentworth, will not you preserve some
consistency in your censures? you upbraid me now with total suspension of my
faculties -- yet how often do you talk to me of the unreasonable effervescence
of my passions?

"Why," replied Sir Francis, you are sometimes passionate to madness; but more
generally quite exanimate. In short, though it sounds a little harshly, I am
sure, if your affairs continue much longer in the same train, you must
necessarily become either a madman or a fool.

"A terrible alternative!" said Sir Edward.

Lord Uvedon seeing our carriage at a distance, came up to Mr. Wentworth,
saying, I fancy, Sir, you would do well to retire, until Mrs. Wentworth can be
prepared to see you. This counsel being strongly enforced by every person
present, he cast a wishful look toward the carriage, and heaving a deep sigh,
suffered lord Uvedon to conduct him to another room.

Some explanation is necessary here; as your lordship will be surprised at the
Melmont family's appearing to be so well acquainted with the situation of our
friends. -- As Mr. Wentworth's happy reconciliation with his lady obliged him
to drop the name of Du Mornai, and reassume his own: to avoid an unpleasingly
mysterious appearance, it was requisite that some reasons should be given for
the change to Sir Francis's acquaintance, who first knew him in his French
character. All his English friends thinking him dead, to them a still clearer
explanation was necessary. Accordingly, he has fabricated a tale that he
designs should satisfy both: -- his delicacy for his Harriet not allowing him
to let the world know he had suspected her. -- Your supposed coffee-house
dispute, your consequent duel, his subsequent flight to Cadiz, and believing
you killed -- all stands as it was. -- As nobody knew his address, all the
letters written to him miscarried: so that he still remained in his error; and
being struck with a remorse so violent, as in some degree to disorder his
reason, for having murdered, upon a frivolous quarrel, a man of worth and
honor, and his brother's friend, he determined to exclude himself for ever
from the society of his wife, his friends -- in short, to resign every thing he
held valuable. Knowing how averse his relations would be to this resolution, he
concealed himself from them, until his dying servant's wish to mix with his
native dust, suggested to him a method of freeing himself from their
opposition. -- The lenient hand of Time healing, in a good measure, both his
head and heart, he began to repent of the part he had acted; and hearing, by
accident from Sir Francis O'Bryen, that lord Methuen was still alive, he
suddenly resolved to return to his country. -- I don't know if your lordship
will think this story probable; but I believe you will agree with me in
thinking, that the truth of it will not be questioned. Every body of sense and
experience, knows that things frequently happen in real life, which a judicious
author would not introduce into a fictitious story. It is a very just, though
trite observation, that -- probability is not always on the side of truth.

When the two gentlemen left the room, lady Melmont said it would be proper for
some of the ladies to drink tea with them; which lady Lucy Domville and Miss
Stanley did. On our enquiring for them, lady Anne said that her sister was with
Miss Stanley, who was confined to her chamber by a cold. Lady Melmont told my
aunt, in a low voice, how matters really stood. Sir Edward gave me the like
information: at the same time, telling me that he thought it would be highly
imprudent to venture to let her know he was in the house. I thought so at first
myself; but when I considered the uneasy and unsettled state of mind in which
she must remain while this important affair depended, I could not help thinking
it would be most advisable to put a speedy period to her anxieties. Knowing how
difficult it would be to bring him over to my opinion, I pretended to assent to
his; but secretly resolved to be guided by my own. His love for his sister
makes him act in direct opposition to the native fire of his character;
rendering him as timid, as deliberate, as nature made him bold and decisive.

After tea, lady Anne saying she would go to Miss Stanley, and send lady Lucy
to us, I begged leave to attend her; my aunt joined in the same request, from a
desire to see Mr. Wentworth, for whom she has a great friendship. We found him
leaning on a sofa, in a posture of deep thoughtfulness. He saluted Mrs.
Chetwynd very cordially; and bowing low to me, said, with great gallantry, Such
beauty can belong only to Miss O'Bryen.

When we were seated, he said, directing himself to my aunt, O, madam, will the
dear treasure I threw away in my folly never be restored to me again?

It shall be restored to you immediately, replied I, with some spirit.

"What do you mean, my dear?" asked my aunt.

I mean to elude Sir Edward's caution; and this very evening to reunite this
deserving pair.

He arose, and pressing one of my hands between both his, said, Then, madam, I
shall say that my Harriet was first given me by Hymen, and the second time by
an angel!

I returned to the drawing room with lady Lucy. -- We found lady Melmont, lady
Alicia, my uncle, and Mr. Domville, just sitting down to quadrille. The rest of
the company was going to make another table; but Sir Francis protesting it was
a sin to waste such a fine evening at cards, lord Melmont proposed a walk, to
which we all agreed.

As we walked, I secretly begged Sir Francis would draw off Sir Edward; telling
him my motive for the request: he warmly approved my design; and promised to
take away all the gentlemen if he could.

"Sir Edward," said he, have you seen my lord's canal improvements? Being
answered in the negative, he proposed going to view them. Your friend said, he
had no objection, if it were agreeable to the ladies. Mrs. Wentworth would have
complied, but lady Lucy and I had our own reasons for opposing it.

"Let us go, however," said O'Bryen.

"No, no," replied Sir Edward, we'll take another opportunity. -- Sir Francis,
added he, with a smile, I should not have suspected you for such a proposition.

Lord Melmont did not give up the point so easily; being extremely fond, as
O'Bryen well knew, of having his improvements admired, he seconded the motion
so strenuously, that Sir Edward could not civilly withhold his consent any
longer.

Sir Francis perceiving that Mr. Melmont meant to attach himself to our party,
took hold of his arm, saying, Come along, Melmont. Deuce take me if you, or any
man living, shall quietly enjoy a blessing I choose to resign. -- Serviteur,
mesdames; we shall return in a moment, kissing his hand to us, with his usual
air of graceful sprightliness.

"Saucy fellows!" said lady Lucy, when they left us; we'll take care they shall
not. Come, my friends, shall we go in?

I assented; saying, Since we are forsaken by one set of beaux, we must only
have recourse to another.

They are too busy with their cards to mind you, said Mrs. Wentworth.

I answered, that I did not mean the gentlemen of the card party.

"Who then?" she demanded carelessly: I presume lord Uvedon is not at home.

He is; and I wish to Heaven I dare bring you to the place he is in.

"What is your reason for such a wish?" asked she, with some surprise.

Cannot you guess? Does Sir Francis's being here suggest nothing to you?

"O, Valeria, is my Henry here?"

"He is: -- be composed."

She trembled violently; and there was a wildness in her looks which froze my
blood. My good-natured friend, alarmed at her disorder, gently reproved my
precipitance; and supported her by holding one arm, while I held the other. I
was exceedingly agitated myself; and really stood in need of the assistance I
endeavored to give her.

"O God! support me!" said she, in a voice hardly articulate.

We placed her on a garden-chair. Neither of us was able to refrain from
weeping: -- tears are softly infectious; -- she wept likewise; which
considerably relieved her. Starting up, she cried, Come, my dear Valeria, will
you not conduct me to my Henry?

"I will," said I; again taking hold of her arm, and pressing her hand to my
breast. But, my dearest Harriet, summon all your courage: -- should you suffer
by my conduct, Edward will never forgive me. Promise me that you will not faint.

She replied with an amiable simplicity, "Indeed I will not, if I can help it."
With trembling steps she hasted toward the house, leaning on lady Lucy and me.

I took her into a small parlour, adjoining that in which Mr. Wentworth was;
begging lady Lucy would direct him to us. He came instantly, accompanied by my
aunt only. He flew to her; his arms involuntarily extended to embrace her; but,
as if impelled by a sudden recollection of his injurious conduct, he threw
himself on his knees at her feet; passionately kissing her hand, and the tears
falling fast down his face, he cried, "O, Harriet! forgive me!" She sunk from
my arms, almost lifeless, into his, faintly murmuring, "My Henry!"

They remained several minutes in a close embrace, without speech or motion. --
O, my lord, what must have been their feelings!

At length, he gently raising her, said, My dear, my injured wife! say that you
forgive -- say that you love me! She was not able to reply: -- I thought I saw
her just expiring; and kneeling by her, I exclaimed in the most frantic manner,
O, Harriet! speak! live! -- Edward, dear Edward! forgive me! My beloved aunt,
inexpressibly terrified at my behavior, raised me from the ground; and
weeping, folded me to her fond heart: -- "My child -- my darling child!" said
the tenderest of parents, be not alarmed; -- she will recover presently.

Mr. Wentworth, with a distracted air, cried, Revive, my only love! Let me not
lose my dearer life in you! -- Oh! thou injured angel! what a barbarian have I
been to thee!

Had she continued much longer insensible, I don't know what might have been
the consequence. -- Opening her lovely eyes, she gazed on her husband with a
tenderness not to be described. -- My soul! my heart's treasure! speak to me!
said he, kissing her with eager transport. -- In the most melting accents, she
replied, My dear Henry.

Enraptured to hear again the sound of that soft voice, I sprung from my aunt,
and again threw myself by her on the floor. "My lovely sister!" said the sweet
creature. -- Mr. Wentworth, in the same affectionate tone, kindly repeated, And
my lovely sister! putting one arm round my waist, he lifted us both; saying to
me, with an air of politeness and sincerity, Miss O'Bryen, I have obligations
to you that words cannot repay.

My aunt observing that Mrs. Wentworth's spirits were weak and exhausted,
called for Sir Francis's chaise; and stepped up to lady Melmont, requesting she
would let them go unnoticed; to which her ladyship consented, on the obliging
condition, that the rest of the family should stay to sup with her.

My aunt, Mrs. Wentworth, and her happy Henry, were just departed, when the
gentlemen returned. O'Bryen danced up to me: -- What have you done since, my
fair cousin?

"Sent them home together."

"Are you serious?" his eyes sparkling with pleasure.

Serious, upon my honor. And you must sleep at Chetwynd-villa, for they have
taken your carriage: -- you shall have your choice of the two vacant seats in
our coach.

"Do what you please with me," said he.

Lord Uvedon overhearing him, said, with a pretty affected sigh, Alas! O'Bryen,
how many of our sex are there, with whom that lady does what she pleases!

"Faith," replied my gay relation, she does what she pleases with both sexes;
as Sir Edward Marchmont may know to his cost.

Sir Edward bowing to me, with his accustomed grace, said, Miss O'Bryen's power
over my sex, no man can be more sensible of than myself; but I confess I do not
perceive how any influence she may have over the ladies can affect me.

"It affects you very nearly," answered Sir Francis, for she has disposed of
your sister without your knowledge; and mon petit chevalier is gone off with
her.

Your dear friend's susceptible heart was too much overjoyed to be restrained
by the laws of cold propriety, from discovering its emotions; -- the presence
of so large a company did not prevent his expressing the acknowledgments, he
generously imagined, due to me, in terms but too flatteringly particular.

What an unconscionable letter have I written! Was I not in the right, to
prepare you for a long one? I assure you it has furnished me with constant
employment for two days -- or nights, rather. I have not the confidence to
expect you can read it tout de suite; but as Sir Edward tells me he has amply
experienced your patience, I am not without hopes, that you will be able to get
through it in some little time.

Lady Methuen has my most ardent wishes for her safety.

I hope her ladyship is not jealous of our correspondence: -- do you know that
Sir Edward has the impertinence to declare that he is? Though I write merely in
compliance with his own request! the unreasonable creature! He urges, however,
that I comply with pleasure; which certainly cannot be controverted. Mr.
Wentworth, who was present, said, that, If there could be any excuse for
causeless jealousy, Lord Methuen's engaging qualities would form one. -- One
word for you, my lord; and two for himself. But seriously, he speaks of you in
the justest, that is to say, in the highest terms; and you may be assured, that
a sincere and lively esteem now holds the place of the enmity he formerly bore
you. He mentions your answer to his letter, with great encomiums on your
politeness; candor, and generosity. -- Noble minds, betrayed by some fatal
mistake or inadvertency, may undesigningly injure; but they are ever sure to
make all the amends in their power to the person they have wronged.

I am, my Lord, With every possible sentiment Of esteem and friendship, Yours,
VALERIA O'BRYEN.

TO MRS. CHETWYND. -- CHETWYND-VILLA.
DEAR MADAM, O'BRYEN CASTLE.
I AM infinitely sorry it is not in my power to return to Chetwynd-villa
today; -- when I came home last night, I found a letter from my mother,
wherein she complains very much of her health: I cannot dispense with visiting
her immediately; and am just on the wing for Dublin.

The little box that accompanies this, I did not get out of the jeweller's
hands till late last night; though the things have been bespoken these two
months. I thought the rascal would never let me have them. I shall be much
indebted to you, if you will take the trouble to order Miss O'Bryen's woman to
leave them on her lady's toillette.

I know what my dear, sagacious uncle, will think of my journey to town; but it
is no such matter, I assure you. I own there have lately been overtures made to
me from that quarter, through lady O'Bryen: she approves them; but I do not. I
hate these sober, formal, patched-up family-matches. To think of my going
expressly to pay my addresses to a woman I never saw! -- and whose temper and
character -- whose very face -- I know only on report from the opinion of
others! ridiculous! detestable! No, I will judge for myself, choose for myself;
and if ever I marry a woman that does not wait till I ask her, -- may I be a
cuckold in the honey-moon! -- I am astonished that gentlemen have not more
pride -- more delicacy -- for their female relations. Had I a sister or a
daughter, she might die an old maid sooner than I would offer her to any man. I
could not endure to have a saucy coxcomb exult -- even in thought -- at having
rejected her.

One word a l'oreille: -- lady Anne Melmont -- amiable, elegant, accomplished,
sensible, and unaffected; of a noble and worthy family, with a respectable
fortune. -- It will do, aunt; but -- mum!

Tell my dear Wentworth I have not time for a line at present, but shall write
to him from Dublin.

I hope I shall be able to prevail on my mother to return with me to
O'Bryen-castle. The country air agrees best with her; besides, she must come
and pay her respects to lady Marchmont.

Adieu, my dear madam, I kiss your hands.

FRANCIS O'BRYEN.

TO SIR FRANCIS O'BRYEN, BART. -- DUBLIN.
CHETWYND VILLA.
I AM extremely glad you found lady O'Bryen so much better than you expected;
though, I confess, I am not a little angry with her, for contriving to be
indisposed so very mal a propos. You have missed a wedding, my friend: --
yesterday Mr. Chetwynd joined the hands of the loveliest pair I ever beheld. --
We had no company but the ladies of the Melmont family. Lady Alicia Sedley, and
lady Anne Melmont, were bridemaids. Your admired lady Anne looked more than
usually pretty. I regretted that you were not present: what an opportunity to
say soft things! -- I took care, however, that she should think of you. --
"Dear lady Anne," whispered I, what would Sir Francis O'Bryen give to be here
now! She was silent, blushed, looked down, and opened and shut her fan with the
sweetest confusion imaginable. How easy to read the language of an ingenuous
heart!

'Twould be vain for me to attempt to mention the bride: your own lively
imagination will scarcely be able to do her justice; -- judge then if my pen
can.

"Triumphant beauty never looks so gay
"As on the morning of a nuptial day."
This observation is rather quaintly expressed; but I think you would with me
have subscribed to its justness, had you seen your charming cousin yesterday
morning; her fine complexion heightened by pleasure, and modesty again
improving the rouge of joy.

I wonder not at the ardour of my brother's passion for her. I acknowledge that
I never saw a woman, who in person, mind, and manners, would appear so
completely and engagingly beautiful to an unprejudiced man: but my fond eye
discovers more attractions in another; -- my gentle Harriet is to me a hundred
times more lovely.

Sir Edward calls himself the happiest of men: but surely the cup of happiness
must have a higher flavor to me, who have drunk so deeply of its bitter
reverse. Yet perhaps his assertion may be just; for he feels not, as I do, the
pang of having injured her he loves. -- I look back on my past conduct with
amazement: -- how could I suspect her? The most delicate -- the most virtuous
of women!

"Pure as the winter stream, when ice embossed
"Whitens its course."
Even to myself reserved, though fond. -- Never, never can I make her
sufficient amends for what she has suffered for me. Yet the dear, too generous
girl, thinks herself recompensed for years of heartrending anguish, only by the
return of that affection and confidence I never had a right to withdraw.

I propose to myself a very singular gratification on my return to England; --
it is to visit my own superb monument! -- You will chide me if I pursue this
subject. I remember, when you were here, you told me, that -- even my happiness
was melancholy. True; it is; -- refined and exquisite joy almost touches sorrow.

I had a letter from England by last post, from a proud old fellow, who is my
relation; -- he supposes I shall immediately have my servant's body removed
from the vault of my ancestors. -- Did you ever hear any thing so ridiculous?
-- Honest, faithful fellow! let thy ashes mix with theirs, and welcome!

All this happy family wish for you, my dear O'Bryen. I am impatient to see
you: I long to have you better acquainted with my Harriet: I am sure you will
admire her. Fear not my jealousy; -- O, trust me, I am cured of that! -- I have
already prepared her to love you as you deserve.

Adieu, my friend -- the friend of my adversity! I will not wound your delicacy
by acknowledging how much I owe you.

HENRY WENTWORTH.

TO LORD METHUEN. -- ENGLAND.
CHETWYND-VILLA.
KISSING, with glowing lips, the whitest hand in the world -- I had just sworn
that my felicity could not admit of increase, when your letter arrived to
contradict me. -- My dear Augustus, you have considerably augmented my
happiness: both lady Marchmont and I inexpressibly rejoice at your loved
Louisa's safety.

My Valeria and Mr. Wentworth request the honor of being sponsors. However, I
need not have spoken for my brother; he is writing to you himself.

I presume your little girl will be named after the late Mrs. Sidney. -- I
shall take it as a particular favor, if you will add my wife's pretty,
romantic name: -- your lordship may think it is with an air of no small
importance, I write -- my wife!

On the day I wrote to you last -- "O day the fairest, sure, that ever rose!"
-- I was so much out of my senses, that I don't know what I may, or may not
have said; but I think I could not have omitted telling you, that we have
prevailed on Mr. and Mrs. Chetwynd to live with us. I am delighted beyond
measure at their compliance: every day renders me more sensible of their
inestimable worth, and more attached to their society. I doubt if their
charming niece herself can love them better than I do.

My little French sister is married: -- Madame la marquise de St. Claire!
nothing less! -- The marquis has promised me a visit in England next spring. I
long extremely to see them both: my Valeria and lady Enmore have very much
prepossessed me in their favor.

Lady Enmore purposes spending much of her time with us. I like this lady very
well: -- she is exceedingly fond of my Valeria, is generous, well-tempered, and
agreeable; has a great deal of good sense, and some knowledge of the world; --
yet still I cannot give her such a place in my affection, as Mrs. Chetwynd
holds: -- her mind is not sufficiently above the common class. The friend of my
heart -- and more particularly if that friend be a woman -- must be exquisitely
refined; must breath the very soul of sentiment.

I wish to Heaven you could transport yourself to Chetwynd-villa for five or
six hours; -- I should not ask to keep you longer from lady Methuen at present.
I am impatient to have you acquainted with my uncle and aunt Chetwynd; I know
you will be charmed with them. What pleasure too would it give your generous
heart, to behold my brother and sister Wentworth's happiness! -- Besides, I
want to show you my angel! lady Marchmont -- with pride I give her that name --
is, if possible, more lovely than Miss O'Bryen was.

"Beauty and worth in her alike contend
"To charm the fancy, and to fix the mind;
"In her my wife, my mistress, and my friend,
"I taste the joys of sense and reason joined."
My boundless and unutterable love gains hourly strength; nay, each moment she
is dearer than the last. -- Methuen, I shall for ever join with you in heart
and voice, to condemn the unfeeling libertine, who stupidly calls matrimony the
bane of happiness and love.

Sir Francis O'Bryen sent my Valeria some very fine diamonds a few days before
our marriage. I hope he will soon give me an opportunity of acknowledging the
favor, by a similar present to his wife.

He has been here these two days, but returns to Dublin tomorrow, in order to
escort his mother to O'Bryen-castle. -- He is a most engaging fellow: --
Wentworth and he are exceedingly attached to each other. If Methuen was not my
friend, I should almost envy my brother. -- O'Bryen has a vast deal of
sensibility, though apparently gay and inconsiderate: when he looks round on
this family, his expressive eyes seem to speak the good-natured language of a
French writer; Qu'il est doux de voir des beureux! -- Happy the man, whose
clear mind, unsullied by selfishness or envy, shines with the reflected light
of others joys!

I just cast my eye out of the window, which commands a view of the garden; --
the divine lady Marchmont tete a tete with Sir Francis. -- What a form! what
movements! -- The sportive zephyrs play through her auburn ringlets; and
artfully steal fragrance from her bosom, while they pretend to add unnecessary
freshness to her cheek.

She leans on O'Bryen's arm; -- she smiles -- Ah! the happy fellow! I Will
supplant him in a moment.

EDWARD MARCHMONT.

FINIS.

