FUGITIVE PIECES.
-- coacta prodire.

WRITTEN BY J. P. KEMBLE

YORK: PRINTED BY W. BLANCHARD AND CO. FOR THE AUTHOR, AND SOLD BY FIELDING AND
WALKER, LONDON; AND T. WILSON AND SON, AND N. FROBISHER, YORK, MDCCLXXX.

PREFACE.
I Declare I hardly know how to say what justice to myself obliges me to say.
-- The public hears daily of so many unlucky Poets, who become publishers from
the same fate that ranges me in their class, that I am apprehensive the truth,
when told, will not serve me as an apology, but the effect of constraint be
reputed the wish of presumption.

The course of my studies first gave me a taste for Poetry, and the sweetness
of the art inspired me with an inclination to improve it. -- The few who saw my
verses said they liked them, and would sometimes ask for a copy of what they
had seen. -- The first pleasure I know is to please; and indeed I thought
complying with their requests an easy return for the obligation of their
praise. -- They had copies, and in their high opinion of me gave copies to
others, who soon circulated some of my pieces, as particular favors to
particular friends, through half a dozen editions, of which three or four were
generally very incorrect.

To prevent this evil from spreading, I have here collected in one small book
those verses of which I have ever given copies, as far as remembrance and
possession have permitted me.

All parents have a partiality to their own child -- so every Writer has a
partiality to the productions of his own brain, that would rather they were
seen in a perfect than an imperfect situation -- and when a man's writings must
unavoidably be delivered into the hands of the public, a decent respect for his
own character, and good manners to his fellowcreatures will oblige him to
endeavor, as much as possiible, that they may not excite a contempt for
himself, nor be entirely useless and disgusting to his readers.

YORK, 1780.
FUGITIVE PIECES.
HEBE's BIRTHDAY.
ADDRESSED TO Miss --
THE Queen of Paphos' flowery groves
Ascends her dove-borne car;
Cupid, the Graces, and the Loves
Shed odours through the air.
Soon Cytherea reached the skies;
Each God that day was there --
She raised to Jove her watery eyes,
And thus preferred her prayer:
"No more mankind invokes my power,
"Nor ardent vows arise
"From doting bosoms, love's no more,
"My Cupid's influence dies.
"His bow, his arrows he has thrown
"Quite useless from his arms --
"See, where the Sister Graces moan
"In negligence of charms.
"Today springs forth to life below
"A Babe of honored line;
"There let each God some boon bestow,
"And stamp the Nymph divine."
She spoke -- Jove gave th'assenting nod,
His thunders took their way;
He then commanded that each God
The Queen of Love obey.
First came the Graces hand in hand
And gave her all their ease,
Over every heart supreme command
And elegance to please.
Apollo and the Muses Nine
Their heavenly gifts impart,
Wit, music, poesy divine
And sense to form the heart,
Jove gave his lightning to her eyes,
Gav Bacchus lasting youth,
Momus with laughter shook the skies
And added smiling truth.
Cupid heard all -- but knew not how
The sky's applause to gain,
Till in her smiles he spied his bow,
And bad it there remain.
Venus transported saw the Maid,
And, her delight to prove,
Cupid, attend on her, she said,
For Hebe's Queen of Love.
MAY.
HOW joyful the golden-tress'd God through the sky
Diffuses his all-forming ray! --
See, the temperate hours, as round him they fly,
Drop roses to crown the new May.
Each many-plum'd songster that lives in yon grove
Gives voice to his green-kirtled spray,
And when he pours forth, the soft tale of his love,
Concludes with a sonnet to May.
The brooks that sweet vi'lets and thyme flow among
Their babbling course wantonly stay,
Till hearing the chorus of Nature's glad song
They purl on in honor of May.
Nor let me forget while enraptured I sing
The honor that is due to this day --
To heighten the transports I taste in the Spring,
I Will make Hebe Queen of the May.
THE WISH.
ARchly-smiling, dimpled Boy,
Son of Venus, God of Love,
Grant my heart, the seat of joy,
May thy temple ever prove!
Let me sing and laugh all day,
Sweetly pass my nights away,
Then arising taste with you
Blessings lasting, Raptures new!
HEBE.
LOOK to my lambkins -- once again
Daphnis shall try the Sylvan strain --
And fetch me, boy, the favorite pipe I hung
Love-lorn on yonder elm; it often has rung
In happier days
With Hebe's praise,
Till valleys, and hills, and the woods all around
To yon river in concert re-echo'd the sound,
Which love-freighted bore the name
Far adown his winding stream,
Repeating it with fond delay,
While from bank to bank the joy
Spread till -- Where Is my pipe, my boy --
Till like my hopes, alas! it died away.
Why do I sigh?
Do know, my pipe? -- Nowspeak -- I Have caught the sound
That lifts me high,
That bids me run my wonted careless round
Bids me again to kinder fair one's rove,
And Hebe leave who slights my proffered love
THE INCONSTANT.
ARound the plain secure I roved,
With every nymph would toy,
Would laugh and kiss -- but never loved
Beyond the moment's joy.
Cupid resolved to snare my heart
Each blooming Beauty tries,
But sent the love-inspiring dart
From Hebe's sparkling eyes.
Since then I Have loved -- but loved in vain,
Gay grandeur charms my fair --
She scorns my sighs -- Ah! Iucklessswain,
Thy portion is despair.
SALLY OF THE MEAD.
ONE morn when nymphs and swains were gay
And danced upon the green,
From mirth poor Jemmy fled away
To mourn his lot unseen --
In tears the amorous Boy complains
Close by the murmuring Tweed,
The sad, sad burden of his strains
Was Sally of the Mead.
My Sally did each nymph surpass
Who trips the flowery plain,
Once she was thought the loveliest lass,
And I the happiest swain --
To please her was my sole employ,
To her I tuned my reed,
And, morn and eve, my only joy
Was Sally of the Mead.
While yet the morn was clad in gray
I rose to court her love,
Through flowery fields I took my way
And then her garland wove --
Though Rose and Lily both were there
To deck her charming head,
That was less sweet, and this less fair
Than Sally of the Mead.
Now she no more shall glad my eyes,
No more my song inspire,
From me the faithless fair one flies
To bless the richer 'Squire --
Yet may her heart know naught but joy,
Nor ever repent this deed --
Jemmy can lay him down -- and die
For Sally of the Mead.
ODE AD SOMNUM.
QUEM mihi semper reperi vocanti,
Somne, praesentem, posito sub umbra
Posco nunc adsis, gravium laborum,
Dulce lenimen.
Tu mari mersus Lybico notasti
Dum polos magni, Palinure, vires
Morpheos nosti properantis in te
Tristia fata.
An prius dicam rabidae Junonis
Furias victas, vigilemque monte
Somniis Ius Dominum solutum
Lumina centum?
Quin Jovem magnum, Superum Parentem
Vincit en Morpheus -- et aguntur omni
Troes e campo, superante Somno
Fulmina coeli.
En Deus, voto toties vocatus
Supplici, segnis comitatus astat
Somniis vanis, oculos cruentos
Vertice mersus!
Fert manu virgam, tacitaeque Lethes
Poculo facto Stygia cupressu
Rora; circumdat gravidum papaver
Tempora rugis
Indecora -- illum comitatur ales
Noctis -- in Vatem leviore tractu
Serpit, et vincit lyricas amantem
Tangere chordas.
OCCASIONAL PROLOGUE TO A PLAY ACTED FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE INFIRMARY IN LEEDS.
SOON as Compassion -- Glory of our Isle --
With modest elegance had raised yon pile,
Where kindly Science to each aching grief,
Each sad mischance administers relief,
Commerce beheld it -- and her looks confessed
The sprightly joy that danced within her breast --
Thus Commerce sung -- "To you, my children, peace!" --
She sung -- and smiling waved her GOLDEN FLEECE --
"'It Is your, my sons, with tenderest care to heal
"The varied mis'ries Poverty may feel;
"'It Is yours the sinking srame of Age to rear,
"'It Is yours to shed the sympathetic Tear,
"'It Is yours Misfortune's keenest pangs to ease --
"And yours shall be the meed of acts like these.
"While this bright sun illumes the face of day,
"While yonder moon reflects one silver ray,
"So long Abundance shall your guest remain
"To deck the board, and whistle over the plain.
"Quickly with her, of every good the Queen,
"White Peace her gentle sister shall be seen.
"I see her now descending from the sky
"To banish War and bid Rebellion fly.
"Industry now has all my sails unfurled,
"Now sends my honest treasures over the world;
"Now pleased the minds of either Inde I view
"Resign, my sons, their many stores to you --
"For you are bounteous as the Hand of Heaven,
"And feel why riches were to mortals given."
Thus Commerce sung -- and here in furtive verse
Have I presumed the carol to rehearse --.
Where praise is merited, let praise be given --
To honor virtue is to act like Heaven.
And sure your generous deeds may well demand
That Angels sing them to the listening land;
For mindful ever of wealth's first, best end,
You bid the Poor in you behold a FRIEND.
OCCASIONAL PROLOGUE TO THE FOUNDLING, ACTED AT THE THEATER ROYAL in YORK, FOR
THE BENEFIT OF THE LUNATIC ASYLUM.
FROM the mild regions of her native sky,
Over BRITAIN'S Isle sweet Pity cast her eye --
She cast -- and Sorrow heaved her melting breast,
As to her view pale Sickness stood confessed.
Here treacherous Waste attains her end by stealth,
And, flattering, slowly saps the base of health.
There Fevers shoot through every swelling vein,
Now fire the lawless blood, now rack the brain. --
Daughter of Hell, a direr fiend than War,
With hasty stride Plague rushes from afar! --
Her savage pleasure grows on spreading death,
And Parent Nations orphan'd by her breath.
Who sits on yonder stone with hollow eye
And hand out-stretch'd, imploring charity?
It Is hungry Famine -- "Thou shall ask no more,"
Cried one -- "but die, and shame that rich man's door." --
Who was it so cried? -- The Monarch of the Dead,
As from yon grave he reared his meagre head.
Pity with smiles beheld his friendly blow,
And hailed him -- Curer of a cureless woe. --
She spoke, and foaming Phrenzy darted by,
Strength in his hand, and murder in his eye --
Sadly she sighed, and as she turned away
Heard calmer Melancholy's pensive lay --
The love-lorn Virgin, wandering through the gloom
Of yew-bound churchyards and the mouldering tomb,
Sung to the Moon of " Marg'ret's grimly ghost,"
Of Henry's broken vows, and Emma lost.
Here Pity wept -- and from her tears arose
A kind ASYLUM for the mad-one's woes.
Hail to the wondrous art that can dispense
The genial floods of renovated sense!
And blessings crown your breasts who feel these woes,
As far the heaviest human nature knows!
EPILOGUE TO BELISARIUS.
They Are busy yonder -- so I Have slipped away
To give you my opinion of the Play.
It Is very, very low -- and on my life
Bays makes sad blunders with his injured Wife:
There Is not a spark of breeding in her nature,
A doting, doleful, humdrum, pretty creature! --
He and our ill-bred Manager it is clear
Want to invade the charters of the fair;
Would have us silent -- bid us keep our houses --
Instruct our families -- and love our spouses --
But we know better -- thanks to education,
Example, foreign manners, and the fashion.
Stay -- I Will recount my sufferings one by one,
Then be you judges what I should have done.
Three years from bed and board did Marcus stay --
I Would served him rightly had I gone astray.
A fool! -- To foreign climes for battles roam? --
Faith, the best battles may be fought at home.
Well -- he returns -- gives credit to a lie,
Becomes a bubble -- and his wife must die.
Thank Fate, our Lords ask gentler expiation,
They would n't wish to murder half the nation --
Madam's divorced, lives with her country friends,
He finds a Mistress, and the squabble ends. --
Next Belisarius in a frantic mood
Resolves to wash my guilt out with my blood --
A pretty life between them both I lead
And the plague is, I never did the deed.
"Think of my same" -- "My fondness," -- says the other,
And adds, "Ah! how unlike thy virtuous Mother!"
Unlike indeed! -- What Belle can bear the road
In which her prim Progenetrix has trod? --
Next -- But I Will not repeat such odious stuff --
I Am sure you have heard absurdity enough.
These my objections to the Bard I made
Before his Be -- li -- sa -- ri -- us was played --
Would you believe it? -- Says the tasteless creature,
"Madam, I always strive to copy Nature."
ECLOGUE. This is the last of four Eclogues -- MORNING -- NOON -- EVENING --
NIGHT -- It is the only one of them published at present because no friend of
mine has yet distributed to his friend any copies of the others.
NIGHT. DESPAIR.
ADDRESSED TO MRS. --.
HIS sportive lambs reposed in gentle rest,
Thus Daphnis sung the sorrows of his breast --
"Ah me! the day -- when over the jocund green
" Daphnis the first to lead the dance was seen.....
"On blythesome reed the frolic round I played,
"Envied by swains, admired by every maid;
"To list my strains my lambs have left their food,
"And fondly seemed to say my strains were good --
"Oh! they were sweet -- my pipe was tuned to love,
"And Hebe's name made vocal every grove.
"Those joys are past -- no more the tinkling stream
"Shall stay its course to dwell on that loved name;
"No more the vale my merry notes shall hear......
"Far other feelings wait upon despair.
" Hebe, how often I Have brushed the glist'ring dew,
"And plucked the pride of vernal morns for you! --
"The virgin Lily, with the blushing Rose,
"And blue-ey'd Vi'let for your wreath I chose,
"And, while I bound it on your temples, stole
"Kisses that thrilled with rapture to my soul! --
"Am I not now as fair as when you said
"A lovelier youth never blessed a happy maid?
"Alas! some other swain has caught your eye --
"He cannot be so true, so fond as I.
"Unmoved could Daphnis hear his Hebe moan!
"No -- He Would bewail her sorrows as his own;
"On the green turf he would seat him by his dear,
"Give for each look, a sigh -- each sigh, a tear;
"The lovely mourner to his bosom press,
"Partake the cause, and lessen her distress......
"But wherefore witless do I thus complain?
"Relentless Hebe laughs at all my pain --
"Why wake my lambkins? -- Sure they cannot know,
"They heed not, feel not for their master's woe.
"Some happier youth at dawn with careful crook
"Shall guide you bleeting to the limpid brook;
"Shall tend a-field the fleecy flocks I bred,
"Pride of the vale, and riches of the mead --
"My Friends, my Father, and my native Home,
"This tear is yours -- to distant plains I roam --
"A dieu the well-known rill, the field, the grove! --
"Absence perhaps may soothe the pangs of Love."
Night checked her yoke to hear the artless swain,
And wept that faithful Love should love in vain.
A PICTURE OF HELEN.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LADY --
REpentant Helen sought the silent shade,
And wept to think what ruin she had made.
Reflection shows a Husband's injured peace,
Hears the deep carses of unpeopled Greece,
Points to the story of her ruined fame,
And future ages shudd'ring at her name.
Lovely in guilt the great Adult'ress stood,
Saw Phrygia's plains imbrued with Hector's blood,
Saw the slain Partner of her lawless joy,
A murdered Priam, and a slaming Troy.
She heaved a groan, and closed her tear-stain'd eye
Lest she might see the Grecian Heroes die --
In vain -- Patroclus rises to her fight,
Dressed in the reddest horrors of the fight:
Linked with his friend the great Achilles rose,
The tower of Greece, and terror of her foes:
Stern Ajax frowned upon the gory field,
Longing in death to grasp Pelides' shield --
Vainly she strives to put them from her mind,
Her guilt hears groans in every whispering wind;
See plated Mars, high on his crimson car
Laugh 'midst the spreading tumult of the war;
Now sees the Greeks and now the Trojans fly,
And hears one death-fraught thunder rend the sky. --
She heard -- and struck with horror at the scene.
On earth's cold bosom sunk the hapless Queen.
In duteous haste her virgin's round her press,
Heave sigh for sigh, and grieve for her distress;
Anxious each balm to sooth her woes they seek,
And bid its native roses tinge her cheek.
Fruitless their care -- In tears they raise her head,
Where Lilies wept their sister Roses dead.
Hark! -- the kind streamlet from the neighboring trees
In gentle murmurs chides the noisy breeze --
The noisy breeze the sweet reproof obeyed,
Beheld the Fair, and died along the glade.
Behold her, thou, whose passions long to rove
Careless of honor and connubial love,
And learn that, though enamored of her charms
Her doting Lord had taken her to his arms
Again, restored her to his bed and throne,
And to the world acknowledged her his own --
Yet not his pardon, nor his throne combined
Could ease the pangs that agoniz'd her mind.
EPITAPHIUM.
SISTE viator!
Hic sepulta jacent ossa
JOSEPHI INCHBALD, HISTRIONIS
Qui aequalium suorum
In Fictis Scaenarum facile Princeps evasit,
Virtutisque in Veris Vitae claruit exemplar.
Procul este, invida Superstitio,
Et mala suadens religionis turbidus Amor! --
Vestris enim ingratiis, hic lapis omnibus praedicabit,
Quod in his humi sacrae carceribus
Vir recti semper tenax,
Sociis charus, in pauperes benignus,
Pater optimus, Maritus fidelis,
Societatis jurum in cunctis observantissimus
Otii guadium, necnon seriorum ornamentum,
Expectans
De clementia Numinis immortalis
Aeterna frui felicitate
Requiescit.
JOSEPHUS INCHBALD
Annum agens quadragesimum quartum
Octavo iduum Junii
Mortem obiit
Anno MDCCLXXIX.
ODE TO THE MEMORY OF MR. INCHBALD.
WHAT time the weak-ey'd Owl, on twilight wing
Slow borne, her vesper scream'd to Eve; and roused
The lazy wing of Bat
With Beetle's sullen hum,
Friendship, and she, the maid of pensive mien,
Pale Melancholy point my sorrowing steps
To meditate the dead
And give my Friend a tear.
Here let me panse -- and pay that tear I owe:
Silent it trickles down my cheek, and drops
Upon the recent sod
That lightly clasps his heart.
But ah! how vain -- Nor flatt'ry's power, nor wealth's,
Nor friendship's tear, nor widowed ANNA'S VOICE,
Sweet as the harps of Heaven,
Can move the tyrant Death.
Hence ye impure! -- for hark -- around his grave
The Sisters chaste, the Sisters whom he loved,
In nine-fold cadence
Chaunt immortal harmony.
It Is done -- it is done -- The well-earn'd laurel spreads
Its verdant foliage over his honored clay:
Again the Muses sing --
Thalia's was the deed.
Thou honest man, farewell! -- I would not stain
Thy worth with praise -- yet not the bright-hair'd King'
Who wooes the rosy morn,
And west'ring skirts the sky
With ruddy gold and purple, ever shall see
Thy likeness -- nor yon paly Crescent call
Her weeping dews to kiss
A turf more loved than thine.
THE CIRCASSIAN.
To Miss --.
JOVE lately took it in his head
To give the Gods a masquerade,
And sent his footman Hermes out
With Cards to ask them to the rout.
Iris, a milliner of taste,
Hand-bills sent forth through Heaven in haste,
To tell the Goddesses she would laid in
Fresh goods against the masquerading.
The Ladies all were in a pother,
And hoping each to outvie the other
Bade her make up their silks and laces --
Venus employed the Sister Graces:
Who all agreed Love's Queen should dress
As a CIRCASSIAN Shepherdess --
The Graces always fancy well --
Quick to their work the Sisters fell,
Finished it in a day or two,
Tried it on Venus, and withdrew......
Who begged them first with earnest prayer
To come next day and dress her hair:
Then in her kirtle tripp'd about,
And soon with this or that fell out;
Till, vexed to death, young Cupid cries
"You Ladies are such oddities! --
"I Am sure, Mama, you quite mistake it,
"It fits as neat as hands can make it,
"There Is not a single thread amiss" --
She smiled -- and gave the Boy a kiss;
When bolder grown, by Slyx he swore
"She never looked half so well before." --
To bed she went -- thought all was right --
But could n't sleep a wink that night.
Next evening came the Graces three,
And Venus had 'em in to tea,
(In great-ones nothing shows so well
As 'haviour kind and affable.)
Well -- after pitying the Moon
For tripping with Endymion;
And calling royal Juno scold,
And twenty harmless tales o'ertold --
Says Venus looking at her watch,
"Ladies, egad we must dispatch,
"For see -- it is almost nine o'clock --
"Euphrosyne, come smooth this lock --
"Pasithea reach my dressing gown,
" Thalia take my toupee down,
"And let its ringlets kiss my head
"Loose, as when on watery bed
"In smiles I woke to life divine --
"And here and there a rose entwine
"Adown that braid" -- Says Miss," I doubt it
"Will Not look so well as 'twould without it,
"These threads of gold" -- "I will have one,
"Miss Grace, you know it is quite the Ton."
(So it is possible we see
That Ton and Grace may disagree)
Her locks ethereal now were dressed......
"Come, bring me my Circassian vest."
"Where is it, Ma'am? -- "In The middle drawer" --
Pusithea went -- her Sisters saw her
Turn pale -- she cries, "we are all undone" --
"How so?" -- "Lord, Ma'am, the dress is gone." --
The Graces sobbings cannot be painted......
Poor Venus only sighed -- and fainted.
"Here, reach the Hartshorn Drops," says one --
"Fresh water," the other -- the other "run
"For Esculapius" -- "Greater need
"Of Doctor Phoebus" -- "He don't bleed,
"Alas!" cries one -- "and in this case
"She should be bled" -- Ay" -- "Cut her lace." --
Nothing was done of all they said,
For each commanded, none obeyed. --
Here Cupid with his play-mate came.
Soft Ganymede, to see the Dame.
For Venus, knowing not a chair
That night in Heaven would be to spare,
Nor coach for love or coin be had,
Very politely told the Lad
That he should be her 'Squire, and ride
That night with Cupid at her side
In her own chariot, drawn by Doves,
And lackied by a thousand Loves --
Entering her room, the Fair they found
Rising recovered from the ground.
Arch Cupid, looking earnest at her,
Climbed on her knee, and "what is the matter,
"Mama?" says he -- "My pretty Boy,
"My dress, my pride, my only joy
"Is gone, is gone." -- "Mama, what dress?" --
"Why, my new PERSIAN Shepherdess!......
"The best CIRCASSIAN prankt with pink
"Was it? -- "Ay, ay" -- The Graces wink --
Began shook his head, and Venus sighed
And roguish Cupid laughing cried,
"That habit, Ma'am, I gave away
"To lively Sappho" -- "When? -- "Today --
"The truth-bearing Graces there
"(The Graces nursed my blooming Fair)
"But yester evening said they knew
"She would look lovelier in it than you.
Venus and Cupid 'gan to scold,
While Gany flew to Heaven and told
The Gods the tale -- "And see," he said,
Pointing to earth,"see there is the Maid,
"The sweet CIRCASSIAN, my sworn Brother
"Thinks so much lovelier than his Mother." --
"Is that the Maid?" says Jove -- "I find
"Our cousin Cupid is n't blind......
"For though the Rogue forgot his duty,
"Yet he is a perfect judge of Beauty."
FINIS.

