A HYMN TO HARMONY.

A HYMN TO HARMONY, Written in HONOR of St. CECILIA's Day, MDCCI.

By Mr. CONGREVE.

Set to Music by Mr. JOHN ECCLES, Master of Her Majesty's Music.

LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson within Gray's Inn Gate next Gray's Inn Lane.
1703.

A HYMN TO HARMONY, In HONOR of St. CECILIA's Day. MDCCI.
I.
O Harmony, to thee we sing,
To thee the grateful Tribute bring
Of Sacred Verse, and sweet resounding Lays;
Thy Aid invoking while thy Power we praise.
All Hail to thee
All-pow'rful Harmony!
Wise Nature owns thy undisputed Sway,
Her wondrous Works resigning to thy Care;
The Planetary Orbs thy Rule obey,
And tuneful roll, unerring in their way,
Thy Voice informing each melodious Sphere.
CHORUS.
All Hail to thee
All-pow'rful Harmony!
II.
Thy Voice, O Harmony, with awful Sound
Could penetrate the Abyss profound,
Explore the Realms of ancient Night,
And search the living Source of unborn Light.
Confusion heard thy Voice and fled,
And Chaos deeper plunged his vanquished Head.
Then did thou, Harmony, give birth
To this fair form of Heaven and Earth;
Then all those Shining Worlds above
In Mystic Dance began to move
Around the radiant Sphere of Central Fire,
A never ceasing, never silent Choir.
CHORUS.
Confusion heard thy Voice and fled,
And Chaos deeper plunged his vanquished Head.
III.
Thou only, Goddess, first could tell
The mighty Charms in Numbers found;
And did to Heavenly Minds reveal
The secret force of tuneful Sound.
When first Cyllenius formed the Lyre,
Thou did the God inspire;
When first the vocal Shell he strung,
To which the Muses sung:
Then first the Muses sung; melodious Strains Apollo played,
And Music first begun by thy auspicious Aid.
Hark, hark, again Urania sings!
Again Apollo strikes the trembling Strings!
And see, the listening Deities around
Attend insatiate, and devour the Sound.
CHORUS.
Hark, hark, again Urania sings!
Again Apollo strikes the trembling Strings!
And see, the listening Deities around
Attend insatiate, and devour the Sound.
IV.
Descend Urania, Heavenly Fair,
To the relief of this afflicted World repair;
See how with various Woes oppressed,
The wretched Race of Men is worn;
Consumed with cares, with doubts distressed
Or by conflicting Passions torn.
Reason in vain employs her Aid,
The furious Will on Fancy waits;
While Reason still by Hopes or Fears betrayed,
Too late advances or too soon retreats.
Music alone with sudden Charms can bind
The wandering Sense, and calm the troubled Mind.
CHORUS.
Music alone with sudden Charms can bind
The wandering Sense, and calm the troubled Mind.
V.
Begin the powerful Song, ye Sacred Nine,
Your Instruments and Voices join;
Harmony, Peace, and sweet Desire
In every Breast inspire.
Revive the melancholy drooping Heart,
And soft Repose to restless Thoughts impart.
Appease the wrathful Mind,
To dire Revenge and Death inclined:
With balmy Sounds his boiling Blood assuage,
And melt to mild Remorse his burning Rage.
It Is done; and now tumultuous Passions cease;
And all is hushed, and all is Peace.
The weary World with welcome Ease is blessed,
By Music lulled to pleasing Rest.
CHORUS.
It Is done; and now tumultuous Passions cease;
And all is hushed, and all is Peace.
The weary World with welcome Ease is blessed,
By Music lulled to pleasing Rest.
VI.
Ah, sweet Repose, too soon expiring!
Ah, foolish Man, new Toils requiring!
Cursed Ambition, Strife pursuing,
Wakes the World to War and Ruin.
See, see, the Battle is prepared!
Behold the Hero comes!
Loud Trumpets with shrill Fifes are heard,
And hoarse resounding Drums.
War, with discordant Notes and jarring Noise,
The Harmony of Peace destroys.
CHORUS.
War, with discordant Notes and jarring Noise,
The Harmony of Peace destroys.
VII.
See the forsaken fair, with streaming Eyes
Her parting Lover mourn;
She weeps, she sighs, despairs and dies,
And watchful wastes the lonely livelong Nights,
Bewailing past Delights
That may no more, no never more return.
O sooth her Cares
With softest, sweetest Airs,
'Till Victory and Peace restore
Her faithful Lover to her tender Breast,
Within her folding Arms to rest,
Thence never to be parted more,
No never to be parted more.
CHORUS.
Let Victory and Peace restore
Her faithful Lover to her tender Breast,
Within her folding Arms to rest,
Thence never to be parted more,
No never to be parted more.
VIII.
Enough, Urania, heavenly fair,
Now to thy Native Skies repair,
And rule again the Starry Sphere;
Cecilia comes, with holy Rapture filled,
To ease the World of Care.
Cecilia, more than all the Muses skilled!
Phoebus himself to her must yield,
And at her Feet lay down
His Golden Harp and Laurel Crown;
The soft enervate Lyre is drowned
In the deep Organ's more majestic Sound.
In peals the swelling Notes ascend the Skies;
Perpetual Breath the swelling Notes supplies,
And lasting as her Name,
Who formed the tuneful Frame,
The immortal Music never dies.
Grand CHORUS.
Cecilia, more than all the Muses skilled!
Phoebus himself to her must yield,
And at her Feet lay down
His Golden Harp and Laurel Crown;
The soft enervate Lyre is drowned
In the deep Organ's more majestic Sound.
In peals the swelling Notes ascend the Skies;
Perpetual Breath the swelling Notes supplies,
And lasting as her Name,
Who formed the tuneful Frame,
The immortal Music never dies.
FINIS.
Books Printed for Jacob Tonson at Gray's Inn Gate.
THE Works of the late Famous Mr. John Dryden, in Four Volumes in Folio;
Containing all his Comedies, Tragedies and Operas, with his Original Poems and
Translations. The Satyrs of Decimus Junius Juvenalis, Translated into English
Verse. By Mr. Dryden, and several other Eminent Hands; together with the Satyrs
of Aulus Perseus Flaccus, made English by Mr. Dryden, with Explanatory Notes at
the end of each Satyr: To which is prefixed a Discourse concerning the Original
and Progress of Satyr, Dedicated to the Right Honorable Charles Earl of
Dorset, etc. By Mr. Dryden. The Works of Mr. Abraham Cowley, consisting of
those which were formerly Printed, and those which he designed for the Press;
now Published out of the Author's Original Copies. To this Edition are added
the Cutter of Coalman Street, and several Commendatory Copies of Verses on the
Author, by Persons of Honor. The Ninth Edition. A Hymn to the Light of the
World. With a short Description of the Cartons of Raphael Urbin, in the Gallery
at Hampton Court. Double Dealer, Love for Love, Mourning Bride, and Way of the
World; all Written by Mr. Congreve. The Christian Hero, an Argument proving
that no Principles but those of Religion are sufficient to make a Great Man.
The Second Edition; to which is added, an Argument, proving that true Greatness
of Mind can be maintained by none but Christian Principles. The Funeral, or
Grief A-la-mode, a Comedy; as it is Acted at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane,
by Her Majesty's Servants. Both Written by Captain Steel. Tamerlane, a
Tragedy, as it is Acted at the New Theater in Little Lincolns-Inn-Fields.
Written by Mr. Row. The False Friend, a Comedy, as it is Acted at the Theater
Royal, by Her Majesty's Servants. A General Ecclesiastical History from the
Nativity of our Blessed Savior to the first Establishment of Christianity by
Human Laws, under the Emperor Constantine the Great; containing the Space of
about 313 Years: With so much of the Jewish and Roman History as is necessary
and convenient to illustrate the Work. To which is added, A large Chronological
Table of all the Roman and Ecclesiastical Affairs, included in the same Period
of Time. By Lawrence Echard, A. M. Prebendary of Lincoln, and Chaplain to the
Right Reverend James, Lord Bishop of that Diocese. Several Orations of
Demosthenes, to encourage the Athenians to oppose the Exorbitant Power of
Philip of Macedon. Englished from the Greek by several Hands. To which is
prefixed the Historical Preface of Monsieur Tourreil. Tully's Five Books de
Finibus; or, concerning the last Object of Desire and Aversion. Done into
English by S. P. Gent. Revised and compared with the Original, with a
Recommendatory Preface; by Jeremy Collier, M. A. Together with an Apology for
the Philosophical Writings of Cicero, in a Letter to the Translator: By Mr.
Henry Dodwell.
LATELY PUBLISHED.
OBservationes quaedam Medico-practicae and Physiologicae; inter quas aliquanto
susius agitur. De Asthmate and Hydrophobia. Quarum etiam December ultimis
subjiciuntur Administrationes totidem Corporum morbis quorum Tituli
Observationibus iis praefiguntur affectorum Anatomicae, cum particulari, and
non ante observata. De Cordis in Embryone Vasorum structura, and sanguinis
juxta eam circuitu Dissertatione. Autore Hum. Ridley, M. D. Coll. Reg. Med.
Land. Soc.

