THE LUCUBRATIONS OF Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire

Revised and Corrected by the Author.

VOL. III.

(...)
Homer. LONDON, Printed by John Nutt, and sold by John Morphew, near
Stationers' Hall. MDCCXII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM Lord Cowper, Baron of WINGHAM.
My Lord,
AFTER having long celebrated the superior Graces and Excellencies, among Men,
in an Imaginary Character, I do my self the Honor to show my Veneration for
transcendent Merit under my own Name, in this Address to your Lordship. The
just Application of those high Accomplishments of which you are Master, has
been an Advantage to all your Fellow Subjects; and it is from the common
Obligation you have laid upon all the World, that I, though a private Man, can
pretend to be affected with, or take the Liberty to acknowledge your great
Talents and public Virtues.

It gives a pleasing Prospect to your Friends, that is to say, to the Friends
of your Country, that you have passed through the Highest Offices, at an Age
when others usually do but form to themselves the Hopes of them. They may
expect to see you in the House of Lords as many Years as you were ascending to
it. It is our common Good, that your admirable Eloquence can now no longer be
employed but in the Expression of your own Sentiments and Judgment. The skilful
Pleader is now for ever changed into the just Judge; which latter Character
your Lordship exerts with so prevailing an Impartiality, that you win the
Approbation even of those who dissent from you, and you always obtain Favor,
because you are never moved by it.

This gives you a certain Dignity peculiar to your present Situation, and makes
the Equity, even of a Lord High Chancellor, appear but a Degree toward the
Magnanimity of a Peer of Great Britain.

Forgive me, My Lord, when I cannot conceal from you, that I shall never
hereafter behold you, but I shall behold you, as lately, defending the Brave,
and the Unfortunate.

When we attend to your Lordship, engaged in a Discourse, we cannot but reflect
upon the many Requisites which the vainglorious Speakers of Antiquity have
demanded in a Man who is to excel in Oratory; I say, My Lord, when we reflect
upon the Precepts by viewing the Example, though there is no Excellence
proposed by those Rhetoricians wanting, the whole Art seems to be resolved into
that one Motive of Speaking, Sincerity in the Intention. The graceful Manner,
the apt Gesture, and the assumed Concern, are impotent Helps to Persuasion, in
Comparison of the honest Countenance of him who utters what he really means.
From hence it is, that all the Beauties which others attain with Labor, are in
your Lordship but the natural Effects of the Heart that dictates.

It is this noble Simplicity which makes you surpass Mankind in the Faculties,
wherein Mankind are distinguished from other Creatures, Reason and Speech.

If these Gifts were communicated to all Men in Proportion to the Truth and
Ardour of their Hearts, I should speak of you with the same Force as you
express your self on any other Subject. But I resist my present Impulse, as
agreeable as it is to me; though indeed, had I any Pretensions to a Fame of
this Kind, I should, above all other Themes, attempt a Panegyric upon My Lord
Cowper: For the only sure Way to a Reputation for Eloquence, in an Age wherein
that perfect Orator lives, is to choose an Argument, upon which he himself must
of Necessity be silent. I am,

My LORD, Your Lordship's Most Devoted, Most Obedient, and Most Humble Servant,
Richard Steel.

THE [No 115. TATLER:
BY Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
VOL. III.
-- Novum intervenit Vitium and Calamitas,
Ut neque spectari, neque cognosci potnerit:
It a Populus Studio stupidus in Funambulo
Animum occuparat.
Ter. de Hecyra.
From Saturday Dec. 31. to Tuesday Jan. 3. 1709.
Sheer-Lane, January 2.
I Went on Friday last to the Opera, and was surprised to find a thin House at
so noble an Entertainment, till I heard that the Tumbler was not to make his
Appearance that Night. For my own Part, I was fully satisfied with the Sight of
an Actor, who, by the Grace and Propriety of his Action and Gesture, does
Honor to an humane Figure, as much as the other vilifies and degrades it.
Every one will easily imagine I mean Signior Nicolini, who sets off the
Character he bears in an Opera by his Action, as much as he does the Words of
it by his Voice. Every Limb, and every Finger, contributes to the Part he acts,
insomuch that a deaf Man might go a long with him in the Sense of it. There is
scarce a beautiful Posture in an old Statue which he does not plant himself in,
as the different Circumstances of the Story give Occasion for it. He performs
the most ordinary Action in a Manner suitable to the Greatness of his
Character, and shows the Prince even in the giving of a Letter, or the
dispatching of a Message. Our best Actors are somewhat at a Loss to support
themselves with proper Gesture, as they move from any considerable Distance to
the Front of the Stage; but I have seen the Person of whom I am now speaking,
eater alone at the remotest Part of it, and advance from it with such Greatness
of Air and Mien, as seemed to fill the Stage, and at the same Time commanded
the Attention of the Audience with the Majesty of his Appearance. But
notwithstanding the Dignity and Elegance of this Entertainment, I find for some
Nights past, that Punchinello has robbed this Gentleman of the greater Part of
his Female Spectators. The Truth of it is, I find it so very hard a Task to
keep that Sex under any Manner of Government, that I have often resolved to
give them over entirely, and leave them to their own Inventions. I was in Hopes
that I had brought them to some Order, and was employing my Thoughts on the
Reformation of their Petticoats, when on a sudden I received Information from
all Parts, that they run gadding after a Puppet-Show. I know very well, that
what I here say, will be thought by some malicious Persons to flow from Envy to
Mr. Powell; for which Reason, I shall set the late Dispute between us in a true
Light. Mr. Powell and I had some Difference about Four Months ago, which we
managed by way of Letter, as learned Men ought to do; and I was very well
contented to bear such Sarcasms as he was pleased to throw upon me, and
answered them with the same Freedom. In the midst of this our Misunderstanding
and Correspondence, I happened to give the World an Account of the Order of
Esquires; upon which, Mr. Powell was so disingenuous, as to make one of his
Puppets (I wish I know which of them it was) declare by way of Prologue, That
one Isaac Bickerstaff, a Pretended Esquire, had wrote a scurrilous Piece to the
Dishonor of that Rank of Men; and then, with more Art than Honesty, concluded,
that all the Esquires in the Pit were abused by his Antagonist as much as he
was. This public Accusation made all the Esquires of that County, and several
of other Parts, my professed Enemies. I do not in the least question, but that
he will proceed in his Hostilities; and I am informed, That Part of his Design
in coming up to Town, was to carry the War into my own Quarters. I do therefore
solemnly declare, (notwithstanding that I am a great Lover of Art and
Ingenuity) that if I hear he opens any of his People's Mouths against me, I
shall not fail to write a Critic upon his whole Performance; for I must
confess, that I have naturally so strong a Desire of Praise, that I cannot bear
Reproach, though from a Piece of Timber. As for Punch who takes all Opportunities
of bespattering me, I know very well his Original, and have been assured by the
Joyner who put him together, that he was in long Dispute with himself, whether
he should turn him into several Pegs and Utensils, or make him the Man he is.
The same Person confessed to me, that he had once actually laid aside his Head
for a Nut-cracker. As for his Scolding Wife, (however she may value her self at
present) it is very well known, that she is but a Piece of Crabtree. This
Artificer further whispered in my Ear, that all his Courtiers and Nobles were
taken out of a Quickset-Hedge not far from Islington; and that Dr. Faustus
himself, who is now so great a Conjurer, is supposed to have learned his whole
Art from an old Woman in that Neighborhood, whom he long served in the Figure
of a Broomstaff.

But perhaps it may look trivial to insist so much upon Men's Persons; I shall
therefore turn my Thoughts rather to examine their Behavior, and consider,
whether the several Parts are written up to that Character which Mr. Powell
piques himself upon, of an able and judicious Dramatist. I have for this
Purpose provided my self with the Works of above Twenty French Critics, and
shall examine, (by the Rules which they have laid down upon the Art of the
Stage) whether the Unity of Time, Place and Action, be rightly observed in any
one of this celebrated Author's Productions; as also, whether in the Parts of
his several Actors, and that of Punch in Particular, there is not sometimes an
Impropriety of Sentiments, and an Impurity of Diction.

White's Chocolate-house, Jan. 2.
I came in here to Day at an Hour when only the Dead appear in Places of Resort
and Gallantry, and saw hung up the Escutcheon of Sir Hannibal, a Gentleman who
used to frequent this Place, and was taken up and interred by the Company of
Upholders, as having been seen here at an unlicensed Hour. The Coat of the
Deceased is, Three Bowls and a Jack in a green Field; the Crest, a Dice-Box,
with the King of Clubs and Pam for Supporters. Some Days ago the Body was
carried out of Town with great Pomp and Ceremony, in order to be buried with
his Ancestors at the Peak. It is a Maxim in Morality, That we are to speak
nothing but Truth of the Living, nothing but Good of the Dead. As I have
carefully observed the first during his Lifetime, I shall acquit my self as to
the latter now he is deceased.

He was Knighted very young, not in the ordinary Form, but by the common
Consent of Mankind.

He was in his Person between round and square; in the Motion and Gesture of
his Body he was unaffected and free, as not having too great a Respect for
Superiors. He was in his Discourse bold and intrepid; and as every one has an
Excellence as well as a Failing which distinguishes him from other Men,
Eloquence was his predominant Quality, which he had to so great a Perfection,
that it was easier to him to speak than to hold his Tongue. This sometimes
exposed him to the Derision of Men who had much less Parts than himself: And
indeed his great Volubility and inimitable Manner of Speaking, as well as the
great Courage he showed on those Occasions, did sometimes betray him into that
Figure of Speech which is commonly distinguished by the Name of Gasconade. To
mention no other, he professed in this very Place some few Days before he died,
That he would be One of the Six that would undertake to assault me; for which
Reason I have had his Figure upon my Wall till the Hour of his Death: And am
resolved for the future to bury every one forthwith who I hear has an Intention
to kill me.

Since I am upon the Subject of my Adversaries, I shall here publish a short
Letter which I have received from a Well-wisher, and is as follows:

Sage SIR,
YOU cannot but know, there are many Scribblers and others who revile you and
your Writings. It is wondered that you do not exert your self, and crush them
at once. I am,

SIR, (With great Respect) Your most humble Admirer, and Disciple.


In Answer to this, I shall act like my Predecessor Aesop, and give him a Fable
instead of a Reply.

It happened one Day, as a stout and honest Mastiff (that guarded the Village
where he lived against Thieves and Robbers) was very gravely walking, with one
of his Puppies by his Side, all the little Dogs in the Street gathered about
him, and barked at him. The little Puppy was so offended at this Affront done
to his Sire, that he asked him, Why he would not fall upon them, and tear them
to Pieces? To which the Sire answered, with a great Composure of Mind, If there
were no Curs, I should be no Mastiff.

The TATLER. [No 116.
-- Pars minima est ipsa Puella ^ui.
Ovid.
From Tuesday Jan. 3. to Thursday Jan. 5. 1709.
Sheer-lane, January 4.
THE Court being prepared for proceeding on the Cause of the Petticoat, I gave
Orders to bring in a Criminal who was taken up as she went out of the
Puppet-Show about Three Nights ago, and was now standing in the Street with a
great Concourse of People about her. Word was brought me, that she had
endeavored twice or thrice to come in, but could not do it by reason of her
Petticoat, which was too large for the Entrance of my House, though I had ordered
both the Folding-Doors to be thrown open for its Reception. Upon this, I
desired the Jury of Matrons, who stood at my Right Hand, to inform themselves
of her Condition, and know whether there were any private Reasons why she might
not make her Appearance separate from her Petticoat. This was managed with
great Discretion, and had such an Effect, that upon the Return of the Verdict
from the Bench of Matrons, I issued out an Order forthwith; That the Criminal
should be stripped of her Encumbrances; till she became little enough to enter
my House. I had before given Directions for an Engine of several Legs, that
could contract or open it self like the Top of an Umbrello, in order to place
the Petticoat upon it, by which Means I might take a leisurely Survey of it, as
it should appear in its proper Dimensions. This was all done accordingly; and
forthwith, upon the closing of the Engine, the Petticoat was brought into
Court. I then directed the Machine to be set upon the Table, and dilated in
such a Manner as to show the Garment in its utmost Circumference; but my great
Hall was too narrow for the Experiment; for before it was half unfolded, it
described so immoderate a Circle, that the lower Part of it brushed upon my
Face as I sat in my Chair of Judicature. I then enquired for the Person that
belonged to the Petticoat; and to my great Surprise, was directed to a very
beautiful young Damsel, with so pretty a Face and Shape, that I bid her come
out of the Crowd, and seated her upon a little Crock at my Left Hand. My pretty
Maid, said I, do you own your self to have been the Inhabitant of the Garment
before us? The Girl I found had good Sense, and told me with a Smile, That
notwithstanding it was her own Petticoat, she should be very glad to see an
Example made of it; and that she wore it for no other Reason, but that she had
a Mind to look as big and burly as other Persons of her Quality; That she had
kept out of it as long as she could, and till she began to appear little in the
Eyes of all her Acquaintance; That if she laid it aside, People would think she
was not made like other Women. I always give great Allowances to the Fair Sex
upon Account of the Fashion, and therefore was not displeased with the Defense
of my pretty Criminal. I then ordered the Vest which stood before us to be
drawn up by a Pully to the Top of my great Hall, and afterward to be spread
open by the Engine it was placed upon, in such a Manner, that it formed a very
splendid and ample Canopy over our Heads, and covered the whole Court of
Judicature with a kind of Silken Rotunda, in its Form not unlike the Cupolo of
St. Paul's. I entered upon the whole Cause with great Satisfaction as I sat
under the Shadow of it.

The Council for the Petticoat was now called in, and ordered to produce what
they had to say against the popular Cry which was raised against it. They
answered the Objections with great Strength and Solidity of Argument, and
expatiated in very florid Harangues, which they did not fail to set off and
furbelow (if I may be allowed the Metaphor) with many Periodical Sentences and
Turns of Oratory. The chief Arguments for their Client were taken, first, from
the great Benefit that might arise to our Woollen Manufactury from this
Invention, which was calculated as follows: The common Petticoat has not above
Four Yards in the Circumference; whereas this over our Heads had more in the
Semi-diameter; so that by allowing it Twenty four Yards in the Circumference,
the Five Millions of Woollen Petticoats, which (according to Sir William Petty)
supposing what ought to be supposed in a wellgoverned State, that all
Petticoats are made of that Stuff, would amount to Thirty Millions of those of
the ancient Mode. A prodigious Improvement of the Woollen Trade! and what could
not fail to fink the Power of France in a few Years.

To introduce the Second Argument, they begged Leave to read a Petition of the
Rope-Makers, wherein it was represented, That the Demand for Cords, and the
Price of them, were much risen since this Fashion came up. At this, all the
Company who were present lifted up their Eyes into the Vault; and I must
confess, we did discover many Traces of Cordage which were interwoven in the
Stiffening of the Drapery.

A Third Argument was founded upon a Petition of the Greenland Trade, which
likewise represented the great Consumption of Whale-bone which would be
occasioned by the present Fashion, and the Benefit which would thereby accrue
to that Branch of the British Trade.

To conclude, they gently touched upon the Weight and Unweildiness of the
Garment, which they insinuated might be of great Use to preserve the Honor of
Families.

These Arguments would have wrought very much upon me, (as I then told the
Company in a long and elaborate Discourse) had I not considered the great and
additional Expense which such Fashions would bring upon Fathers and Husbands;
and therefore by no Means to be thought of till some Years after a Peace. I
further urged, that it would be a Prejudice to the Ladies themselves, who could
never expect to have any Money in the Pocket, if they laid out so much on the
Petticoat. To this I added, the great Temptation it might give to Virgins, of
acting in Security like married Women, and by that Means give a Check to
Matrimony, an Institution always encouraged by wise Societies.

At the same Time, in Answer to the several Petitions produced on that Side, I
showed one subscribed by the Women of several Persons of Quality, humbly
setting forth, That since the Introduction of this Mode, their respective
Ladies had (instead of bestowing on them their Cast-Gowns) cut them into
Shreds, and mixed them with the Cordage and Buckram, to complete the Stiffening
of their Under-Petticoats. For which and sundry other Reasons, I pronounced the
Petticoat a Forfeiture: But to show that I did not make that Judgment for the
Sake of filthy Lucre, I ordered it to be folded up, and sent it as a Present to
a Widow-Gentlewoman, who has five Daughters, desiring she would make each of
them a Petticoat out of it, and send me back the Remainder, which I design to
cut into Stomachers, Caps, Facings of my Wastcoat-Sleeves, and other Garnitures
suitable to my Age and Quality.

I would not be understood, that (while I discard this monstrous Invention) I
am an Enemy to the proper Ornaments of the Fair Sex. On the contrary, as the
Hand of Nature has poured on them such a Profusion of Charms and Graces, and
sent them into the World more amiable and finished than the rest of her Works;
so I would have them bestow upon themselves all the additional Beauties that
Art can supply them with, provided it does not interfere with, disguise, or
pervert, those of Nature.

I consider Woman as a beautiful Romantic Animal, that may be adorned with
Furs and Feathers, Pearls and Diamonds, Ores and Silks. The Lynx shall cast its
Skin at her Feet to make her a Tippet; the Peacock, Parrat and Swan, shall pay
Contributions to her Muff; the Sea shall be searched for Shells, and the Rocks
for Gems; and every Part of Nature furnish out its Share toward the
Embellishment of a Creature that is the most consummate Work of it. All this I
shall indulge them in; but as for the Petticoat I have been speaking of, I
neither can, nor will allow it.

The TATLER. [No 117.
Durate, and vosmot Rebus servate secundis.
Virg.
From Thursday Jan. 5. to Saturday Jan. 7. 1709.
Sheer-Lane, January 6.
WHen I look into the Frame and Constitution of my own Mind, there is no Part
of it which I observe with greater Satisfaction, than that Tenderness and
Concern which it bears for the Good and Happiness of Mankind. My own
Circumstances are indeed so narrow and scanty, that I should taste but very
little Pleasure, could I receive it only from those Enjoyments which are in my
own Possession; but by this great Tincture of Humanity, which I find in all my
Thoughts and Reflections, I am happier than any single Person can be, with all
the Wealth, Strength, Beauty, and Success, that can be conferred upon a Mortal,
if he only relishes such a Proportion of these Blessings as is vested in
himself, and is his own private Property. By this Means, every Man that does
himself any real Service, does me a Kindness. I come in for my Share in all the
Good that happens to a Man of Merit and Virtue, and partake of many Gifts of
Fortune and Power that I was never born to. There is nothing in particular in
which I so much rejoice, as the Deliverance of good and generous Spirits out of
Dangers, Difficulties, and Distresses. And because the World does not supply
Instances of this Kind to furnish out sufficient Entertainments for such an
Humanity and Benevolence of Temper, I have ever delighted in reading the
History of Ages past, which draws together into a narrow Compass the great
Occurrences and Events that are but thinly sown in those Tracts of Time which
lie within our own-Knowledge and Observation. When I see the Life of a great
Man, who has deserved well of his Country, after having struggled through all
the Oppositions of Prejudice and Envy, breaking out with Luster, and shining
forth in all the Splendour of Success, I close my Book, and am an happy Man for
a whole Evening.

But since in History, Events are of a mixed Nature, and often happen alike to
the Worthless and the Deserving, insomuch that we frequently see a virtuous Man
dying in the Midst of Disappointments and Calamities, and the Vicious ending
their Days in Prosperity and Peace; I love to amuse my self with the Accounts I
meet with in fabulous Histories and Factions: For in this Kind of Writings we
have always the Pleasure of seeing Vice punished, and Virtue rewarded. Indeed,
were we able to view a Man in the whole Circle of his Existence, we should have
the Satisfaction of seeing it close with Happiness or Misery, according to its
proper Merit: But though our View of him is interrupted by Death before the
finishing of his Adventures, (if I may so speak) we may be sure that the
Conclusion and Catastrophe is altogether suitable to his Behavior. On the
contrary, the whole Being of a Man, considered as an Hero, or a Knight Errant,
is comprehended within the Limits of a Poem or Romance, and therefore always
ends to our Satisfaction; so that Inventions of this Kind are like Food and
Exercise to a good-natured Disposition, which they please and gratify at the
same Time that they nourish and strengthen. The greater the Affliction is in
which we see our Favorites in these Relations engaged, the greater is the
Pleasure we take in seeing them relieved.

Among the many feigned Histories which I have met with in my Reading, there is
none in which the Hero's Perplexity is greater, and the winding out of it more
difficult, than that in a French Author whose Name I have forgot. It so
happens, that the Hero's Mistress was the Sister of his most intimate Friend,
who for certain Reasons was given out to be dead, while he was preparing ^o
leave his Country in Quest of Adventures. The Hero having heard of his Friend's
Death, immediately repaired to his Mistress, to condole with her, and comfort
her. Upon his Arrival in her Garden, he discovered at a Distance a Man clasped
in her Arms, and embraced with the most endearing Tenderness. What should he
do? It did not consist with the Gentleness of a Knight Errant either to kill
his Mistress, or the Man whom she was pleased to favor. At the same Time, it
would have spoiled a Romance, should he have laid violent Hands on himself. In
short, he immediately entered upon his Adventures; and after a long Series of
Exploits, found out by Degrees, that the Person he saw in his Mistress's Arms
was her own Brother, taking Leave of her before he left his Country, and the
Embrace she gave him nothing else but the affectionate Farewell of a Sister: So
that he had at once the Two greatest Satisfactions that could enter into the
Heart of Man, in finding his Friend alive, whom he thought dead; and his
Mistress faithful, whom he had believed inconstant.

There are indeed some Disasters so very fatal, that it is impossible for any
Accidents to rectify them. Of this Kind was that of poor Lucretia; and yet we
see Ovid has found an Expedient even in this Case. He describes a Beautiful and
Royal Virgin walking on the Seashore, where she was discovered by Neptune, and
violated after a long and unsuccessful Importunity. To mitigate her Sorrow, he
offers her whatever she would wish for. Never certainly was the Wit of Woman
more puzzled in finding out a Stratagem to retrieve her Honor. Had she desired
to be changed into a Stock or Stone, a Beast, Fish or Fowl, she would have been
a Loser by it: Or had she desired to have been made a Sea-Nymph, or a Goddess,
her Immortality would but have perpetuated her Disgrace. Give me therefore,
said she, such a Shape as may make me incapable of suffering again the like
Calamity, or of being reproached for what I have already suffered. To be short,
she was turned into a Man, and by that only Means avoided the Danger and
Imputation she so much dreaded.

I was once my self in Agonies of Grief that are unutterable, and in so great a
Distraction of Mind, that I thought my self even out of the Possibility of
receiving Comfort. The Occasion was as follows: When I was a Youth in a Part of
the Army which was then quartered at Dover, I fell in Love with an agreeable
young Woman, of a good Family in those Parts, and had the Satisfaction of
seeing my Addresses kindly received, which occasioned the Perplexity I am going
to relate.

We were in a calm Evening diverting our selves upon the Top of the Cliff with
the Prospect of the Sea, and trifling away the Time in such little Fondnesses
as are most ridiculous to People in Business, and most agreeable to those in
Love.

In the Midst of these our innocent Endearments, she snatched a Paper of Verses
out of my Hand, and ran away with them. I was following her, when on a sudden
the Ground, though at a considerable Distance from the Verge of the Precipice,
sunk under her, and threw her down from so prodigious an Height upon such a
Range of Rocks, as would have dashed her into Ten Thousand Pieces, had her Body
been made of Adamant. It is much easier for my Reader to imagine my State of
Mind upon such an Occasion, than for me to express it. I said to my self, It is
not in the Power of Heaven to relieve me! When I awaked, equally transported
and astonished, to see my self drawn out of an Affliction which the very Moment
before appeared to me altogether inextricable.

The Impressions of Grief and Horror were so lively on this Occasion, that
while they lasted, they made me more miserable than I was at the real Death of
this beloved Person, (which happened a few Months after, at a Time when the
Match between us was concluded) inasmuch as the imaginary Death was untimely,
and I my self in a Sort an Accessory; whereas her real Decease had at least
these Alleviations, of being natural and inevitable.

The Memory of the Dream I have related still dwells so strongly upon me, that
I can never read the Description of Dover-Cliff in Shakespeare's Tragedy of King
Lear, without a fresh Sense of my Escape. The Prospect from that Place is drawn
with such proper Incidents, that whoever can read it without growing giddy,
must have a good Head, or a very bad One.

Come on, Sir, here is the Place; stand still! How fearful
And dizzy it is to cast ones Eyes so low?
The Crows and Choughs that wing the Midway Air,
Show scarce as gross as Beetles. Halfway down
Hangs one that gathers Samphire. Dreadful Trade!
Methinks he seems no bigger than his Head.
The Fishermen that walk upon the Beach,
Appear like Mice, and yond' tall anchoring Bark
Diminished to'her Boat; her Boat! a Buoy
Almost too small for Sight. The murmuring Surge
(That on the unnumber'd idle Pebble beats)
Cannot be heard so high. I Will look no more,
Lest my Brain turn.
The TATLER. [No 118
Lusisti satis, edisti satis, atque bibisti,
Tempus abire tibi. --
Hor.
From Saturday Jan. 7. to Tuesday Jan. 10, 1709.
From my own Apartment, Jan. 8.
I Thought to have given over my Prosecution of the Dead for this Season,
having by me many other Projects for the Reformation of Mankind; but I have
received so many Complaints from such different Hands, that I shall disoblige
Multitudes of my Correspondents, if I do not take Notice of them. Some of the
Deceased, who I thought had been laid quietly in their Graves, are such
Hobgoblins in public Assemblies, that I must be forced to deal with them as
Evander did with his triple-lived Adversary, who, according to Virgil, was
forced to kill him thrice over before he could dispatch him.

Ter Letho sternendus erat. --
I am likewise informed, That several Wives of my Dead Men have, since the
Decease of their Husbands, been seen in many public Places without Mourning,
or Regard to common Decency.

I am further advised, That several of the Defunct, contrary to the Woollen
Act, presume to dress themselves in Lace, Embroidery, Silks, Muslins, and other
Ornaments forbidden to Persons in their Condition. These and other the like
Informations moving me thereunto, I must desire, for Distinction-Sake, and to
conclude this Subject for ever, that when any of these Posthumous Persons
appear, or are spoken of, that their Wives may be called Widows; their Houses,
Sepulchers; their Chariots, Hearses; and their Garments, Flannel: On which
Condition, they shall be allowed all the Conveniences that Dead Men can in
Reason desire.

As I was writing this Morning on this Subject, I received the following Letter:

From the Banks of Styx. Mr. Bickerstaff,
I Must confess I treated you very scurrilously when you first sent me hither;
but you have dispatched such Multitudes after me to keep me in Countenance,
that I am very well reconciled both to you and my Condition. We live very
lovingly together; for as Death makes us all equal, it makes us very much
delight in one another's Company. Our Time passes away much after the same
Manner as it did when we were among you: Eating, Drinking, and Sleeping, are
our chief Diversions. Our Quid Nunes between Whiles go to a Coffee-house, where
they have several warm Liquors made of the Waters of Lethe, with very good
Poppy Tea. We that are the sprightly Genius's of the Place, refresh our selves
frequently with a Bottle of Mum, and tell Stories till we fall asleep. You
would do well to send among us Mr. Dodwill's Book against the Immortality of
the Soul, which would be of great Consolation to our whole Fraternity, who
would be very glad to find that they are dead for good and all, and would in
particular make me rest for ever,

Yours, John Partridge.
P. S. Sir James is just arrived here in good Health.




The foregoing Letter was the more pleasing to me, because I perceive some
little Symptoms in it of a Resusciation; and having lately seen the Predictions
of this Author, which are written in a true Protestant Spirit of Prophecy, and
a particular Zeal against the French King, I have some Thoughts of sending for
him from the Banks of Styx, and reinstating him in his own House, at the Sign
of the Globe in Salisbury-street. For the Encouragement of him and others, I
shall offer to their Consideration a Letter which gives me an Account of the
Revival of one of their Brethren.

Dec. 31. SIR,
I Have perused your Tatler of this Day, and have wept over it with great
Pleasure: I wish you would be more frequent in your Family-Pieces. For as I
consider you under the Notion of a great Designer, I think these are not your
least valuable Performances. I am glad to find you have given over your
Facepainting for some Time, because, I think, you have employed your self more
in Grotesque Figures than in Beauties; for which Reason, I would rather see you
work upon History-Pieces, that on single Portraicts. Your several Draughts of
Dead Men appear to me as Pictures of Still-Life, and have done great Good in
the Place where I live. The 'Squire of a neighboring Village, who had been a
long Time in the Number of Non-Entities, is entirely recovered by them. For
these several Years past, there was not an Hare in the County that could be at
Rest for him; and I think, the greatest Exploit he ever boasted of, was, That
when he was High Sheriff of the County, he hunted a Fox so far, that he could
not follow him any further by the Laws of the Land. All the Hours he spent at
Home, were in swelling himself with October, and rehearsing the Wonders he did
in the Field. Upon reading your Papers, he has sold his Dogs, shook off his
dead Companions, looked into his Estate, got the Multiplication-Table by Heart,
paid his Tithes, and intends to take upon him the Office of Churchwarden next
Year. I wish the same Success with your other Patients, and am, etc.


Ditto, January 9.
When I came Home this Evening, a very tight middle-aged Woman presented to me
the following Petition:

To the Worshipful Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire Censor of Great Britain.
The humble Petition of Penelope Prim, Widow;
Shows,
THat your Petitioner was bred a Clear-starcher and Sempstress, and for many
Years worked to the Exchange; and to several Aldermens Wives, Lawyers Clerks,
and Merchants-Apprentices.

That through the Scarcity caused by Regraters of Bread-Corn, (of which Starch
is made) and the Gentries immoderate frequenting the Opera's, the Ladies, to
save Charges, have their Heads washed at Home, and the Beaus put out their
Linen to common Landresses. So that your Petitioner has little or no Work at
her Trade: For Want of which she is reduced to such Necessity, That she and her
Seven Fatherless Children must inevitably perish, unless relieved by your
Worship.

That your Petitioner is informed, That in Contempt of your Judgment pronounced
on Tuesday the 3d Instant against the new-fashioned Petticoat, or old-fashioned
Fardingal, the Ladies design to go on in that Dress. And since it is presumed
your Worship will not suppress them by Force, your Petitioner humbly desires
you would order, That Ruffs may be added to the Dress; and that she may be
heard by her Council, who has assured your Petitioner, he has such cogent
Reasons to offer to your Court, that Ruffs and Fardingals are inseparable; and
that he questions not but Two Thirds of the greatest Beauties about Town will
have Cambrick Collars on their Necks before the End of Easter-Term next. He
further says, That the Design of our Great Grandmothers in this Petticoat, was
to appear much bigger than the Life; for which Reason, they had false
Shoulder-Blades, like Wings, and the Ruff abovementioned, to make their upper
and lower Parts of their Bodies appear proportionable; whereas the Figure of a
Woman in the present Dress, bears (as he calls it) the Figure of a Cone, which
(as he advises) is the same with that of an Extinguisher, with a little Knob at
the upper End, and widening downward, till it ends in a Basis of a most
enormous Circumference.

Your Petitioner therefore most humbly prays, That you would restore the Ruff
to the Fardingal, which in their Nature ought to be as inseparable as the Two
Hungarian Twins.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray.
I have examined into the Allegations of this Petition, and find, by several
ancient Pictures of my own Predecessors, particularly that of Dame Deborah
Bickerstaff, my Great Grandmother, that the Ruff and Fardingal are made Use of
as absolutely necessary to preserve the Symmetry of the Figure; and Mrs.
Pyramid Bickerstaff, her second Sister, is recorded in our Family-Book, with
some Observations to her Disadvantage, as the first Female of our House that
discovered, to any besides her Nurse and her Husband, an Inch below her Chin or
above her Instep. This convinces me of the Reasonableness of Mrs. Prim's
Demand; and therefore I shall not allow the reviving of any one Part of that
ancient Mode, except the Whole is complied with. Mrs. Prim is therefore hereby
empowered to carry Home Ruffs to such as she shall see in the abovementioned
Petticoats, and require Payment on Demand.

Mr. Bickerstaff has under Consideration the Offer from the Corporation of
Colchester of Four hundred Pounds per Annum, to be paid Quarterly, provided
that all his dead Persons shall be obliged to wear the Days of that Place.

The TATLER. [No 119.
In Tenui Labor. --
Virg.
From Tuesday Jan. 10. to Thursday Jan. 12. 1709.
Sheer-Lane, January 11.
I Have lately applied my self with much Satisfaction to the curious
Discoveries that have been made by the Help of Microscopes, as they are related
by Authors of our own and other Nations. There is a great deal of Pleasure in
prying into this World of Wonders, which Nature has laid out of Sight, and
seems industrious to conceal from us. Philosophy had ranged over all the
visible Creation, and began to want Objects for her Enquiries, when the present
Age, by the Invention of Glasses, opened a new and inexhaustible Magazine of
Rarities, more wonderful and amazing than any of those which astonished our
Forefathers. I was Yesterday amusing my self with Speculations of this Kind,
and reflecting upon Myriads of Animals that swim in those little Seas of Juice
that are contained in the several Vessels of an Humane Body. While my Mind was
thus filled with that secret Wonder and Delight, I could not but look upon my
self as in an Act of Devotion, and am very well pleased with the Thought of the
great Heathen Anatomist, who calls his Description of the Parts of an Humane
Body, An Hymn to the Supreme Being. The Reading of the Day produced in my
Imagination an agreeable Morning's Dream, if I may call it such; for I am still
in Doubt, whether it passed in my sleeping or waking Thoughts. However it was,
I fancied that my good Genius stood at my Bed's Head, and entertained me with
the following Discourse; for upon my Rising, it dwelt so strongly upon me, that
I writ down the Substance of it, if not the very Words.

If (said he) you can be so transported with those Productions of Nature which
are discovered to you by those artificial Eyes that are the Works of Humane
Invention, how great will your Surprise be, when you shall have it in your
Power to model your own Eye as you please, and adapt it to the Bulk of Objects,
which, with all these Helps, are by infinite Degrees too minute for your
Perception. We who are unbodied Spirits can sharpen our Sight to what Degree we
think fit, and make the least Work of the Creation distinct and visible. This
gives us such Idea's as cannot possibly enter into your present Conceptions.
There is not the least Particle of Matter which may not furnish one of us
sufficient Employment for a whole Eternity. We can still divide it, and still
open it, and still discover new Wonders of Providence, as we look into the
different Texture of its Parts, and meet with Beds of vegetables, Mineral and
Metallic Mixtures, and several Kinds of Animals that lie hid, and as it were
lost in such an endless Fund of Matter. I find you are surprised at this
Discourse; but as your Reason tells you there are infinite Parts in the
smallest Portion of Matter, it will likewise convince you, that there is as
great a Variety of Secrets, and as much Room for Discoveries, in a Particle no
bigger than the Point of a Pin, as in the Globe of the whole Earth. Your
Microscopes bring to Sight Shoals of living Creatures in a Spoonful of Vinegar;
but we who can distinguish them in their different Magnitudes, see among them
several huge Leviathans that terrify the little Fry of Animals about them, and
take their Pastime as in an Ocean, or the great Deep. I could not but smile at
this Part of his Relation, and told him, I doubted not but he could give me the
History of several Invisible Giants, accompanied with their respective Dwarfs,
in case that any of these little Beings are of an humane Shape. You may assure
your self (said he) that we see in these little Animals different Natures,
Instincts and Modes of Life, which correspond to what you observe in Creatures
of bigger Dimensions. We descry Millions of Species subsisted on a green Leaf,
which your Glasses represent only in Crowds and Swarms. What appears to your
Eye but as Hair or Down rising on the Surface of it, we find to be Woods and
Forests, inhabited by Beasts of Prey, that are as dreadful in those their
little Haunts, as Lions and Tigers in the Deserts of Libya. I was much
delighted with his Discourse, and could not forbear telling him, That I should
be wonderfully pleased to see a natural History of Imperceptibles, containing a
true Account of such Vegetables and Animals as grow and live out of Sight. Such
Disquisitions (answered he) are very suitable to reasonable Creatures; and you
may be sure, there are many curious Spirits amongst us who employ themselves in
such Amusements. For as our Hands, and all our Senses, may be formed to what
Degree of Strength and Delicacy we please, in the same Manner as our Sight, we
can make what Experiments we are inclined to, how small soever the Matter be in
which we make them. I have been present at the Dissection of a Mite, and have
seen the Skeleton of a Flea. I have been shown a Forest of numberless Trees,
which has been picked out of an Acorn. Your Microscope can show you in it a
complete Oak in Miniature; and could you suit all your Organs as we do, you
might pluck an Acorn from this little Oak, which contains another Tree; and so
proceed from Tree to Tree, as long as you would think fit to continue your
Disquisitions. It is almost impossible (added he) to talk of Things so remote
from common Life, and the ordinary Notions which Mankind receive from blunt and
gross Organs of Sense, without appearing extravagant and ridiculous. You have
often seen a Dog opened, to observe the Circulation of the Blood, or make any
other useful Enquiry; and yet would be tempted to laugh if I should tell you,
that a Circle of much greater Philosophers than any of the Royal Society, were
present at the cutting up of one of those little Animals which we find in the
Blue of a Plumb: That it was tied down alive before them; and that they
observed the Palpitations of the Heart, the Course of the Blood, the Working of
the Muscles, and the Convulsions in the several Limbs, with great Accuracy and
Improvement. I must confess, said I, for my own Part, I go along with you in
all your Discoveries with great Pleasure; but it is certain, they are too fine
for the Gross of Mankind, who are more struck with the Description of every
Thing that is great and bulky. Accordingly we find the best Judge of humane
Nature setting forth his Wisdom, not in the Formation of these minute Animals,
(though indeed no less wonderful than the other) but in that of the Leviathan and
Behemoth, the Horse and the Crocodile. Your Observation (said he) is very just;
and I must acknowledge for my own Part, that although it is with much Delight
that I see the Traces of Providence in these Instances, I still take greater
Pleasure in considering the Works of the Creation in their Immensity, than in
their Minuteness. For this Reason, I rejoice when I strengthen my Sight so as
to make it pierce into the most remote Spaces, and take a View of those
Heavenly Bodies which lie out of the Reach of Humane Eyes, though assisted by
Telescopes. What you look upon as one confused White in the Milky-Way, appears
to me a long Tract of Heavens, distinguished by Stars that are ranged in proper
Figures and Constellations. While you are admiring the Sky in a Starry Night, I
am entertained with a Variety of Worlds and Suns placed one above another, and
rising up to such an immense Distance, that no created Eye can see an End of
them.

The latter Part of his Discourse flung me into such an Astonishment, that he
had been silent for some Time before I took Notice of it; when on a sudden I
started up and drew my Curtains, to look if any one was near me, but saw no
Body, and cannot tell to this Moment whether it was my good Genius or a Dream
that left me.

The TATLER. [No 120
-- Velut Silvis, ubi passim
Palantes Error certo de Tramite pellit;
Ille sinistrorsum, hic dextrorsum abit.
Hor.
From Thursd. Jan. 12. to Saturd. Jan. 14. 1709.
Sheer-Lane, January 13.
INstead of considering any particular Passion o^ Character in any one Set of
Men, my Thought^ were last Night employed on the Contemplatio^ of Humane Life
in general; and truly it appear^ to me, that the whole Species are hurried on
by the same Desires, and engaged in the same Pursuits, according to the
different Stages and Divisions of Life. Youth is devoted to Lust, middl^ Age to
Ambition, old Age to Avarice. These are the Three general Motives and
Principles o^ Action both in good and bad Men; though i^ must be acknowledged,
that they change their Names, and refine their Natures, according t^ the Temper
of the Person whom they direct an^ animate. For with the Good, Lust becomes
Virtuous Love; Ambition, True Honor; and Avarice, the Care of Posterity. This
Scheme o^ Thought amused me very agreeably till I retire^ to Rest; and
afterward formed it self into ^ pleasing and regular Vision, which I shall
describ^ in all its Circumstances, as the Objects presente^ themselves, whether
in a serious or ridiculou^ Manner.

I dreamed that I was in a Wood, of so prodigious an Extent, and cut into such
a Variety o^ Walks and Allies, that all Mankind were lost an^ bewildered in it.
After having wandered up an^ down some Time, I came into the Center of it,
which opened into a wide Plain, that was filled with Multitudes of both Sexes.
I here discovered Three great Roads, very wide and long, that led into Three
different Parts of the Forest. On a sudden, the whole Multitude broke into
Three Parts, according to their different Ages, and marched in their respective
Bodies into the Three great Roads that lay before them. As I had a Mind to know
how each of these Roads terminated, and whether it would lead those who passed
through them, I joined my self with the Assembly that were in the Flower and
Vigor of their Age, and called themselves, The Band of Lovers. I found to my
great Surprise, that several old Men besides my self had intruded into this
agreeable Company; as I had before observed, there were some young Men who had
united themselves to the Band of Misers, and were walking up the Path of
Avarice; though both made a very ridiculous Figure, and were as much laughed at
by those they joined, as by those they forsook. The Walk which we marched up,
for Thickness of Shades, Embroidery of Flowers, and Melody of Birds, with the
distant Purling of Streams, and Falls of Water, was so wonderfully delightful,
that it charmed our Senses, and intoxicated our Minds with Pleasure. We had not
been long here, before every Man singled out some Woman to whom he offered his
Addresses, and professed himself a Lover; when on a sudden we perceived this
delicious Walk to grow more narrow as we advanced in it, till it ended in many
intricate Thickets, Mazes and Labyrinths, that were so mixed with Roses and
Brambles, Brakes of Thorns, and Beds of Flowers, rocky Paths and pleasing
Grotto's, that it was hard to say, whether it gave greater Delight or
Perplexity to those who traveled in it.

It was here that the Lovers began to be eager in their Pursuits. Some of their
Mistresses, who only seemed to retire for the Sake of Form and Decency, led
them into Plantations that were disposed into regular Walks; where, after they
had wheeled about in some Turns and Windings, they suffered themselves to be
overtaken, and gave their Hands to those who pursued them. Others withdrew from
their Followers into little Wildernesses, where there were so many Paths
interwoven with each other in so much Confusion and Irregularity, that several
of the Lovers quitted the Pursuit, or broke their Hearts in the Chase. It was
sometimes very odd to see a Man pursuing a fine Woman that was following
another, whose Eye was fixed upon a Fourth, that had her own Game in View in
some other Quarter of the Wilderness. I could not but observe Two Things in
this Place which I thought very particular, That several Persons who stood only
at the End of the Avenues, and cast a careless Eye upon the Nymphs during their
whole Flight, often catched them, when those who pressed them the most warmly
through all their Turns and Doubles, were wholly unsuccessful: And that some of
my own Age, who were at first looked upon with Aversion and Contempt, by being
well acquainted with the Wilderness, and by dodging their Women in the
particular Corners and Allies of it, catched them in their Arms, and took them
from those whom they really loved and admired. There was a particular Grove,
which was called, The Labyrinth of Coquets; where many were enticed to the
Chase, but few returned with Purchase. It was pleasant enough to see a
celebrated Beauty, by smiling upon one, casting a Glance upon another,
beckoning to a third, and adapting her Charms and Graces to the several Follies
of those that admired her, drawing into the Labyrinth a whole Pack of Lovers,
that lost themselves in the Maze, and never could find their Way out of it.
However, it was some Satisfaction to me, to see many of the Fair Ones who had
thus deluded their Followers, and left them among the Intricacies of the
Labyrinth, obliged when they came out of it, to surrender to the first Partner
that offered himself. I now had crossed over all the difficult and perplexed
Passages that seemed to bound our Walk, when on the other Side of them, I saw
the same great Road running on a little Way, till it was terminated by two
beautiful Temples. I stood here for some Time, and saw most of the Multitude
who had been dispersed amongst the Thickets, coming out Two by Two, and
marching up in Parts toward the Temples that stood before us. The Structure on
the Right Hand was (as I afterward found) consecrated to Virtuous Love, and
could not be entered but by such as received a Ring, or some other Token, from
a Person who was placed as a Guard at the Gate of it. He wore a Garland of
Roses and Myrtles on his Head, and on his Shoulders a Robe like an Imperial
Mantle, white and unspotted all over, excepting only, that where it was clasped
at his Breast, there were Two golden Turtle-Doves that buttoned it by their
Bills, which were wrought in Rubies. He was called by the Name of Hymen, and
was seated near the Entrance of the Temple, in a delicious Bower, made up of
several Trees, that were embraced by Woodbines, Jessamines, and Amaranths,
which were as so many Emblems of Marriage, and Ornaments to the Trunks that
supported them. As I was single and unaccompanied, I was not permitted to enter
the Temple, and for that Reason am a Stranger to all the Mysteries that were
performed in it. I had however the Curiosity to observe how the several Couples
that entered were disposed of; which was after the following Manner. There were
two great Gates on the Backside of the Edifice, at which the whole Crowd was
let out. At one of these Gates were Two Women, extremely beautiful, though in a
different Kind, the one having a very careful and composed Air, the other a
Sort of Smile and ineffable Sweetness in her Countenance. The Name of the first
was Discretion, and of the other Complacency. All who came out of this Gate,
and put themselves under the Direction of these two Sisters, were immediately
conducted by them into Gardens, Groves, and Meadows, which abounded in
Delights, and were furnished with every Thing that could make them the proper
Seats of Happiness. The Second Gate of this Temple let out all the Couples that
were unhappily married, who came out linked together by Chains, which each of
them strove to break, but could not. Several of these were such as had never
been acquainted with each other before they met in the great Walk, or had been
too well acquainted in the Thicket. The Entrance to this Gate was possessed by
three Sisters, who joined themselves with these Wretches, and occasioned most
of their Miseries. The youngest of the Sisters was known by the Name of Levity,
who with the Innocence of a Virgin, had the Dress and Behavior of a Harlot.
The Name of the Second was Contention, who bore on her Right Arm a Muff made of
the Skin of a Porcupine; and on her Left carried a little Lap-Dog, that barked
and snapped at every one that passed by her.

The eldest of the Sisters, who seemed to have an haughty and imperious Air,
was always accompanied with a tawny Cupid, who generally marched before her
with a little Mace on his Shoulder, the End of which was fashioned into the
Horns of a Stag. Her Garments were yellow, and her Complexion pale. Her Eyes
were piercing, but had odd Casts in them, and that particular Distemper, which
makes Persons who are troubled with it, see Objects double. Upon Enquiry, I was
informed that her Name was Jealousy.

Having finished my Observations upon this Temple, and its Votaries, I repaired
to that which stood on the Left Hand, and was called, The Temple of Lust. The
Front of it was raised on Corinthian Pillars, with all the meretricious
Ornaments that accompany that Order; whereas that of the other was composed of
the chaste and matron-like Ionic. The Sides of it were adorned with several
grotesque Figures of Goats, Sparrows, Heathen Gods, Satyrs, and Monsters made
up of half Man half Beast. The Gates were unguarded, and open to all that had a
Mind to enter. Upon my going in, I found the Windows were blinded, and let in
only a Kind of Twilight, that served to discover a prodigious Number of dark
Corners and Apartments, into which the whole Temple was divided. I was here
stunned with a mixed Noise of Clamor and Jollity: On one Side of me, I heard
Singing and Dancing; on the other, Brawls and Clashing of Swords. In short, I
was so little pleased with the Place, that I was going out of it; but found I
could not return by the Gate where I entered, which was barred against all that
were come in, with Bolts of Iron, and Locks of Adamant. There was no going back
from this Temple through the Paths of Pleasure which led to it: All who passed
through the Ceremonies of the Place, went out at an Iron Wicket, which was kept
by a dreadful Giant called Remorse, that held a Scourge of Scorpions in his
Hand, and drove them into the only Outlet from that Temple. This was a Passage,
so rugged, so uneven, and choked with so many Thorns and Briars, that it was a
melancholy Spectacle to behold the Pains and Difficulties which both Sexes
suffered who walked through it. The Men, though in the Prime of their Youth,
appeared weak and infeebled with old Age: The Women rung their Hands, and tore
their Hair; and several lost their Limbs before they could extricate themselves
out of the Perplexities of the Path in which they were engaged. The remaining
Part of this Vision, and the Adventures I met with in the Two great Roads of
Ambition and Avarice, must be the Subject of another Paper.

ADVERTISEMENT.
I have this Morning received the following Letter from the Famous Mr. Thomas
Dogget.

SIR,
ON Monday next will be acted for my Benefit, the Comedy of Love for Love: If
you will do me the Honor to appear there, I will publish on the Bills, That it
is to be performed at the Request of Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire and question not but
it will bring me as great an Audience as ever was at the House since the
Morocco Ambassador was there. I am,

(With the greatest Respect) Your most Obedient, and Most Humble Servant,
Thomas Dogget.


Being naturally an Encourager of Wit, as well as bound to it in the Quality of
Censor, I returned the following Answer.

Mr. Dogget,
I AM very well pleased with the Choice you have made of so excellent a Play,
and have always looked upon you as the best of Comedians; I shall therefore
come in between the First and Second Act, and remain in the Right Hand Box over
the Pit till the End of the Fourth, provided you take Care that every Thing be
rightly prepared for my Reception.


The TATLER. [No 121.
-- Similis tibi, Cynthia, vel tibi cujus
Turbavit nitidos extinctus Passer Ocellos.
Juv.
From Saturd. Jan. 14, to Tuesd. Jan. 17. 1709.
From my own Apartment, Jan. 16.
I Was recollecting the Remainder of my Vision, when my Maid came to me, and
told me, there was a Gentlewoman below who seemed to be in great Trouble, and
pressed very much to see me. When it lay in my Power to remove the Distress of
an unhappy Person, I thought I should very ill employ my Time in attending
Matters of Speculation, and therefore desired the Lady would walk in. When she
entered, I saw her Eyes full of Tears. However, her Grief was not so great as
to make her omit Rules; for she was very long and exact in her Civilities,
which gave me Time to view and consider her. Her Clothes were very rich, but
tarnish'd; and her Words very fine, but illapplied. These Distinctions made me
without Hesitation (though I had never seen her before) asked her, If her Lady
had any Commands for me? She then began to weep afresh, and with many broken
Sighs told me, That their Family was in very great Affliction -- I beseeched
her to compose her self, for that I might possibly be capable of assisting them
-- She then cast her Eye upon my little Dog, and was again transported with too
much Passion to proceed; but with much ado, she at last gave me to understand,
That Cupid, her Lady's Lap-dog, was dangerously ill, and in so bad a Condition,
that her Lady neither saw Company, nor went abroad, for which Reason she did
not come her self to consult me; that as I had mentioned with great Affection
my own Dog, (here she courtsied, and looking first at the Cur, and then on me,
said, indeed I had Reason, for he was very pretty) her Lady sent to me rather
than to any other Doctor, and hoped I would not laugh at her Sorrow, but send
her my Advice. I must confess, I had some Indignation to find my self treated
like something below a Farrier; yet well knowing, that the best, as well as
most tender Way, of dealing with a Woman, is to fall in with her Humors, and
by that Means to let her see the Absurdity of them. I proceeded accordingly:
Pray, Madam, said I, can you give me any methodical Account of this Illness,
and how Cupid was first taken? Sir (said she) we have a little ignorant Country
Girl who is kept to tend him: She was recommended to our Family by one, that my
Lady never saw but once, at a Visit; and you know, Persons of Quality are
always inclined to Strangers; for I could have helped her to a Cousin of my
own, but -- Good Madam (said I) you neglect the Account of the sick Body, while
you are complaining of this Girl. No, no, Sir (said she), begging your Pardon:
But it is the general Fault of Physicians, they are so in Haste, that they
never hear out the Case. I say, this silly Girl, after washing Cupid, let him
stand half an Hour in the Window without his Collar, where he catched cold, and
in an Hour after began to bark very hoarse. He had however a pretty good Night,
and we hoped the Danger was over; but for these Two Nights last past, neither
he nor my Lady have slept a Wink. Has he (said I) taken any Thing? No (said
she), but my Lady says, he shall take any Thing that you prescribe, provided
you do not make Use of Jesuits Powder, or the Cold Bath. Poor Cupid (continued
she) has always been Phtisical, and as he lies under something like a
Chin-Cough, we are afraid it will end in a Consumption. I then asked her, if
she had brought any of his Water to show me. Upon this, she stared me in the
Face, and said, I am afraid, Mr. Bickerstaff, you are not serious; but if you
have any Receipt that is proper on this Occasion, pray let us have it; for my
Mistress is not to be comforted. Upon this, I pansed a little without returning
any Answer, and after some short Silence, I proceeded in the following Manner:
I have considered the Nature of the Distemper, and the Constitution of the
Patient, and by the best Observation that I can make on both, I think it is
safest to put him into a Course of Kitchen Physic. In the mean time, to remove
his Hoarseness, it will be the most natural Way to make Cupid his own Druggist;
for which Reason, I shall prescribe to him, Three Mornings successively, as
much Powder as will lie on a Groat, of that noble Remedy which the Apothecaries
call Album Graecum. Upon hearing this Advice, the young Woman smiled, as if she
knew how ridiculous an Errand she had been employed in; and indeed I found by
the Sequel of her Discourse, That she was an arch Baggage, and of a Character
that is frequent enough in Persons of her Employment, who are so used to
conform themselves in every Thing to the Humors and Passions of their
Mistresses, that they sacrifice Superiority of Sense to Superiority of
Condition, and are insensibly betrayed into the Passions and Prejudices of
those whom they serve, without giving themselves Leave to consider, that they
are extravagant and ridiculous. However I thought it very natural, when her
Eyes were thus open, to see her give a new Turn to her Discourse, and from
sympathizing with her Mistress in her Follies, to fall a Railing at her. You
cannot imagine, said she, Mr. Bickerstaff, what a Life she makes us lead for
the Sake of this little ugly Cur: If he dies, we are the most unhappy Family in
Town. She chanced to lose a Parrat last Year, which, to tell you truly, brought
me into her Service; for she turned off her Woman upon it, who had lived with
her Ten Years, because she neglected to give him Water, though every one of the
Family says, she was as innocent of the Bird's Death, as the Babe that is
unborn. Nay, she told me this very Morning, That if Cupid should die, she would
send the poor innocent Wench I was telling you of, to Bridewell, and have the
Milk-Woman tried for her Life at the Old Bailey, for putting Water into his
Milk. In short, she talks like any distracted Creature.

Since it is so, young Woman (said I), I will by no Means let you offend her,
by staying on this Message longer than is absolutely necessary, and so forced
her out.

While I am studying to cure those Evils and Distresses that are necessary or
natural to Humane Life, I find my Task growing upon me, since by these
accidental Cares, and acquired Calamities, (if I may so call them) my Patients
contract Distempers to which their Constitution is of it self a Stranger. But
this is an Evil I have for many Years remarked in the Fair Sex; and as they are
by Nature very much formed for Affection and Dalliance, I have observed, That
when by too obstinate a Cruelty, or any other Means, they have disappointed
themselves of the proper Objects of Love, as Husbands, or Children, such
Virgins have exactly at such a Year grown fond of Lap-dogs, Parrats, or other
Animals. I know at this Time a celebrated Toast, whom I allow to be one of the
most agreeable of her Sex, that in the Presence of her Admirers, will give a
Torrent of Kisses to her Cat, any one of which a Christian would be glad of. I
do not at the same Time deny, but there are as great Enormities of this Kind
committed by our Sex as theirs. A Roman Emperor had so very great an Esteem for
an Horse of his, that he had Thoughts of making him a Consul; and several
Moderns of that Rank of Men whom we call Country Squires, will not scruple to kiss
their Hounds before all the World, and declare in the Presence of their Wives,
that they had rather salute a Favorite of the Pack, than the finest Woman in
England. These voluntary Friendships between Animals of different Species, seem
to arise from Instinct; for which Reason, I have always looked upon the mutual
good Will between the 'Squire and the Hound, to be of the same Nature with that
between the Lion and the Jackall.

The only Extravagance of this Kind which appears to me excusable, is one that
grew out of an Excess of Gratitude, which I have somewhere met with in the Life
of a Turkish Emperor. His Horse had brought him safe out of a Field of Battle,
and from the Pursuit of a victorious Enemy. As a Reward for such his good and
faithful Service, his Master built him a Stable of Marble, shod him with Gold,
fed him in an Ivory Manger, and made him a Rack of Silver. He annexed to the
Stable several Fields and Meadows, Lakes, and running Streams. At the same time
he provided for him a Seraglio of Mares, the most beautiful that could be found
in the whole Ottoman Empire. To these were added a suitable Train of
Domestics, consisting of Grooms, Farriers, Rubbers, etc. accommodated with
proper Liveries and Pensions. In short, nothing was omitted that could
contribute to the Ease and Happiness of his Life who had preserved the
Emperor's.

By reason of the extreme Cold, and the Changeableness of the Weather, I have
been prevailed upon to allow the free Use of the Fardingal, till the 20th of
February next ensuing.

The TATLER. [No 122.
Cur in Theatrum Cato severe venisti?
Mart.
From Tuesd. Jan. 17. to Thursd. Jan. 19. 1709.
From my own Apartment, Jan. 18.
I Find it is thought necessary, that I (who have taken upon me to censure the
Irregularities of the Age) should give an Account of my own Actions when they
appear doubtful, or subject to Misconstruction. My appearing at the Play on
Monday last, is looked upon as a Step in my Conduct, which I ought to explain,
that others may not be misled by my Example. It is true in Matter of Fact, I
was present at the ingenious Entertainment of that Day, and placed my self in a
Box which was prepared for me with great Civility and Distinction. It is said
of Virgil, when he entered a Roman Theater, where there were many Thousands of
Spectators present, That the whole Assembly rose up to do him Honor; a Respect
which was never before paid to any but the Emperor. I must confess, That
universal Clap, and other Testimonies of Applause, with which I was received at
my first Appearance in the Theater of Great Britain, gave me as sensible a
Delight, as the abovementioned Reception could give to that Immortal Poet. I
should be ungrateful at the same Time, if I did not take this Opportunity of
acknowledging the great Civilities that were shown me by Mr. Thomas Dogget, who
made his Compliments to me between the Acts, after a most ingenuous and
discreet Manner; and at the same Time communicated to me, that the Company of
Upholders desired to receive me at their Door at the End of the Harmarket, and
to light me home to my Lodgings. That Part of the Ceremony I forbad, and took
particular Care during the whole Play to observe the Conduct of the Drama, and
give no Offense by my own Behavior. Here I think it will not be foreign to my
Character, to lay down the proper duties of an Audience, and what is incumbent
upon each individual Spectator in public Diversions of this Nature. Every one
should on these Occasions show his Attention, Understanding and Virtue. I would
undertake to find out all the Persons of Sense and Breeding by the Effect of a
single Sentence, and to distinguish a Gentleman as much by his Laugh, as his
Bow. When we see the Footman and his Lord diverted by the same Jest, it very
much turns to the Diminution of the one, or the Honor of the other. But though a
Man's Quality may appear in his Understanding and Taste, the Regard to Virtue
ought to be the same in all Ranks and Conditions of Men, however they make a
Profession of it under the Name of Honor, Religion, or Morality. When
therefore we see any Thing divert an Audience, either in Traged or Comedy, that
strikes at the Duties of Civil Life, or exposes what the best Men in all Ages
have looked upon as sacred and inviolable, it is the certain Sign of a
prosligate Race of Men, who are fallen from the Virtue of their Forefathers,
and will be contemptible in the Eyes of their Posterity. For this Reason I took
great Delight in seeing the generous and disinterested Passion of the Lovers in
this Comedy (which stood so many Trials, and was proved by such a Variety of
diverting Incidents) received with an universal Approbation. This brings to my
Mind a Passage in Cicero, which I could never read without being in Love with
the Virtue of a Roman Audience. He there describes the Shouts and Applauses
which the People gave to the Persons who acted the Parts of Pilades and
Orestes, in the noblest Oceasion that a Poet could invent to show Friendship in
Perfection. One of them had forfeited his Life by an Action which he had
committed; and as they stood in Judgment before the Tyrant, each of them strove
who should be the Criminal, that he might save the Life of his Friend. Amidst
the Vehemence of each asserting himself to be the Offender, the Roman Audience
gave a Thunder of Applause, and by that Means, as the Author hints, approved in
others what they would have done themselves on the like Occasion. Methinks, a
People of so much Virtue were deservedly placed at the Head of Mankind: But
alas! Pleasures of this Nature are not frequently to be met with on the English
Stage.

The Athenians, at a Time when they were the most polite, as well as the most
powerful, Government in the World, made the Care of the Stage one of the chief
Parts of the Administration: And I must confess, I am astonished at the Spirit
of Virtue which appeared in that People upon some Expressions in a Scene of a
famous Tragedy; an Account of which we have in one of Seneca's Epistles. A
coverous Person is represented speaking the common Sentiments of all who are
possessed with that Vice in the following Soliloquy, which I have translated
literally.

Let me be called a base Man, so I am called a rich one. If a Man is rich, who
asks if he is good? The Question is. How much we have; not from whence, or by
what Means, we have it. Every one has so much Merit as he has Wealth. For my
own Part, let me be rich, Oh ye Gods! or let me die. The Man dies happily, who
dies increasing his Treasure. There is more Pleasure in the Possession of
Wealth, than in that of Parents, Children, Wife, or Friends. The Audience were
very much provoked by the first Words of this Speech; but when the Actor came
to the Close of it, they could bear no longer. In short, the whole Assembly
rose up at once in the greatest Fury, with a Design to pluck him off the Stage,
and brand the Work it self with Infamy. In the Midst of the Tumult, the Author
came out from behind the Scenes, begging the Audience to be composed for a
little while, and they should see the Tragical End which this Wretch should
come to immediately. The Promise of Punishment appeased the People, who sat
with great Attention and Pleasure to see an Example made of so odious a
Criminal. It is with shame and Concern that I speak it; but I very much
question, whether it is possible to make a Speech so impious, as to raise such
a laudable Horror and Indignation in a Modern Audience. It is very natural for
an Author to make Ostentation of his Reading, as it is for an old Man to tell
Stories; for which Reason I must beg the Reader will excuse me, if I for once
indulge my self in both these Inclinations. We see the Attention, Judgment and
Virtue of a whole Audience, in the foregoing Instances. If we would imitate the
Behavior of a single Spectator, let us reflect upon that of Socrates, in a
Particular which gives me as great an Idea of that extraordinary Man, as any
Circumstance of his Life; or what is more, of his Death. This venerable Person
often frequented the Theater, which brought a great many thither, out of a
Desire to see him. On which Occasion it is recorded of him, That he sometimes
stood to make himself the more conspicuous, and to satisfy the Curiosity of the
Beholders. He was one Day present at the first Representation of a Tragedy of
Euripides, who was his intimate Friend, and whom he is said to have assisted in
several of his Plays. In the Midst of the Tragedy, which had met with very
great Success, there chanced to be a Line that seemed to encourage Vice and
Immorality.

This was no sooner spoken, but Socrates rose from his Seat, and without any
Regard to his Affection for his Friend, or to the Success of the Play, showed
himself displeased at what was said, and walked out of the Assembly. I question
not but the Reader will be curious to know what the Line was that gave this
Divine Heathen so much Offense. If my Memory fails me not, it was in the Part
of Hippolitus, who when he is pressed by an Oath, which he had taken to keep
Silence, returned for Answer, That he had taken the Oath with his Tongue, but
not with his Heart. Had a Person of a vicious Character made such a Speech, it
might have been allowed as a proper Representation of the Baseness of his
Thoughts: But such an Expression out of the Mouth of the virtuous Hippolitus,
was giving a Sanction to Falsehood, and establishing Perjury by a Maxim.

Having got over all Interruptions, I have set apart to Morrow for the closing
of my Vision.

The TATLER. [No 123.
Audire atque Togam jubeo componere, quisquis
Ambitione mala, aut Argenti pallet Amore.
Hor.
From Thursd. Jan. 19. to Saturd. Jan. 21. 1709.
From my own Apartment, January 20.
A Continuation of the Vision.
WITH much Labor and Difficulty I passed through the first Part of my Vision,
and recovered the Center of the Wood, from whence I had the Prospect of the
Three great Roads. I here joined my self to the middle-aged Party of Mankind,
who marched behind the Standard of Ambition. The great Road lay in a direct
Line, and was terminated by the Temple of Virtue. It was planted on each Side
with Laurels, which were intermixed with Marble Trophies, Carved Pillars, and
Statues of Lawgivers, Heroes, Statesmen, Philosophers, and Poets. The Persons
who traveled up this great Path, were such whose Thoughts were bent upon doing
eminent Services to Mankind, or promoting the Good of their Country. On each
Side of this great Road were several Paths, that were also laid out in straight
Lines, and ran parallel with it. These were most of them covered Walks, and
received into them Men of retired Virtue, who proposed to themselves the same
End of their Journey, though they chose to make it in Shade and Obscurity. The
Edifices at the Extremity of the Walk were so contrived, that we could not see
the Temple of Honor by reason of the Temple of Virtue, which stood before it.
At the Gates of this Temple we were met b^ the Goddess of it, who conducted us
into tha^ of Honor, which was joined to the other Edifice by a beautiful
Triumphal Arch, and had no other Entrance into it. When the Deity of the Inner
Structure had received us, she presented us in a Body to a Figure that was
placed over the high Altar, and was the Emblem of Eternity. She sat on a Globe
in the midst of a Golden Zodiac, holding the Figure of a Sun in one Hand, and a
Moon in the other. Her Head was veiled, and her Feet covered. Our Hearts glowed
within us as we stood amidst the Sphere of Light which this Image cast on every
Side of it.

Having seen all that happened to this Band of Adventurers, I repaired to
another Pile of Building that stood within View of the Temple of Honor, and
was raised in Imitation of it, upon the very same Model; but at my Approach to
it, I found, that the Stones were laid together without Mortar, and that the
whole Fabric stood upon so weak a Foundation, that it shook with every Wind
that blew. This was called the Temple of Vanity. The Goddess of it sat in the
midst of a great many Tapers, that burned Day and Night, and made her appear
much better than she would have done in open Daylight. Her whole Art, was to
show her self more beautiful and majestic than she really was. For which
Reason, she had painted her Face, and wore a Cluster of false Jewels upon her
Breast: But what I more particularly observed, was, the Breadth of her
Petticoat, which was made altogether in the Fashion of a modern Fardingal. This
Place was filled with Hypocrites, Pedants, Free-Thinkers, and prating
Politicians; with a Rabble of those who have only Titles to make them great
Men. Female Votaries crowded the Temple, choked up the Avenues of it, and were
more in Number than the Sand upon the Seashore. I made it my Business in my
Return toward that Part of the Wood from whence I first set out, to observe
the Walks which led to this Temple; for I met in it several who had begun their
Journey with the Band of virtuous Persons, and traveled some Time in their
Company: But upon Examination I found, that there were several Paths which led
out of the great Road into the Sides of the Wood, and ran into so many crooked
Turns and Windings, that those who traveled through them often turned their
Backs upon the Temple of Virtue, then crossed the straight Road, and sometimes
marched in it for a little Space, till the crooked Path which they were engaged
in again led them into the Wood. The several Alleys of these Wanderers had
their particular Ornaments: One of them I could not but take Notice of, in the
Walk of the mischievous Pretenders to Politics, which had at every Turn the
Figure of a Person, whom by the Inscription I found to be Machiavel, pointing
out the Way with an extended Finger like a Mercury.

I was now returned in the same Manner as before, with a Design to observe
carefully every Thing that passed in the Region of Avarice, and the Occurrences
in that Assembly, which was made up of Persons of my own Age. This Body of
Travelers had not gone far in the Third great Road, before it led them
insensibly into a deep Valley, in which they journied several Days with great
Toil and Uneasiness, and without the necessary Refreshments of Food and Sleep.
The only Relief they met with, was in a River that ran through the Bottom of
the Valley on a Bed of Golden Sand: They often drank of this Stream, which had
such a particular Quality in it, that though it refreshed them for a Time, it
rather inflamed than quenched their Thirst. On each Side of the River was a
Range of Hills full of precious Ore; for where the Rains had washed off the
Earth, one might see in several Parts of them long Viens of Gold, and Rocks
that looked like pure Silver. We were told, That the Deity of the Place had
forbad any of his Votaries to dig into the Bowels of these Hills, or convert
the Treasures they contained to any Use, under Pain of Starving. At the End of
the Valley stood The Temple of Avarice, made after the Manner of a
Fortification, and surrounded with a thousand tripple-headed Dogs, that were
placed there to keep off Beggars. At our Approach they all fell a Barking, and
would have very much terrified us, had not an old Woman who had called her self
by the forged Name of Competency offered her self for our Guide. She carrried
under her Garment a Golden Bow, which she no sooner held up in her Hand, but
the Dogs lay down, and the Gates flew open for our Reception. We were led
through an Hundred Iron Doors, before we entered the Temple. At the upper End
of it sat the God of Avarice, with a long filthy Beard, and a meagre starved
Countenance, enclosed with Heaps of Ingots, and Pyramids of Money, but half
naked and shivering with Cold. On his Right Hand was a Fiend called Rapine, and
on his Left a particular Favorite to whom he had given the Title of Parsimony.
The First was his Collector, and the other his Cashier.

There were several long Tables placed on each Side of the Temple, with
respective Officers attending behind them. Some of these I enquired into. At
the first Table was kept the Office of Corruption. Seeing a Solicitor extremely
busy, and whispering every Body that passed by, I kept my Eye upon him very
attentively, and saw him often going up to a Person that had a Pen in his Hand,
with a Multiplication Table and an Almanac before him, which as I afterward
heard, was all the Learning he was Master of. The Solicitor would often apply
himself to his Ear, and at the same Time convey Money into his Hand, for which
the other would give him out a Piece of Paper or Parchment, signed and sealed
in Form. The Name of this dextrous and successful Solicitor was Bribery. At the
next Table was the Office of Extortion. Behind it sat a Person in a Bob-Wig,
counting over a great Sum of Money. He gave out little Purses to several, who
after a short Tour brought him, in Return, Sacks full of the same Kind of Coin.
I saw at the same Time a Person called Fraud, who sat behind a Counter with
false Scales, light Weights, and scanty Measures; by the skilful Application of
which Instruments, she had got together an immense Heap of Wealth. It would be
endless to name the several Officers, or describe the Voraries that attended in
this Temple. There were many old Men panting and breathless, reposing their
Heads on Bags of Money; nay many of them actually dying, whose very Pangs and
Convulsions (which rendered their Purses useless to them) only made them grasp
'em the faster. There were some tearing with one Hand all Things, even to the
Garments and Flesh of many miserable Persons who stood before them, and with
the other Hand, throwing away what they had seized, to Harlots, Flatterers, and
Panders, that stood behind them.

On a sudden the whole Assembly fell a trembling, and upon Enquiry, I found,
that the great Room we were in was haunted with a Spectre, that many Times a
Day appeared to them, and terrified them to Distraction.

In the midst of their Terror and Amazement, the Apparition entered, which I
immediately knew to be Poverty. Whether it were by my Acquaintance with this
Phantom, which had rendered the Sight of her more familiar to me, or however it
was, she did not make so indigent or frightful a Figure in my Eye as the God of
this loathsome Temple. The miserable Votaries of this Place were, I found, of
another Mind. Every one fancied himself threatened by the Apparition as she
stalked about the Room, and began to lock their Coffers, and tie their Bags,
with the utmost Fear and Trembling.

I must confess, I look upon the Passion which I saw in this unhappy People to
be of the same Nature with those unaccountable Antipathies which some Persons
are born with, or rather as a kind of Phrensy, not unlike that which throws a
Man into Terrors and Agonies at the Sight of so useful and innocent a Thing as
Water. The whole Assembly was surprised, when, instead of paying my Devotions
to the Deity whom they all adored, they saw me address my self to the Phantom.

Oh Poverty! (said I) my first Petition to thee is, That thou would never
appear to me hereafter; but if thou will not grant me this, that thou would
not bear a Form more terrible than that in which thou appearest to me at
present. Let not thy Threats and Menaces betray me to any Thing that is
ungrateful or unjust. Let me not shut my Ears to the Cries of the Needy. Let me
not forget the Person that has deserved well of me. Let me not, for any Fear of
thee, desert my Friend, my Principles, or my Honor. If Wealth is to visit me,
and to come with her usual Attendants, Vanity and Avarice, do thou, Oh Poverty!
hasten to my Rescue; but bring along with thee the two Sisters, in whose
Company thou art always cheerful, Liberty and Innocence. The Conclusion of this
Vision must be deferred to another Opportunity.

The TATLER. [No 124.
-- Ex humili summa ad Fastigia Rerum
Extollit, quoties voluit Fortuna jocari.
Juv.
From Saturday Jan. 21. to Tuesday Jan. 24. 1709.
From my own Apartment, January 23.
I Went on Saturday last to make a Visit in the City; and as I passed through
Cheapside, I saw Crowds of People turning down toward the Bank, and struggling
who should first get their Money into the new-erected Lottery. It gave me a
great Notion of the Credit of our present Government and Administration, to
find People press as eagerly to pay Money, as they would to receive it; and at
the same Time a due Respect for that Body of Men who have found out so pleasing
an Expedient for carrying on the Common Cause, that they have turned a Tax into
a Diversion. The Cheerfulness of Spirit, and the Hopes of Success, which this
Project has occasioned in this great City, lightens the Burden of the War, and
puts me in Mind of some Games which they say were invented by wise Men who were
Lovers of their Country, to make their Fellow-Citizens undergo the Tediousness
and Fatigues of a long Siege. I think there is a Kind of Homage due to Fortune,
(if I may call it so) and that I should be wanting to my self if I did not lay
in my Pretenses to her Favor, and pay my Compliments to her by Recommending a
Ticket to her Disposal. For this Reason, upon my Return to my Lodgings, I sold
off a Couple of Globes and a Telescope, which, with the Cash I had by me,
raised the Sum that was requisite for that Purpose. I find by my Calculations,
that it is but an Hundred and Fifty Thousand to One against my being worth a
Thousand Pounds per Annum for Thirty two Years; and if any Plumb in the City
will lay me an Hundred and Fifty Thousand Pounds to Twenty Shillings (which is
an even Bett) that I am not this fortunate Man, I will take the Wager, and
shall look upon him as a Man of singular Courage and Fair-dealing, having given
Orders to Mr. Morphew to subscribe such a Policy in my Behalf, if any Person
accepts of the Offer. I must confess, I have had such private Intimations from
the Twinkling of a certain Star in some of my Astronomical Observations, that I
should be unwilling to take Fifty Pounds a Year for my Chance, unless it were
to oblige a particular Friend. My chief Business at present is, to prepare my
Mind for this Change of Fortune: For as Seneca, who was a greater Moralist, and
a much richer Man than I shall be with this Addition to my present Income,
says, Munera ista Fortune putatis? Insidiae sunt. What we look upon as Gifts
and Presents of Fortune, are Traps and Snares which she lays for the Unwary. I
am arming my self against her Favors with all my Philosophy; and that I may
not lose my self in such a Redundance of unnecessary and superfluous Wealth^ I
have determined to settle an Annual Pension ou^ of it upon a Family of
Palatines, and by tha^ Means give these unhappy Strangers a Taste o^ British
Property. At the same Time, as I have an excellent Servant Maid, whose
Diligence i^ attending me has increased in Proportion to my Infirmities, I
shall settle upon her the Revenu^ arising out of the Ten Pounds, and amounting
t^ Fourteen Shillings per Annum, with which she may retire into Wales, where
she was born a Gentlewoman, and pass the remaining Part of he^ ^ays in a
Condition suitable to her Birth an^ Quality. It was impossible for me to make
an Inspection into my own Fortune on this Occasion, without seeing at the same
Time the Fate of others who are embarked in the same Adventure. And indeed it
was a great Pleasure to me to observe, That the War, which generally
impoverishes those who furnish out the Expense of it, will by this Means give
Estates to some, without making others the poorer for it. I have lately seen
several in Liveries, who will give as good of their own very suddenly; and took
a particular Satisfaction in the Sight of a young Country Wench, whom I this
Morning passed by as she was whirling her Mop, with her Petticoats tucked up
very agreeably, who, if there is any Truth in my Art, is within Ten Months of
being the handsomest great Fortune in Town. I must confess, I was so struck
with the Foresight of what she is to be, that I treated her accordingly, and
said to her, Pray, young Lady, permit me to pass by. I would for this Reason
advise all Masters and Mistresses to carry it with great Moderation and
Condescension toward their Servants till next Michaelmas, lest the Superiority
at that Time should be inverted. I must likewise admonish all my Brethren and
Fellow-Adventurers, to fill their Minds with proper Arguments for their Support
and Consolation in case of ill Success. It so happens in this Particular, that
though the Gainers will have Reason to rejoice, the Losers will have no Reason
to complain. I remember, the Day after the Thousand Pound Prize was drawn in
the Penny Lottery, I went to visit a splenatick Acquaintance of mine, who was
under much Dejection, and seemed to me to have suffered some great
Disappointment. Upon Enquiry, I found he had put Twopence for himself and his
Son into the Lottery, and that neither of them had drawn the Thousand Pound.
Hereupon this unlucky Person took Occasion to enumerate the Misfortunes of his
Life, and concluded with telling me, That he never was successful in any of his
Undertakings. I was forced to comfort him with the common Reflection upon such
Occasions, That Men of the greatest Merit are not always Men of the greatest
Success, and that Persons of his Character must not expect to be as happy as
Fools. I shall proceed in the like Manner with my Rivals and Competitors for
the Thousand Pounds a Year which we are now in Pursuit of; and that I may give
general Content to the whole Body of Candidates, I shall allow all that draw
Prizes to be fortunate, and all that miss them to be wise.

I must not here omit to acknowledge, that I have received several Letters upon
this Subject, but find one common Error running through them all, which is,
That the Writers of them believe their Fate in these Cases depends upon the
Astrologer, and not upon the Stars, as in the following Letter from one, who, I
fear, flatters himself with Hopes of Success, which are altogether groundless,
since he does not seem to me so great a Fool as he takes himself to be.

SIR,
COming to Town, and finding my Friend Mr. Partridge dead and buried, and you
the only Conjurer in Repute, I am under a Necessity of applying my self to you
for a Favor, which nevertheless I confess it would better become a Friend to
ask, than one who is, as I am, altogether a Stranger to you; but Poverty, you
know, is impudent; and as that gives me the Occasion, so that alone could give
me the Confidence to be thus importunate.

I am, Sir, very poor, and very desirous to be otherwise: I have got Ten
Pounds, which I design to venture in the Lottery now on foot. What I desire of
you is, that by your Art, you will choose such a Ticket for me as shall arise a
Benefit sufficient to maintain me. I must beg Leave to inform you, That I am
good for nothing, and must therefore insist upon a larger Lot than would
satisfy those who are capable by their own Abilities of adding something to
what you should assign 'em; whereas I must expect an absolute, independent
Maintenance, because, as I said, I can do nothing. It Is possible, after this
free Confession of mine, you may think I don't deserve to be rich; but I hope
you will likewise observe, I can ill afford to be poor. My own Opinion is, I am
well qualified for an Estate, and have a good Title to Luck in a Lottery; but I
resign my self wholly to your Mercy, not without Hopes that you will consider,
the less I deserve, the greater the Generosity in you. If you reject me, I have
agreed with an Acquaintance of mine to bury me for my Ten Pounds. I once more
recommend my self to your Favor, and bid you Adieu.


I cannot forbear publishing another Letter which I have received, because it
redounds to my own Credit, as well as to that of a very honest Footman.

Jan. 23. 1709/10. Mr. Bickerstaff,
I AM bound in Justice to acquaint you, That I put an Advertisement into your
last Paper about a Watch which was lost, and was brought to me on the very Day
your Paper came out by a Footman, who told me, That he would have brought it,
if he had not read your Discourse of that Day against Avarice; but that since
he had read it, he scorned to take a Reward for doing what in Justice he ought
to do. I am,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, John Hamond.


The TATLER. [No 125.
Quem mala Stultitia, and quaecunque Inscitia very
Caecum agit, Insanum Chrysippi Porticus, and Grex
Autumat. Haec Populos, haec magnos formula Reges,
Excepto Sapiente, tenet. --
Hor.
From Tuesd. Jan. 24. to Thursd. Jan. 26. 1709.
From my own Apartment, Jan. 25.
THere is a Sect of ancient Philosophers, who, I think, have left more Volumes
behind them, and those better written, than any other of the Fraternities in
Philosophy. It was a Maxim of this Sect, That all those who do not live up to
the Principles of Reason and Virtue, are Madmen. Every one, who governs himself
by these Rules, is allowed the Title of Wise, and reputed to be in his Senses;
and every one in Proportion, as he deviates from them, is pronounced Frantic
and Distracted. Cicero having chosen this Maxim for his Theme, takes Occasion
to argue from it very agreeably with Clodius, his implacable Adversary, who had
procured his Banishment. A City (says he) is an Assembly distinguished into
Bodies of Men, who are in Possession of their respective Rights and Privileges,
cast under proper Subordinations, and in all its Parts obedient to the Rules of
Law and Equity. He then represents the Government from whence he was banished,
at a Time when the Consul, Senate, and Laws, had lost their Authority, as a
Commonwealth of Lunaricks. For this Reason, he regards his Expulsion from Rome,
as a Man would being turned out of Bedlam, if the Inhabitants of it should
drive him out of their Walls as a Person unfit for their Community. We are
therefore to look upon every Man's Brain to be touched, however he may appear
in the general Conduct of his Life, if he has an unjustifiable Singularity in
any Part of his Conversation or Behavior: Or if he swerves from right Reason,
however common his Kind of Madness may be, we shall not excuse him for its
being epidemical, it being our present Design to clap up all such as have the
Marks of Madness upon them, who are now permitted to go about the Streets, for
no other Reason, but because they do no Mischief in their Fits. Abundance of
imaginary great Men are put in Straw to bring them to a right Sense of
themselves: And is it not altogether as reasonable, that an insignificant Man,
who has an immoderate Opinion of his Merits, and a quite different Notion of
his own Abilities from what the rest of the World entertain, should have the
same Care taken of him, as a Beggar who fancies himself a Duke or a Prince? Or,
Why should a Man, who starves in the Midst of Plenty, be trusted with himself,
more than he who fancies he is an Emperor in the Midst of Poverty? I have
several Women of Quality in my Thoughts, who set so exorbitant a Value upon
themselves, that I have often most heartily pitied them, and wished them, for
their Recovery, under the same Discipline with the Pewterer's Wife. I find by
several Hints in ancient Authors, that when the Romans were in the Height of
Power and Luxury, they assigned out of their vast Dominions an Island called
Anticyra, as an Habitation for Madmen. This was the Bedlam of the Roman Empire,
whither all Persons who had lost their Wits used to resort from all Parts of
the World in Quest of them. Several of the Roman Emperors were advised to
repair to this Island; but most of them, instead of listening to such sober
Counsels, gave Way to their Distraction, till the People knocked them in the
Head as despairing of their Cure. In short, it was as usual for Men of
distempered Brains to take a Voyage to Anticyra in those Days, as it is in ours
for Persons who have a Disorder in their Lungs to go to Montpellier.

The prodigious Crops of Hellebore with which this whole Island abounded, did
not only furnish them with incomparable Tea, Snuff, and Hungary Water, but
impregnated the Air of the Country with such sober and salutiferous Steams, as
very much comforted the Heads, and refreshed the Senses, of all that breathed
in it. A discarded Statesman, that at his first Landing appeared stark staring
mad, would become calm in a Week's Time; and upon his Return Home, live easy
and satisfied in his Retirement. A moaping Lover would grow a pleasant Fellow
by that Time he had rid thrice about the Island; and a hair-brained Rake, after
a short Stay in the Country, go Home again a composed, grave, worthy Gentleman.

I have premised these Particulars before I enter on the main Design of this
Paper, because I would not be thought altogether notional in what I have to
say, and pass only for a Projector in Morality. I could quote Horace, and
Seneca, and some other ancient Writers of good Repute, upon the same Occasion,
and make out by their Testimony, that our Streets are filled with distracted
Persons; that our Shops and Taverns, private and public Houses, swarm with
them; and that it is very hard to make up a tolerable Assembly without a
Majority of them. But what I have already said, is, I hope, sufficient to
justify the ensuing Project, which I shall therefore give some Account of
without any further Preface. 1. It is humbly proposed, That a proper Receptacle
or Habitation be forthwith erected for all such Persons as, upon due Trial and
Examination, shall appear to be out of their Wits. 2. That to serve the present
Exigency, the College in Moor-Fields be very much extended at both Ends; and
that it be converted into a Square, by adding three other Sides to it. 3. That
no Body be admitted into these Three additional Sides, but such whose Phrensy
can lay no Claim to an Apartment in that Row of Building which is already
erected. 4. That the Architect, Physician, Apothecary, Surgeon, Keepers,
Nurses, and Porters, be all and each of them cracked, provided that their
Phrensy does not lie in the Profession or Employment to which they shall
severally and respectively be assigned. N.B. It is thought fit to give the
foregoing Notice, that none may present himself here for any Post of Honor or
Profit who is not duly qualified.

5. That over all the Gates of the additional Buildings, there be Figures
placed in the same Manner as over the Entrance of the Edifice already erected;
provided, they represent such Distractions only as are proper for those
additional Buildings; as, of an envious Man gnawing his own Flesh, a Gamester
pulling himself by the Ears, and knocking his Head against a Marble Pillar, a
covetous Man warming himself over a Heap of Gold, a Coward flying from his own
Shadow, and the like.


Having laid down this general Scheme of my Design, I do hereby invite all
Persons who are willing to encourage so publick-spirited a Project, to bring in
their Contributions as soon as possible, and to apprehend forthwith any
Politician whom they shall catch raving in a Coffee-house, or any Free-thinker
whom they shall find publishing his Deliriums, or any other Person who shall
give the like manifest Signs of a crazed Imagination: And I do at the same Time
give this public Notice to all the Madmen about this great City, That they may
return to their Senses with all imaginable Expedition, lest if they should come
into my Hands, I should put them into a Regimen which they would not like: for
if I find any one of them persist in his frantic Behavior, I will make him in
a Month's Time as famous as ever Oliver's Porter was.

The TATLER. [No 126.
Anguillam Canda tenes.
T. D'Urfey.
From Thursd. Jan. 26. to Saturd. Jan. 28. 1709.
From my own Apartment, Jan. 27.
THere is no Sort of Company so agreeable as that of Women who have good Sense
without Affectation, and can converse with Men without any private Design of
imposing Chains and Fetters. Belvidera, whom I visited this Evening, is one of
these. There is an invincible Prejudice in Favor of all she says, from her
being a beautiful. Woman, because she does not consider her self as such when
she talks to you. This amiable Temper gives a certain Tincture to all her
Discourse, and made it very agreeable to me, till we were interrupted by Lydia,
a Creature who has all the Charms that can adorn a Woman. Her Attractions would
indeed be irresistible, but that she thinks them so, and is always employing
them in Stratagems and Conquests. When I turned my Eye upon her as she sat
down, I saw she was a Person of that Character, which, for the further
Information of my Country Correspondents, I had long wanted an Opportunity of
explaining. Lydia is a finished Coquet; which is a Sect among Women of all
others the most mischievous, and makes the greatest Havoc and Disorder in
Society. I went on in the Discourse I was in with Belvidera, without showing
that I had observed any Thing extraordinary in Lydia: Upon which, I immediately
saw her look me over as some very ill-bred Fellow; and casting a scornful
Glance on my Dress, give a Shrug at Belvidera. But as much as she despised me,
she wanted my Admiration, and made Twenty Offers to bring my Eyes her Way: But
I reduced her to a Restlesness in her Seat, and impertinent playing of her Fan,
and many other Motions and Gestures, before I took the least Notice of her. At
last I looked at her with a Kind of Surprise, as if she had before been
unobserved by reason of an ill Light where she sar. It is not to be expressed
what a sudden Joy I saw rise in her Countenance, even at the Approbation of
such a very old Fellow: But she did not long enjoy her Triumph without a Rival;
for there immediately entered Castabella, a Lady of a quite contrary Character,
that is to say, as eminent a Prude as Lydia is a Coquet. Belvidera gave me a
Glance, which methought intimated, that they were both Curiosities in their
Kind, and worth remarking. As soon as we were again seated, I stole Looks at
each Lady, as if I was comparing their Perfections. Belvidera observed it, and
began to lead me into a Discourse of them both to their Faces, which is to be
done easily enough; for one Woman is generally so intent upon the Faults of
another, that she has not Reflection enough to observe when her own are
represented. I have taken Notice, Mr. Bickerstaff (said Belvidera), that you
have in some Parts of your Writings drawn Characters of our Sex, in which you
have not, to my Apprehension, been clear enough and distinct, particularly in
those of a Prude and a Coquet. Upon the Mention of this, Lydia was rouzed with
the Expectation of seeing Castabella's Picture, and Castabella with the Hopes
of that of Lydia. Madam (said I to Belvidera), when we consider Nature, we
shall often find very contrary Effects flow from the same Cause. The Prude and
Coquet (as different as they appear in their Behavior) are in Reality the same
Kind of Women: The Motive of Action in both is the Affectation of pleasing Men.
They are Sisters of the same Blood and Constitution, only one chooses a grave,
the other a light, Dress. The Prude appears more virtuous, the Coquet more
vicious, than she really is. The distant Behavior of the Prude, tends to the
same Purpose as the Advances of the Coquet; and you have as little Reason to
fall into Despair from the Severity of the one, as to conceive Hope from the
Familiarity of the latter. What leads you into a clear Sense of their Character
is, That you may observe each of them has the Distinction of Sex in all her
Thoughts, Words and Actions. You can never mention any Assembly you were lately
in, but one asks you with a rigid, the other with a sprightly Air, Pray what
Men were there? As for Prudes, it must be confessed, that there are several of
them, who, like Hypocrites, by long Practice of a false Part, become sincere;
or at least delude themselves into a Relief that they are so.

For the Benent of this Society of Ladies, I shall propose one Rule to them as
a Test of their Virtue. I find in a very celebrated modern Author, That the
great Foundress of the Pietists, Madam de Bourignon, who was no less famous for
the Sanctity of her Life than for the Singularity of some of her Opinions, was
used to boast, That she had not only the Spirit of Continency in her self, but
that she had also the Power of communicating it to all who beheld her. This the
Scoffers of those Days called, The Gift of Infrigidation, and took Occasion
from it to rally her Face, rather than admire her Virtue. I would therefore
advise the Prude, who has a Mind to know the Integrity of her own Heart, to lay
her Hand seriously upon it, and to examine her self, whether she could
sincerely rejoice in such a Gift of conveying chaste Thoughts to all her Male
Beholders. If she has any Aversion to the Power of Inspring so great a Virtue,
whatever Notion she may have of her Perfection, she deceives her own Heart, and
is still in the State of Prudery. Some perhaps will look upon the Boast of
Madam de Bourignon as the utmost Ostentation of a Prude.

If you would see the Humor of a Coquet pushed to the last Excess, you may
find an Instance of it in the following Story, which I will set down at length,
because it pleased me when I read it, though I cannot recollect in what Author.

A young Coquet Widow in France having been followed by a Gascon of Quality,
who had boasted among his Companions of some Favors which he had never
received, to be revenged of him, sent for him one Evening, and told him, It was
in his Power to do her a very particular Service. The Gascon, with much
Profession of his Readiness to obey her Commands, begged to hear in what Manner
she designed to employ him. You know (said the Widow) my Friend Belinda, and
must often have heard of the Jealousy of that impotent Wretch her Husband. Now
it is absolutely necessary, for the carrying on a certain Affair, That his Wife
and I should be together a whole Night. What I have to ask of you is, to dress
your self in her Night-Clothes, and lie by him a whole Night in her Place, that
he may not miss her while she is with me. The Gascon (though of a very lively
and undertaking Complexion) began to startle at the Proposal. Nay, says the
Widow, if you have not the Courage to go through what I ask of you, I must
employ some Body else that will. Madam; (says the Gascon) I Will kill him for you
if you please; but for lying with him! -- How is it possible to do it without
being discovered? If you do not discover your self, (says the Widow) you will
lie safe enough, for he is past all Curiosity. He comes in at Night while she
is asleep, and goes out in a Morning before she awakes, and is in Pain for
nothing, so he knows she is there. Madam, (replied the Gascon) How can you
reward me for passing a Night with this old Fellow? The Widow answered with a
Laugh, Perhaps by admitting you to pass a Night with one you think more
agreeable. He took the Hint, put on his Night-Clothes, and had not been a-bed
above an Hour before he heard a Knocking at the Door, and the Treading of one
who approached the other Side of the Bed, and who he did not question was the
good Man of the House. I do not know, whether the Story would be better by
telling you in this Place, or at the End of it, That the Person who went to Bed
to him, was our young Coquet Widow. The Gascon was in a terrible Fright every
Time she moved in the Bed, or turned toward him, and did not fail to shrink
from her till he had conveyed himself to the very Ridge of the Bed. I will not
dwell upon the Perplexity he was in the whole Night, which was augmented, when
he observed that it was now bread Day, and that the Husband did not yet offer
to get up and go about his Business. All that the Gascon had for it, was to
keep his Face turned from him, and to feign himself asleep, when, to his utter
Confusion, the Widow at last puts out her Arm, and pulls the Bell at her Bed's
Head. In came her Friend, and Two or Three Companions to whom the Gascon had
boasted of her Favors. The Widow jumped into a Wrapping-Gown, and joined with
the rest in laughing at this Man of Intrigue.

The TATLER. [No 127.
Nimirum Insanus paucis videatur, eo quad
Maxima Pars Hominum Morbo jactatur exdem.
Hor.
From Saturd. Jan. 28. to Tuesd. Jan. 31. 1709.
From my own Apartment, Jan. 30.
THere is no Affection of the Mind so much blended in humane Nature, and
wrought into our very Constitution, as Pride. It appears under a Multitude of
Disguises, and breaks out in Ten Thousand different Symptoms. Every one feels
it in himself, and yet wonders to see it in his Neighbor. I must confess, I
met with an Instance of it the other Day where I should very little have
expected it. Who would believe the proud Person I am going to speak of, is a
Cobbler upon Ludgate Hill? This Artist being naturally a Lover of Respect, and
considering that his Circumstances are such that no Man living will give it
him, has contrived the Figure of a Beau in Wood, who stands before him in a
bending Posture, with his Hat under his Left Arm, and his Right Hand extended
in such a Manner as to hold a Thread, a Piece of Wax, or an Awl, according to
the particular Service in which his Master thinks fit to employ him. When I saw
him, he held a Candle in this obsequious Posture. I was very well pleased with
the Cobler's Invention, that had so ingeniously contrived an Inferior, and
stood a little while contemplating this inverted Idolatry, wherein the Image
did Homage to the Man. When we meet with such a fantastic Vanity in one of
this Order, it is no Wonder if we may trace it through all Degrees above it,
and particularly through all the Steps of Greatness. We casily see the
Absurdity of Pride when it enters into the Heart of a Cobbler; though in Reality
it is altogether as ridiculous and unreasonable wherever it takes Possession of
an Humane Creature. There is no Temptation to it from the Reflection upon our
Being in general, or upon any Comparative Perfection, whereby one Man may excel
another. The greater a Man's Knowledge is, the greater Motive he may seem to
have for Pride; but in the same Proportion as the one rises, the other sinks,
it being the chief Office of Wisdom to discover to us our Weaknesses and
Imperfections.

As Folly is the Foundation of Pride, the natural Superstructure of it is
Madness. If there was an Occasion for the Experiment, I would not question to
make a proud Man a Lunatic in Three Weeks Time, provided I had it in my Power
to ripen his Phrensy with proper Applications. It is an admirable Reflection in
Terence, where it is said of a Parasite, Hic Homines ex Stultis facit Insanos.
This Fellow (says he) has an Art of converting Fools into Madmen. When I was in
France, (the Region of Complaisance and Vanity) I have often observed, that a
great Man who has entered a Levy of Flatterers humble and temperate, has grown
so insensibly heated by the Court, which was paid him on all Sides, that he has
been quite distracted before he could get into his Coach.

If we consult the Collegiates of Moorfields, we shall find most of them are
beholden to their Pride for their Introduction into that magnificent Palace. I
had some Years ago the Curiosity to enquire into the particular Circumstances
of these whimsical Freeholders, and learned from their own Mouths the Condition
and Character of each of them. Indeed I found, that all I spoke to were Persons
of Quality. There were at that Time Five Dutchesses, Three Earls, Two Heathen
Gods, an Emperor, and a Prophet. There were also a great Number of such as were
locked up from their Estates, and others who concealed their Titles. A
Leather-seller of Taunton whispered me in my Ear, That he was the Duke of
Monmouth; but begged me not to betray him. At a little Distance from him sat a
Taylor's Wife, who asked me as I went by, if I had seen the Sword Bearer? Upon
which I presumed to ask her, Who she was? And was answered, My Lady Mayoress.

I was very sensibly touched with Compassion toward these miserable People;
and indeed, extremely mortified to see Humane Nature capable of being thus
disfigured. However, I reaped this Benefit from it, That I was resolved to
guard my self against a Passion which makes such Havoc in the Brain, and
produces so much Disorder in the Imagination. For this Reason, I have
endeavored to keep down the secret Swellings of Resentment, and stifle the
very first Suggestions of Self-esteem; to establish my Mind in Tranquillity, and
overvalue nothing in my own, or in another's Possession.

For the Benefit of such whose Heads are a little turned, though not to so
great a Degree as to qualify them for the Place of which I have been now
speaking, I shall assign one of the Sides of the College which I am erecting,
for the Cure of this dangerous Distemper.

The most remarkable of the Persons whose Disturbance arises from Pride, and
whom I shall use all possible Diligence to cure, are such as are hidden in the
Appearance of quite contrary Habits and Dispositions. Among such, I shall in
the first Place take Care of one who is under the most subtle Species of Pride
that I have observed (...) my whole Experience.

This Patient is a Person for whom I have a great Respect, as being an old
Courtier, and a Friend of mine in my Youth. The Man has but a bare Subsistence,
just enough to pay his Reckoning with us at the Trumpet: But by having spent
the Beginning of his Life in the Hearing of great Men and Persons of Power, he
is always promising to do good Offices, to introduce every Man he converses
with into the World; will desire one of ten Times his Substance to let him see
him sometimes, and hints to him, that he does not forget him. He answers to
Matters of no Consequence with great Circumspection; but however, maintains a
general Civility in his Words and Actions, and an insolent Benevolence to all
whom he has to do with: This he practices with a grave Tone and Air; and though I
am his Senior by Twelve Years, and richer by Forty Pounds per Annum, he had
Yesterday the Impudence to commend me to my Face, and tell me, He should be
always ready to encourage me. In a Word, he is a very insignificant Fellow, but
exceeding Gracious. The best Return I can make him for his Favors, is, to
carry him my self to Bedlam, and see him well taken Care of.

The next Person I shall provide for, is of a quite contrary Character; that
has in him all the Stiffness and Insolence of Quality, without a Grain of Sense
or Good Nature to make it either respected or beloved. His Pride has infected
every Muscle of his Face; and yet, after all his Endeavors to show Mankind
that he contemns them, he is only neglected by all that see him, as not of
Consequence enough to be hated.

For the Cure of this particular Sort of Madness, it will be necessary to break
through all Forms with him, and familiarize his Carriage by the Use of a good
Cudgel. It may likewise be of great Benefit to make him jump over a Stick half
a Dozen Times every Morning.

A Third whom I have in my Eye is a young Fellow, whose Lunacy is such, that he
boasts of nothing but what he ought to be ashamed of. He is vain of being
rotten, and talks publicly of having committed Crimes, which he ought to be
hanged for by the Laws of his Country.

There are several others whose Brains are hurt with Pride, and whom I may
hereafter attempt to recover; but shall conclude my present List with an old
Woman, who is just dropping into her Grave, that talks of nothing but her
Birth. Though she has not a Tooth in her Head, she expects to be valued for the
Blood in her Veins, which she fancies is much better than that which glows in
the Cheeks of Belinda, and sets half the Town on Fire.

The TATLER. [No 128.
-- Veniunt a Dote Sagittae,
Juv.
From Tuesday Jan. 31. to Thursday Febr. 2. 1709.
From my own Apartment, February 1.
THis Morning I received a Letter from a Fortune-Hunter, which being better in
its Kind than Men of that Character usually write, I have thought fit to
communicate to the Public.

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
SIR,
I Take the Boldness to recommend to your Care the enclosed Letter, not knowing
how to communicate it but by your Means to the agreeable Country Maid you
mention with so much Honor in your Discourse concerning the Lottery.

I should be ashamed to give you this Trouble without offering at some small
Requital: I shall therefore direct a new Pair of Globes and a Telescope of the
best Maker, to be left for you at Mr. Morphew's, as a Testimony of the great
Respect with which I am

Your most humble Servant, etc.


To Mopsa in Sheer-Lane.
Fairest Unknown,
IT being discovered by the Stars, that about Ten Months hence, you will run
the Hazard of being persecuted by many worthless Pretenders to your Person,
unless timely prevented, I now offer my Service for your Security against the
Persecution that threatens you. This is therefore to let you know, That I have
conceived a most extraordinary Passion for you; and that for several Days I
have been perpetually haunted with the Vision of a Person I have never yet
seen. To satisfy you that I am in my Senses, and that I do not mistake you for
any one of higher Rank, I assure you, that in your daily Employment, you appear
to my Imagination more agreeable in a short scanty Petticoat, than the finest
Woman of Quality in her spreading Fardingal; and that the dextrous Twirl of
your Mon has more native Charms, than the studied Airs of a Lady's Fan. In a
Word, I am captivated with your Menial Qualifications: The Domestic Virtues
adorn you like Attendant Cupids; Cleanliness and healthful Industry wait on all
your Motions; and Dust and Cobwebs fly your Approach.

Now, to give you an honest Account of my self, and that you may see my Designs
are honorable, I am an Esquire of an ancient Family, born to about Fifteen
Hundred Pounds a Year, half of which I have spent in discovering my self to be
a Fool, and with the rest am resolved to retire with some plain honest Partner,
and study to be wiser. I had my Education in a Laced Coat, and a French
Dancing-School; and by my Travel into Foreign Parts, have just as much Breeding
to spare, as you may think you want, which I intend to exchange as fast as I
can for old English Honesty and good Sense. I will not impose on you by a false
Recommendation of my Person, which (to show you my Sincerity) is none of the
handsomest, being of a Figure somewhat short; but what I want in Length, I make
out in Breadth. But in Amends for that and all other Defects, if you can like
me when you see me, I shall continue to you, whether I find you Fair, Black or
Brown,

The most constant of Lovers.
27 Jan. 1709/10.

This Letter seems to be written by a Wag, and for that Reason I am not much
concerned for what Reception Mopsa shall think fit to give it; but the
following certainly proceeds from a poor Heart, that languishes under the most
deplorable Misfortune that possibly can befall a Woman. A Man that is
treacherously dealt with in Love, may have Recourse to many Consolations. He
may gracefully break through all Opposition to his Mistress, or explain with
his Rival; urge his own Constancy, or aggravate the Falsehood by which it is
repaid. But a Woman that is ill ^reated, has no Refuge in her Griefs but in
Si^ence and Secrecy. The World is so unjust, that ^ Female Heart which has been
once touched, ^s thought for ever blemished. The very Grief ^n this Case is
looked upon as a Reproach, and ^ Complaint almost a Breach of Chastity. For
^hese Reasons, we see Treachery and Falsehood ^re become as it were Male-Vices,
and are sel^om found, never acknowledged, in the other Sex. This may serve to
introduce Statira's Letter, which, without any Turn or Art, has something so
pathetical and moving in it, that I verily believe it to be true, and therefore
heartily pity the injured Creature that writ it.

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
SIR,
YOU seem in many of your Writings to be a Man of a very compassionate Temper,
and well acquainted with the Passion of Love. This encourages me to apply my
self to you in my present Distress, which I believe you will look upon to be
very great, and treat with Tenderness, notwithstanding it wholly arises from
Love, and that it is a Woman that makes this Confession. I am now in the Twenty
third Year of my Age, and have for a great while entertained the Addresses of a
Man who I thought loved me more than Life. I am sure I did him; and must own to
you, not without some Confusion, that I have thought on nothing else for these
two long Years, but the happy Life we should lead together, and the Means I
should use to make my self still dearer to him. My Fortune was indeed much
beyond his; and as I was always in the Company of my Relations, he was forced
to discover his Inclinations, and declare himself to me by Stories of other
Persons, kind Looks, and many Ways, which he knew too well that I understood.
Oh! Mr. Bickerstaff, it is impossible to tell you, how industrious I have been
to make him appear lovely in my Thoughts. I made it a Point of Conscience to
think well of him, and of no Man else: But he has since had an Estate fallen to
him, and makes Love to another of a greater Fortune than mine. I could not
believe the Report of this at first; but about a Fortnight ago I was convinced
of the Truth of it by his own Behavior. He came to give our Family a formal
Visit, when, as there were several in Company, and many Things talked of, the
Discourse fell upon some unhappy Woman who was in my own Circumstances. It was
said by one in the Room, That they could not believe the Story could be true,
because they did not believe any Man could be so false. Upon which, I stole a
Look upon him with an Anguish not to be expressed. He saw my Eyes full of
Tears; yet had the Cruelty to say, That he could see no Falsehood in Alterations
of this Nature, where there had been no Contracts or Vows interchanged. Pray,
do not make a Jest of Misery, but tell me seriously your Opinion of his
Behavior; and if you can have any Pity for my Condition, publish this in your
next Paper, that being the only Way I have of complaining of his Unkindness,
and showing him the Injustice he has done me. I am

Your humble Servant, The unfortunate Statira.


The Name my Correspondent gives her self, puts me in Mind of my old reading in
Romances, and brings into my Thoughts a Speech of the renowned Don Bellianis,
who, upon a Complaint made him of a discourteous Knight, that had left his
injured Paramour in the same Manner, dries up her Tears with a Promise of
Relief. Disconsolate Damsel, (quoth he) a foul Disgrace it were to all right
worthy Professors of Chivalry, if such a Blot to Knighthood should pass
unchastised. Give me to know the Abode of this recreant Lover, and I will give
him as a Feast to the Fowls of the Air, or drag him bound before you at my
Horse's Tail.

I am not ashamed to own my self a Champion of distressed Damsels, and would
venture as far to relieve them as Don Bellianis; for whic Reason, I do invite
this Lady to let me know the Name of the Traitor' who has deceived her and do
promise, not only her, but all the Fair One of Great Britain, who lie under the
same Calamity, to employ my Right Hand for their Redress, and serve them to my
last Drop of Ink.

The TATLER. [No 129
Ingenio Manus est and Cervix caesa.
Juv.
From Thursd. Febr. 2. to Saturd. Febr. 4. 1709.
From my own Apartment, February 3.
WHen my Paper for to Morrow was prepared for the Press, there came in this
Morning a Mail from Holland, which brought me several Advices from Foreign
Parts, and took my Thoughts off Domestic Affairs. Among others, I have a
Letter from a Burgher of Amsterdam, who makes me his Compliments, and tells me,
he has sent me several Draughts of Humorous and Satirical Pictures by the best
Hands of the Dutch Nation. They are a trading People, and in their very Minds
Mechanics. They express their Wit in Manufacture, as we do in Manuscript. He
informs me, That a very witty Hand has lately represented the present Posture
of Public Affairs in a Landscape, or rather Sea-piece, wherein the Potentates
of the Alliance are figured as their Interests correspond with, or affect each
other, under the Appearance of Commanders of Ships. These Vessels carry the
Colors of the respective Nations concerned in the present War. The whole
Design seems to tend to one Point, which is, That several Squadrons of British
and Dutch Ships are battering a French Man of War, in order to make her deliver
up a Longboat with Spanish Colors. My Correspondent informs me, That a Man
must understand the Compass perfectly well, to be able to comprehend the Beauty
and Invention of this Piece, which is so skilfully drawn, that the particular
Views of every Prince in Europe, are seen according as the Ships lie to the
main Figure in the Picture, and as that Figure may help or retard their
Sailing. It seems this Curiosity is now on Board a Ship bound for England, and
with other Rarities made a Present to me. As soon as it arrives, I design to
expose it to public View at my Secretary Mr. Lillie's, who shall have an
Explication of all the Terms of Art; and I doubt not but it will give as good
Content as the moving Picture in Fleet Street.

But above all the Honors I have received from the Learned World abroad, I am
most delighted with the following Epistle from Rome.

Pasquin of Rome, to Isaac Bickerstaff of Great Britain, Greeting.
SIR,
YOur Reputation has passed the Alps, and would have come to my Ears by this
Time, if I had any. In short, Sir, you are looked upon here as a Northern
Drole, and the greatest Vertuoso among the Tramontanes. Some indeed say, That
Mr. Bickerstaff and Pasquin are only Names invented, to father Compositions
which the natural Parent does not care for owning. But however that is, all
agree, that there are several Persons, who, if they durst attack you, would
endeavor to leave you no more Limbs than I have. I need not tell you that my
Adversaries have joined in a Confederacy with Time to demolish me, and that, if
I were not a very great Wit, ^ should make the worst Figure in Europe, being
abridged of my Legs, Arms, Nose, and Ears^ If you think fit to accept of the
Correspondenc^ of so facetious a Cripple, I shall from Tim^ to Time send you an
Account of what happen^ at Rome. You have only heard of it from Lati^ and Greek
Authors; may, perhaps, have read n^ Accounts from hence, but of a Triumph,
Ovation^ or Apotheosis, and will, doubtless, be surprize^ to see the
Description of a Procession, Jubilee, o^ Canonization. I shall however send you
wha^ the Place affords, in Return to what I shall receive from you. If you will
acquaint me wit^ your next Promotion of General Officers, I will send you an
Account of our next Advancement of Saints. If you will let me know wh^ is
reckoned the bravest Warrior in Great Britain, I Will tell you who is the best
Fiddler i^ Rome. If you will favor me with an Inventory of the Riches that
were brought into you^ Nation by Admiral Wager, I will not fail giving you an
Account of a Pot of Medals tha^ has been lately dug up here, and are no^ under
the Examination of our Ministers o^ State.

There is one Thing in which I desire yo^ would be very particular. What I
mean, i^ an exact List of all the Religions in Great Britain, as likewise the
Habits, which are sai^ here to be the great Points of Conscience i^ England,
whether they are made of Serge o^ Broad-Cloth, of Silk or Linen. I should b^
glad to see a Model of the most conscientiou^ Dress amongst you, and desire you
would sen^ me an Hat of each Religion; as likewise, i^ it be not too much
Trouble, a Cravat. It would also be very acceptable here to receive an Account
of those Two Religious Orders which are lately sprung up amongst you, the Whig,
and the Tories, with the Points of Doctrine, Severities in Discipline,
Penances, Mortifications, and good Works, by which they differ one from
another. It would be no less kind if you would explain to us a Word which they
do not understand even at our English Monastery, Toasts, and let us know
whether the Ladies so called are Nuns or Lay-Sisters.

In Return, I will send you the Secret History of several Cardinals, which I
have by me in Manuscript, with Gallantries, Amors, Politics, and Intrigues,
by which they made their Way to the Holy Purple.

But when I propose a Correspondence, I must not tell you what I intend to
advise you of hereafter, and neglect to give you what I have at present. The
Pope has been sick for this Fortnight of a violent Toothache, which has very
much raised the French Faction, and put the Conclave into a great Ferment.
Every one of the Pretenders to the Succession, is grown Twenty Years older than
he was a Fortnight ago. Each Candidate tries who shall cough and stoop most;
for these are at present the great Gifts that recommend to the Apostolical
Seat, which he stands the fairest for, who is likely to resign it the soonest.
I have known the Time when it used to rain Louis-d'Ors on such Occasions; but
whatever is the Matter, there are very few of them to be seen at present at
Rome, insomuch that it is thought a Man might purchase Infallibility at a very
reasonable Rate. It is nevertheless hoped, that his Holiness may recover, and
bury these his imaginary Successors.

There has lately been found an Humane Tooth in a Catecomb, which has engaged a
Couple of Convents in a Lawsuit; each of them pretending, That it belonged to
the Jaw Bone of a Saint who was of their Order. The College have sat upon it
thrice, and I fine there is a Disposition among them to take i out of the
Possession of both the contending Parties, by reason of a Speech which was made
by one of the Cardinals, who, by reason of its being found out of the Company
of any other Bones, asserted, That it migh be one of the Teeth which was
coughed ou by Aelia, an old Woman, whose Loss is recorded in Martial.

I have nothing remarkable to communicate to you of State Affairs, excepting
only, that the Pope has lately received an Horse from the German Ambassador, as
an Acknowledgment for the Kingdom of Naples, which is a Fief of the Church. His
Holiness refused this Horse from the Germans ever since the Duke of Anjou has
been possessed of Spain; but as they lately took Care to accompany it with a
Body of Ten thousand more, they have at last overcome his Holiness's Modesty,
and prevailed upon him to accept the Present. I am,

SIR, Your most Obedient, Humble Servant, PASQUIN.
P.S. Morforio is very much Yours.




The TATLER. [No 130.
-- At 'me
Cum magnisvixisse invite fatebitur usque
Invidia --
Hor.
From Saturday Febr. 4. to Tuesday Febr. 7. 1709.
Sheer-Lane, February 6.
I Find some of the most polite Latin Authors, who wrote at a Time when Rome
was in its Glory, speak with a certain noble Vanity of the Brightness and
Splendor of the Age in which they lived. Pliny often compliments his Emperor
Trajan upon this Head; and when he would animate him to any Thing great, or
dissuade him from any Thing that was improper, he insinuates, that it is
befitting or unbecoming (the Claritas and Nitor S^uli) that Period of Time
which was made illustrious by his Reign. When we cast our Eyes back on the
History of Mankind, and trace them through their several Successions to their
first Original, we sometimes see them breaking out in great and memorable
Actions, and towering up to the utmost Heights of Virtue and Knowledge; when;
perhaps, if we carry our Observation to a little Distance, we see them sunk
into Sloth and Ignorance, and altogether lost in Darkness and Obscurity.
Sometimes the whole Species is asleep for Two or Three Generations, and then
again awakens into Action, flourishes in Heroes, Philosophers, and Poets, who
do Honor to humane Nature, and leave such Tracts of Glory behind them, as
distinguish the Years, in which they acted their Part, from the ordinary Course
of Time.

Methinks a Man cannot, without a secret Satisfaction, consider the Glory of
the present Age, which will shine as bright as any other in the History of
Mankind. It is still big with great Events, and has already produced Changes
and Revolutions which will be as much admired by Posterity, as any that have
happened in the Days of our Fathers, or in the old Times before them. We have
seen Kingdoms divided and united, Monarchs erected and deposed, Nations
transferred from one Sovereign to another; Conquerors raised to such a
Greatness as has given a Terror to Europe, and thrown down by such a Fall, as
has moved their Pity.

But it is still a more pleasing View to an Englishman, to see his own Country
give the chief Influence to so illustrious an Age, and stand in the st ongest
Point of Light amidst the diffused Glory that surrounds it.

If we begin with Learned Men, we may observe, to the Honor of our Country,
That those who make the greatest Figure in most Arts and Sciences, are
universally allowed to be of the British Nation; and what is more remarkable,
That Men of the greatest Learning are among the Men of the greatest Quality.

A Nation may indeed abound with Persons of such uncommon Parts and Worth, as
may make them rather a Misfortune than a Blessing to the Public. Those who
singly might have been of infinite Advantage to the Age they live in, may, by
rising up together in the same Crisis of Time, and by interfering in their
Pursuits of Honor, rather interrupt than promote the Service of their Country.
Of this we have a famous Instance in the Republic of Rome, when Caesar,
Pompey, Cato, Cicero, and Brutus, endeavored to recommend themselves at the
same Time to the Admiration of their Contemporaries. Mankind was not able to
provide for so many extraordinary Persons at once, or find out Posts suitable
to their Ambition and Abilities. For this Reason, they were all as miserable in
their Deaths, as they were famous in their Lives, and occasioned, not only the
Ruin of each other, but also that of the Commonwealth.

It is therefore a particular Happiness to a People, when the Men of superior
Genius and Character are so justly disposed in the high Places of Honor, that
each of them moves in a Sphere which is proper to him, and requires those
particular Qualities in which he excels.

If I see a General commanding the Forces of his Country, whose Victories are
not to be paralleled in Story, and who is as famous for his Negotiations as his
Victories; and at the same Time see the Management of a Nation's Treasury in
the Hands of one who has always distinguished himself by a generous Contempt of
his own private Wealth, and an exact Frugality of that which belongs to the
Public; I cannot but think a People under such an Administration may promise
themselves Conquest abroad, and Plenty at home, If I were to wish for a proper
Person to preside over the Public Councils, it should certainly be one as much
admired for his universal Knowledge of Men and Things, as for his Eloquence,
Courage and Integrity, in the exerting of such extraordinary Talents.

Who is not pleased to see a Person in the highest Station in the Law, who was
the most eminent in his Profession, and the most accomplished Orator at the
Bar? Or at the Head of the Fleet a Commander, under whose Conduct the Common
Enemy received such a Blow, as he has never been able to recover?

Were we to form to our selves the Idea of one whom we should think proper to
govern a distant Kingdom, consisting chiefly of those who differ from us in
Religion, and are influenced by foreign Politics, would it not be such a one
as had signalized himself by an uniform and unshaken Zeal for the Protestant
Interest, and by his Dexterity in defeating the Skill and Artifice of its
Enemies. In short, if we find a great Man popular for his Honesty and Humanity,
as well as famed for his Learning and great Skill in all the Languages of
Europe, or a Person eminent for those Qualifications which make Men shine in
public Assemblies, or for that Steadiness, Constancy, and good Sense, which
carry a Man to the desired Point through all the Opposition of Tumult and
Prejudice, we have the Happiness to behold them all in Posts suitable to their
Characters.

Such a Constellation of great Persons, if I may so speak, while they shine out
in their own distinct Capacities, reflect a Luster upon each other, but in a
more particular Manner on their Sovereign, who has placed them in those proper
Situations, by which their Virtues become so beneficial to all Her Subjects. It
is the Anniversary of the Birthday of this Glorious Queen, which naturally led
me into this Field of Contemplation, and instead of joining in the public
Exultations that are made on such Occasions, to entertain my Thoughts with the
more serious Pleasure of ruminating upon the Glories of Her Reign.

While I behold Her surrounded with Triumphs, and adorned with all the
Prosperity and Success which Heaven ever shed on a Mortal, and still
considering her self as such, though the Person appears to me exceedinggreat that
has these just Honors paid to her; yet I must confess, she appears much great
er in that she receives them with such a glorious Humilility, and shows she has
no further Regard for them, than as they arise from these great Events which
have made her Subjects happy. For my own Part, I must confess, when I see
private Virtues in so high a Degree of Perfection, I am not astonished at any
extraordinary Success that attends them, but look upon public Triumphs as the
natural Consequences of religious Retirements.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Finding some Persons have mistaken Pasquin who was mentioned in my last, for
one who has been pilloried at Rome; I must here advertise them, That it is only
a maimed Statue so called, on which the private Scandal of that City is
generally pasted. Morforio is a Person of the same Quality, who is usually made
to answer whatever is published by the other: The Wits of that Place, like too
many of our own Country, taking Pleasure in setting innocent People together by
the Ears. The Mentioning of this Person, who is a great Wit, and a great
Cripple, put me in Mind of Mr. Eastcourt, who is under the same Circumstances.
He was formerly my Apothecary, and being at present disabled by the Gout and
Stone, I must recommend him to the Public on Thursday next, that admirable
Play of Ben. Johnson's, called, The silent Woman, being appointed to be acted
for his Benefit. It would be indecent for me to appear twice in a Season at
these ludicrous Diversions; but as I always give my Man and my Maid one Day in
the Year, I shall allow them this, and am promised by Mr. Eastcourt, my
ingenious Apothecary, that they shall have a Place kept for them in the first
Row of the Middle Gallery.

The TATLER. [No 131.
-- Scelus est jugulare Falernum,
Et dare Campano toxica saeva Mero.
Mart.
From Tuesd. February 7. to Thursd. February 9. 1709.
Sheer-Lane, February 8.
THere is in this City a certain Fraternity of Chemical Operators, who work
under Ground in Holes, Caverns, and dark Retirements, to conceal their
Mysteries from the Eyes and Observation of Mankind. These Subterraneous
Philosophers are daily employed in the Transmutation of Liquors, and, by the
Power of Magical Drugs and Incantations, raising under the Streets of London
the choicest Products of the Hills and Valleys of France. They can squeeze
Bourdeaux out of the Sloe, and draw Champagne from an Apple. Virgil in that
remarkable Prophecy, Incultisque rubens pendebit Sentibus Uva.
" The ripening Grape shall hang on every Thorn.
Seems to have hinted at this Art, which can turn a Plantation of Northern
Hedges into a Vineyard. These Adepts are known among one another by the Name of
Wine-Brewers, and I am afraid do great Injury, not only to Her Majesty's
Customs, but to the Bodies of many of Her good Subjects.

Having received sundry Complaints against these invisible Workmen, I ordered
the proper Officer of my Court to ferret them out of their respective Caves,
and bring them before me, which was Yesterday executed accordingly.

The Person who appeared against them was a Merchant, who had by him a great
Magazine of Wines that he had laid in before the War: But these Gentlemen (as
he said) had so vitiated the Nation's Palate, that no Man could believe his to
be French, because it did not taste like what they sold for such. As a Man never
pleads better than where his own Personal Interest is concerned, he exhibited
to the Court with great Eloquence, That this new Corporation of Druggists had
inflamed the Bills of Mortality, and puzzled the College of Physicians with
Diseases, for which they neither knew a Name or Cure. He accused some of giving
all their Customers Colicks and Megrims; and mentioned one who had boasted, he
had a Tun of Claret by him, that in a Fortnight's Time should give the Gout to
a Dozen of the healthfulest Men in the City, provided that their Constitutions
were prepared for it by Wealth and Idleness. He then enlarged, with a great
Show of Reason, upon the Prejudice which these Mixtures and Compositions had
done to the Brains of the English Nation; as is too visible (said he) from many
late Pamphlets, Speeches and Sermons, as well as from the ordinary
Conversations of the Youth of this Age. He then quoted an ingenious Person, who
would undertake to know by a Man's Writings, the Wine he most delighted in; and
on that Occasion named a certain Satyrist, whom he had discovered to be the
Author of a Lampoon, by the manifest Taste of the Sloe, which showed it self in
it by much Roughness, and little Spirit.

In the last Place, he ascribed to the unnatural Tumults and Fermentations
which these Mixtures raise in our Blood; the Divisions, Heats and Animosities,
that reign among us; and in particular, asserted most of the modern Enthusiasms
and Agitations to be nothing else but the Effects of adulterated Port.

The Council for the Brewers had a Face so extremely inflamed and illuminated
with Carbuncles, that I did not wonder to see him an Advocate for these
Sophistications. His Rhetoric was likewise such as I should have expected from
the common Draught, which I found he often drank to a great Excess. Indeed, I
was so surprised at his Figure and Parts, that I ordered him to give me a Taste
of his usual Liquor; which I had no sooner drank, but I found a Pimple rising
in my F^ehead; and felt such a sensible Decay in my Understanding, that I would
not proceed in the Trial till the Fume of it was entirely dissipated.

This notable Advocate had little to say in the Defense of his C^ents, but that
they were under a Necessity of making Claret if they would keep open their
Doors, it being the Nature of Mankind to love every Thing that is prohibited.
He further pretended to reason, That it might be as profitable to the Nation to
make French Wine as French Hats; and concluded with the great Advantage that
this had already brought to Part of the Kingdom. Upon which he informed the
Court, That the Lands in Herefordshire were raised Two Years Purchase since the
Beginning of the War.

When I had sent out my Summons to these People, I gave at the same Time Orders
to each of them to bring the several Ingredients he made use of in distinct
Phials, which they had done accordingly, and ranged them into two Rows on each
Side of the Court. The Workmen were drawn up in Ranks behind them. The Merchant
informed me, That in one Row of Phials were the several Colors they dealt in,
and in the other the Tastes. He then showed me on the Right Hand one who went by
the Name of Tom. Tintoret, who (as he told me) was the greatest Master in his
Coloring of any Vintner in London. To give me a Proof of his Art, he took a
Glass of fair Water; and by the Infusion of Three Drops out of one of his
Phials, converted it into a most beautiful pale Burgundy. Two more of the same
Kind heightened it into a perfect Languedoc: From thence it passed into a
florid Hermitage: And after having gone through Two or Three other Changes, by
the Addition of a single Drop, ended in a very deep Pontack. This ingenious
Vertuoso seeing me very much surprised at his Art, told me, That he had not an
Opportunity of showing it in Perfection, having only made use of Water for the
Groundwork of his Coloring: But that if I were to see an Operation upon
Liquors of stronger Bodies, the Art would appear to a much greater Advantage.
He added, That he doubted not but it would please my Curiosity to see the Cider
of one Apple take only a Vermilion, when another, with a less Quantity of the
same Infusion, would rise into a dark Purple, according to the different
Texture of Parts in the Liquor. He informed me also, That he could hit the
different Shades and Degrees of Red, as they appear in the Pink and the Rose,
the Clove and the Carnation, as he had Rhenish or Moselle, Perry or White Port,
to work in.

I was so satisfied with the Ingenuity of this Vertuoso, that, after having
advised him to quit so dishonest a Profession, I promised him, in Consideration
of his great Genius, to recommend him as a Partner to a Friend of mine, who has
heaped up great Riches, and is a Scarlet Dyer.

The Artists on my other Hand were ordered in the Second Place to make some
Experiments of their Skill before me: Upon which the famous Harry Sippet stepped
out, and asked me, What I would be pleased to drink? At the same Time he filled
out Three or Four white Liquors in a Glass, and told me, That it should be what
I pleased to tall for; adding very learnedly, That the Liquor before him was as
the naked Substance or First Matter of his Compound, to which he and his
Friend; who stood over against him, could give what Accidents or Form they
pleased. Finding him so great a Philosopher, I desired he would convey into it
the Qualities and Essence of right Bourdeaux. Coming, coming, Sir, (said he)
with the Air of a Drawer; and after having cast his Eye on the several Tastes
and Flavours that stood before him, he took up a little Cruit that was filled
with a kind of Inky Juice, and pouring some of it out into the Glass of
White Wind, presented it to me, and told me, This was the Wine over which most
of the Business of the last Term had been dispatched. I must confess, I looked
upon that sooty Drug which he held up in his Cruit as the Quintessence of
English Bourdeaux, and therefore desired him to give me a Glass of it by it
self, which he did with great Unwillingness. My Cat at that Time sat by me upon
the Elbow of my Chair; and as I did not care for making the Experiment upon my
self, I reached it to her to sip of it, which had like to have cost her her
Life; for notwithstanding it flung her at first into freakish Tricks, quite
contrary to her usual Gravity, in less than a quarter of an Hour she fell into
Convulsions; and had it not been a Creature more tenacious of Life than any
other, would certainly have died under the Operation.

I was so incensed by the Tortures of my innocent Domestic, and the unworthy
Dealings of these Men, that I told them, if each of them had as many Lives as
the injured Creature before them, they deserved to forfeit them for the
pernicious Arts which they used for their Profit. I therefore bid them look
upon themselves as no better than as a kind of Assassins and Murderers within
the Law. However, since they had dealt so clearly with me, and laid before me
their whole Practice. I dismissed them for that Time; with a particular
Request, That they would not poison any of my Friends and Acquaintance, and
take to some honest Livelihood without Loss of Time.

For my own Part, I have resolved hereafter to be very careful in my Liquors,
and have agreed with a Friend of mine in the Army, upon their next March, to
secure me Two Hogsheads of the best Stomach Wine in the Cellars of Versailles,
for the good of my Lucubrations, and the Comfort of my old Age.

The TATLER. [No 132.
Habes Senectuti magnam Gratiam, quae mihi Sermonis Aviditatem auxit, Potionis
and Cibi sustulit. Tull. de Sen.
From Thursd. Febr. 9. to Saturd. Febr. 11. 1709.
Sheer-Lane, February 10.
AFter having applied my Mind with more than ordinary Attention to my Studies,
it is my usual Custom to relax and unbend it in the Conversation of such as are
rather easy than shining Companions. This I find particularly necessary for me
before I retire to Rest, in order to draw my Slumbers upon me by Degrees, and
fall asleep insensibly. This is the particular Use I make of a Set of heavy
honest Men, with whom I have passed many Hours with much Indolence, though not
with great Pleasure. Their Conversation is a kind of Preparative for Sleep: It
takes the Mind down from its Abstractions, leads it into the familiar Traces of
Thought, and lulls it into that State of Tranquillity, which is the Condition of
a thinking Man when he is but half awake. After this, my Reader will not be
surprised to hear the Account which I am about to give of a Club of my own
Contemporaries, among whom I pass Two or Three Hours every Evening. This I look
upon as taking my first Nap before I go to Bed. The Truth of it is, I should
think my self unjust to Posterity, as well as to the Society at the Trumpet, of
which I am a Member, did not I in some Part of my Writings give an Account of
the Persons among whom I have passed almost a Sixth Part of my Time for these
last Forty Years. Our Club consisted originally of Fifteen; but partly by the
Severity of the Law in arbitrary Times, and partly by the natural Effects of
old Age, we are at present reduced to a Third Part of that Number: In which
however we have this Consolation, That the best Company is said to consist of
Five Persons. I must confess, besides the aforementioned Benefit which I meet
with in the Conversation of this select Society, I am not the less pleased with
the Company, in that I find my self the greatest Wit among them, and am heard
as their Oracle in all Points of Learning and Difficulty.

Sir Jeoffrey Notch, who is the oldest of the Club, has been in Possession of
the Right Hand Chair Time out of Mind, and is the only Man among us that has
the Liberty of stirring the Fire. This our Foreman is a Gentleman of an ancient
Family, that came to a great Estate some Years before he had Discretion, and
run it out in Hounds, Horses, and Cock-fighting; for which Reason he looks upon
himself as an honest worthy Gentleman who has had Misfortunes in the World, and
calls every thriving Man a pitiful Upstart.

Major Matchlock is the next Senior, who served in the last Civil Wars, and has
all the Battles by Heart. He does not think any Action in Europe worth talking
of since the Fight of Marston-Moor; and every Night tells us of his having been
knocked off his Horse at the Rising of the London 'Prentices; for which he is
in great Esteem amongst us.

Honest old Dick Reptile is the Third of our Society: He is a good natured
indolent Man, who speaks little himself, but laughs at our Jokes, and brings
his young Nephew along with him, a Youth of Eighteen Years old, to show him
good Company, and give him a Taste of the World. This young Fellow sits
generally silent; but whenever he opens his Mouth, or laughs at any Thing that
passes, he is constantly told by his Uncle, after a jocular Manner, "Ay, ay,
Jack, you young Men think us Fools; but we old Men know you are.'

The greatest Wit of our Company, next to my self, is a Bencher of the
neighboring Inn, who in his Youth frequented the Ordinaries about
Charing Cross, and pretends to have been intimate with Jack Ogle. He has about
Ten Distichs of Hudibras without Book, and never leaves the Club till he has
applied them all. If any modern Wit be mentioned, or any Town Frolic spoken
of, he shakes his Head at the Dullness of the present Age, and tells us a Story
of Jack Ogle.

For my own Part, I am esteemed among them, because they see I am something
respected by others, though at the same Time I understand by their Behavior,
that I am considered by them as a Man of a great deal of Learning, but no
Knowledge of the World; insomuch that the Major sometimes, in the Height of his
Military Pride, calls me the Philosopher: And Sir Jeoffrey no longer ago than
last Night, upon a Dispute what Day of the Month it was then in Holland, pulled
his Pipe out of his Mouth, and cried, What does the Scholar say to it?

Our Club meets precisely at Six a Clock in the Evening; but I did not come
last Night till Half an Hour after Seven, by which Means I escaped the Battle
of Naseby, which the Major usually begins at about Three Quarters after Six; I
found also, That my good Friend, the Bencher, had already spent Three of his
Distichs, and only waiting an Opportunity to hear a Sermon spoken of, that he
might introduce the Couplet where a-Stick rhimes to Ecclesiastic. At my
Entrance into the Room, they were naming a red Petticoat and a Cloak, by which
I found that the Bencher had been diverting them with a Story of Jack Ogle.

I had no sooner taken my Seat, but Sir Jeoffrey, to show his good Will toward
me, gave me a Pipe of his own Tobacco, and stirred up the Fire. I lock upon it
as a Point of Morality, to be obliged by those who endeavor to oblige me; and
therefore in Requital for his Kindness, and to set the Conversation a going, I
took the best Occasion I could, to put him upon telling us the Story of old
Gantlett, which he always does with very particular Concern. He traced up his
Descent on both Sides for several Generations, describing his Diet and Manner
of Life, with his several Battles, and particularly that in which he fell. This
Gantlett was a Game-Cock, upon whose Head the Knight in his Youth had won Five
Hundred Pounds, and lost Two Thousand. This naturally set the Major upon the
Account of Edgehill Fight, and ended in a Duel of Jack Ogle's

Old Reptile was extremely attentive to all that was said, though it was the same
he had heard every Night for these Twenty Years, and upon all Occasions, winked
upon his Nephew to mind what passed.

This may suffice to give the World a Taste of our innocent Conversation, which
we spun out till about Ten of the Clock, when my Maid came with a Lanthorn to
light me Home. I could not but reflect with my self as I was going out upon the
talkative Humor of old Men, and the little Figure which that Part of Life
makes in one who cannot employ this natural Propensity in Discourses which
would make him venerable. I must own, it makes me very melancholy in Company,
when I hear a young Man begin a Story; and have often observed, That one of a
Quarter of an Hour long in a Man of Five and twenty, gathers Circumstances
every Time he tells it, till it grows into a long Canterbury Tale of two Hours
by that Time he is Threescore.

The only Way of avoiding such a trifling and frivolous old Age, is, to lay up
in our Way to it such Stores of Knowledge and Observation as may make us useful
and agreeable in our declining Years. The Mind of Man in a long Life will
become a Magazine of Wisdom or Folly, and will consequently discharge it self
in something impertinent or improving. For which Reason, as there is nothing
more ridiculous than an old trifling Story-Teller, so there is nothing more
venerable than one who has turned his Experience to the Entertainment and
Advantage of Mankind.

In short, we who are in the last Stage of Life, and are apt to indulge our
selves in Talk, ought to consider, if what we speak be worth being heard, and
endeavor to make our Discourse like that of Nastor, which Homer compares to
the Flowing of Honey for its Sweetness.

I am afraid I shall be thought guilty of this Excess I am speaking of, when I
cannot conclude without observing, that Milton certainly thought of this
Passage in Homer when in his Description of an eloquent Spirit, he says, His
Tongue dropped Manna.

The TATLER. [No 133.
D^ tacent, Cla^ant. Tull.
From Saturd. Feb. 11. to Tuesd. Feb. 14. 1709.
Sheer-Lane, February 13.
SIlence is sometimes more significant and sublime than the most noble and most
expressive Eloquence, and is on many Occasions the Indication of a great Mind.
Several Authors have treated of Silence as a Part of Duty and Discretion, but
none of them have considered it in this Light. Homer compares the Noise and
Clamor of the Trojans advancing toward the Enemy, to the Cackling of Cranes
when they invade an Army of Pigmies. On the contrary, he makes his Countrymen
and Favorites, the Greeks, move forward in a regular determined March, and in
the Depth of Silence. I find in the Accounts which are given us of some of the
more ^ast^ Nations, where the Inhabitants are disposed by their Constitutions
and Climates to higher Strains of Thought, and more elevated Raptures than what
we feel in the Northern Regions of the World, That Silence is a Religious
Exercise among them. For when their public Devotions are in the greatest
Fervor, and their Hearts lifted up as high as Words can raise them, there are
certain Suspensions of Sound and Motion for a Time, in which the Mind is left
to it self, and supposed to swell with such secret Conceptions as are too big
for Utterance. I have my self been wonderfully delighted with a Masterpiece of
Music, when in the very Tumult and Ferment of their Harmony, all the Voices
and Instruments have stopped short on a sudden, and after a little Pause
recovered themselves again as it were, and renewed the Concert in all its
Parts. Methoughts this short Interval of Silence has had more Mufick in it than
any the same Space of Time before or after it. There are Two Instances of
Silence in the Two greatest Poets that ever wrote, which have something in them
as sublime as any of the Speeches in their whole Works. The First is that of
Ajax, in the Eleventh Book of the Odyssy. Ulysses, who had been the Rival of
this great Man in his Life, as well as the Occasion of his Death, upon meeting
his Shade in the Region of departed Heroes, makes his Submission to him with an
Humility next to Adoration, which the other passes over with dumb sullen
Majesty, and such a Silence, as (to use the Words of Longinus) had more
Greatness in it than any Thing he could have spoken.

The next Instance I shall mention is in Virgil, where the Poet, doubtless,
imitates this Silence of Ajax in that of Dido; though I do not know that any of
his Commentators have taken Notice of it. Aeneas finding among the Shades of
despairing Lovers, the Ghost of her who had lately died for him, with the Wound
still fresh upon her, addresses himself to her with expanded Arms, Floods of
Tears, and the most passionate Professions of his own Innocence as to what had
happened; all which Dido receives with the Dignity and Disdain of a resenting
Lover, and an injured Queen; and is so far from vouchsafing him an Answer, that
she does not give him a single Look. The Poet represents her as turning away
her Face from him while he spoke to her; and after having kept her Eyes for
some Time upon the Ground, as one that heard and contemned his Protestations,
flying from him into the Grove of Myrtle, and into the Arms of another, whose
Fidelity had deserved her Love.

I have often thought our Writers of Tragedy have been very defective in this
Particular, and that they might have given great Beauty to their Works, by
certain Stops and Pauses in the Representation of such Passions, as it is not
in the Power of Language to express. There is something like this in the last
Act of Venice Preserved, where Pierre is brought to an infamous Execution, and
begs of his Friend, as a Reparation for past Injuries, and the only Favor he
could do him, to rescue him from the Ignominy of the Wheel by stabbing him. As
he is going to make this dreadful Request, he is not able to communicate it,
but withdraws his Face from his Friend's Ear, and bursts into Tears. The
melancholy Silence that follows hereupon, and continues till he has recovered
himself enough to reveal his Mind to his Friend, raises in the Spectators a
Grief that is inexpressible, and an Idea of such a complicated Distress in the
Actor, as Words cannot utter. It would look as ridiculous to many Readers to
give Rules and Directions for proper Silences, as for Penning a Whisper: But it
is certain, that in the Extremity of most Passions, particularly Surprise,
Admiration, Astonishment, nay, Rage it self; there is nothing more graceful
than to see the Play stand still for a few Moments, and the Audience fixed in
an agreeable Suspense, during the Silence of a skilful Actor.

But Silence never shows it self to so great an Advantage, as when it is made
the Reply to Calumny and Defamation, provided that we give no just Occasion for
them. We might produce an Example of it in the Behavior of one in whom it
appeared in all its Majesty, and one, whose Silence, as well as his Person, was
altogether Divine. When one considers this Subject only in its Sublimity, this
great Instance could not but occur to me; and since I only make Use of it to
show the highest Example of it, I hope I do not offend in it. To forbear
replying to an unjust Reproach, and overlook it with a generous, or (if
possible) with an entire Neglect of it, is one of the most heroic Acts of a
great Mind: And I must confess, when I reflect upon the Behavior of some of
the greatest Men in Antiquity, I do not so much admire them that they deserved
the Praise of the whole Age they lived in, as because they contemned the Envy
and Detraction of it.

All that is incumbent on a Man of Worth, who suffers under so ill a Treatment,
is to lie by for some Time in Silence and Obscurity, till the Prejudice of the
Times be over, and his Reputation cleared. I have often read with a great deal
of Pleasure a Legacy of the famous Lord Bacon, one of the greatest Genius's
that our own or any Country has produced: After having bequeathed his Soul,
Body, and Estate, in the usual Form, he adds, 'My Name and Memory I leave to
Foreign Nations, and to my Countrymen, after some Time be passed over.'

At the same Time that I recommend this Philosophy to others, I must confess, I
am so poor a Proficient in it my self, that if in the Course of my Lucubrations
it happens, as it has done more than once, that my Paper is duller than in
Conscience it ought to be, I think the Time an Age till I have an Opportunity
of putting out another, and growing famous again for Two Days.

I must not close my Discourse upon Silence, without informing my Reader, That
I have by me an elaborate Treatise on the Aposiopesis called an Et caetera, it
being a Figure much used by some learned Authors, and particularly by the great
Littleton, who, as my Lord Chief Justice Coke observes, had a most admirable
Talent at an etc.

ADVERTISEMENT.
To oblige the Pretty Fellows, and my Fair Readers, I have thought fit to
insert the whole Passage abovementioned relating to Dido, as it is translated
by Mr. Dryden.

Not far from thence, the mournful Fields appear;
So called, from Lovers that inhabit there.
The Souls, whom that unhappy Flame invades,
In Secret Solitude, and Myrtle Shades,
Make endless Means, and pining with Desire,
Lament too late their unextinguish'd Fire.
Here Procris, Eryphile here, he found
Haring her Breast, yet bleeding with the Wound
Made by her Son. He saw Pa^phae there,
With Phaedra's Ghost, a foul incestuous Pair;
There Laodamia with Evadne moves:
Unhappy both, but loyal in their Loves.
Caeneus, a Woman once, and once a Man;
But ending in the Sex she first began.
Not far from these, Phaenician Dido stood;
Fresh from her Wound, her Bosom bathed in Blood.
Whom, when the Trojan Here hardly knew,
Obscure in Shades, and with a doubtful View,
(Doubtful as he who runs through dusky Night,
Or thinks he sees the Moon's uncertain Light:)
With Tears he first approached the sullen Shade,
And, as his Love inspired him, thus he said:
Unhappy Queen! Then is the common Breath
Of Rumor true, in your reported Death;
And I, alas, the Cause! By Heaven, I vow,
And all the Powers that rule the Realms below,
Unwilling I forsook your friendly State,
Commanded by the Gods, and forced by Fate.
Th^se Gods, that Fate, whose unresisted Might,
Have sent me to these Regions, void of Light,
Through the vast Empire of eternal Night.
Nor dared I to presume, that, pressed with Grief,
My Flight should urge you to this dire Relief.
Stay, stay your Steps, and listen to my Vows;
It Is the last Interview that Fate allows!
In vain he thus attempts her Mind to move,
With Tears and Prayers, and late repenting Love.
Disdainfully she looked, then turning round;
But fixed her Eyes unmoved upon the Ground;
And, what he says, and swears, regards no more
Than the deaf Rocks, when the loud Billows rear.
But whirled away, to shun his hateful Sight,
Hid in the Forest, and the Shades of Night.
Then songht Sicheus through the shady Grove,
Who answered all her Cares, and equaled all her Love.
The TATLER. [No 134.
-- Quis Talia fando,
Myrmidonum Dolopu^ve, aut duri Miles Ulyssei,
Temperet a Lachrymis.
Virg.
From Tuesd. Febr. 14. to Thursd. Febr. 16. 1709.
Sheer-Lane, February 15.
I WAS awakened very early this Morning by the distant Crowing of a Cock, which
I thought had the finest Pipe I ever heard. He seemed to me to strain his Voice
more than ordinary, as if he designed to make himself heard to the remotest
Corner of this Lane. Having entertained my self a little before I went to Bed
with a Discourse on the Transmigration of Men into other Animals, I could not
but fancy that this was the Soul of some drowsy Bell-man who used to sleep upon
his Post, for which he was condemned to do Penance in Feathers, and
distinguish the several Watches of the Night under the Outside of a Cock. While
I was thinking of the Condition of this poor Bell-man in Masquerade, I heard a
great Knocking at my Door, and was soon after told by my Maid, That my worthy
Friend the tall black Gentleman, who frequents the Coffee-houses hereabouts,
desired to speak with me. This ancient Pythagorean, who has as much Honesty as
any Man living, but good Nature to an Excess, brought me the following
Petition, which I am apt to believe he penned himself, the Pititioner not being
able to express his Mind in Paper under his present Form, however famous he
might have been for writing Verses when he was in his original Shape.

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire Censor of Great Britain.
The humble Petition of Job Chanticleer, in Behalf of himself, and many other
poor Sufferers in the same Condition;
Shows,
THat whereas your Petitioner is truly descended of the ancient Family of the
Chanticleers at Cock-Hall near Rumford in Essex, it has been his Misfortune to
come into the mercenary Hands of a certain ill-disposed Person, commonly called
an Higler, who, under the close Confinement of a Pannier, has conveyed him and
many others up to London; but hearing by Chance of your Worship's great
Humanity toward Robin-Redbreasts and Tom-Tits, he is emboldened to beseech you
to take his deplorable Condition into your tender Consideration, who otherwise
must suffer (with many Thousands more as innocent as himself) that inhumane
Barbarity of a Shrove-Tuesday Persecution. We humbly hope, that our Courage and
Vigilance may plead for us on this Occasion.

Your poor Petitioner most earnestly implore^ your immediate Protection from
the Insolenc^ of the Rabble, the Batteries of Catsticks, an^ a painful
lingering Death.

And your Petitioner, etc From my Coup in Clare-Market, Febr. 13. 1709.
Upon Delivery of this Petition, the worthy Gentleman who presented it, told me
the Customs of many wise Nations of the East, through which he had traveled;
That nothing was more frequent than to see a Dervees lay out a whole Year's
Income in the Redemption of Larks or Linets that had unhappily fallen into the
Hands of Bird-Catchers: That it was also usual to run between a Dog and a Bull
to keep them from hurting one another, or to lose the Use of a Limb in parting
a Couple of furious Mastiffs. He then insisted upon the Ingratitude and
Disingenuity of treating in this Manner a necessary and Domestic Animal, that
has made the whole House keep good Hours, and called up the Cook-Maid for five
Years together. What would a Turk say, continued he, should he hear, that it is
a common Entertainment in a Nation which pretends to be one of the most
civilized of Europe, to tie an innocent Animal to a Stake, and put him to an
ignominious Death, who has perhaps been the Guardian and Proveditor of a poor
Family, as long as he was able to get Eggs for his Mistress.

I thought what this Gentleman said was very reasonable; and have often
wondered, that we do not lay aside a Custom which makes us appear barbarous to
Nations much more rude and unpolished than our selves. Some French Writers have
represented this Diversion of the common People much to our Disadvantage, and
imputed it to natural Fierceness and Cruelty of Temper; as they do some other
Entertainments peculiar to our Nation: I mean those elegant Diversions of
Bull-baiting and Prize-fighting, with the like ingenious Recreations of the
Bear-Garden. I wish I knew how to answer this Reproach which is cast upon us,
and excuse the Death of so many innocent Cocks, Bulls, Dogs, and Bears, as have
been set together by the Ears, or died untimely Deaths, only to make us Sport.

It will be said, That these are the Entertainments of common People. It is
true; but they are the Entertainments of no other common People. Besides, I am
afraid there is a Tincture of the same savage Spirit in the Diversions of those
of higher Rank, and more refined Relish. Rapine observes, That the English
Theater very much delights in Bloodshed, which he likewise represents as an
Indication of our Tempers. I must own, there is something very horrid in the
public Executions of an English Tragedy. Stabbing and Poisoning, which are
performed behind the Scenes in other Nations, must be done openly among us, to
gratify the Audience.

When poor Sandford was upon the Stage, I have seen him groaning upon a Wheel,
stuck with Daggers, impaled alive, calling his Executioners, with a dying
Voice, Cruel Dogs and Villains! And all this to please his judicious
Spectators, who were wonderfully delighted with seeing a Man in Torment so well
acted. The Truth of it is, the Politeness of our English Stage, in Regard to
Decorum, is very extraordinary. We act Murders to show our Intrepidity, and
Adulteries to show our Gallantry: Both of them are frequent in our most taking
Plays, with this Difference only, That the First are done in the Sight of the
Audience, and the other wrought up to such an Height upon the Stage, that they
are almost put in Execution before the Actors can get behind the Scenes.

I would not have it thought, that there is jus^ Ground for those Consequences
which our Enemies draw against us from these Practices; bu^ methinks one would
be sorry for any Manner o^ Occasion for such Misrepresentations of us. The
Virtues of Tenderness, Compassion, and Humanity, are those by which Men are
distinguish'^ from Brutes, as much as by Reason it self; and it would be the
greatest Reproach to a Nation to distinguish it self from all others by any
Defect in these particular Virtues. For which Reasons, I hope that my dear
Countrymen will no longer expose themselves by an Effusion of Blood, whether it
be of Theatrical Heroes, Cocks, or any other innocent Animals, which we are not
obliged to slaughter for our Safety, Convenience, or Nourishment. Where any of
these Ends are not served in the Destruction of a living Creature, I cannot but
pronounce it a great Piece of Cruelty, if not a kind of Murder.

The TATLER. [No 135.
Quod si in hoc erro, quod Animos Hominum immortales esse credam, libenter
erro: N^c mihi hunc Errorem, quo delector, dum vivo, extorqueri volo: Sin
Mortuus (ut quidam Minuti Philosophi censent) nihil sentiam; non vercor, ne
hunc Errorem meum mortui Philosophi irrideant. Tull.
From Thursd. Febr. 16. to Saturd. Febr. 18. 1709.
Sheer-Lane, February 17.
SEveral Letters which I have lately received give me Information, That some
well-disposed Persons have taken Offense at my using the Word Free-Thinker as a
Term of Reproach. To set therefore this Matter in a clear Light, I must
declare, That no one can have a greater Veneration than my self for the
Free-Thinkers of Antiquity, who acted the same Part in those Times, as the
great Men of the Reformation did in several Nations of Europe, by exerting
themselves against the Idolatry and Superstition of the Times in which they
lived. It was by this noble Impulse that Socrates and his Disciples, as well as
all the Philosophers of Note in Greece, and Cicero, Seneca, with all the
Learned Men of Rome, endeavored to enlighten their Contemporaries amidst the
Darkness and Ignorance in which the World was then sunk and buried. The great
Points which these Free-Thinkers endeavored to establish and inculcate into
the Minds of Men, was, the Formation of the Universe, the Superintendency of
Providence, the Perfection of the Divine Nature, the Immortality of the Soul,
and the future State of Rewards and Punishments. They all complied with the
Religion of their Country, as much as possible, in such Particulars as did not
contradict and pervert these great and fundamental Doctrines of Mankind. On the
contrary, the Persons who now set up for Free-Thinkers, are such as endeavor
by a little Trash of Words and Sophistry, to weaken and destroy those very
Principles, for the Vindication of which, Freedom of Thought at first became
laudable and heroic. These Apostates, from Reason and good Sense, can look at
the glorious Frame of Nature, without paying an Adoration to him that raised
it; can consider the great Revolutions in the Universe, without lifting up
their Minds to that Superior Power which has the Direction of it; can presume
to censure the Deity in his Ways toward Men; can level Mankind with the Beasts
that perish; can extinguish in their own Minds all the pleasing Hopes of a
future State, and lull themselves into a stupid Security against the Terrors of
it. If one were to take the Word Priestcraft out of the Mouths of these shallow
Monsters, they would be immediately struck dumb. It is by the Help of this
single Term that they endeavor to disappoint the good Works of the most
Learned and Venerable Order of Men, and harden the Hearts of the Ignorant
against the very Light of Nature, and the common received Notions of Mankind.
We ought not to treat such Miscreants as these upon the Foot of fair
Disputants, but to pour out Contempt upon them, and speak of them with Scorn
and Infamy, as the Pests of Society, the Revilers of Humane Nature, and the
Blasphemers of a Being, whom a good Man would rather die than hear dishonored.
Cicero, after having mentioned the great Heroes of Knowledge that recommended
this Divine Doctrine of the Immortality of the Soul, calls those small
Pretenders to Wisdom who declared against it, certain Minute Philosophers,
using a Diminutive even of the Word Little, to express the despicable Opinion
he had of them. The Contempt he throws upon them in another Passage is yet more
remarkable, where, to show the mean Thoughts he entertains of them, he
declares, he would rather be in the Wrong with Plato, than in the Right with
such Company. There is indeed nothing in the World so ridiculous as one of
these grave Philosophical Free-Thinkers, that has neither Passions nor
Appetites to gratify, no Heats of Blood nor Vigor of Constitution that can
turn his Systems of Infidelity to his Advantage, or raise Pleasures out of them
which are inconsistent with the Belief of an Hereafter. One that has neither
Wit, Gallantry, Mirth, or Youth, to indulge by these Notions, but only a poor,
joyless uncomfortable Vanity of distinguishing himself from the rest of
Mankind, is rather to be regarded as a Mischievous Lunatic, than a mistaken
Philosopher. A chaste Infidel, a speculative Libertine, is an Animal that I
should not believe to be in Nature, did I not sometimes meet with this Species
of Men, that plead for the Indulgence of their Passions in the midst of a
severe studious Life, and talk against the Immortality of the Soul over a Dish
of Coffee.

I would fain ask a Minute Philosopher, What Good he proposes to Mankind by the
publishing of his Doctrines? Will they make a Man a better Citizen, or Father
of a Family; a more endearing Husband, Friend, or Son? Will they enlarge his
public or private Virtues, or correct any of his Frailties or Vices? What is
there either joyful or glorious in such Opinions? Do they either refresh or
enlarge our Thoughts? Do they contribute to the Happiness, or raise the Dignity
of Humane Nature? The only Good that I have ever heard pretended to, is, That
they banish Terrors, and set the Mind at Ease. But whose Terrors do they
banish? It is certain, if there were any Strength in their Arguments, they
would give great Disturbance to Minds that are influenced by Virtue, Honor,
and Morality, and take from us the only Comforts and Supports of Affliction,
Sickness, and Old Age. The Minds therefore which they set at Ease, are only
those of impenitent Criminals and Malefactors, and which, to the Good of
Mankind, should be in perpetual Terror and Alarm.

I must confess, nothing is more usual than for a Free-Thinker, in Proportion
as the Insolence of Skepticism is abated in him by Years and Knowledge, or
humbled and beaten down by Sorrow or Sickness, to reconcile himself to the
general Conceptions of reasonable Creatures; so that we frequently see the
Apostates turning from their Revolt toward the End of their Lives, and
employing the Refuse of their Parts in promoting those Truths which they had
before endeavored to invalidate.

The History of a Gentleman in France is very well known, who was so zealous a
Promoter of Infidelity, that he had got together a select Company of Disciples,
and traveled into all Parts of the Kingdom to make Converts. In the Midst of
his fantastical Success he fell sick, and was reclaimed to such a Sense of his
Condition, that after he had passed some Time in great Agonies and Horrors of
Mind, he begged those who had the Care of burying him, to dress his Body in the
Habit of a Capuchin, that the Devil might not run away with it. And to do
further Justice upon himself, desired 'em to tie an Halter about his Neck, as a
Mark of that ignominious Punishment, which in his own Thoughts he had so justly
deserved.

I would not have Persecution so far disgraced, as to wish these Vermin might
be animadverted on by any Legal Penalties; though I think it would be highly
reasonable, that those few of them who die in the Professions of their
Infidelity, should have such Tokens of Infamy fixed upon them, as might
distinguish those Bodies which are given up by the Owners to Oblivion and
Putrefaction, from those which rest in Hope, and shall rise in Glory. But at
the same Time that I am against doing them the Honor of the Notice of our
Laws, which ought not to suppose there are such Criminals in Being, I have
often wondered, how they can be tolerated in any mixed Conversations while they
are venting these absurd Opinions; and should think, that if on any such
Occasion, half a Dozen of the most roburst Christians in the Company would lead
one of these Gentlemen to a Pump, or convey him into a Blanket, they would do
very good Service both to Church and State. I do not know how the Laws stand in
this Particular; but I hope, whatever Knocks, Bangs or Thumps, might be given
with such an honest Intention, would not be construed as a Breach of the Peace.
I dare say, they would not be returned by the Person who receives them; for
whatever these Fools may say in the Vanity of their Hearts, they are too wise
to risque their Lives upon the Uncertainty of their Opinions.

When I was a young Man about this Town, I frequented the Ordinary of the
Black-Horse in Holbourn, where the Person that usually presided at the Table
was a rough old-fashioned Gentleman, who, according to the Custom of those
Times, had been the Major and Preacher of a Regiment. It happened one Day that
a noisy young Officer, bred in France, was venting some new-frangled Notions,
and speaking, in the Gaiety of his Humor, against the Dispensations of
Providence. The Major at first only desired him to talk more respectfully of
one for whom all the Company had an Honor; but finding him run on in his
Extravagance, began to reprimand him after a more serious Manner. Young Man,
said he, do not abuse your Benefactor whilst you are eating his Bread. Consider
whose Air you breathe, whose Presence you are in, and who it is that gave you
the Power of that very Speech which you make use of to his Dishonor. The young
Fellow, who thought to turn Matters into a Jest, asked him, if he was going to
preach? But at the same Time desired him to take Care what he said when he
spoke to a Man of Honor. A Man of Honor, says the Major, Thou art an Infidel
and a Blasphemer, and I shall use thee as such. In short, the Quarrel ran so
high, that the Major was desired to walk out. Upon their coming into the
Garden, the old Fellow advised his Antagonist to consider the Place into which
one Pass might drive him; but finding him grow upon him to a Degree of
Scurrility, as believing the Advice proceeded from Fear; Sirrah, says he, If a
Thunderbolt does not strike the dead before I come at thee, I shall not fail to
chastise thee for thy Profaneness to thy Maker, and thy Sawciness to his
Servant. Upon this he drew his Sword, and cried out with a loud Voice, The
Sword of the Lord and of Gideon; which so terrified his Antagonist, that he was
immediately disarmed, and thrown upon his Knees. In this Posture he begged his
Life; but the Major refused to grant it, before he had asked Pardon for his
Offense in a short extemporary Prayer which the old Gentleman dictated to him
upon the Spot, and which his Proselyte repeated after him in the Presence of
the whole Ordinary, that were now gathered about him in the Garden.

The TATLER. [No 136.
Deprendi miserum est: Fabio vel judice vincam.
Hor.
From Saturday Febr. 18. to Tuesday Febr. 21. 1709.
White's Chocolate-house, February 18.
The History of Tom. Varnish.
BECAUSE I have a professed Aversion to long Beginnings of Stories, I will go
into this at once, by telling you, That there dwells near the Royal Exchange as
happy a Couple as ever entered into Wedlock. These live in that mutual
Confidence of each other, which renders the Satisfactions of Marriage even
greater than those of Friendship, and makes Wife and Husband the dearest
Appellations of Humane Life. Mr. Balance is a Merchant of good Consideration,
and understands the World not from Speculation, but Practice. His Wife is the
Daughter of an honest House, ever bred in a Family-Way; and has, from a natural
good Understandng, and great Innocence, a Freedom which Men of Sense know to be
the certain Sign of Virtue, and Fools take to be an Encouragement to Vice.

Tom. Varnish, a young Gentleman of the Middle Temple, by the Bounty of a good
Father who was so obliging as to die, and leave him in his Twenty fourth Year,
besides a good Estate, a large Sum, which lay in the Hands of Mr. Balance, had
by this Means an Intimacy at his House; and being one of those hard Students
who read Plays for Improvement in the Law, took his Rules of Life from thence.
Upon mature Deliberation, he conceived it very proper, that he, as a Man of Wit
and Pleasure of the Town, should have an Intrigue with his Merchant's Wife. He
no sooner thought of this Adventure, but he began it by an amorous Epistle to
the Lady, and a faithful Promise to wait upon her, at a certain Hour the next
Evening, when he knew her Husband was to be absent.

The Letter was no sooner received, but it was communicated to the Husband, and
produced no other Effect in him, than that he joined with his Wife to raise all
the Mirth they could out of this fantastical Piece of Gallantry. They were so
little concerned at this dangerous Man of Mode, that they plotted Ways to
perplex him without hurting him. Varnish comes exactly at his Hour; and the
Lady's well acted Confusion at his Entrance, gave him Opportunity to repeat
some Couplets very fit for the Occasion with very much Grace and Spirit. His
Theatrical Manner of making Love was interrupted by an Alarm of the Husband's
coming; and the Wife, in a personated Terror, beseeched him, If he had any
Value for the Honor of a Woman that loved him, he would jump out of the
Window. He did so, and fell upon Feather-Beds placed on purpose to receive him.

It is not to be conceived how great the Joy of an amorous Man is when he has
suffered for his Mistress, and is never the worse for it. Varnish the next Day
writ a most elegant Billet, wherein he said all that Imagination could form
upon the Occasion. He violently protested, going out of the Window was no Way
terrible, but as it was going from her; with several other kind Expressions,
which procured him a Second Assignation. Upon his second Visit, he was conveyed
by a faithful Maid into her Bedchamber, and left there to expect the Arrival
of her Mistress. But the Wench, according to her Instructions, ran in again to
him, and locked the Door after her to keep out her Master. She had just Time
enough to convey the Lover into a Chest before she admitted the Husband and his
Wife into the Room.

You may be sure that Trunk was absolutely necessary to be opened; but upon her
Husband's ordering it, she assured him, she had taken all the Care imaginable
in packing up the Things with her own Hand, and he might send the Trunk aboard
as soon as he thought fit. The easy Husband believed his Wife, and the good
Couple went to Bed; Varnish having the Happiness to pass the Night in his
Mistress's Bedchamber without Molestation. The Morning arose, but our Lover
was not well situated to observe her Blushes; so that all we know of his
Sentiments on this Occasion, is, That he heard Balance ask for the Key, and
say, he would himself go with this Chest, and have it opened before the Captain
of the Ship, for the greater Safety of so valuable a Lading.

The Goods were hoisted away, and Mr. Balance marching by his Chest with great
Care and Diligence, omitted nothing that might give his Passenger Perplexity.
But to consummate all, he delivered the Chest, with strict Charge, in case they
were in Danger of being taken, to throw it overboard, for there were Letters
in it, the Matter of which might be of great Service to the Enemy.

N. B. It is not thought advisable to proceed further in this Account, Mr.
Varnish being just returned from his Travels, and willing to conceal the
Occasion of his first applying himself to the Languages.

St. James's Coffee-house, Febr. 20.
This Day came in a Mail from Holland, with a Confirmation of our late Advices,
That a Treaty of Peace would very suddenly be set on Foot, and that Yachts were
appointed by the States to convey the Ministers of France from Moerdyke to
Gertruydenburgh, which is appointed for the Place wherein this important
Negotiation is to be transacted. It is said, This Affair has been in Agitation
ever since the Close of the last Campaign; Monsieur Petticum having been
appointed to receive from Time to Time the Overtures of the Enemy. During the
whole Winter, the Ministers of France have used their utmost Skill in forming
such Answers as might amuse the Allies, in Hopes of a favorable Event; either
in the North, or some other Part of Europe, which might affect some Part of the
Alliance too nearly to leave it in a Capacity of adhering firmly to the
Interest of the whole. In all this Transaction, the French King's own Name has
been as little made use of as possible: But the Season of the Year advancing
too fast to admit of much longer Delays in the present Condition of France,
Monsieur Torci, in the Name of the King, sent a Letter to Monsieur Petticum,
wherein he says, That the King is willing all the Preliminary Articles shall
rest as they are during the Treaty for the 37 th.

Upon the Receipt of this Advice, Passports were sent to the French Court, and
their Ministers are expected at Mierdyke on the 5th of the next Month.

Sheer-Lane, February 20.
I have been earnestly solicited for a further Term, for wearing the Fardingal
by several of the Fair Sex, but more especially by the following Petitioners.

The humble Petition of Deborah Hark, Sarah Threadpaper, and Rachel Thimble,
Spinsters, and single Women, commonly called Waiting-Maids, in Behalf of
themselves and their Sisterhood;
Shows,
THat your Worship has been pleased to order and command, That no Person or
Persons shall presume to wear quilted Petticoats, on Forfeiture of the said
Petticoats, or Penalty of wearing Ruffs, after the 17th Instant now expired.

That your Petitioners have Time out of Mind been entitled to wear their Ladies
Clothes, or to sell the same.

That the Sale of the said Clothes is spoiled by your Worship's said
Prohibition.

Your Petitioners therefore most humbly pray, That your Worship would please to
allow, That all Gentlewomen's Gentlewomen may be allowed to wear the said
Dress, or to repair the Loss of such a Perquisite in such Manner as your
Worship shall think fit.

And your Petitioner, etc.
I do allow the Allegations of this Petition to be just, and forbid all Persons
but the Petitioners, or those who shall purchase from them, to wear the said
Garment after the Date hereof.

The TATLER. [No 137.
Ter Centum tonat Ore Deos Erebumque Ch^sque
Tergeminamque Hecaten. --
Virg.
From Tuesd. Feb. 21. to Thursd. Feb. 23. 1709.
Sheer-Lane, February 22.
DICK Reptile and I sat this Evening later than the rest of the Club; and as
some Men are better Company when only with one Friend, others when there is a
large Number, I found Dick to be of the former Kind. He was bewailing to me in
very just Terms, the Offenses which he frequently met with in the Abuse of
Speech: Some use Ten Times more Words than they need, some put in Words quite
foreign to their Purpose, and others adorn their Discourses with Oaths and
Blasphemies by Way of Tropes and Figures. What my good Friend started, dwelt
upon me after I came Home this Evening, and led me into an Enquiry with my
self, Whence should arise such strange Excrescencies in Discourse? Whereas it
must be obvious to all reasonable Beings, That the sooner a Man speaks his
Mind, the more complaisant he is to the Man with whom he talks: But upon mature
Deliberation, I am come to this Resolution, That for One Man who speaks to be
understood, there are Ten who talk only to be admired.

The ancient Greeks had little independent Syllables called Expletives, which
they brought into their Discourses both in Verse and Prose, for no other
Purpose but for the better Grace and Sound of their Sentences and Periods. I
know no Example but this which can authorize the Use of more Words than are
necessary. But whether it be from this Freedom taken by that wise Nation, or
however it arises, Dick Reptile hit upon a very just and common Cause of
Offense in the Generality of the People of all Orders. We have one here in our
Lane who speaks nothing without quoting an Authority; for it is always with
him, So and so, as the Man said. He asked me this Morning, How I did? as the
Man said; and hoped I would come now and then to see him, as the Man said. I am
acquainted with another, who never delivers himself upon any Subject, but he
cries. He only speaks his poor Judgment; this is his humble Opinion; or as for
his Part, if he might presume to offer any Thing on that Subject. But of all
the Persons who add Elegancies and Superfluities to their Discourses, those who
deserve the foremost Rank, are the Swearers; and the Lump of these may, I
think, be very aptly divided into the common Distinction of High and Low.
Dullness and Barrenness of Thought is the Original of it in both these Sects,
and they differ only in Constitution: The Low is generally a phlegmatic, and
the High a choleric Coxcomb. The Man of Phlegm is sensible of the Emptiness of
his Discourse, and will tell you, That Psackins, such a Thing is true: Or if
you warm him a little, he may run into Passion, and cry, Odsbodikins, you do
not say right. But the High affects a Sublimity in Dullness, and invokes Hell
and Damnation at the Breaking of a Glass, or the Slowness of a Drawer.

I was the other Day trudging along Fleetstreet on Foot, and an old Army-Friend
came up with me. We were both going toward Westminster, and finding the
Streets were so crowded that we could not keep together, we resolved to club
for a Coach. This Gentleman I knew to be the First of the Order of the
Choleric. I must confess, (were there no Crime in it) nothing could be more
diverting than the Impertinence of the High Juror: For whether there is Remedy
or not against what offends him, still he is to show he is offended; and he
must sure not omit to be magnificently passionate, by falling on all Things in
his Way. We were stopped by a Train of Coaches at Temple Bar. What the Devil!
(says my Companion) cannot you drive on Coachman? D -- n you all, for a Set of
Sons of Whores, you will stop here to be paid by the Hour! There is not such a
Set of confounded Dogs as the Coachmen unhang'd! But these rascally Cits --
'Ounds, why should not there be a Tax to make these Dogs widen their Gates? Oh!
but the Hell Hounds move at last. Ay, said I, I knew you would make 'em whip on
if once they heard you -- No, says he; but would it not fret a Man to the
Devil, to pay for being carried slower than he can walk. Lookee, there is for
ever a Stop at this Hole by St. Clement's Church. Blood, you Dog! -- Harkee,
Sirrah, -- Why, and be d -- n'd to you, do not you drive over that Fellow? --
Thunder, Furies, and Damnation! I Will cut your Ears off, you Fellow before
there. -- Come hither, you Dog you, and let me ring your Neck round your
Shoulders. We had a Repetition of the same Eloquence at the Cockpit, and the
Turning into Palace-Yard.

This gave me a perfect Image of the Insignificancy of the Creatures who
practice this Enormity; and made me conclude, That it is ever Want of Sense
makes a Man guilty in this Kind. It was excellently well said, That this Folly
had no Temptation to excuse it, no Man being born of a Swearing Constitution.
In a Word, a few rumbling Words and Consonants clapped together, without any
Sense, will make an accomplished Swearer: And it is needless to dwell long upon
this Blustering Impertinence, which is already banished out of the Society of
well-bred Men, and can be useful only to Bullies and ill Tragic Writers, who
would have Sound and Noise pass for Courage and Sense.

St. James's Coffee-house, Feb. 22.
There arrived a Messenger last Night from Harwich, who left that Place just as
the Duke of Marlborough was going on board. The Character of this important
General going out by the Command of his Queen, and at the Request of his
Country, put me in Mind of that noble Figure which Shakespeare gives Harry the
Fifth upon his Expedition against France. The Poet wishes for Abilities to
represent so great an Hero.

Oh for a Muse of Fire! [says he]
Then should the Warlike Harry, like himself,
Assume the Port of Mars; and at his Heels,
Leash'd in, like Hounds, should Famine, Sword and Fire,
Crouch for Employments.
A Conqueror drawn like the God of Battle, with such a dreadful Leash of
Hell Hounds at his Command, makes a Picture of as much Majesty and Terror, as
is to be met with in any Poet.

Shakespeare understood the Force of this particular Allegory so well, that he
had it in his Thoughts in another Passage, which is altogether as Daring and
Sublime as the former. What I mean, is in the Tragedy of Julius Caesar, where
Antony, after having foretold the Bloodshed and Destruction that should be
brought upon the Earth by the Death of that great Man; to fill up the Horror of
his Description, adds the following Verses:

And Caesar's Spirit ranging for Revenge,
With Ate by his Side, come hot from Hell,
Shall in these Confines, with a Monarch's Voice,
Cry Havoc; and let slip the Dogs of War.
I do not question but these Quotations will call to Mind in my Readers of
Learning and Taste, that imaginary Person described by Virgil with the same
Spirit. He mentions it upon the Occasion of a Peace which was restored to the
Roman Empire, and which we may now hope for from the Departure of that great
Man who has given Occasion to these Reflections. The Temple of Janus (says he)
shall be shut, and in the Midst of it Military Fury shall sit upon a Pile of
broken Arms, loaded with an Hundred Chains, bellowing with Madness, and
grinding his Teeth in Blood.

Claudentur Belli Portae, Furor impius intus
Saeva sedens super Arma, and Centum vinctus ahenis
Post Tergum nodis, fremit horidus Ore cruento.
' Janus himself before his Fane shall wait,
' And keep the dreadful Issues of his Gate,
' With Bolts and Iron Bars. Within remains
' Imprisoned Fury bound in Brazen Chains;
' High on a Trophy raised of useless Arms,
' He fits, and threats the World with vain Alarms.
Dryden. ADVERTISEMENT.
The Tickets which were delivered out for the Benefit of Senior Nicolini
Grimaldi on the 24th Instant, will be taken on Thursday the 2d of March, his
Benefit being deferred till that Day.

N. B. In all Opera's for the future, where it thunders and lightens in proper
Time and in Tune, the Matter of the said Lightning is to be of the finest
Rosin; and, for the Sake of Harmony, the same which is used to the best Cremona
Fiddles.

Note also, That the True Perfumed Lightning is only prepared and sold by Mr.
Charles Lilly, at the Corner of Beauford-Buildings.

The Lady who has chosen Mr. Bickerstaff for her Valentine, and is at a Loss
what to present him with, is desired to make him, with her own Hands, a warm
Nightcap.

The TATLER. [No 138.
Secretosque Pios, his dantem Jura Catonem.
Virg.
From Thursd. Febr. 23. to Saturd. Febr. 25. 1709.
Sheer-Lane, February 24.
IT is an Argument of a clear and worthy. Spirit in a Man, to be able to
disengage himself from the Opinions of others, so far as not to let the
Deference due to the Sense of Mankind ensnare him to act against the Dictates
of his own Reason. But the Generality of the World are so far from walking by
any such Maxim, that it is almost a standing Rule to do as others do, or be
ridiculous. I have heard my old Friend Mr. Heart speak it as an Observation
among the Players, That it is impossible to act with Grace, except the Actor
has forgot that he is before an Audience. Till he has arrived at that, his
Motion, his Air, his every Step and Gesture, has something in them which
discovers he is under a Restraint for Fear of being ill received; or if he
considers himself as in the Presence of those who approve his Behavior, you
see an Affectation of that Pleasure run through his whole Carriage. It is as
common in Life, as upon the Stage, to behold a Man in the most indifferent
Action betray a Sense he has of doing what he is about gracefully. Some have
such an immoderate Relish for Applause, that they expect it for Things, which
in themselves are so frivolous, that it is impossible, without this
Affectation, to make them appear worthy either of Blame or Praise. There is
Will Glare, so passionately intent upon being admired, that when you see him in
public Places, every Muscle of his Face discovers his Thoughts are fixed upon
the Consideration of what Figure he makes. He will often fall into a musing
Posture to attract Observation, and is then obtruding himself upon the Company
when he pretends to be withdrawn from it. Such little Arts are the certain and
infallible Tokens of a superficial Mind, as the avoiding Observation is the
Sign of a great and sublime one. It is therefore extremely difficult for a Man
to judge even of his own Actions, without forming to himself an Idea of what he
should act, were it in his Power to execute all his Desires without the
Observation of the rest of the World. There is an Allegorical Fable in Plato,
which seems to admonish us, That we are very little acquainted with our selves,
while we know our Actions are to pass the Censures of others; but had we the
Power to accomplish all our Wishes unobserved, we should then easily inform our
selves how far we are possessed of Real and Intrinsic Virtue. The Fable I was
going to mention, is that of Gyges, who is said to have had an enchanted Ring,
which had in it a miraculous Quality, making him who wore it visible or
invisible, as he turned it to or from his Body. The Use Gyges made of his
occasional Invisibility, was, by the Advantage of it, to violate a Queen, and
murder a King. Tully takes Notice of this Allegory, and says very handsomely,
That a Man of Honor who had such a Ring, would act just in the same Manner as
he would do without it. It is indeed no small Pitch of Virtue under the
Temptation of Impunity, and the Hopes of accomplishing all a Man's Desires, not
to transgress the Rules of Justice and Virtue; but this is rather not being an
ill Man, than being positively a good one; and it seems wonderful, that so
great a Soul as that of Tully, should not form to himself a Thousand worthy
Actions which a virtuous Mind would be prompted to by the Possession of such a
Secret. There are certainly some Part of Mankind who are Guardian Beings to the
other. Sallust could say of Cato, That he had rather be than appear good; but
indeed, this Eulogium rose no higher than (as I just now hinted) to an
Inoffensiveness, rather than an active Virtue. Had it occurred to the noble
Orator to represent, in his Language, the glorious Pleasures of a Man secretly
employed in Beneficence and Generosity, it would certainly have made a more
charming Page than any he has now left behind him. How might a Man, furnished
with Gyges's Secret, employ it in bringing together distant Friends, laying
Snares for creating Good Will in the room of groundless Hatred; in removing the
Pangs of an unjust Jealousy, the Shyness of an imperfect Reconciliation, and
the Tremor of an awful Love? Such a one could give Confidence to bashful Merit,
and Confusion to over-bearing Impudence.

Certain it is, That secret Kindnesses done to Mankind, are as beautiful as
secret Injuries are detestable. To be invisibly good, is as God-like, as to be
invisibly ill, Diabolical. As degenerate as we are apt to say the Age we live
in is, there are still amongst us Men of illustrious Minds, who enjoy all the
Pleasures of good Actions, except that of being commended for them. There
happens among others very worthy Instances of a public Spirit, one of which I
am obliged to discover, because I know not otherwise how to obey the Commands
of the Benefactor. A Citizen of London has given Directions to Mr. Rainer, the
Writing Master of Paul's School, to educate at his Charge Ten Boys (who shall
be nominated by me) in Writing and Accounts, till they shall be fit for any
Trade. I desire therefore such as know any proper Objects for receiving this
Bounty, to give Notice thereof to Mr. Morphew, or Mr. Lilly, and they shall,
if properly qualified, have Instructions accordingly.

Actions of this Kind have in them something so transcendent, that it is an
Injury to applaud them, and a Diminution of that Merit which consists in
shunning our Approbation. We shall therefore leave them to enjoy that glorious
Obscurity, and silently admire their Virtue, who can contemn the most delicious
of Humane Pleasures, that of receiving due Praise. Such Celestial Dispositions
very justly suspend the Discovery of their Benefactions, till they come where
their Actions cannot be misinterpreted, and receive their first Congratulations
in the Company of Angels.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Whereas Mr. Bickerstaff, by a Letter bearing Date this 24th of February, has
received Information, That there are in and about the Royal Exchange a Sort of
Persons commonly known by the Name of Whetters, who drink themselves into an
intermediate State of being neither drunk or sober before the Hours of 'Change,
or Business, and in that Condition buy and sell Stocks, discount Notes, and do
many other Acts of well-disposed Citizens; This is to give Notice, That from
this Day forward, no Whetter shall be able to give or endorse any Note, or
execute any other Point of Commerce, after the 3d half Print, before the Hour
of One: And whoever shall transact any Matter or Matters with a Whetter, (not
being himself of that Order) shall be conducted to Moorfields upon the first
Application of his next akin.

N. B. No Tavern near the 'Change shall deliver Wine to such as drink at the
Bar standing, except the same shall be three Parts of the best Cider; and the
Master of the House shall produce a Certificate of the same from Mr. Tintoret,
or some other credible Wine-Painter.

Whereas the Model of the intended Bedlam is now finished, and that the Edifice
it self will be very suddenly begun; it is desired, That all such as have
Relations, whom they would recommend to our Care, would bring in their Proofs
with all speed, none being to be admitted of course but Lovers, who are put
into an immediate Regimen. Young Politicians also are received without Fees or
Examination.

The TATLER. [No 139.
-- Nihil est quod credere de se
Non possit, cum laudatur Diis aequa Potestas.
Juv.
From Saturd. Febr. 25. to Tuesd. Febr. 28. 1709.
Sheer-Lane, February 27.
WHEN I reflect upon the many Nights I have sat up for some Months last past in
the greatest Anxiety for the Good of my Neighbors and Contemporaries, it is no
small Discouragement to me, to see how slow a Progress I make in the
Reformation of the World. But indeed I must do my Female Readers the Justice to
own, that their tender Hearts are much more susceptible of good Impressions,
than the Minds of the other Sex. Business and Ambition take up Men's Thoughts
too much to leave Room for Philosophy: But if you speak to Women in a Style and
Manner proper to approach them, they never fail to improve by your Counsel. I
shall therefore for the future turn my Thoughts more particularly to their
Service, and study the best Methods to adorn their Persons, and inform their
Minds in the justest Methods to make them what Nature designed them, the most
beauteous Objects of our Eyes, and the most agreeable Companions of our Lives.
But when I say this, I must not omit at the same Time to look into their Errors
and Mistakes, that being the readiest Way to the intended End of adorning and
instructing them. It must be acknowledged, That the very Inadvertencies of this
Sex are owing to the other; for if Men were not Flatterers, Women could not
fall into that general Cause of all their Follies, and our Misfortunes, their
Love of Flattery. Were the Commendation of these agreeable Creatures built upon
its proper Foundation, the higher we raised their Opinion of themselves, the
greater would be the Advantage to our Sex; but all the Topic of Praise is
drawn from very senseless and extravagant Idea's we pretend we have of their
Beauty and Perfection. Thus when a young Man falls in Love with a young Woman,
from that Moment she is no more Mrs. Alice such a one, born of such a Father,
and educated by such a Mother, but from the first Minute that he cast his Eye
upon her with Desire, he conceives a Doubt in his Mind, What Heavenly Power
gave so unexpected a Blow to an Heart that was ever before untouched. But who
can resist Fate and Destiny, which are lodged in Mrs. Alice's Eyes? After which
he desires Orders accordingly, Whether he is to live or breath; the Smile or
Frown of his Goddess is the only Thing that can now either save or destroy him.
By this Means, the well-humoured Girl, that would have romped with him before
she received this Declaration, assumes a State suitable to the Majesty he has
given her, and treats him as the Vassal he calls himself. The Girl's Head is
immediately turned by having the Power of Life and Death, and takes Care to
suit every Motion and Air to her new Sovereignty. After he has placed himself
at this Distance, he must never hope to recover his former Familiarity, till
she has had the Addresses of another, and found them less sincere.

If the Application to Women were justly turned, the Address of Flattery, though
it implied at the same Time an Admonition, would be much more likely to
succeed. Should a captivated Lover, in a Billet, let his Mistress know, That
her Piety to her Parents, her Gentleness of Behavior, her prudent Economy
with respect to her own little Affairs in a Virgin Condition, had improved the
Passion which her Beauty had inspired him with, into so settled an Esteem for
her, that of all Women breathing he wished her his Wifes though his commending
her for Qualities she knew she had as a Virgin, would make her believe he
expected from her an answerable Conduct in the Character of a Matron: I will
answer for it, his Suit would be carried on with less Perplexity.

Instead of this, the Generality of our young Women, taking all their Notions
of Life from gay Writings, or Letters of Love, consider themselves as
Goddesses, Nymphs, and Shepherdesses.

By this Romantic Sense of Things, all the natural Relations and Duties of
Life are forgotten, and our Female Part of Mankind are bred and treated, as if
they were designed to inhabit the happy Fields of Arcadia, rather than be Wives
and Mothers in old England. It is indeed long since I had the Happiness to
converse familiarly with this Sex, and therefore have been fearful of falling
into the Error which recluse Men are very subject to, that of giving false
Representations of the World from which they have retired, by imaginary Schemes
drawn from their own Reflections. An old Man cannot easily gain Admittance into
the Dressing Room of Ladies; I therefore thought it Time well spent, to turn
over Agrippa, and use all my occult Art, to give my old Co^nelian Ring the same
Force with that of Gyges, which I have lately spoken of. By the Help of this, I
went unobserved to a Friend's House of mine, and followed the Chambermaid
invisibly about Twelve of the Clock into the Bedchamber of the beauteous
Flavia, his Fine Daughter, just before she got up.

I drew the Curtains, and being wrapped up in the Safety of my old Age, could
with much Pleasure, without Passion, behold her sleeping with Waller's Poems,
and a Letter fixed in that Part of him, where every Woman thinks her self
described. The Light flashing upon her Face, awakened her: She opened her Eyes,
and her Lips too, repeating that Piece of false Wit in that admired Poet;

Such Helen was, And who can blame the Boy,
That in so bright a Flame consumed his Troy?
This she pronounced with a most bewitching Sweetness; but after it fetched a
Sigh, that methought had more Desire than Languishment, then took out her
Letter, and read aloud, for the Pleasure, I suppose, of hearing soft Words in
Praise of her self, the following Epistle:

Madam,
I Sat near you at the Opera last Night; but knew no Entertainment from the
vain Show and Noise about me, while I waited wholly intent upon the Motion of
your Bright Eyes, in Hopes of a Glance, that might restore me to the Pleasures
of Sight and Hearing in the midst of Beauty and Harmony. It is said, the Hell
of the Accursed in the next Life, arises from an Incapacity to partake the Joys
of the Blessed, though they were to be admitted to them. Such I am sure was my
Condition all this Evening; and if you, my Deity, cannot have so much Mercy, as
to make me by your Influence capable of tasting the Satisfactions of Life, my
Being is ended, which consisted only in your Favor.


The Letter was hardly read over, when she rushed out of Bed in her
Wrapping-Gown, and consulted her Glass for the Truth of his Passion. She raised
her Head, and turned it to a Profile, repeating the last Lines, My Being is
ended, which consisted only in your Favor. The Goddess immediately called her
Maid, and fell to dressing that mischievous Face of hers, without any Manner of
Consideration for the Mortal who had offered up his Petition. Nay, it was so
far otherwise, that the whole Time of her Woman's combing her Hair was spent in
Discourse of the Impertinence of his Passion, and ended, in declaring a
Resolution, if she ever had him, to make him wait. She also frankly told the
Favorite Gypsy that was prating to her, that her passionate Lover had put it
out of her Power to be civil to him, if she were inclined to it; for (said she)
if I am thus Celestial to my Lover, he will certainly so far think himself
disappointed, as I grow into the Familiarity and Form of a mortal Woman.

I came away as I went in, without staying for other Remarks than what
confirmed me in the Opinion, That it is from the Notions the Men inspire them
with, that the Women are so fantastical in the Value of themselves. This
imaginary Pre-eminence which is given to the Fair Sex, is not only formed from
the Addresses of People of Condition; but it is the Fashion and Humor of all
Orders to go regularly out of their Wits, as soon as they begin to make Love. I
know at this Time Three Goddesses in the New-Exchange; and there are Two
Shepherdesses that sell Gloves in Westminster Hall.

The TATLER. [No 140.
-- Aliena Neg^tia centum
Per Caput and circumsaliunt latus.
Hor.
From Tuesd. Febr. 28. to Thursd. March 2. 1709.
Sheer-Lane, March 1.
HAVING the Honor to be by my Great Grandmother a Welshman, I have been among
some choice Spirits of that Part of Great Britain, where we solaced our selves
in Celebration of the Day of St. David. I am, I confess, elevated above that
State of Mind which is proper for Lucubration: But I am the less concerned at
this, because I have for this Day or two last past observed, that we Novelists
have been condemned wholly to the Pastry-Cooks, the Eyes of the Nation being
turned upon greater Matters. This therefore being a Time when none but my
immediate Correspondents will read me, I shall speak to them chiefly at this
present Writing. It is the Fate of us who pretend to joke, to be frequently
understood to be only upon the Drole when we are speaking the most seriously,
as appears by the following Letter to Charles Lilly.

London, 28 Feb. 1709/10. Mr. Lilly,
IT being professed by 'Squire Bickerstaff, that his Intention is to expose the
Vices and Follies of the Age, and to promote Virtue and Goodwill amongst
Mankind; it must be a Comfort, to a Person laboring under great Straits and
Difficulties, to read any Thing that has the Appearance of Succor. I should be
glad to know therefore, whether the Intelligence given in his Tatler of
Saturday last, of the intended Charity of a certain Citizen of London, to
maintain the Education of Ten Boys in Writing and Accounts till they be fit for
Trade, be given only to encourage and recommend Persons to the Practice of such
noble and charitable Designs, or whether there be a Person who really intends
to do so. If the latter, I humbly beg 'Squire Bickerstaff's Pardon for making a
Doubt, and impute it to my Ignorance; and most humbly crave, That he would be
pleased to give Notice in his Tatler, when he thinks fit, whether his
Nomination of Ten Boys be disposed of, or whether there be Room for Two Boys to
be recommended to him; and that he will permit the Writer of this to present
him with Two Boys, who, it is humbly presumed, will be judged to be very
remarkable Objects of such Charity.

SIR, Your most humble Servant.


I am to tell this Gentleman in sober Sadness, and without Jest, That there
really is so good and charitable a Man as the Benefactor enquired for in his
Letter, and that there are but Two Boys yet named. The Father of one of them
was killed at Bleinheim, the Father of the other at Almanza. I do not here give
the Names of the Children, because I should take it to be an Insolence in me to
publish them, in a Charity which I have only the Direction of as a Servant, to
that worthy and generous Spirit who bestows upon them this Bounty, without
laying the Bondage of an Obligation. What I have to do is to tell them, they
are beholden only to their Maker, to kill in them as they grow up the false
Shame of Poverty, and let them know, That their present Fortune, which is come
upon them by the Loss of their poor Fathers on so glorious Occasions, is much
more honorable, than the Inheritance of the most ample ill-gotten Wealth.

The next Letter which lies before me is from a Man of Sense, who strengthens
his own Authority with that of Tully, in persuading me to what he very justly
believes one cannot be averse.

London, 27 Feb. 1709. Mr. Bickerstaff,
I am so confident of your Inclination to promote any Thing that is for the
Advancement of liberal Arts, that I lay before you the following Translation of
a Paragraph in Cicero's Oration in Defense of Archias the Poet, as an Incentive
to the agreeable and instructive Reading of the Writings of the Augustan Age.
Most Vices and Follies proceed from a Man's Incapacity of entertaining himself,
and we are generally Fools in Company, because we dare not be wise alone. I
hope, on some future Occasions, you will find this no barren Hint. Tully, after
having said very handsome Things of his Client, commends the Arts of which he
was Master as follows:

If so much Profit be not reaped in the Study of Letters, and if Pleasure only
be found; yet, in my Opinion, this Relaxation of the Mind should be esteemed
most humane and ingenuous. Other Things are not for all Ages, Places and
Seasons. These Studies form Youth, delight Old Age, adorn Prosperity, and
soften, and even remove Adversity, entertain at Home, and no Hindrance Abroad;
don't leave us at Night, and keep us Company on the Road and in the Country. I
am,

Your Humble Servant, STREPHON.


The following Epistle seems to want the quickest Dispatch, because a Lady is
every Moment offended till it is answered; which is best done by letting the
Offender see in her own Letter how tender she is of calling him so.

SIR,
THIS comes from a Relation of yours, though unknown to you, who, besides the Tie
of Consanguinity, has some Value for you on the Account of your Lucubrations,
those being designed to refine our Conversation, as well as cultivate our
Minds. I humbly beg the Favor of you, in one of your Tatlers, (after what
Manner you please) to correct a particular Friend of mine, for an Indecorum he
is guilty of in Discourse, of calling his Acquaintance, when he speaks of them,
Madam: As for Example, my Cousin Jenny Distaff, Madam Distaff; which I am sure
you are sensible is very unpolite, and it is what makes me often uneasy for him,
though I cannot tell him of it my self, which makes me guilty of this
Presumption, that I depend upon your Goodness to excuse; and I do assure you,
the Gentleman will mind your Reprehension, for he is, as I am,

SIR, Your most humble Servant and Cousin, Dorothy Drumstick.


I write this in a thin Under-Petticoat, and never did or will wear a Fardingal.

I had no sooner read the just Complaint of Mrs. Drumstick, but I received an
urgent One from another of the Fair Sex, upon Faults of more pernicious
Consequence.

Mr. Bickerstaff,
OBserving that you are entered into a Correspondence with Pasquin, who is, I
suppose, a Roman Catholic, I beg of you to forbear giving him any Account of
our Religion, or Manners, till you have rooted out certain Misbehaviours even
in our Churches. Among others, that of Bowing, Saluting, taking Snuff, and
other Gestures. Lady Autumn made me a very low Courtesy the other Day from the
next Pew, and, with the most courtly Air imaginable, called her self, Miserable
Sinner. Her Niece soon after, in saying, Forgive us our Trespasses, courtesy'd
with a gloting Look at my Brother. He returned it, opening his Snuffbox and
repeating yet a more solemn Expression. I beg of you, good Mr. Gensor, not to
tell Pasquin any Thing of this Kind, and to believe this does not come from one
of a morose Temper, mean Birth, rigid Education, narrow Fortune, or Bigottry in
Opinion, or from one in whom Time had worn out all Taste of Pleasure. I assure
you, it is far otherwise, for I am possessed of all the contrary Advantages;
and hope, Wealth, good Humor, and good Breeding, may be best employed in the
Service of Religion and Virtue; and desire you would, as soon as possible,
remark upon the abovementioned Indecorums, that we may not longer transgress
against the latter, to preserve our Reputation in the former.

Your humble Servant, LIDIA.


The last Letter I shall insert is what follows. This is written by a very
inquisitive Lady; and I think, such Interrogative Gentlewomen are to be
answered no other Way than by Interrogation. Her Billet is this: Dear Mr.
Bickerstaff,
Are you quite as good as you seem to be?

Chloe.




To which I can only answer; Dear Chloe,
Are you quite as ignorant as you seem to be?

I. B.




The TATLER. [No 141.
From Thursd. March 2. to Saturd. March 4. 1709.
Sheer-Lane, March 3.
WHILE the Attention of the Town is drawn aside from the reading us Writers of
News, we all save our selves against it is at more Leisure. As for my own Part,
I shall still let the laboring Oar be managed by my Correspondents, and fill
my Paper with their Sentiments, rather than my own, 'till I find my Readers
more disengaged than they are at present. When I came Home this Evening, I
found several Letters and Petitions, which I shall insert with no other Order,
than as I accidentally opened them, as follows:

March 1. 1709/10. SIR,
HAving a Daughter about Nine Years of Age, I would endeavor she might have
Education; I mean such as may be useful, as working well, and a good
Deportment. In order to it, I am persuaded to place her at some
Boarding-School, situate in a good Air. My Wife opposes it, and gives for her
greatest Reason, That she is too much a Woman, and understands the Formalities
of Visiting and a Tea-Table so very nicely, that none, though much older, can
exceed her; and with all these Perfections, the Girl can scarce thread a
Needle: But however, after several Arguments, we have agreed to be decided by
your Judgment; and knowing your Abilities, shall manage our Daughter exactly as
you shall please to direct. I am serious in my Request, and hope you will be so
in your Answer, which will lay a deep Obligation upon,

SIR, Your humble Servant, T. T.
Sir, pray answer it in your Tatler, that it may be serviceable to the Public.




I am as serious on this Subject as my Correspondent can be, and am of Opinion,
That the great Happiness or Misfortune of Mankind depends upon the Manner of
Educating and Treating that Sex. I have lately said, I design to turn my
Thoughts more particularly to them and their Service: I beg therefore a little
Time to give my Opinion on so important a Subject, and desire the young Lady
may fill Tea one Week longer, till I have considered whether she shall be
removed or not.

Chancery Lane, Febr. 27. 1709. Mr. Bickerstaff,
YOUR Notice in the Advertisement in your Tatler of Saturday last about
Whetters in and about the Royal Exchange, is mightily taken Notice of by
Gentlemen who use the Coffee-houses near the Chancery-Office in Chancery Lane;
and there being a particular certain Set of both young and old Gentlemen that
belong to and near adjoining to the Chancery-Office, both in Chancery Lane and
Bell-Yard, that are not only Whetters all the Morning long, but very Musically
given about Twelve at Night the same Days, and mightily taken with the Union of
the Dulcimer, Violin, and Song; at which Recreation they rejoice together with
perfect Harmony, however their Clients disagree: You are humbly desired by
several Gentlemen to give some Regulation concerning them; in which you will
contribute to the Repose of us, who are

Your very humble Servants, L. T. N. F. T. W.


These Whetters are a People I have considered with much Pains, aad find them
to differ from a Sect I have heretofore spoken of, called Snuff-Takers, only in
the Expedition they take in destroying their Brains: The Whetter is obliged to
refresh himself every Moment with a Liquor, as the Snuff Taker with a Powder.
As for their Harmony in the Evening, I have nothing to object, provided they
remove to Wapping or the Bridge-Foot, where it is not to be supposed that their
Vociferations will annoy the Studious, the Busy, or the Contemplative. I once
had Lodgings in Gray's Inn, where we had two hard Students, who learned to play
upon the Hautboy; and I had a Couple of Chamber-Fellows over my Head not less
diligent in the Practice of Back-Sword and Single-Rapier. I remember these
Gentlemen were assigned by the Benchers the Two Houses at the End of the
Terras-Walk, as the only Places sit for their Meditations. Such Students as
will let none improve but themselves, ought indeed to have their proper
Distances from Societies.

The Gentlemen of loud Mirth abovementioned I take to be, in the Quality of
their Crime, the same as Eves-Droppers; for they who will be in your Company
whether you will or no, are to as great a Degree Offenders, as they who hearken
to what passes without being of your Company at all. The ancient Punishment for
the latter, when I first came to this Town, was the Blanket, which I humbly
conceive may be as justly applied to him that bawls, as to him that listens. It
is therefore provided for the future, That (except in the long Vacation) no
Retainers to the Law, with Dulcimer, Violin, or any other Instrument, in any
Tavern within a Furlong of an Inn of Court, shall sing any Tune, or pretended
Tune whatsoever, upon Pain of the Blanker, to be administered according to the
Discretion of all such peaceable People as shall be within the Annoyance. And
it is further directed, That all Clerks who shall offend in this Kind shall
forfeit their Indentures, and be turned over as Assistants to the Clerks of
Parishes within the Bills of Mortality, who are hereby empowered to demand them
accordingly.

I am not to omit the Receipt of the following Letter, with a Nightcap, from my
Valentine; which Nightcap I find was finished in the Year 1588, and is too
finely wrought to be of any modern Stitching. Its Antiquity will better appear
by my Valentine's own Words.

SIR,
SInce you are pleased to accept of so mean a Present as a Nightcap from your
Valentine, I have sent you one, which I do assure you has been very much
esteemed of in our Family; for my Great Grandmother's Daughter who worked it,
was Maid of Honor to Queen Elizabeth, and had the Misfortune to lose her Life
by pricking her Finger in the making of it, of which she bled to Death, as her
Tomb now at West minster will show. For which Reason, my self, nor none of my
Family, have loved Work ever since; otherwise you should have had one as you
desired, made by the Hands of,

SIR, Your affectionate Valentine.


To the Right Worshipful Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire Censor of Great Britain, and
Governor of the Hospital erected, or to be erected, in Moorfields.
The Petition of the Inhabitants of the Parish of Goatham in the County of
Middlesex;
Humbly shows,
THAT whereas it is the undoubted Right of your said Petitioners to repair on
every Lord's Day to a Chapel of Ease in the said Parish, there to be instructed
in their Duties in the known or vulgar Tongue; yet so it is, (may it please
your Worship) that the Preacher of the said Chapel has of late given himself
wholly up to Matters of Controversy, in no wise tending to the Edification of
your said Petitioners; and in handling (as he calls it) the same, has used
diverse hard and crabbed Words; such as, among many others, are Orthodox and
Heterodox, which are in no sort understood by your said Petitioners; and it is
with Grief of Heart, that your Petitioners beg Leave to represent to you, that
in mentioning the aforesaid Words or Names, (the latter of which, as we have
Reason to believe, is his deadly Enemy) he will fall into Ravings and Foamings,
illbecoming the Meekness of his Office, and tending to give Offense and Scandal
to all good People.

Your Petitioners further say, That they are ready to prove the aforesaid
Allegations; and therefore humbly hope, that from a true Sense of their
Condition, you will please to receive the said Preacher into the Hospital,
'till he shall recover a right Use of his Senses.

And your Petitioners, etc.
The TATLER. [No 142.
From Saturd. March 4. to Tuesd. March 7. 1709.
Sheer-Lane, March 6.
ALL Persons who employ themselves in Public, are still interrupted in the
Course of their Affairs: And it seems, the admired Cavalier Nicolini himself is
commanded by the Ladies, who at present employ their Time with great Assiduity
in the Care of the Nation, to put off his Day till he shall receive their
Commands, and Notice that they are at Leisure for Diversions. In the mean Time
it is not to be expressed, how many cold Chickens the Fair Ones have eaten
since this Day Seven-night for the Good of their Country. This great Occasion
has given Birth to many Discoveries of high Moment for the Conduct of Life.
There is a Toast of my Acquaintance told me, She had now found out, that it was
Day before Nine in the Morning; and I am very confident, if the Affair holds
many Days longer, the Ancient Hours of Eating will be revived among us, many
having by it been made acquainted with the Luxury of Hunger and Thirst.

There appears, methinks, something very venerable in all Assemblies: And I
must confess, I envied all who had Youth and Health enough to make their
Appearance there, that they had the Happiness of being a whole Day in the best
Company in the World. During the Adjournments of that awful Court, a Neighbor
of mine was telling me, That it gave him a Notion of the ancient Grandeur of
the English Hospitality, to see Westminster Hall a Dining Room. There is a
Cheerfulness at such Repasts, which is very delightful to Tempers which are so
happy as to be clear of Spleen and Vapor; for to the Jovial to see others
pleased, is the greatest of all Pleasures.

But since Age and Infirmities forbid my Appearance at such public Places, the
next Happiness is to make the best Use of Privacy, and acquit my self of the
Demands of my Correspondents. The following Letter is what has given me no
small Inquietude, it being an Accusation of Partiality, and Disregard to Merit,
in the Person of a Vertuoso, who is the most eloquent of all Men upon small
Occasions, and is the more to be admired for his prodigious Fertility of
Invention, which never appears but upon Subjects which others would have
thought barren. But in Consideration of his uncommon Talents, I am contented to
let him be the Hero of my next Two Days, by inserting his Friend's
Recommendation of him at large.

Nando's, Febr. 28. 1709. Dear Cousin,
I Am just come out of the Country, and upon perusing your late Lucubrations, I
find Charles Lilly to be the Darling of your Affections, that you have give
him a Place, and taken no small Pains to establish him in the World; and at the
same Time ^ave passed by his Namesake at this End of the Town, as if he was a
Citizen defunct, and one of no Use in a Commonwealth. I must own, his
Circumstances are so good, and so well known, that he does not stand in Need of
having his Fame published to the World; but being of an ambitious Spirit, and
an aspiring Soul, he would be rather proud of the Honor, than desirous of the
Profit, which might result from your Recommendation. He is a Person of a
particular Genius, the First that brought Toys in Fashion, and Bawbles to
Perfection. He is admirably well versed in Screws, Springs, and Hinges, and
deeply read in Knives, Combs or Scissars, Buttons or Buckles. He is a perfect
Master of Words, which uttered with a smooth voluble Tongue, flow into a most
persuasive Eloquence; insomuch that I have known a Gentleman of Distinction
find several ingenious Faults with a Toy of his, and show his utmost Dislike to
it, as being either useless, or ill contrived; but when the Orator behind the
Counter had harangued upon it for an Hour and a half, displayed its hidden
Beauties, and revealed its secret Perfections, he has wondered how he had been
able to spend so great a Part of his Life without so important an Utensil. I
will not pretend to furnish out an Inventory of all the valuable Commodities that
are to be found at his Shop.

I shall content my self with giving an Account of what I think most curious.
Imprimis, his Pocket-Books are very neat, and well contrived, not for keeping
Bank Bills or Goldsmiths Notes, I confess; but they are admirable for
registring the Lodgings of Madona's, and for preserving Letters from Ladies of
Quality. His Whips and Spurs are so nice, that they will make one that buys them
ride a Fox-hunting, though before he hated Noise and early Rising, and was afraid
of breaking his Neck. His Seals are curiously fancied, and exquisitely well
cut, and of great Use to encourage young Gentlemen to write a good Hand. Ned
Puzzlepost had been ill used by his Writing-Master, and writ a Sort of a
Chinese, or downright Scrawlian: However, upon his buying a Seal of my Friend,
he is so much improved by continual Writing, that it is believed in a short
Time one may be able to read his Letters, and find out his Meaning, without
guessing. His Pistols and Fusees are so very good, that they are fit to be laid
up among the finest China. Then his Tweezer-Cases are incomparable: You shall
have one not much bigger than your Finger, with 17 several Instruments in it,
all necessary every Hour of the Day, during the whole Course of a Man's Life.
But if this Vertuoso excels in one Thing more than another, it is in Canes: He
has spent his most select Hours in the Knowledge of them, and is arrived at
that Perfection, that he is able to hold forth upon Canes longer than upon any
one Subject in the World. Indeed his Canes are so finely clouded, and so well
made up, either with Gold or Amber-Heads, that I am of the Opinion it is
impossible for a Gentleman to walk, talk, sit, or stand as he should do,
without one of them. He knows the Value of a Cane, by knowing the Value of the
Buyer's Estate. Sir Timothy Shallow has Two Thousand Pounds per Annum, and Tom.
Empty One. They both at several Times bought a Cane of Charles: Sir Timothy's
cost Ten Guinea's, and Tom. Empty's Five. Upon comparing them, they were
perfectly alike. Sir Timothy surprised there should be no Difference in the
Canes, and so much in the Price, comes to Charles. Damn it, Charles, says he,
you have sold me a Cane here for Ten Pieces, and the very same to Tom. Empty
for Five. Lord, Sir Timothy, says Charles, I am concerned that you, whom I took
to understand Canes better than any Baronet in Town, should be so overseen:
Why, Sir Timothy, yours is a true Jambee, and Squire Empty's only a plain
Dragon.

This Vertuoso has a Parcel of Jambees now growing in the East Indies, where he
keeps a Man on purpose to look after them, which will be the finest that ever
landed in Great Britain, and will be sit to cut about Two Years hence. Any
Gentleman may subscribe for as many as he pleases. Subscriptions will be taken
in at his Shop at Ten Guinea's each Joint. They that subscribe for Six, shall
have a Dragon Gratis. This is all I have to say at present concerning Charles's
Curiosities; and hope it may be sufficient to prevail with you to take him into
your Consideration, which if you comply with, you will oblige,

Your humble Servant.


N. B. Whereas there came out last Term, several Gold Snuff-Boxes and others:
This is to give Notice. That Charles will put out a new Edition on Saturday
next, which will be the only one in Fashion till after Easter. The Gentleman
that gave Fifty Pounds for the Box set with Diamonds, may show it till Sunday
Night, provided he goes to Church; but not after that Time, there being one to
be published on Monday which will cost Fourscore Guinea's.

The TATLER. [No 143.
From Tuesday March 7. to Thursday March 9. 1709.
Sheer-Lane, March 8.
I Was this Afternoon surprised with a Visit from my Sister Jenny, after an
Absence of some Time. She had, methought, in her Manner and Air, something that
was a little below that of the Women of first Breeding and Quality, but at the
same Time above the Simplicity and Familiarity of her usual Deportment. As soon
as she was seated, she began to talk to me of the odd Place I lived in, and
begged of me to remove out of the Lane where I have been so long acquainted;
for (said she) it does so spoil one's Horses, that I must beg your Pardon if
you see me much seldomer, when I am to make so great a Journey with a single
Pair, and make Visits and get Home the same Night. I understood her pretty
well, but would not; therefore desired her to pay off her Coach, for I had a
great deal to talk to her. She very pertly told me, She came in her own
Chariot. Why, said I, is your Husband in Town? And has he set up an Equipage?
No, answered she, but I have received 500 l. by his Order; and his Letters,
which came at the same Time, bad me want for nothing that was necessary. I was
heartily concerned at her Folly, whose Affairs render her but just able to bear
such an Expense. However I considered, that according to the British Custom of
treating Women, there is no other Method to be used in removing any of their
Faults and Errors, but conducting their Minds from one Humor to another, with
as much Ceremony as we lead their Persons from one Place to another. I
therefore dissembled my Concern, and in Compliance with her, as a Lady that was
to use her Feet no more, I begged of her, after a short Visit, to let me
persuade her not to stay out till it was late, for fear of catching Cold as she
went into her Coach in the Dampness of the Evening. The Malapert knew well
enough I laughed at her, but was not ill pleased with the Certainty of her
Power over her Husband, who, she knew, would support her in any Humor he was
able, rather than pass through the Torment of an Expostulation, to gainsay any
Thing she had a Mind to. As soon as my fine Lady was gone, I writ the following
Letter to my Brother.

Dear Brother,
I Am at present under very much Concern at the splendid Appearance I saw my
Sister make in an Equipage which she has set up in your Absence. I beg of you
not to indulge her in this Vanity; and desire you to consider, the World is so
whimsical, that though it will value you for being happy, it will hate you for
appearing so. The Possession of Wisdom and Virtue (the only solid Distinctions
of Life) is allowed much more easily than that of Wealth and Quality. Besides
which, I must entreat you to weigh with your self, What it is that People aim
at in setting themselves out to Show in gay Equipages, and moderate Fortunes?
You are not by this Means a better Man than your Neighbor is; but your Horses
are better than his are. And will you suffer Care and Inquietude, to have it
said as you pass by, Those are very pretty punch Nags? Nay, when you have
arrived at this, there are a Hundred worthless Fellows who are still Four
Horses happier than you are. Remember, dear Brother, there is a certain Modesty
in the Enjoyment of moderate Wealth, which to transgress, exposes Men to the
utmost Derision; and as there is nothing but Meanness of Spirit can move a Man
to value himself upon what can be purchased with Money, so he that shows an
Ambition that Way, and cannot arrive at it, is more emphatically guilty of that
Meanness. I give you only my first Thoughts on this Occasion, but shall, as I
am a Censor, entertain you in my next with my Sentiments in general upon the
Subject of Equipage; and show, that though there are no sumptuary Laws amongst
us, Reason and good Sense are equally binding, and will ever prevail in
appointing Approbation or Dislike in all Matters of an indifferent Nature, when
they are pursued with Earnestness. I am,

SIR, etc.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
To all Gentlemen, Ladies, and others, that delight in soft Lines.
These are to give Notice, That the proper Time of the Tear for writing
Pastorals now drawing near, there is a Stage-Coach settled from the One-Bell in
the Strand to Dorchester, which sets out twice a Week, and passes through
Basingstoke, Sutton, Stockbridge, Salisbury, Blandford, and so to Dorchester,
over the finest Downs in England. At all which Places, there are Accommodations
of Spreading Beeches, Beds of Flowers, Turf Seats, and Purling Streams, for
happy Swains; and Thunderstruck Oaks, and Left Handed Ravens, to foretell
Misfortunes to those that please to be wretched; with all other Necessaries for
pensive Passion.

And for the Convenience of such whose Affairs will not permit 'em to leave
this Town, at the same Place they may be furnished, during the Season, with
Opening Buds, Flowring Thyme, Warbling Birds, Sporting Lambkins, and Fountain
Water, right and good, and bottled on the Spot, by one sent down on Purpose.

N. B. The Nymphs and Swains are farther given to understand, That in those
happy Climes, they are so far from being troubled with Wolves, that for want of
even Foxes, a considerable Pack of Hounds have been lately forced to eat Sheep.

Whereas on the 6th Instant at Midnight, several Persons of light Honor and
loose Mirth, having taken upon them in the Shape of Men, but with the Voice of
the Players belonging to Mr. Powell's Company, to call up Surgeons at Midnight,
and send Physicians to Persons in sound Sleep, and perfect Health: This is to
certify, That Mr. Powell had locked up the Legs of all his Company for Fear of
Mischief that Night; and that Mr. Powell will not pay for any Damages done by
the said Persons. It is also farther advised, That there were no Midwives
wanted when those Persons called them up in the several Parts of Westminster;
but that those Gentlewomen who were in the Company of the said Imposters, may
take Care to call such useful Persons on the 6th of December next.

The Censor having observed, That there are fine wrought Ladies Shoes and
Slippers put out to View at a great Shoemaker's Shop toward St. James's End of
Pall Mall, which create irregular Thoughts and Desires in the Youth of this
Nation; The said Shopkeeper is required to take in those Eye-sores, or show
Cause the next Court-Day why he continues to expose the same; and he is
required to be prepared particularly to answer to the Slippers with green Lace
and blue Heels.

It is impossible for me to return the obliging Things Mr. Joshua Barnes has
said to me upon the Account of our mutual Friend Homer. He and I have read him
now Forty Years with some Understanding, and great Admiration. A Work to be
produced by one who has enjoyed so great an Intimacy with an Author, is
certainly to be valued more than any Comment made by Persons of Yesterday:
Therefore, according to my Friend Joshua's Request, I recommend his Mr. Joshua
Barnes's new and accurate Edition of all Homer's Works, etc.
Work; and having used a little Magic in the Case, I give this Recommendation
by Way of Amulet or Charm, against the Malignity of envious Backbiters, who
speak Evil of Performances whereof themselves were never capable. If I may use
my Friend Joshua's own Words, I shall at present say no more, but that we,
Homer's oldest Acquaintance now living, know best his Ways; and can inform the
World, that they are often mistaken when they think he is in Lethargick Fits,
which we know he was never subject to; and shall make appear to be rank Scandal
and Envy that of the Latin Poet:

-- Aliquando bonus dormitat Homerus.
The TATLER [No 144.
From Thursd. March 9. to Saturd. March 11. 1709.
Sheer-Lane, March 10.
IN a Nation of Liberty, there is hardly a Person in the whole Mass of the
People more absolutely necessary than a Censor. It is allowed, that I have no
Authority for assuming this important Appellation, and that I am Censor of
these Nations, just as one is chosen King at the Game of Questions and
Commands: But if, in the Execution of this fantastical Dignity, I observe upon
Things which do not fall within the Cognizance of real Authority, I hope it
will be granted, that an idle Man could not be more usefully employed. Among
all the Irregularities of which I have taken Notice, I know none so proper to
be presented to the World by a Censor, as that of the general Expense and
Affectation in Equipage. I have lately hinted, that this Extravagance must
necessarily get Footing where we have no sumptuary Laws, and where every Man
may be dressed, attended, and carried, in what Manner he pleases. But my
Tenderness to my Fellow Subjects will not permit me to let this Enormity go
unobserved.

As the Matter now stands, every Man takes it in his Head, that he has a
Liberty to spend his Money as he pleases. Thus, in Spite of all Order,
Justice, and Decorum, we the greater Number of the Queen's loyal Subjects, for
no Reason in the World but because we want Money, do not share alike in the
Division of Her Majesty's High-Road. The Horses and Slaves of the Rich take up
the whole Street, while we Peripateticks are very glad to watch an Opportunity
to whisk cross a Passage, very thankful that we are not run over for
interrupting the Machine, that carries in it a Person neither more handsome,
wise, or valiant than the Meanest of us. For this Reason, were I to propose a
Tax, it should certainly be upon Coaches and Chairs: For no Man living can
assign a Reason, why one Man should have half a Street to carry him at his
Ease, and perhaps only in Pursuit of Pleasures, when as good a Man as himself
wants Room for his own Person to pass upon the most necessary and urgent
Occasion. Till such an Acknowledgment is made to the Public, I shall take upon
me to vest certain Rights in the Scavengers of the Cities of London and
Westminster, to take the Horses and Servants of all such as do not become or
deserve such Distinctions into their peculiar Custody. The Offenders themselves
I shall allow safe Conduct to their Places of Abode in the Carts of the said
Scavengers, but their Horses shall be mounted by their Footmen, and sent into
the Service Abroad: And I take this Opportunity in the first Place to recruit
the Regiment of my good old Friend the brave and honest Sylvius, that they be
as well taught as they are fed. It is to me most miraculous, so unreasonable an
Usurpation as this I am speaking of should so long have been tolerated. We hang
a poor Fellow for taking any trifle from us on the Road, and bear with the Rich
for robbing us of the Road it self. Such a Tax as this, would be of great
Satisfaction to us who walk on Foot; and since the Distinction of riding in a
Coach is not to be appointed according to a Man's Merit or Service to their
Country, nor that Liberty given as a Reward for some eminent Virtue, we should
be highly contented to see them pay something for the Insult they do us in the
State they take upon them while they are drawn by us.

'Till they have made us some Reparation of this Kind, we the Peripateticks of
Great Britain cannot think our selves well treated, while every one that is
able is allowed to set up an Equipage.

As for my Part, I cannot but admire how Persons, conscious to themselves of no
Manner of Superiority above others, can out of mere Pride or Laziness expose
themselves at this Rate to public View, and put us all upon pronouncing those
Three terrible Syllables, Who is that? When it comes to that Question, our
Method is to consider the Mien and Air of the Passenger, and comfort our selves
for being dirty to the Ankles, by laughing at his Figure and Appearance who
overlooks us. I must confess, were it not for the solid Injustice of the Thing,
there is nothing could afford a discerning Eye greater Occasion for Mirth, than
this licentious Huddle of Qualities and Characters in the Equipages about this
Town. The Overseers of the Highway and Constables have so little Skill or Power
to rectify this Matter, that you may often see the Equipage of a Fellow whom
all the Town knows to deserve hanging, make a Stop that shall interrupt the
Lord High Chancellor and all the Judges in their Way to Westminster.

For the better understanding of Things and Persons in this general Confusion,
I have given Directions to all the Coach-Makers and Coach-Painters in Town, to
bring me in Lists of their several Customers; and doubt not, but with comparing
the Orders of each Man, in the placing his Arms on the Doors of his Chariot, as
well as the Words, Devices and Ciphers to be fixed upon them, to make a
Collection which shall let us into the Nature, if not the History, of Mankind,
more usefully than the Curiosities of any Medallist in Europe.

But this Evil of Vanity in our Figure, with many others, proceeds from a
certain Gaiety of Heart, which has crept into Men's very Thoughts and
Complexions. The Passions and Adventures of Hero's, when they enter the Lists
for the Tournament in Romances, are not more easily distinguishable by their
Palfreys and their Armor, than the secret Springs and Affections of the
several Pretenders to Show amongst us are known by their Equipages in ordinary
Life. The young Bridegroom with his gilded Cupids, and winged Angels, has some
Excuse in the Joy of his Heart to launch out into something that may be
significant of his present Happiness: But to see Men, for no Reason upon Earth
but that they are rich, ascend Triumphant Chariots, and ride through the People,
has at the Bottom nothing else in it but an insolent Transport, arising only
from the Distinction of Fortune.

It is therefore high Time that I call in such Coaches as are in their
Embellishments improper for the Character of their Owners. But if I find I am
not obeyed herein, and that I cannot pull down these Equipages already erected,
I shall take upon me to prevent the Growth of this Evil for the future, by
enquiring into the Pretensions of the Persons who shall hereafter attempt to
make public Entries with Ornaments and Decorations of their own Appointment.
If a Man, who believed he had the handsomest Leg in this Kingdom, should take a
Fancy to adorn so deserving a Limb with a blue Garter, he would justly be
punished for offending against the Most Noble Order: And, I think, the general
Prostitution of Equipage and Retinue is as destructive to all Distinction, as
the Impertinence of one Man, if permitted, would certainly be to that
illustrious Fraternity.

ADVERTISEMENT.
The Censor having lately received Intelligence, that the ancient Simplicity in
the Dress and Manners of that Part of this Island, called Scotland, begins to
decay; and that there are at this Time in the good Town of Edinburgh, Beaus,
Fops, and Coxcombs: His late Correspondent from that Place is desired to send
up their Names and Characters with all Expedition, that they may be proceeded
against accordingly, and proper Officers named to take in their Canes,
Snuff-boxes, and all other useless Necessaries commonly worn by such Offenders.

The TATLER. [No 145.
N^scio quis teneros Oculus mihi fascinet Agnos.
Virg.
From Saturd. March 11. to Tuesd. March 14. 1709.
White's Chocolate-house, March 13.
THIS Evening was allotted for taking into Consideration a late Request of two
indulgent Parents, touching the Care of a young Daughter, whom they design to
send to a Boarding-School, or keep at Home, according to my Determination; but
I am diverted from that Subject by Letters which I have received from several
Ladies, complaining of a certain Sect of professed Enemies to the Repose of the
Fair Sex, called Oglers. These are, it seems, Gentlemen who look with deep
Attention on one Object at the Play Houses, and are ever staring all round them
in Churches. It is urged by my Correspondents, that they do all that is
possible to keep their Eyes off these Insnarers; but that, by what Power they
know not, both their Diversions and Devotions are interrupted by them in such a
Manner, as that they cannot attend either, without stealing Looks at the
Persons whose Eyes are fixed upon them. By this Means, my Petitioners say, they
find themselves grow insensibly less offended, and in Time enamoured, of these
their Enemies. What is required of me on this Occasion, is, That as I love and
study to preserve the better Part of Mankind, the Females, I would give them
some Account of this dangerous Way of Assault, against which there is so little
Defense, that it lays Ambush for the Sight it self, and makes them seeingly,
knowingly, willingly, and forcibly go on to their own Captivity.

This Representation of the present State of Affairs between the Two Sexes gave
me very much Alarm; and I had no more to do, but to recollect what I had seen
at any one Assembly for some Years last past, to be convinced of the Truth and
Justice of this Remonstrance. If there be not a Stop put to this evil Art, all
the Modes of Address, and the elegant Embellishments of Life, which arise out
of the noble Passion of Love, will of Necessity decay. Who would be at the
Trouble of Rhetoric, or study the Bon Mien, when his Introduction is so much
easier obtained, by a sudden Reverence in a downcast Look at the meeting the
Eye of a Fair Lady, and beginning again to ogle her as soon as she glances
another Way? I remember very well, when I was last at an Opera, I could
perceive the Eyes of the whole Audience last into particular cross Angles one
upon another, without any Manner of Regard to the Stage, though King Latinus
was himself present when I made that Observation. It was then very pleasant to
look into the Hearts of the whole Company; for the Balls of Sight are so
formed, that one Man's Eyes are Spectacles to another to read his Heart with.
The most ordinary Beholder can take Notice of any violent Agitation in the
Mind, any pleasing Transport, or any inward Grief, in the Person he looks at;
but one of these Oglers can see a studied Indifference, a concealed Love, or a
smothered Resentment, in the very Glances that are made to hide those
Dispositions of Thought. The Naturalists tell us, That the Rattle Snake will
fix himself under a Tree where he sees a Squirrel playing; and when he has once
got the Exchange of a Glance from the pretty Wanton, will give it such a sudden
Stroke on its Imagination, that though it may play from Bough to Bough, and
strive to avert its Eyes from it for some Time, yet it comes nearer and nearer
by little Intervals of looking another Way, 'till it drops into the Jaws of the
Animal, which it knew gazed at it for no other Reason but to ruin it. I did not
believe this Piece of Philosophy 'till that Night I was just now speaking of;
but I then saw the same Thing pass between an Ogler and a Coquer. Mirtillo, the
most learned of the former, had for some Time discontinued to visit Flavia, no
less eminent among the latter. They industriously avoided all Places where they
might probably meet, but Chance brought them together to the Playhouse, and
seated them in a direct Line overagainst each other, she in a Front Box, he in
the Pit next the Stage. As soon as Flavia had received the Looks of the whole
Crowd below her with that Air of Insensibility, which is necessary at the first
Entrance, she began to look round her and saw the Vagabond Mirtillo, who had so
long absented himself from her Circle; and when she first discovered him, she
looked upon him with that Glance, which, in the Language of Oglers, is called
the Scornful, but immediately turned her Observation another Way, and returned
upon him with the Indifferent. This gave Mirtillo no small Resentment; but he
used her accordingly. He took Care to be ready for her next Glance. She found
his Eyes full in the Indolent, with his Lips crumpled up in the Posture of one
Whistling. Her Anger at this Usage immediately appeared in every Muscle of her
Face; and after many Emotions, which glisten'd in her Eyes, she cast them round
the whole House, and gave 'em Softnesses in the Face of every Man she had ever
seen before. After she thought she had reduced all she saw to her Obedience,
the Play began and ended their Dialogue. As soon as the first Act was over, she
stood up with a Visage full of dissembled Alacrity and Pleasure, with which she
overlooked the Audience, and at last came to him; He was then placed in a
Side-way, with his Hat slouching over his Eyes, and gazing at a Wench in the
Side-Box, as talking of that Gipsy to the Gentleman who sat by him. But as she
was fixed upon him, he turned suddenly with a full Face upon her, and with all
the Respect imaginable, made her the most obsequious Bow in the Presence of the
whole Theater. This gave her a Pleasure not to be concealed, and she made him
the Recovering or Second Courtesy, with a Smile that spoke a perfect
Reconciliation. Between the ensuing Acts, they talked to each other with
Gestures and Glances so significant, that they ridiculed the whole House in
this silent Speech, and made an Appointment that Mirtillo should lead her to
her Coach.

The peculiar Language of one Eye, as it differs from another, as much as the
Tone of one Voice from another, and the Fascination or Enchantment which is
lodged in the Optic Nerves of the Persons concerned in these Dialogues, is, I
must confess, too nice a Subject for one who is not an Adept in these
Speculations; but I shall, for the Good and Safety of the Fair Sex, call my
learned Friend Sir William Read to my Assistance, and, by the Help of his
Observations on this Organ, acquaint them when the Eye is to be believed, and
when distrusted. On the contrary, I shall conceal the true Meaning of the Looks
of Ladies, and indulge in them all the Art they can acquire in the Management
of their Glances: All which is but too little against Creatures who triumph in
Falsehood, and begin to forswear with their Eyes, when their Tongues can be no
longer believed.

ADVERTISEMENT.
A very clean, well behaved young Gentleman, who is in a very good Way in
Cornhil, has writ to me the following Lines, and seems in some Passages of his
Letter (which I omit) to lay it very much to Heart, that I have not spoken of a
supernatural Beauty whom he sighs for, and complains to in most elaborate
Language. Alas! What can a Monitor do? All Mankind live in Romance.

Royal Exchange, March 11. Mr. Bickerstaff,
SOme Time since you were pleased to mention the Beauties in the New-Exchange
and Westminster Hall, and in my Judgment were not very impartial; for if you
were pleased to allow there was one Goddess in the New-Exchange, and two
Shepherdesses in Westminster Hall, you very well might say, there was and is at
present one Angel in the Royal Exchange: And I humbly beg the Favor of you to
let Justice be done her, by inserting this in your next Tatler; which will make
her my good Angel, and me your most humble Servant,

A. B.


The TATLER. [No 146.
Permittes ipsis expendere Numinibus, quid
Conveniat nobis, rebusque sit Utile nostris,
Nam pro Jucundis aptissima quaeque dabunt Dii.
Charior est illis Homo, quam sibi. Nos animorum
Impulsu and caeca magnaque cupidine ducti
Conjugium petimus, partumque Uxoris; at illis
Notum, qui pueri, qualisque futura sit Uxor.
Juv.
From Tuesday March 14. to Thursday March 16. 1709.
From my own Apartment, March 15.
AMong the various Sets of Correspondents who apply to me for Advice, and send
up their Cases from all Parts of Great Britain, there are none who are more
importunate with me, and whom I am more inclined to answer, than the
Complainers. One of them dates his Letter to me from the Banks of a purling
Stream, where he used to ruminate in Solitude upon the Divine Clarissa, and
where he is now looking about for a Convenient Leap, which he tells me he is
resolved to take, unless I support him under the Loss of that charming perjured
Woman. Poor Lavinia presses as much for Consolation on the other Side, and is
reduced to such an Extremity of Despair by the Inconstancy of Philander, that
she tells me she writes her Letter with her Pen in one Hand, and her Garter in
the other. A Gentleman of an ancient Family in Norfolk is almost out of his
Wits upon Account of a Greyhound, that after having been his inseparable
Companion for Ten Years, is at last run mad. Another (who I believe is serious)
complains to me, in a very moving Manner, of the Loss of a Wife; and another,
in Terms still more moving' of a Purse of Money that was taken from him on
Bagshot Heath, and which, he tells me, would not have troubled him if he had
given it to the Poor. In short, there is scarce a Calamity in humane Life that
has not produced me a Letter.

It is indeed wonderful to consider, how Men are able to raise Affliction to
themselves out of every Thing. Lands and Houses, Sheep and Oxen, can convey
Happiness and Misery into the Hearts of reasonable Creatures. Nay, I have known
a Muff, a Scarf, or a Tippet, become a solid Blessing or Misfortune. A Lap-Dog
has broke the Hearts of Thousands. Flavia, who had buried Five Children, and
Two Husbands, was never able to get over the Loss of her Parrat. How often has
a Divine Creature been thrown into a Fit by a Neglect at a Ball or an Assembly?
Mopsa has kept her Chamber ever since the last Masquerade, and is in greater
Danger of her Life upon being left out of it, than Clarinda from the violent
Cold which she caught at it. Nor are these dear Creatures the only Sufferers by
such imaginary Calamities: Many an Author has been dejected at the Censure of
one whom he ever looked upon as an Idiot; and many a Hero cast into a Fit of
Melancholy, because the Rabble have not hooted at him as he passed through the
Streets. Thereon places all his Happiness in a Running Horse, Suffenus in a
Gilded Chariot, Fulvius in a Blue String, and Florio in a Tulip Root. It would
be endless to enumerate the many fantastical Afflictions that disturb Mankind;
but as a Misery is not to be measured from the Nature of the Evil, but from the
Temper of the Sufferer, I shall present my Readers, who are unhappy either in
Reality or Imagination, with an Allegory, for which I am indebted to the great
Father and Prince of Poets.

As I was sitting after Dinner in my Elbow-Chair, I took up Homer, and dipped
into that famous Speech of Achilles to Priam, in which he tells him, That
Jupiter has by him Two great Vessels, the one filled with Blessings, and the
other with Misfortunes; out of which he mingles a Composition for every Man
that comes into the World. This Passage so exceedingly pleased me, that as I
fell insensibly into my Afternoon's Slumber, it wrought my Imagination into the
following Dream.

When Jupiter took into his Hands the Government of the World, the several
Parts of Nature, with the Presiding Deities, did Homage to him. One presented
him with a Mountain of Winds, another with a Magazine of Hail, and a third with
a Pile of Thunderbolts. The Stars offered up their Influences; the Ocean gave
in his Trident, the Earth her Fruits, and the Sun his Seasons. Among the
several Deities who came to make their Court on this Occasion, the Destinies
advanced with two great Tuns carried before them, one of which they fixed at
the Right Hand of Jupiter as he sat upon his Throne, and the other on his
Left. The first was filled with all the Blessings, and the other with all the
Calamities of Humane Life. Jupiter, in the Beginning of his Reign, finding the
World much more innocent than it is in this Iron Age, poured very plentifully
out of the Tun that stood at his Right Hand; but as Mankind degenerated, and
became unworthy of his Blessings, he set abroach the other Vessel, that filled
the World with Pain and Poverty, Battles and Distempers, Jealousy and Falsehood,
intoxicating Pleasures and untimely Deaths.

He was at length so very much incensed at the great Depravation of Humane
Nature, and the repeated Provocations which he received from all Parts of the
Earth, that having resolved to destroy the whole Species, except Deucalion and
Pyrrha, he commanded the Destinies to gather up the Blessings which he had
thrown away upon the Sons of Men, and lay them up till the World should be
inhabited by a more virtuous and deserving Race of Mortals.

The Three Sisters immediately repaired to the Earth, in Search of the several
Blessings that had been scattered on it; but found the Task which was enjoined
them, to be much more difficult than they had imagined. The first Places they
resorted to, as the most likely to succeed in; were Cities, Palaces, and
Courts; but instead of meeting with what they looked for here, they found
nothing but Envy, Repining, Uneasiness, and the like bitter Ingredients, of the
Left Hand Vessel. Whereas, to their great Surprise, they discovered Content,
Cheerfulness, Health, Innocence, and other the most substantial Blessings of
Life, in Cottages, Shades, and Solitudes.

There was another Circumstance no less unexpected than the former, and which
gave them very great Perplexity in the Discharge of the Trust which Jupiter had
committed to them. They observed, that several Blessings had degenerated into
Calamities, and that several Calamities had improved into Blessings, according
as they fell into the Possession of wise or foolish Men. They often found
Power, with so much Insolence and Impatience cleaving to it, that it became a
Misfortune to the Person on whom it was conferred. Youth had often Distempers
growing about it, worse than the Infirmities of old Age: Wealth was often
united to such a sordid Avarice, as made it the most uncomfortable and painful
Kind of Poverty. On the contrary, they often found Pain made glorious by
Fortitude, Poverty lost in Content, Deformity beautified with Virtue. In a
Word, the Blessings were often like good Fruits planted in a bad Soil, that by
Degrees fall off from their natural Relish, into Tastes altogether insipid or
unwholesome; and the Calamities, like harsh Fruits, cultivated in a good Soil,
and enriched by proper Grafts and Inoculations, till they swell with generous
and delightful Juices.

There was still a Third Circumstance that occasioned as great a Surprise to
the Three Sisters as either of the foregoing, when they discovered several
Blessings and Calamities which had never been in either of the Tuns that stood
by the Throne of Jupiter, and were nevertheless as great Occasions of Happiness
or Misery as any there. These were that spurious Crop of Blessings and
Calamities which were never sown by the Hand of the Deity, but grow of
themselves out of the Fancies and Dispositions of Humane Creatures. Such are
Dress, Titles, Place, Equipage, false Shame and groundless Fear, with the like
vain Imaginations that shoot up in trifling, weak, and irresolute Minds.

The Destinies finding themselves in so great a Perplexity, concluded, that it
would be impossible for them to execute the Commands that had been given them
according to their first Intention; for which Reason they agreed to throw all
the Blessings and Calamities together into one large Vessel, and in that Manner
offer them up at the Feet of Jupiter.

This was performed accordingly, the eldest Sister presenting her self before
the Vessel, and introducing it with an Apology for what they had done.

O Jupiter! (says she) we have gathered together all the Good and Evil, the
Comforts and Distresses of Humane Life, which we thus present before thee in
one promiscuous Heap. We beseech thee that thou thy self wilt sort them out for
the future, as in thy Wisdom thou shall think fit. For we acknowledge, that
there is none beside thee that can judge what will occasion Grief or Joy in the
Heart of a Humane Creature, and what will prove a Blessing or a Calamity to the
Person on whom it is bestowed. The TATLER. [No 147.
-- Ut ameris amabilis esto.
Ovid.
From Thursd. March 16. to Saturd. March 18. 1709.
From my own Apartment, March 17.
REading is to the Mind, what Exercise is to the Body. As by the one, Health is
preserved, strenthened and invigorated; by the other, Virtue (which is the
Health of the Mind) is kept alive, cherished and confirmed. But as Exercise
becomes tedious and painful when we make use of it only as the Means of Health,
so Reading is apt to grow uneasy and burdensome, when we apply our selves to it
only for our Improvement in Virtue. For this Reason, the Virtue which we gather
from a Fable, or an Allegory, is like the Health we get by Hunting; as we are
engaged in an agreeable Pursuit that draws us on with Pleasure, and makes us
insensible of the Fatigues that accompany it.

After this Preface, I shall set down a very beautiful Allegorical Fable out of
the great Poet whom I mentioned in my last Paper, and whom it is very difficult
to lay aside when one is engaged in the reading of him. And this I particularly
design for the Use of several of my Fair Correspondents, who in their Letters
have complained to me, that they have lost the Affections of their Husbands,
and desire my Advice how to recover them.

Juno, says Homer, seeing her Jupiter seated on the Top of Mount Ida, and
knowing that he had conceived an Aversion to her, began to study how she should
regain his Affections, and make her self amiable to him. With this Thought she
immediately retired into her Chamber, where she bathed her self in Ambrosia,
which gave her Person all its Beauty, and diffused so divine an Odor, as
refreshed all Nature, and sweetened both Heaven and Earth. She let her immortal
Tresses flow in the most graceful Manner, and took a particular Care to dress
her self in several Ornaments, which the Poet describes at length, and which
the Goddess chose out as the most proper to set off her Person to the best
Advantage. In the next Place, she made a Visit to Venus, the Deity who presides
over Love, and begged of her, as a particular Favor, that she would lend her
for a while those Charms with which she subdued the Hearts both of Gods and
Men. For, says the Goddess, I would make use of them to reconcile the Two
Deities, who took Care of me in my Infancy, and who, at present, are at so
great a Variance, that they are estranged from each other's Bed. Venus was
proud of an Opportunity of obliging so great a Goddess, and therefore made her
a Present of the Cestus which she used to wear about her own Wast, with Advice
to hide it in her Bosom till she had accomplished her Intention. This Cestus
was a fine Party-colored Girdie, which, as Homer tells us, had all the
Attractions of the Sex wrought into it. The Four principal Figures in the
Embroidery were Love, Desi e, Fondness of Speech, and Conversation, filled with
that Sweetness and Complacency, which, says the Poet, insensibly steal away the
Hearts of the wisest Men.

Juno, after having made these necessary Preparations, came as by Accident into
the Presence of Jupiter, who is said to have been as much inflamed with her
Beauty, as when he first stole to her Embraces without the Consent of their
Parents. Juno, to cover her real Thoughts, told him as she had told Venus, That
she was going to make a Visit to Oceanus and Tethys. He prevailed upon her to
stay with him, protesting to her, that she appeared more amiable in his Eye,
than ever any Mortal, Goddess, or even her self, had appeared to him till that
Day. The Poet then represents him in so great an Ardour, that (without going up
to the House which had been built by the Hands of Vulcan according to Juno's
Direction) he threw a Golden Cloud over their Heads as they sat upon the Top
of Mount Ida, while the Earth beneath them sprung up in Lotus's, Saffrons,
Hyacinths, and a Bed of the softest Flowers for their Repose.

This close Translation of one of the finest Passages in Homer, may suggest
abundance of Instruction to a Woman who has a Mind to preserve or recall the
Affection of her Husband. The Care of the Person, and the Dress, with the
particular Blandishments woven in the Cestus, are so plainly recommended by
this Fable, and so indispensibly necessary in every Female who desires to
please, that they need no further Explanation. The Discretion likewise in
covering all Matrimonial Quarrels from the Knowledge of others, is taught in
the pretended Visit to Tethys, in the Speech where Juno addresses her self to
Venus; as the chaste and prudent Management of a Wife's Charms is intimated by
the same Pretense for her appearing before Jupiter, and by the Concealment of
the Cestus in her Bosom.

I shall leave this Tale to the Consideration of such good Housewives who are
never well dressed but when they are Abroad, and think it necessary to appear
more agreeable to all Men living than their Husbands: As also to those prudent
Ladies, who to avoid the Appearance of being over-fond, entertain their
Husbands with Indifference, Aversion, sullen Silence, or exasperating Language.

Sheer-Lane, March 17.
Upon my coming Home last Night, I found a very handsome Present of Wine left
for me, as a Taste of 216 Hogsheads which are to be put to Sale at 20 l. a
Hogshead, at Garraway's Coffee-house in Exchange-Alley, on the 22 d Instant, at
3 in the Afternoon, and to be tasted in Major Long 's Vaults from the 20 th
Instant till the Time of Sale. This having been sent to me with a Desire that I
would give my Judgment upon it, I immediately impannelled a Jury of Men of nice
Palates and strong Heads, who being all of them very scrupulous, and unwilling
to proceed rashly in a Matter of so great Importance, refused to bring in their
Verdict till Three in the Morning; at which Time the Foreman pronounced, as
well as he was able, Extra -- a -- ordinary French Claret. For my own Part, as
I love to consult my Pillow in all Points of Moment, I slept upon it before I
would give my Sentence, and this Morning confirmed the Verdict.

Having mentioned this Tribute of Wine, I must give Notice to my Correspondents
for the future, who shall apply to me on this Occasion, That as I shall decide
nothing unadvisedly in Matters of this Nature, I cannot pretend to give
Judgment of a right good Liquor, without examining at least Three Dozen Bottles
of it. I must at the same Time do my self the Justice to let the World know,
that I have resisted great Temptations in this Kind; as it is well known to a
Butcher in Clare-Market, who endeavored to corrupt me with a Dozen and half of
Marrow-Bones. I had likewise a Bribe sent me by a Fishmonger, consisting of a
Collar of Brawn, and a Joll of Salmon; but not finding them excellent in their
Kinds, I had the Integrity to eat them both up, without speaking one Word of
them. However, for the future, I shall have an Eye to the Diet of this great
City, and will recommend the best and most wholesome Food to them, if I receive
these proper and respectful Notices from the Sellers, that it may not be said
hereafter, my Readers were better taught than fed.

The TATLER. [No 148.
-- Gustus Elementa per omnia quaerunt,
Nunquam Animo Pretiis obstantibus. --
Juv.
From Saturd. March 18. to Tuesd. March 21. 1709.
From my own Apartment, March 20.
HAVING intimated in my last Paper, that I design to take under my Inspection
the Diet of this great City, I shall begin with a very earnest and serious
Exhortation to all my welldisposed Readers, that they would return to the Food
of their Forefathers, and reconcile themselves to Beef and Mutton. This was the
Diet which bred that hardy Race of Mortals who won the Fields of Cressy and
Agincourt. I need not go up so high as the History of Guy Earl of Warwick, who
is well known to have eaten up a Dun Cow of his own killing. The Renowned King
Arthur is generally looked upon as the first who ever sat down to a whole
roasted Ox, (which was certainly the best Way to preserve the Gravy) and it is
further added, that he and his Knights sat about it at his Round Table, and
usually consumed it to the very Bones before they would enter upon any Debate
of Moment. The Black Prince was a professed Lover of the Brisket; not to
mention the History of the Surloin, or the Institution of the Order of
Beef-Eaters, which are all so many evident and undeniable Marks of the great
Respect which our Warlike Predecessors have paid to this excellent Food. The
Tables of the ancient Gentry of this Nation were covered thrice a Day with hot
Roast-Beef; and I am credibly informed, by an Antiquary who has searched the
Registers, in which the Bills of Fare of the Court are recorded, that instead
of Tea and Bread and Butter, which have prevailed of late Years, the Maids of
Honor in Queen Elizabeth's Time were allowed Three Rumps of Beef for their
Breakfast. Mutton has likewise been in great Repute among our valiant
Countrymen, but was formerly observed to be the Food rather of Men of nice and
delicate Appetites, than those of strong and robust Constitutions. For which
Reason, even to this Day, we use the Word Sheep-Biter as a Term of Reproach, as
we do Beef-Eater in a respectful and honorable Sense. As for the Flesh of
Lamb, Veal, Chicken, and other Animals under Age, they were the Invention of
sickly and degenerate Palates, according to that wholesome Remark of Daniel the
Historian, who takes Notice, That in all Taxes upon Provisions, during the
Reigns of several of our Kings, there is nothing mentioned besides the Flesh of
such Fowl and Cattle as were arrived at their full Growth, and were mature for
Slaughter. The Common People of this Kingdom do still keep up the Taste of
their Ancestors; and it is to this that we in a great Measure owe the
unparallelled Victories that have been gained in this Reign: For I would desire
my Reader to consider, what Work our Countrymen would have made at Blenheim and
Ramillies, if they had been fed with Fricacies and Ragousts.

For this Reason, we at present see the florid Complexion, the strong Limb, and
the hale Constitution, are to be found chiefly among the meaner Sort of People,
or in the wild Gentry, who have been educated among the Woods or Mountains.
Whereas many great Families are insensibly fallen off from the Athletick
Constitution of their Progenitors, and are dwindled away into a pale, sickly,
spindle-legged Generation of Valetudinarians.

I may perhaps be thought extravagant in my Notion; but I must confess, I am
apt to impute the Dishonours that sometimes happen in great families to the
inflaming kind of Diet which is so much in Fashion. Many Dishes can excite
Desire without giving Strength, and heat the Body without nourishing it; as
Physicians observe, That the poorest and most dispirited Blood is most subject
to Fevers. I look upon a French Ragoust to be as pernicious to the Stomach as a
Glass of Spirits; and when I have seen a young Lady swallow all the
Instigations of high Soups, seasoned Sauces, and forced Meats, I have wondered
at the Despair or tedious Sighing of her Lovers.

The Rules among these false Delicates, are to be as Contradictory as they can
be to Nature.

Without expecting the Return of Hunger, they eat for an Appetite, and prepare
Dishes not to allay, but to excite it.

They admit of nothing at their Tables in its natural Form, or without some
Disguise.

They are to eat every Thing before it comes in Season, and to leave it off as
soon as it is good to be eaten.

They are not to approve any Thing that is agreeable to ordinary Palates; and
nothing is to gratify their Senses, but what would offend those of their
Inferiors.

I remember I was last Summer invited to a Friend's House, who is a great
Admirer of the French Cookery, and (as the Phrase is) eats well. At our fitting
down, I found the Table covered with a great Variety of Unknown Dishes. I was
mightily at a Loss to learn what they were, and therefore did not know where to
help my self. That which stood before me, I took to be a roasted Porcupine,
however did not care for asking Questions; and have since been informed, that
it was only a larded Turkey. I afterward passed my Eye over several Hashes,
which I do not know the Names of to this Day; and hearing that they were
Delicacies, did not think fit to meddle with them.

Among other Dainties, I saw something like a Pheasant, and therefore desired
to be helped to a Wing of it; but to my great Surprise, my Friend told me it
was a Rabbet, which is a sort of Meat I never cared for. At last I discovered,
with some Joy, a Pig at the lower End of the Table, and begged a Gentleman that
was near it to cut me a Piece of it. Upon which the Gentleman of the House
said, with great Civility, I am sure you will like the Pig, for it was whipped
to Death. I must confess, I heard him with Horror, and could not eat of an
Animal that had died so tragical a Death. I was now in great Hunger and
Confusion, when, methought, I smelled the agreeable Savor of Roast Beef, but
could not tell from which Dish it arose, though I did not question but it lay
disguised in one of them. Upon turning my Head, I saw a noble Sirloin on the
Side-Table smoking in the most delicious Manner. I had Recourse to it more
than once, and could not see, without some Indignation, that substantial
English Dish banished in so ignominious a Manner, to make Way for French
^kshaws.

The Desert was brought up at last, which in ^th was as extraordinary as any
Thing that (...) come before it. The whole, when ranged ^ts proper Order,
looked like a very beautiful ^ter-Piece. There were several Pyramids of ^ndy'd
Sweetmeats, that hung like Icicles, ^th Fruits scattered up and down, and hid
in an ^ificial kind of Frost. At the same Time there ^ere great Quantities of
Cream beaten up into (...) Snow, and near them little Plates of Sugar^umbs,
disposed like so many Heaps of Hail^nes, with a Multitude of Congelations in
Jel^s of various Colors. I was indeed so pleased ^th the several Objects which
lay before me, ^at I did not care for displacing any of them, ^d was half angry
with the rest of the Com^ny, that for the Sake of a Piece of Lemon^el, or a
Sugar-Plumb, would spoil so pleasing (...) Picture. Indeed, I could not but
smile to see ^veral of them cooling their Mouths with Lumps ^f Ice which they
had just before been burning with Salts and Peppers.

As soon as this Show was over I took my ^eave, that I might finish my Dinner
at my own House: For as I in every Thing love what is ^mple and natural, so
particularly in my Food; Two plain Dishes, with Two or Three good-na^ured,
cheerful, ingenious Friends, would make ^he more pleased and vain, than all
that Pomp and Luxury can bestow. For it is my Maxim, That he keeps the greatest
Table, who has the most valuable Company at it.

The TATLER. [No 149.
From Tuesd. March 21. to Thursd. March 23. 1709.
From my own Apartment, March 22.
IT has often been a solid Grief to me, when I have reflected on this glorious
Nation, which is the Scene of public Happiness and Liberty, that there are
still Crowds of private Tyrants, against whom there neither is any Law now in
Being, nor can there be invented any by the Wit of Man. These cruel Men are
ill-natured Husbands. The Commerce in the Conjugal State is so delicate, that
it is impossible to prescribe Rules for the Conduct of it, so as to fit Ten
Thousand nameless Pleasures and Disquietudes which arise to People in that
Condition. But it is in this as in some other nice Cases, where touching upon
the Malady tenderly, is half Way to the Cure; and there are some Faults which
need only to be observed to be amended. I am put into this Way of thinking by a
late Conversation which I am going to give an Account of.

I made a Visit the other Day to a Family for which I have a great Honor, and
found the Father, the Mother, and Two or Three of the younger Children, drop
off designedly to leave me alone with the eldest Daughter, who was but a
Visitant there as well as my self, and is the Wife of a Gentleman of a very
fair Character in the World. As soon as we were alone, I saw her Eyes fall of
Tears, and methought she had much to say to me, for which she wanted
Encouragement. Madam, said I, you know I wish you all as well as any Friend you
have: Speak freely what I see you are oppressed with, and you may be sure, if I
cannot relieve your Distress, you may at least reap so much present Advantage,
as safely to give your self the Ease of uttering it. She immediately assumed
the most becoming Composure of Countenance, and spoke as follows: 'It is an
Aggravation of Affliction in a married Life, that there is a Sort of Guilt in
communicating it: For which Reason it is, that a Lady of your and my
Acquaintance, instead of speaking to you her self, desired me the next Time I
saw you, as you are a professed Friend to our Sex, to turn your Thoughts upon
the reciprocal Complaisance which is the Duty of a married State.' 'My Friend
was neither in Fortune, Birth or Education, below the Gentleman whom she has
married. Her Person, her Age, and her Character, are also such as he can make
no Exception to. But so it is, that from the Moment the Marriage-Ceremony was
over, the Obsequiousness of a Lover was turned into the Haughtiness of a
Master. All the kind Endeavors which she uses to please him, are at best but
so many Instances of her Duty. This Insolence takes away that secret
Satisfaction, which does not only excite to Virtue, but also rewards it. It
abates the Fire of a free and generous Love, and imbitters all the Pleasures of
a social Life. The young Lady spoke all this with such an Air of Resentment, as
discovered how nearly she was concerned in the Distress.'



When I observed she had done speaking, Madam, said I, the Affliction you
mention is the greatest that can happen in Humane Life, and I know but one
Consolation in it, if that be a Consolation, that the Calamity is a pretty
general one. There is nothing so common as for Men to enter into Marriage,
without so much as expecting to be happy in it. They seem to propose to
themselves a few Holidays in the Beginning of it; after which they are to
return at best to the usual Course of their Life; and for ought they know, to
constant Misery and Uneasiness. From this false Sense of the State they are
going into, proceeds the immediate Coldness and Indifference, or Hatred and
Aversion, which attend ordinary Marriages, or rather Bargains to cohabit. Our
Conversation was here interrupted by Company which came in upon us.

The Humor of affecting a superior Carriage, generally rises from a false
Notion of the Weakness of a Female Understanding in general, or an over-weaning
Opinion that we have of our own: For when it proceeds from a natural Ruggedness
and Brutality of Temper, it is altogether incorrigible, and not to be amended
by Admonition. Sir Francis Bacon, as I remember, lays it down as a Maxim, That
no Marriage can be happy in which the Wife has no Opinion of her Husband's
Wisdom; but without Offense to so great an Authority, I may venture to say,
That a sullen-wife Man is as bad as a good-natured Fool. Knowledge, softened
with Complacency and good Breeding, will make a Man equally beloved and
respected; but when joined with a severe, distant and unsociable Temper, it
creates rather Fear than Love. I who am a Bachelor, have no other Notion of
Conjugal Tenderness, out what I learn from Books, and shall therefore produce
Three Letters of Pliny, who was not only one of the greatest, but the most
^arned Men in the whole Roman Empire. At the same Time I am very much ashamed,
that on such Occasions I am obliged to have Recou^se to Heathen Authors, and
shall appeal to my Readers, if they would not think it a Mark of a narrow
Education in a Man of Quality to write such passionate Letters to any Woman but
a Mistress. They were all Three written at a Time when she was at a Distance
from him: The first of them puts me in Mind of a married Friend of Mine, who
said, Sickness it self is pleasant to a Man that is attended in it by one whom
he dearly loves.

Pliny to Calphurnia.
I Never was so much offended at Business, as when it hindered me from going
with you into the Country, or following you thither: For I more particularly
wish to be with you at present, that I might be sensible of the Progress you
make in the Recovery of your Strength and Health; as also of the Entertainment
and Diversions you can meet with in your Retirement. Believe me, it is an
anxious State of Mind to live in Ignorance of what happens to those whom we
passionately love. I am not only in Pain for your Absence, but also for your
Indisposition. I am afraid of every Thing, fancy every Thing, and, as it is the
Nature of Men in Fear, I fancy those Things most which I am most afraid of. Let
me therefore earnestly desire you to favor me under these my Apprehensions
with One Letter every Day, or, if possible, with Two; for I shall be a little
at Ease while I am reading your Letters, and grow anxious again as soon as I
have read them.


Second LETTER.
YOU tell me, That you are very much afflicted at my Absence, and that you have
no Satisfaction in any Thing but my Writings, which you often lay by you upon
my Pillow. You oblige me very much in wishing to see me, and making me your
Comforter in my Absence. In Return, I must let you know, I am no less pleased
with the Letters which you writ to me, and read them over a Thousand Times with
new Pleasure. If your Letters are capable of giving me so much Pleasure, what
would your Conversation do? Let me beg of you to write to me often; though at
the same Time I must confess, your Letters give me Anguish whilst they give me
Pleasure.


Third LETTER.
IT is impossible to conceive how much I languish for you in your Absence; the
tender Love I bear you, is the chief Cause of this my Uneasiness, which is
still the more insupportable, because Absence is wholly a new Thing to us. I
lie awake most Part of the Night in thinking of you, and several Times of the
Day go as naturally to your Apartment, as if you were there to receive me; but
when I miss you, I come away dejected, out of Humor, and like a Man that had
suffered a Repulse. There is but one Part of the Day in which I am relieved
from this Anxiety, and that is when I am engaged in Public Affairs.

You may guess at the uneasy Condition of one who has no Rest but in Business,
no Consolation but in Trouble.


I shall conclude this Paper with a beautiful Passage out of Milton, and leave
it as a Lecture to those of my own Sex, who have a Mind to make their
Conversation agreeable as well as instructive, to the Fair Partners who are
fallen into their Care. Eve having observed, That Adam was entering into some
deep Disquisitions with the Angel, who was sent to visit him, is described as
retiring from their Company, with a Design of learning what should pass there
from her Husband.

So spoke our Sire, and by his Countenance seemed
Entering on studious Thoughts abstruse, which Eve
Perceiving where she sat retired in Sight,
With Lowliness Majestic from her Seat
Rose, and went forth among her Fruits and Flowers
Yet went she not, as not with such Discourse
Delighted, or not capable her Ear
Of what was high: Such Pleasure she reserved,
Adam relating, she sole Auditress;
Her Husband the Relater she preferred
Before the Angel, and of him to ask
Chose rather: He, she knew would intermix
Grateful Digressions, and solve high Dispute
With Conjugal Caresses, from his Lip
Not Words alone pleased her. O! When meet now
Such Pairs, in Love and mutual Honor joined?
The TATLER. [No 150.
Haec sunt Jucundi Causa, Cibusque Mali.
Ovid.
From Thursd. March 23. to Saturd. March 25. 1710.
From my own Apartment, March 24.
I Have received the following Letter upon the Subject of my last Paper. The
Writer of it tells me, I there spoke of Marriage as one that knows it only by
Speculation, and for that Reason he sends me his Sense of it, as drawn from
Experience.

Mr. Bickerstaff,
I Have read your Paper of this Day, and think you have done the Nuptial State
a great deal of Justice in the Authority you give us of Pliny, whose Letters to
his Wife you have there translated: But give me Leave to tell you, That it is
impossible for you, that are a Bachelor, to have so just a Notion of this Way
of Life, as to touch the Affections of your Readers in a Particular, wherein
every Man's own Heart suggests more than the nicest Observer can form to
himself without Experience. I therefore, who am an old married Man, have sat
down to give you an Account of the Matter from my own Knowledge, and the
Observations which I have made upon the Conduct of others in that most
agreeable or wretched Condition.

It is very commonly observed, That the most smart Pangs whech we meet with are
in the Beginning of Wedlock, which proceed from Ignorance of each others
Humor, and Want of Prudence to make Allowances for a Change from the most
careful Respect, to the most unbounded Familiarity. Hence it arises, That
Trifles are commonly Occasions of the greatest Anxiety; for Contradiction being
a Thing wholly unusual between a new married Couple, the smallest Instance of
it is taken for the highest Injury; and it very seldom happens, that the Man is
slow enough in assuming the Character of an Husband, or the Woman quick enough
in condescending to that of a Wife. It immediately follows, That they think
they have all the Time of their Courtship been talking in Masks to each other,
and therefore begin to act like disappointed People. Philander finds Delia
ill-natured and impertinent; and Delia, Philander surly and inconstant.

I have known a fond Couple quarrel in the very Honey-moon about cutting up a
Tart: Nay, I could name Two, who after having had Seven Children, fell out and
parted Beds upon the boiling of a Leg of Mutton. My very next Neighbors have
not spoke to one another these Three Days, because they differed in their
Opinions, whether the Clock should stand by the Window, or over the Chimney. It
may seem strange to you, who are not a married Man, when I tell you, how the
least Trifle can strike a Woman dumb for a Week together. But if you ever enter
into this State, you will find, that the Soft Sex as often express their Anger
by an obstinate Silence, as by an ungovernable Clamor.

Those indeed who begin this Course of Life without Jars at their setting out,
arrive within few Months at a Pitch of Benevolence and Affection, of which the
most perfect Friendship is but a feint Resemblance. As in the unfortunate
Marriage, the most minute and indifferent Things are Objects of the sharpest
Resentment; so in an happy One, they are Occasions of the most exquisite
Satisfaction. For what does not oblige in one we love? What does not offend in
one we dislike? For these Reasons I take it for a Rule, That in Marriage, the
chief Business is to acquire a Prepossession in Favor of each other. They
should consider one another's Words and Actions with a secret Indulgence: There
should be always an inward Fondness pleading for each other, such as may add
new Beauties to every Thing that is excellent, give Charms to what is
indifferent, and cover every Thing that is defective. For want of this kind
Propensity and Biass of Mind, the married Pair often take Thi^as ill of each
other, which no one else would take Notice of in either of them.

But the most unhappy Circumstance of all is, where each Party is always laying
up Fuel for Dissension, and gathering together a Magazine of Provocations to
exasperate each other with when they are out of Humor. These People in common
Discourse make no Scruple to let those who are by know they are quarrelling
with one another, and think they are discreet enough, if they conceal from the
Company the Matters which they are hinting at. About a Week ago, I was
entertained for a whole Dinner with a mysterious Conversation of this Nature;
out of which I could learn no more, than that the Husband and Wife were angry
at one another. We had no sooner sat down, but says the Gentleman of the
House, in order to raise Discourse, I thought Margarita sung extremely well
last Night. Upon this, says the Lady, looking as pale as Ashes, I suppose she
had Cherry-coloured Ribands on. No, answered the Husband, with a Flush in his
Face, but she had Laced Shoes. I look upon it, that a Stander-by on such
Occasions has as much Reason to be out of Countenance as either of the
Combatants. To turn off my Confusion, and seem regardless of what had passed, I
desired the Servant who attended to give me the Vinegar, which unluckily
created a new Dialogue of Hints; for as far as I could gather by the subsequent
Discourse, they had dissented the Day before about the Preference of Elder to
Wine-Vinegar. In the Midst of their Discourse, there appeared a Dish of
Chickens and Sparagrass, when the Husband seemed disposed to lay aside all
Disputes; and looking upon her with a great deal of good Nature, said, Pray, my
Dear, will you help my Friend to a Wing of the Fowl that lies next you, for I
think it looks extremely well. The Lady, instead of answering him, addressing
her self to me, Pray, Sir, said she, do you in Surrey reckon the white or the
black-legged Fowls the best? I found the Husband changed Color at the
Question; and before I could answer, asked me, Whether we did not call Hops
Broom in our Country? I quickly found, they did not ask Questions so much out
of Curiosity as Anger: For which Reason I thought fit to keep my Opinion to my
self, and, as an honest Man ought, (when he sees Two Friends in Warmth with
each other) I took the first Opportunity I could to leave them by themselves.

You see, Sir, I have laid before you only small Incidents, which are seemingly
frivial; but take it from a Man who am very well experienced in this State,
they are principally Evils of this Nature which make Marriages unhappy. At the
same Time, that I may do Justice to this excellent Institution, I must own to
you, there are unspeakable Pleasures which are as little regarded in the
Computation of the Advantages of Marriage, as the others are in the usual
Survey that is made of its Misfortunes.

Lovemore and his Wife live together in the happy Possession of each other's
Hearts, and by that Means have no indifferent Moments, but their whole Life is
one continued Scene of Delight. Their Passion for each other communicates a
certain Satisfaction, like that which they themselves are in, to all that
approach them. When she enters the Place where he is, you see a Pleasure which
he cannot conceal, nor he or any one else describe. In so consummate an
Affection, the very Presence of the Person beloved, has the Effect of the most
agreeable Conversation. Whether they have Matter to talk of or not, they enjoy
the Pleasures of Society, and at the same Time the Freedom of Solitude. Their
ordinary Life is to be preferred to the happiest Moments of other Lovers. In a
Word, they have each of them great Merit, live in the Esteem of all who know
them, and seem but to comply with the Opinions of their Friends, in the just
Value they have for each other.


The TATLER. [No 151.
-- Ni Vis Boni
In ipsa inesset Forma, haec Formam extinguerent.
Ter.
From Saturd. March 25. to Tuesd. March 28. 1710.
From my own Apartment, March 27.
WHEN Artists would expose their Diamonds to an Advantage, they usually set
them to Show in little Cases of black Velvet. By this Means the Jewels appear
in their true and genuine Luster, while there is no Color that can infect
their Brightness, or give a false Cast to the Water. When I was at the Opera
the other Night, the Assembly of Ladies in Mourning made me consider them in
the same Kind of View. A Dress wherein there is so little Variety, shows the
Face in all its natural Charms, and makes one differ from another only as it is
more or less beautiful. Painters are ever careful of offending against a Rule
which is so essential in all just Representation. The chief Figure must have
the strongest Point of Light, and not be injured by any gay Colorings that may
draw away the Attention to any less considerable Part of the Picture. The
present Fashion obliges every Body to be dressed with Propriety, and makes the
Ladies Faces the principal Objects of Sight. Every beautiful Person shines out
in all the Excellence with which Nature has adorned her: Gaudy Ribands and
glaring Colors being now out of Use, the Sex has no Opportunity given them to
disfigure themselves, which they seldom fail to do whenever it lies in their
Power. When a Woman comes to her Glass, she does not employ her Time in making
her self look more advantagiously what she really is, but endeavors to be as
much another Creature as she possibly can. Whether this happens, because they
stay so long, and attend their Work so diligently, that they forget the Faces
and Persons which they first sat down with, or whatever it is, they seldom
rise from the Toilet the same Women they appeared when they began to dress.
What Jewel can the Charming Cleora place in her Ears, that can please her
Beholders so much as her Eyes? The Cluster of Diamonds upon the Breast can add
no Beauty to the fair Chest of Ivory which supports it. It may indeed tempt a
Man to steal a Woman, but never to love her. Let Thalestris change her self
into a Motly Party-colored Animal: The Pearl Neck-lace, the Flowered
Stomacher, the Artificial Nosegay, and Shaded Furbelow, may be of Use to
attract the Eye of the Beholder, and turn it from the Imperfections of her
Features and Shape. But if Ladies will take my Word for it, (and as they dress
to please Men, they ought to consult our Fancy rather than their own in this
Particular) I can ass re them, there is nothing touches our Imagination so much
as a beautiful Woman in a plain Dress. There might be more agreeable Ornaments
found in our own Manufacture, than any that rise out of the Looms of Persia.

This, I know, is a very harsh Doctrine to Womankind, who are carried away
with every Thing that is showy, and with what delights the Eye, more than any
other Species of Living Creatures whatsoever. Were the Minds of the Sex laid
open, we should find the chief Idea in one to be a Tippet, in another a Muff,
in a Third a Fan, and in a Fourth a Fardingal. The Memory of an old
Visiting-Lady is so filled with Gloves, Silks, and Ribands, that I can look
upon it as nothing else but a Toy-shop. A Matron of my Acqaintance complaining
of her Daughter's Vanity, was observing, that she had all of a sudden held up
her Head higher than ordinary, and taken an Air that showed a secret
Satisfaction in her self, mixed with a Scorn of others. I did not know, says my
Friend, what to make of the Carriage of this Fantastical Girl, till I was
informed by her elder Sister, that she had a Pair of striped Garters on. This
odd Turn of Mind often makes the Sex unhappy, and disposes them to be struck
with every Thing that makes a Show, however trifling and superficial.

Many a Lady has fetched a Sigh at the Toss of a Wig, and been ruined by the
Tapping of a Snuff box. It is impossible to describe all the Execution that was
done by the Shoulder-Knot while that Fashion prevailed, or to reckon up all the
Virgins that have fallen a Sacrifice to a Pair of fringed Gloves. A sincere
Heart has not made half so many Conquests as an open Wastcoat; and I should be
glad to see an able Head make so good a Figure in a Woman's Company as a Pair
of Red Heels. A Grecian Hero, when he was asked whether he could play upon the
Lute, thought he had made a very good Reply when he answered, No, but I can
make a great City of a little One. Notwithstanding his boasted Wisdom, I appeal
to the Heart of any Toast in Town, whether she would not think the Lutanist
preferable to the Statesman. I do not speak this out of any Aversion that I
have to the Sex: On the contrary, I have always had a Tenderness for them; but
I must confess, it troubles me very much, to see the Generality of them place
their Affections on improper Objects, and give up all the Pleasures of Life for
Gugaws and Trifles.

Mrs. Margery Bickerstaff, my great Aunt, had a Thousand Pounds to her Portion,
which our Family was desirous of keeping among themselves, and therefore used
all possible Means to turn off her Thoughts from Marriage. The Method they
took, was, in any Time of Danger to throw a new Gown or Petticoat in her Way.
When she was about Twenty five Years of Age, she fell in Love with a Man of an
agreeable Temper, and equal Fortune, and would certainly have married him, had
not my Grandfather, Sir Jacob, dressed her up in a Suit of flowered Satin;
upon which, she set so immoderate a Value upon her self, that the Lover was
contemned and discarded. In the Fortieth Year of her Age, she was again
smitten, but very luckily transferred her Passion to a Tippet, which was
presented to her by another Relation who was in the Plot. This, with a white
Sarsenet Hood, kept her safe in the Family till Fifty. About Sixty, which
generally produces a Kind of latter Spring in amorous Constitutions, my Aunt
Margery had again a Colt's-Tooth in her Head, and would certainly have eloped
from the Mansion House, had not her Brother Simon, who was a wise Man, and a
Scholar, advised to dress her in Cherry-coloured Ribands, which was the only
Expedient that could have been found out by the Wit of Man to preserve the
Thousand Pounds in our Family, Part of which I enjoy at this Time.

This Discourse puts me in Mind of an Humorist mentioned by Horace, called
Eutrapelus, who, when he designed to do a Man a Mischief, made him a Present of
a gay Suit; and brings to my Memory another Passage of the same Author, when he
describes the most ornamental Dress that a Woman can appear in with Two Words,
Simplex Munditiis, which I have quoted for the Benefit of my Female Readers.

The TATLER. [No 152.
Dii, quibus Imperium est Animarum, Umbraeque silentes,
Et Chaos, and Phlegethon, Loca Nocte Silentia late,
Sit mihi Fas audita loqui, sit Numine vestro
Pandere Res alta Terra and Caligine mersas.
Virg.
From Tuesd. March 28. to Thursd. March 30. 1710.
From my own Apartment, March 29.
A Man who confines his Speculations to the Time present, has but a very narrow
Province to employ his Thoughts in. For this Reason, Persons of studious and
contemplative Natures often entertain themselves with the History of past Ages,
or raise Schemes and Conjectures upon Futurity. For my own Part, I love to
range through that Half of Eternity which is still to come, rather than look on
that which is already run out; because I know I have a real Share and Interest
in the one, whereas all that was transacted in the other, can be only Matter of
Curiosity to me.

Upon this Account, I have been always very much delighted with meditating on
the Soul's Immortality, and in reading the several Notions which the wisest of
Men, both ancient and modern, have entertained on that Subject. What the
Opinions of the greatest Philosophers have been, I have several times hinted
at, and shall give an Account of them from Time to Time as Occasion requires.
It may likewise be worth while to consider, what Men of the most exalted
Genius, and elevated Imagination, have thought of this Matter. Among these,
Homer stands up as a Prodigy of Mankind, that looks down upon the rest of
Humane Creatures as a Species beneath him. Since he is the most ancient Heathen
Author, we may guess from his Relation, what were the common Opinions in his
Time concerning the State of the Soul after Death.

Ulysses, he tells us, made a Voyage to the Regions of the Dead, in order to
consult Tiresias how he should return to his own Country, and recommend himself
to the Favor of the Gods. The Poet scarce introduces a single Person, who does
not suggest some useful Precept to his Reader, and designs his Description of
the Dead for the Amendment of the Living.

Ulysses, after having made a very plenteous Sacrifice, sat him down by the
Pool of Holy Blood, which attracted a prodigious Assembly of Ghosts of all Ages
and Conditions, that hovered about the Hero, and feasted upon the Steams of his
Oblation. The first he knew, was the Shade of Elpenor, who, to show the
Activity of a Spirit above that of Body, is represented as arrived there long
before Ulysses, notwithstanding the Winds and Seas had contributed all their
Force to hasten his Voyage thither. This Elpenor, to inspire the Reader with a
Detestation of Drunkenness, and at the same Time with a religious Care of doing
proper Honors to the Dead, describes himself as having broken his Neck in a
Debauch of Wine; and begs Ulysses, that for the Repose of his Soul, he would
build a Monument over him, and perform Funeral Rites to his Memory. Ulysses
with great Sorrow of Heart promises to fulfill his Request, and is immediately
diverted to an Object much more moving than the former. The Ghost of his own
Mother Anticlea, whom he still thought living, appears to him among the
Multitude of Shades that surrounded him, and sits down at a small Distance from
him by the Lake of Blood, without speaking to him, or knowing who he was.
Ulysses was exceedingly troubled at the Sight, and could not forbear weeping as
he looked upon her: But being all along set forth as a Pattern of consummate
Wisdom, he makes his Affection give Way to Prudence; and therefore, upon his
seeing Tiresias, does not reveal himself to his Mother, till he had consulted
that great Prophet, who was the Occasion of this his Descent into the Empire of
the Dead. Tiresias having cautioned him to keep himself and his Companions free
from the Guilt of Sacrilege, and to pay his Devotions to all the Gods, promises
him a safe Return to his Kingdom and Family, and a happy old Age in the
Enjoyment of them.

The Poet having thus with great Art kept the Curiosity of the Reader in
Suspense, represents his wise Man, after the Dispatch of his Business with
Tiresias, as yielding himself up to the Calls of natural Affection, and making
himself known to his Mother. Her Eyes are no sooner opened, but she cries out
in Tears, Oh my Son! and enquires into the Occasions that brought him thither,
and the Fortune that attended him.

Ulysses on the other Hand desires to know, what the Sickness was that had sent
her into those Regions, and the Condition in which she had left his Father, his
Son, and more particularly his Wife. She tells him, they were all Three
inconsolable for his Absence; and as for my self, says she, That was the
Sickness of which I died. My Impatience for your Return, my Anxiety for your
Welfare, and my Fondness for my Dear Ulysses, were the only Distempers that
preyed upon my Life, and separated my Soul from my Body. Ulysses was melted
with these Expressions of Tenderness, and Thrice endeavored to catch the
Apparition in his Arms, that he might hold his Mother to his Bosom and weep
over her.

This gives the Poet Occasion to describe the Notion the Heathens at that Time
had of an unbodied Soul, in the Excuse which the Mother makes for seeming to
withdraw her self from her Son's Embraces. The Soul, says she, is composed
neither of Bones, Flesh, nor Sinews, but leaves behind her all those
Encumbrances of Mortality to be consumed on the Funeral Pile. As soon as she
has thus cast her Burden, she makes her Escape, and flies away from it like a
Dream.

When this melancholy Conversation is at an End, the Poet draws up to View as
charming a Vision as could enter into Man's Imagination. He describes the next
who appeared to Ulysses, to have been the Shades of the finest Women that had
ever lived upon the Earth, and who had either been the Daughters of Kings, the
Mistresses of Gods, or Mothers of Heroes, such as Antiope, Alemena, Leda,
Ariadne, Iphimedia, Eri^hyle, and several others, of whom he gives a Catalogue,
with a short History of their Adventures. The beautiful Assembly of Apparitions
were all gathered together about the Blood: Each of them, says Ulysses, (as a
gentle Satyr upon Female Vanity) giving me an Account of her Birth and Family.
This Scene of extraordinary Women, seems to have been designed by the Poet as a
Lecture of Mortality to the whole Sex, and to put them in Mind of what they
must expect, notwithstanding the greatest Perfections, and highest Honors,
they can arrive at.

The Circle of Beauties at length disappeared, and was succeeded by the Shades
of several Grecian Heroes who had been engaged with Ulysses in the Siege of
Troy. The first that approached was Agamemnon, the Generalissimo of that great
Expedition, who at the Appearance of his old Friend wept very bitterly, and
without saying any Thing to him, endeavored to grasp him by the Hand. Ulysses,
who was much moved at the Sight, poured out a Flood of Tears, and asked him the
Occasion of his Death, which Agamemnon related to him in all its Tragical
Circumstances; how he was murdered at a Banquet by the Contrivance of his own
Wife, in Confederacy with her Adulterer: From whence he takes Occasion to
reproach the whole Sex, after a Manner which would be inexcusable in a Man who
had not been so great a Sufferer by them. My Wife (says he) has disgraced all
the Women that shall ever be born into the World, even those who hereafter
shall be innocent: Take Care how you grow too fond of your Wife. Never tell her
all you know. If you reveal some Things to her, be sure you keep others
concealed from her. You indeed have nothing to fear from your Penelope, she
will not use you as my Wife has treated me; however, take Care how you trust a
Woman. The Poet, in this and other Instances, according to the System of many
Heathen as well as Christian Philosophers, shows, how Anger, Revenge, and other
Habits which the Soul had contracted in the Body, subsist and grow in it under
its State of Separation.

I am extremely pleased with the Companions which the Poet in the next
Description assigns to Achilles. Achilles (says the Hero) came up to me with
Patroclus and Antilochus. By which we may see that it was Homer's Opinion, and
probably that of the Age he lived in, that the Friendships which are made among
the Living, will likewise continue among the Dead. Achilles enquires after the
Welfare of his Son, and of his Father, with a Fierceness of the same Character
that Homer has every where expressed in the Actions of his Life. The Passage
relating to his Son is so extremely beautiful, that I must not omit it.
Ulysses, after having described him as wise in Council, and active in War, and
mentioned the Foes whom he had slain in Battle, adds an Observation that he
himself had made of his Behavior whilst he lay in the Wooden Horse. Most of
the Generals (says he) that were with us, either wept or trembled: As for your
Son, I neither saw him wipe a Tear from his Cheeks, or change his Countenance.
On the contrary, he would often lay his Hand upon his Sword, or grasp his
Spear, as impatient to employ them against the Trojans. He then informs his
Father of the great Honor and Rewards which he had purchased before Troy, and
of his Return from it without a Wound. The Shade of Achilles, says the Poet,
was so pleased with the Account he received of his Son, that he enquired no
further, but stalked away with more than ordinary Majesty over the green Meadow
that lay before them.

This last Circumstance of a deceased Father's rejoicing in the Behavior of
his Son, is very finely contrived by Homer, as an Incentive to Virtue, and made
use of by none that I know besides himself.

The Description of Ajax, which follows, and his refusing to speak to Ulysses,
who had won the Armor of Achilles from him, and by that Means occasioned his
Death, is admired by every one that reads it. When Ulysses relates the
Sullenness of his Deportment, and considers the Greatness of the Hero, he
expresses himself with generous and noble Sentiments. Oh! that I had never
gained a Prize which cost the Life of so brave a Man as Ajax! Who, for the
Beauty of his Person, and Greatness of his Actions, was inferior to none but
the Divine Achilles. The same noble Condescension, which never dwells but in
truly great Minds, and such as Homer would represent that of Ulysses to have
been, discovers it self likewise in the Speech which he made to the Ghost of
Ajax on that Occasion. Oh Ajax! says he, Will you keep your Resentments even
after Death? What Destructions has this fatal Armor brought upon the Greeks,
by robbing them of you, who were their Bulwark and Defense? Achilles is not
more bitterly lamented among us than you. Impute not then your Death to any one
but Jupiter, who out of his Anger to the Greeks, took you away from among them:
Let me entreat you to approach me; restrain the Fierceness of your Wrath, and
the Greatness of your Soul, and bear what I have to say to you. Ajax, without
making a Reply, turned his Back upon him, and retired into a Crowd of Ghosts.

Ulysses, after all these Visions, took a View of those impious Wretches who
lay in Tortures for the Crimes they had committed upon the Earth, whom he
describes under all the Varieties of Pain, as so many Marks of Divine
Vengeance, to deter others from following their Example. He then tells us, That
notwithstanding he had a great Curiosity to see the Hero's that lived in the
Ages before him, the Ghosts began to gather about him in such prodigious
Multitudes, and with such a Confusion of Voices, that his Heart trembled as he
saw himself amidst so great a Scene of Horrors. He adds, That he was afraid
lest some hideous Spectre should appear to him, that might terrify him to
Distraction; and therefore withdrew in Time.

I question not but my Reader will be pleased with this Description of a future
State, represented by such a noble and fruitful Imagination, that had nothing
to direct it besides the Light of Nature, and the Opinions of a dark and
ignorant Age.

The TATLER. [No 153.
Bambalio, Clanger, Stridor, Taratantara, Murmur. Farn. Rhet.
From Thursd. March 30. to Saturd. April 1. 1710.
From my own Apartment, March 31.
I Have heard of a very valuable Picture, wherein all the Painters of the Age
in which it was drawn, are represented sitting together in a Circle, and
joining in a Consort of Music. Each of them plays upon such a particular
Instrument as is the most suitable to his Character, and expresses that Style
and Manner of Painting which is peculiar to him. The famous Cupola-Painter of
those Times, to show the Grandeur and Boldness of his Figures, has a Horn in
his Mouth, which he seems to wind with great Strength and Force. On the
contrary, an eminent Artist, who wrought up his Pictures with the greatest
Accuracy, and gave them all those delicate Touches which are apt to please the
nicest Eye, is represented as tuning a Theorbo. The same Kind of Humor runs
through the whole Piece.

I have often from this Hint imagined to my self, that different Talents in
Discourse might be shadowed out after the same Manner by different Kinds of
Music; and that the several conversable Parts of Mankind in this great City,
might be cast into proper Characters and Divisions, as they resemble several
Instruments that are in Use among the Masters of Harmony. Of these therefore in
their Order, and First of the Drum.

Your Drums are the Blusterers in Conversation, that with a loud Laugh,
unnatural Mirth, and a Torrent of Noise, domineer in public Assemblies,
over-bear Men of Sense, stun their Companions, and fill the Place they are in
with a rattling Sound, that has seldom any Wit, Humor, or good Breeding in it.
The Drum notwithstanding, by this boisterous Vivacity, is very proper to impose
upon the Ignorant; and in Conversation with Ladies, who are not of the finest
Taste, often passes for a Man of Mirth and Wit, and for wonderful pleasant
Company. I need not observe, that the Emptiness of the Drum very much
contributes to its Noise.

The Lute is a Character directly opposite to the Drum, that sounds very finely
by it self, or in a very small Consort. Its Notes are exquisitely sweet, and
very low, easily drowned in a Multitude of Instruments, and even lost among a
few, unless you give a particular Attention to it. A Lute is seldom heard in a
Company of more then Five, whereas a Drum will show it self to Advantage in an
Assembly of Five hundred. The Lutanists therefore are Men of a fine Genius,
uncommon Reflection, great Affability, and esteemed chiefly by Persons of a
good Taste, who are the only proper Judges of so delightful and soft a Melody.

The Trumpet is an Instrument that has in it no Compass of Music, or Variety
of Sound, but is notwithstanding very agreeable, so long as it keeps within its
Pitch. It has not above Four or Five Notes, which are however very pleasing,
and capable of exquisite Turns and Modulations. The Gentlemen who fall under
this Denomination, are your Men of the most fashionable Education and refined
Breeding, who have learned a certain Smoothness of Discourse, and Sprightliness
of Air, from the polite Company they have kept; but at the same Time have
shallow Parts, weak Judgments, and a short Reach of Understanding: A Playhouse,
a Drawing Room, a Ball, a Visiting-Day, or a Ring at Hide-Park, are the few
Notes they are Masters of, which they touch upon in all Conversations. The
Trumpet however is a necessary Instrument about a Court, and a proper Enlivener
of a Consort, though of no great Harmony by it self.

Violins are the lively, forward, importunate Wits, that distinguish themselves
by the Flourishes of Imagination, Sharpness of Repartee, Glances of Satyr, and
bear away the upper Part in every Consort. I cannot however but observe, That
when a Man is not disposed to hear Music, there is not a more disagreeable
Sound in Harmony than that of a Violin.

There is another Musical Instrument, which is more frequent in this Nation
than any other; I mean your Bass-Viol, which grumbles in the Bottom of the
Consort, and with a surly Masculine Sound strengthens the Harmony, and tempers
the Sweetness of the several Instruments that play along with it. The Bass-Viol
is an Instrument of a quiet different Nature to the Trumpet, and may signify
Men of rough Sense, and unpolished Parts, who do not love to hear themselves
talk, but sometimes break out with an agreeable Bluntless, unexpected Wit, and
su^ly Pleasantries, to the no small Diversion of their Friends and Companions.
In short, I look upon every sensible true-born Britain to be naturally a
Bass-Viol.

As for your Rural Wits, who talk with great Eloquence and Alacrity of Foxes,
Hounds, Horses, Quickset Hedges, and Six-Bar Gates, double Ditches, and broken
Necks, I am in Doubt, whether I should give them a Place in the conversable
World. However, if they will content themselves with being raised to the
Dignity of Hunting-Horns, I shall desire for the future that they may be known
by that Name.

I must not here omit the Bagpipe Species, that will entertain you from Morning
to Night with the Repetition of a few Notes, which are played over and over,
with the perpetual Humming of a Drone running underneath them. These are your
dull, heavy, tedious Story Tellers, the Load and Burden of Conversations, that
set up for Men of Importance, by knowing secret History, and giving an Account
of Transactions, that whether they ever passed in the World or not, does not
signify an Halfpenny to its Instruction, or its Welfare. Some have observed,
That the Northern Parts of this Island are more particularly fruitful in
Bagpipes.

There are so very few Persons who are Masters in every Kind of Conversation,
and can talk on all Subjects, that I don't know whether we should make a
distinct Species of them: Nevertheless, that my Scheme may not be defective,
for the Sake of those few who are endowed with such extraordinary Talents, I
shall allow them to be Harpsicords, a Kind of Music which every one knows is a
Consort by it self.

As for your Passing-Bells, who look upon Mirth as Criminal, and talk of
nothing but what is melancholy in it self, and mortifying to Humane Nature, I
shall not mention them.

I shall likewise pass over in Silence all the Rabble of Mankind, that crowd
our Streets, Coffee-houses, Feasts, and public Tables. I cannot call their
Discourse Conversation, but rather something that is practiced in Imitation of
it. For which Reason, if I would describe them by any Musical Instrument, it
should be by those modern Inventions of the Bladder and String, Tongs and Key,
Marrow-Bone and Cleaver.

My Reader will doubtless observe, That I have only touched here upon Male
Instruments, having reserved my Female Consort to another Occasion. If he has a
Mind to know where these several Characters are to be met with, I could direct
him to a whole Club of Drums; not to mention another of Bagpipes, which I have
before given some Account of in my Description of our Nightly Meetings in
Sheer-Lane. The Lutes may often be met with in Couples upon the Banks of a
Crystal Stream, or in the Retreats of shady Woods and flowery Meadows; which
for different Reasons are likewise the great Resort of your Hunting-Horns.
Bass-Viols are frequently to be found over a Glass of stale Beer and a Pipe of
Tobacco; whereas those who set up for Violins, seldom fail to make their
Appearance at Will's once every Evening. You may meet with a Trumpet any where
on the other Side of Charing Cross.

That we may draw something for our Advantage in Life out of the foregoing
Discourse, I must entreat my Reader to make a narrow Search into his Life and
Conversation, and upon his leaving any Company, to examine himself seriously,
whether he has behaved himself in it like a Drum or a Trumpet, a Violin or a
Bass-Viol; and accordingly endeavor to mend his Music for the future. For my
own Part, I must confess, I was a Drum for many Years; nay, and a very noisy
one, till having polished my self a little in good Company, I threw as much of
the Trumpet into my Conversation as was possible for a Man of an impetuous
Temper, by which Mixture of different Musicks, I look upon my self, during the
Course of many Years, to have resembled a Tabor and Pipe. I have since very
much endeavored at the Sweetness of the Lute; but in Spite of all my
Resolutions, I must confess with great Confusion, that I find my self daily
degenerating into a Bagpipe; whether it be the Effect of my old Age, or of the
Company I keep, I know not. All that I can do, is to keep a Watch over my
Conversation, and to silence the Drone as soon as I find it begin to hum in my
Discourse, being determined rather to hear the Notes of others, than to play
out of Time, and incroach upon their Parts in the Consort by the Noise of so
tiresome an Instrument.

I shall conclude this Paper with a Letter which I received last Night from a
Friend of mine, who knows very well my Notions upon this Subject, and invites
me to pass the Evening at his House, with a select Company of Friends, in the
following Words:

Dear Isaac,
I Intend to have a Consort at my House this Evening, having by great Chance
got a Harpsicord, which I am sure will entertain you very agreeably. There will
be likewise Two Lutes and a Trumpet: Let me beg you to put your self in Tune,
and believe me

Your very faithful Servant, Nicholas Humdrum.


The TATLER. [No 154.
Obscuris Vera involvens.
Virg. Aen. L. 6.
From Saturday April 1. to Tuesday April 4. 1710.
From my own Apartment, April 3.
WE have already examined Homer's Description of a Future State, and the
Condition in which he has placed the Souls of the Deceased. I shall in this
Paper make some Observations on the Account which Virgil has given us of the
same Subject, who, besides a Greatness of Genius, had all the Lights of
Philosophy and Humane Learning to assist and guide him in his Discoveries.

Aeneas is represented as descending into the Empire of Death, with a
Prophetess by his Side, who instructs him in the Secrets of those lower Regions.

Upon the Confines of the Dead, and before the very Gates of this infernal
World, Virgil describes several Inhabitants, whose Natures are wonderfully
suited to the Situation of the Place, as being either the Occasions or
Resemblances of Death. Of the first Kind are the Shadows of Sickness, Old Age,
Fear, Famine, and Poverty; (Apparitions very terrible to behold) with several
others, as Toil, War, Contention, and Discord, which contribute all of them to
people this common Receptacle of humane Souls. As this was likewise a very
proper Residence for every Thing that resembles Death, the Poet tells us, That
Sleep, whom he represents as a near Relation to Death, has likewise his
Habitation in these Quarters, and describes in them a huge gloomy Elm-Tree,
which seems a very proper Ornament for the Place, and is possessed by an
innumerable Swarm of Dreams, that hang in Clusters under every Leaf of it. He
then gives us a List of imaginary Persons, who very naturally lie within the
Shadow of the Dream-Tree, as being of the same Kind of Make in themselves, and
the Materials or (to use Shakespeare's Phrase) the Stuff of which Dreams are
made. Such are the Shades of the Giant with a Hundred Hands, and of his Brother
with Three Bodies; of the double-shap'd Centaur, and Sylla; the Gorgon with
Snakey Hair; the Harpy with a Woman's Face and Lion's Talons; the Sevenheaded
Hydra; and the Chimaera, which breaths forth a Flame, and is a Compound of
Three Animals. These several mixed Natures, the Creatures of Imagination, are
not only introduced with great Art after the Dreams, but as they are planted at
the very Entrance, and within the very Gates of those Regions, do probably
denote the wild Deliriums and Extravagancies of Fancy, which the Soul usually
falls into when she is just upon the Verge of Death.

Thus far Aeneas travels in an Allegory. The rest of the Description is drawn
with great Exactness, according to the Religion of the Heathens, and the
Opinions of the Platonic Philosophy. I shall not trouble my Reader with a
common dull Story, that gives an Account why the Heathens first of all supposed
a Ferryman in Hell, and his Name to be Charon; but must not pass over in
Silence the Point of Doctrine which Virgil has very much insisted upon in this
Book, That the Souls of those who are unburied, are not permitted to go over
into their respective Places of Rest, till they have wandered a Hundred Years
upon the Banks of Styx. This was probably an Invention of the Heathen
Priesthood, to make the People extremely careful of performing proper Rights
and Ceremonies to the Memory of the Dead. I shall not however, with the
infamous Scribblers of the Age, take an Occasion from such a Circumstance, to
run into Declamations against Priestcraft, but rather look upon it even in this
Light as a Religious Artifice, to raise in the Minds of Men an Esteem for the
Memory of their Forefathers, and a Desire to recommend themselves to that of
Posterity; as also to excite in them an Ambition of imitating the Virtues of
the Deceased, and to keep alive in their Thoughts the Sense of the Soul's
Immortality. In a Word, we may say in Defense of the severe Opinions relating
to the Shades of unburied Persons, what has been said by some of our Divines
in regard to the rigid Doctrines concerning the Souls of such who die without
being initiated into our Religion, That supposing they should be erroneous,
they can do no Hurt to the Dead, and will have a good Effect upon the Living,
in making them cautious of neglecting such necessary Solemnities.

Charon is no sooner appeased, and the Tripleheaded Dog laid asleep, but Aeneas
makes his Entrance into the Dominions of Pluto. There are Three Kinds of
Persons described, as being situated on the Borders; and I can give no Reason
for their being stationed there in so particular a Manner, but because they
none of them seem to have had a proper Right to a Place among the Dead, as not
having run out the whole Thread of their Days, and finished the Term of Life
that had been allotted them upon Earth. The First of these are the Souls of
Infants, who are snatched away by untimely Ends: The Second, are of those who
are put to Death wrongfully, and by an unjust Sentence; and the Third, of those
who grew weary of their Lives, and laid violent Hands upon themselves. As for
the Second of these, Virgil adds with great Beauty, That Minos, the Judge of
the Dead, is employed in giving them a Rehearing, and assigning them their
several Quarters suitable to the Parts they acted in Life. The Poet, after
having mentioned the Souls of those unhappy Men who destroyed themselves,
breaks out into a fine Exclamation; Oh! how gladly, says he, would they now
endure Life with all its Miseries! But the Destinies forbid their Return to
Earth, and the Waters of Styx surround them with Nine Streams that are
unpassable. It is very remarkable, that Virgil, notwithstanding Self-murder
was so frequent among the Heathens, and had been practiced by some of the
greatest Men in the very Age before him, has here represented it as so heinous
a Crime. But in this Particular he was guided by the Doctrines of his great
Master Plato, who says on this Subject, That a Man is placed in his Station of
Life like a Soldier in his proper Post, which he is not to quit whatever may
happen, until he is called off by his Commander who planted him in it.

There is another Point in the Platonic Philosophy, which Virgil has made the
Groundwork of the greatest Part in the Piece we are now examining, having with
wonderful Art and Beauty materializ'd (if I may so call it) a Scheme of
abstracted Notions, and clothed the most nice refined Conceptions of
Philosophy in Sensible Images, and Poetical Representations. The Platonists
tell us, That the Soul, during her Residence in the Body, contracts many
virtuous and vicious Habits, so as to become a beneficient, mild, charitable,
or an angry, malicious, revengeful Being: A Substance inflamed with Lust,
Avarice, and Pride; or, on the contrary, brightened with pure, generous, and
humble Dispositions: That these and the like Habits of Virtue and Vice growing
into the very Essence of the Soul, survive and gather Strength in her after her
Dissolution: That the Torments of a vicious Soul in a future State arise
principally from those importunate Passions which are not capable of being
gratified without a Body; and that on the contrary, the Happiness of virtuous
Minds very much consists in their being employed in sublime Speculatins,
innocent Diversions, sociable Affections, and all the Ecstasies of Passion and
Rapture which are agreeable to reasonable Natures, and of which they gained a
Relish in this Life.

Upon this Foundation, the Poet raises that beautiful Description of the secret
Haunts and Walks, which he tells us are inhabited by deceased Lovers.

Not far from hence, says he, lies a great Wast of Plains, that are called the
Fields of Melancholy. In these there grows a Forest of Myrtle, divided into
many shady Retirements and covered Walks, and inhabited by the Souls of those
who pined away with Love. The Passion, says he, continues with them after
Death. He then gives a List of this languishing Tribe, in which his own Dido
makes the principal Figure, and is described as living in this soft Romantic
Scene, with the Shade of her first Husband Sychaeus.

The Poet in the next Place mentions another Plain that was peopled with the
Ghosts of Warriors as still delighting in each other's Company, and pleased
with the Exercise of Arms. He there represents the Grecian Generals and common
Soldiers who perished in the Siege of Troy as drawn up in Squadrons, and
terrified at the Approach of Aeneas, which renewed in them those Impressions of
Fear they had before received in Battle with the Trojans. He afterward
likewise, upon the same Notion, gives a View of the Trojan Heroes who lived in
former Ages, amidst a visionary Scene of Chariots and Arms, flowery Meadows,
shining Spears, and generous Steeds, which he tells us were their Pleasures
upon Earth, and now make up their Happiness in Elysium. For the same Reason
also, he mentions others as singing Paeans, and Songs of Triumph, amidst a
beautiful Grove of Laurel. The Chief of the Consort was the Poet Musaeus, who
stood enclosed with a Circle of Admirers, and rose by the Head and Shoulders
above the Throng of Shades that surrounded him. The Habitations of unhappy
Spirits, to show the Duration of their Torments, and the desperate Condition
they are in, are represented as guarded by a Fury, moated round with a Lake of
Fire, strengthened with Towers of Iron, encompassed with a triple Wall, and
fortified with Pillars of Adamant, which all the Gods together are not able to
heave from their Foundations. The Noise of Stripes, the Clank of Chains, and
the Groans of the Tortured, strike the poius Aeneas with a kind of Horror. The
Poet afterward divides the Criminals into two Classes: The first and blackest
Catalogue consists of such as were guilty of Outrages against the Gods; and the
next, of such who were convicted of Injustice between Man and Man: The greatest
Number of whom, says the Poet, are those who followed the Dictates of Avarice.

It was an Opinion of the Platonists, That the Souls of Men having contracted
in the Body great Stains and Pollutions of Vice and Ignorance, there were
several Purgations and Cleansings necessary to be passed through both here and
hereafter, in order to refine and purify them.

Virgil, to give this Thought likewise a Clothing of Poetry, describes some
Spirits as bleaching in the Winds, others as cleansing under great Falls of
Waters, and others as purging in Fire to recover the primitive Beauty and
Purity of their Natures.

It was likewise an Opinion of the same Sect of Philosophers, That the Souls of
all Men exist in a separate State, long before their Union with their Bodies;
and that upon their Immersion into Flesh, they forget every Thing which passed
in the State of Pre-existence; so that what we here call Knowledge, is nothing
else but Memory, or the Recovery of those Things which we knew before.

In pursuance of this Scheme, Virgil gives us a View of several Souls, who, to
prepare themselves for living upon Earth, flock about the Banks of the River
Lethe, and swill themselves with the Waters of Oblivion.

The same Scheme gives him an Opportunity of making a noble Compliment to his
Countrymen, where Anchises is represented taking a Survey of the long Train of
Heroes that are to descend from him, and giving his Son Aeneas an Account of
all the Glories of his Race.

I need not mention the Revolution of the Platonic Year, which is but just
touched upon in this Book; and as I have consulted no Authors Thoughts in this
Explication, shall be very well pleased, if it can make the noblest Piece of
the most accomplished Poet more agreeable to my female Readers, when they think
sit to look into Dryden's Translation of it.

The TATLER. [No 155.
-- Aliena Negotia curat
Excussus propriis --
Hor.
From Tuesday April 4. to Thursday April 6. 1710.
From my own Apartment, April 5.
THere lived some Years since within my Neighborhood a very grave Person, an
Upholsterer, who seemed a Man of more than ordinary Application to Business. He
was a very early Riser, and was often abroad Two or Three Hours before any of
his Neighbors. He had a particular Carefulness in the knitting of his Brows,
and a kind of Impatience in all his Motions, that plainly discovered he was
always intent on Matters of Importance. Upon my Enquiry into his Life and
Conversation, I found him to be the greatest Newsmonger in our Quarter; that he
rose before Day to read the Post-Man; and that he would take Two or Three Turns
to the other End of the Town before his Neighbors were up, to see if there
were any Dutch Mails come in. He had a Wife and several Children; but was much
more inquisitive to know what passed in Poland than in his own Family, and was
in greater Pain and Anxiety of Mind for King Augustus's Welfare than that of
his nearest Relations. He looked extremely thin in a Dearth of News, and never
enjoyed himself in a Westerly Wind. This indefatigable kind of Life was the
Ruin of his Shop; for about the Time that his Favorite Prince left the Crown
of Poland, he broke and disappeared.

This Man and his Affairs had been long out of my Mind, till about Three Days
ago, as I was walking in St. James's Park, I heard some body at a Distance
hemming after me: And who should it be but my old Neighbor the Upholsterer? I
saw he was reduced to extreme Poverty, by certain shabby Superfluities in his
Dress: For notwithstanding that it was a very sultry Day for the Time of the
Year, he wore a loose great Coat and a Muff, with a long Campaign-Wig out of
Curl; to which he had added the Ornament of a Pair of black Garters buckled
under the Knee. Upon his coming up to me, I was going to enquire into his
present Circumstances; but was prevented by his asking me, with a Whisper,
Whether the last Letters brought any Accounts that one might rely upon from
Bender? I told him, None that I heard of; and asked him, Whether he had yet
married his eldest Daughter? He told me, No. But pray, says he, tell me
sincerely, What are your Thoughts of the King of Sweden? For though his Wife and
Children were starving, I found his chief Concern at present was for this great
Monarch. I told him, That I looked upon him as one of the first Heroes of the
Age. But pray, says he, do you think there is any Thing in the Story of his
Wound? And finding me surprised at the Question, Nay, says he, I only propose
it to you. I answered, That I thought there was no Reason to doubt of it. But
why in the Heel. says he, more than in any other Part of the Body? Because,
says I, the Bullet chanced to light there.

This extraordinary Dialogue was no s one ended, but he began to launch out
into a long Dissertation upon the Affairs of the North; and after having spent
some Time on them, he told me, He was in a great Perplexity how to reconcile
the Supplement with the English-Post, and had been just now examining what the
other Papers say upon the same Subject. The Daily Courant, says he, has these
Words, We have Advices from very good Hands, That a certain Prince has some
Matters of great Importance under Consideration. This is very mysterious; but
the Post-Boy leaves us more in the Dark, for he tells us, That there are
private Intimations of Measures taken by a certain Prince, which Time will
bring to Light. Now the Post-Man, says he, who uses to be very clear, refers to
the same News in these Words; The late Conduct of a certain Prince affords
great Matter of Speculation. This certain Prince, says the Upholsterer, whom
they are all so cautious of naming, I take to be -- Upon which, though there was
no Body near us, he whispered something in my Ear, which I did not hear, or
think worth my while to make him repeat.

We were now got to the upper End of the Mall, where were Three or Four very
odd Fellows sitting together upon the Bench. These I found were all of them
Politicians, who used to Sun themselves in that Place every Day about
Dinnertime. Observing them to be Curiosities in their Kind, and my Friend's
Acquaintance, I sat down among them.

The chief Politician of the Bench was a great Asserter of Paradoxes. He told
us, with a seeming Concern, That by some News he had lately read from Muscovy,
it appeared to him that there was a Storm gathering in the Black Sea, which
might in Time do Hurt to the Naval Forces of this Nation. To this he added,
That for his Part, he could not wish to see the Turk driven out of Europe,
which he believed could not but be prejudicial to our Woollen Manufacture. He
then told us, That he looked upon those extraordinary Revolutions which had
lately happened in these Parts of the World, to have risen chiefly from Two
Persons who were not much talked of; and those, says he, are Prince Menzikoff,
and the Duchess of Mirandola. He backed his Assertions with so many broken
Hints, and such a Show of Depth and Wisdom, that we gave our selves up to his
Opinions.

The Discourse at length fell upon a Point which seldom escapes a Knot of
true-born Englishmen, Whether in Case of a Religious War, the Protestants would
not be too strong for the Papists? This we unanimously determined on the
Protestant Side. One who sat on my Right Hand, and, as I found by his
Discourse, had been in the West Indies, assured us, That it would be a very
easy Matter for the Protestants to beat the Pope at Sea; and added, That
whenever such a War does break out, it must turn to the Good of the Leeward
Islands. Upon this, one who sat at the End of the Bench, and, as I afterward
found, was the Geographer of the Company, said, That in case the Papists should
drive the Protestants from these Parts of Europe, when the worst came to the
worst, it would be impossible to beat them out of Norway and Greenland,
provided the Northern Crowns hold together, and the Czar of Muscavy stand
Neuter.

He further told us for our Comfort, That there were vast Tracts of Land about
the Pole, inhabited neither by Protestants nor Papists, and of greater Extent
than all the Roman Catholic Dominions in Europe.

When we had fully discussed this Point, my Friend the Upholsterer began to
exert himself upon the present Negotiations of Peace, in which he deposed
Princes, settled the Bounds of Kingdoms, and balanced the Power of Europe,
with great Justice and Impartiality.

I at length took my Leave of the Company, and was going away; but had not been
gone Thirty Yards, before the Upholsterer hemmed again after me. Upon his
advancing toward me, with a Whisper, I expected to hear some secret Piece of
News, which he had not thought fit to communicate to the Bench; but instead of
that, he desired me in my Ear to lend him Half a Crown. In Compassion to so
needy a Statesman, and to dissipate the Confusion I found he was in, I told
him, if he pleased, I would give him Five Shillings, to receive Five Pounds of
him when the Great Turk was driven out of Constable intinople; which he very
readily accepted, but not before he had laid down to me the Impossibility of
such an Event, as the Affairs of Europe now stand.

This Paper I design for the particular Benefit of those worthy Citizens who
live more in a Coffee-house than in their Shops, and whose Thoughts are so
taken up with the Affairs of the Allies, that they forget their Customers.

The TATLER. [No 156.
-- Sequiturque Patrem non passibus aequis.
Virg.
From Thursd. April 6. to Saturd. April 8. 1710.
From my own Apartment, April 7.
WE have already described out of Homer the Voyage of Ulysses to the Infernal
Shades, with the several Adventures that attended it. If we look into the
beautiful Romance published not many Years since by the Archbishop of Cambray,
we may see the Son of Ulysses bound on the same Expedition, and after the same
Manner making his Discoveries among the Regions of the Dead. The Story of
Telemachus is formed altogether in the Spirit of Homer, and will give an
unlearned Reader a Notion of that great Poet's Manner of Writing, more than any
Translation of him can possibly do. As it was written for the Instruction of a
young Prince, who may one Day sit upon the Throne of France, the Author took
Care to suit the several Parts of his Story, and particularly the Description
we are now entering upon, to the Character and Quality of his Pupil. For which
Reason, he insists very much on the Misery of bad, and the Happiness of good
Kings, in the Account he has given of Punishments and Rewards in the other
World.

We may however observe, notwithstanding the Endeavors of this great and
learned Author, to copy after the Style and Sentiments of Homer, that there is
a certain Tincture of Christianity running through the whole Relation. The
Prelate in several Places mixes himself with the Poet; so that his future State
puts me in Mind of Michael Angelo's Last Judgment, where Charon and his Boat
are represented as bearing a Part in the dreadful Solemnities of that great Day.

Telemachus, after having passed through the dark Avenues of Death in the
Retinue of Mercury, who every Day delivers up a certain Tale of Ghosts to the
Ferryman of Styx, is admitted into the Infernal Bark. Among the Companions of
his Voyage, is the Shade of Nabopharzon, a King of Babylon, and Tyrant of all
the East. Among the Ceremonies and Pomps of his Funeral, there were Four Slaves
sacrificed, according to the Custom of the Country, in order to attend him
among the Shades. The Author having described this Tyrant in the most odious
Colors of Pride, Insolence, and Cruelty, tells us, That his Four Slaves,
instead of serving him after Death, were perpetually insulting him with
Reproaches and Affronts for his past Usage; That they spurned him as he lay
upon the Ground, and forced him to show his Face, which he would fain have
covered, as lying under all the Confusions of Guilt and Infamy; and in short,
that they kept him bound in a Chain, in order to drag him before the Tribunal
of the Dead.

Telemachus, upon looking out of the Bark, sees all the Strand covered with an
innumerable Multitude of Shades, who, upon his jumping ashore, immediately
vanished. He then pursues his Course to the Palace of Pluto, who is described
as seated on his Throne in terrible Majesty, with Proserpine by his Side. At
the Foot of his Throne was the pale hideous Spectre, who, by the Ghastliness of
his Visage, and the Nature of the Apparitions that surrounded him, discovers
himself to be Death. His Attendants are, Melancholy, Distrust, Revenge, Hatred,
Avarice, Despair, Ambition, Envy, Impiety, with frightful Dreams, and waking
Cares, which are all drawn very naturally in proper Actions and Postures. The
Author, with great Beauty, places near his frightful Dreams an Assembly of
Phantoms, which are often employed to terrify the Living, by appearing in the
Shape and Likeness of the Dead.

The young Hero in the next Place takes a Survey of the different Kinds of
Criminals that lay in Torture among Clouds of Sulphur, and Torrents of Fire.
The First of these were such as had been guilty of Impieties, which every one
has an Horror for: To which is added, a Catalogue of such Offenders that
scarce appear to be faulty in the Eyes of the Vulgar. Among these, says the
Author, are malicious Critics, that have endeavored to cast a Blemish upon
the Perfections of others; with whom he likewise places such as have often hurt
the Reputation of the Innocent, by passing a rash Judgment on their Actions,
without knowing the Occasion of them. These Crimes, says he, are more severely
punished after Death, because they generally meet with Impunity upon Earth.

Telemachus, after having taken a Survey of several other Wretches in the same
Circumstances, arrives at that Region of Torments in which wicked Kings are
punished. The e are very fine Strokes of Imagination in the Description which
he gives of this unhappy Multitude. He tells us, That on one Side of them there
stood a revengesul Fury, thundering in their Ears incessant Repetitions of all
the Crimes they had committed upon Earth, with the Aggravations of Ambition,
Vanity, Hardness of Heart, and all those secret Affections of Mind that enter
into the Composition of a Tyrant. At the same Time, she holds up to them a
large Mirror, in which every one sees himself represented in the natural Horror
and Deformity of his Character. On the other Side of them stands another Fury,
that with an insulting Derision, repeats to them all the Praises that their
Flatterers had bestowed upon them while they sat upon their respective Thrones.
She too, says the Author, presents a Mirror before their Eyes, in which every
one sees himself adorned with all those Beauties and Perfections in which they
had been drawn by the Vanity of their own Hearts, and the Flattery of others.
To punish them for the Wantonness of the Cruelty which they formerly exercised,
they are now delivered up to be treated according to the Fancy and Caprice of
several Slaves, who have here an Opportunity of tyrannizing in their Turns.

The Author having given us a Description of these ghastly Specter, who, says
he, are always calling upon Death, and are placed under the Distillation of
that burning Vengeance which falls upon them Drop by Drop, and is never to be
exhausted, leads us into a pleasing Scene of Groves, filled with the Melody of
Birds, and the Odours of a Thousand different Plants. These Groves are
represented as rising among a great many flowery Meadows, and watered with
Streams that diffuse a perpetual Freshness, in the midst of an eternal Day, and
a never-fading Spring. This, says the Author, was the Habitation of those good
Princes who were Friends of the Gods, and Parents of the People. Among these,
Telemachus converses with the Shade of one of his Ancestors, who makes a most
agreeable Relation of the Joys of Elysium, and the Nature of its Inhabitants.
The Residence of Sesostris among these happy Shades, with his Character and
present Employment, is drawn in a very lively Manner, and with a great
Elevation of Thought.

The Description of that pure and gentle Light which overflows these happy
Regions, and clothes the Spirits of these virtuous Persons, has something in
it of that Enthusiasm which this Author was accused of by his Enemies in the
Church of Rome; but however it may look in Religion, it makes a very beautiful
Figure in Poetry.

The Rays of the Sun, says he, are Darkness in Comparison with this Light,
which rather deserves the Name of Glory, than that of Light. It pierces the
thickest Bodies, in the same Manner as the Sun Beams pass through Crystal: It
strengthens the Sight instead of dazzling it; and nourishes in the most inward
Recesses of the Mind, a perpetual Serenity that is not to be expressed. It
enters and incorporates it self with the very Substance of the Soul: The
Spirits of the Blessed feel it in all their Senses, and in all their
Perceptions. It produces a certain Source of Peace and Joy that arises in them
for ever, running through all the Faculties, and refreshing all the Desires of
the Soul. External Pleasures and Delights, with all their Charms and
Allurements, are regarded with the utmost Indifference and Neglect by these
happy Spirits who have this great Principle of Pleasure within them, drawing
the whole Mind to its self, calling off their Attention from the most
delightful Objects, and giving them all the Transports of Inebriation, without
the Confusion and the Folly of it.

I have here only mentioned some Master-Touches of this admirable Piece,
because the Original it self is understood by the greater Part of my Readers. I
must confess, I take a particular Delight in these Prospects of Futurity,
whether grounded upon the probable Suggestions of a fine Imagination, or the
more severe Conclusions of Philosophy; as a Man loves to hear all the
Discoveries or Conjectures relating to a Foreign Country which he is, at some
Time, to inhabit. Prospects of this Nature lighten the Burden of any present
Evil, and refresh us under the worst and lowest Circumstances of Mortality.
They extinguish in us both the Fear and Envy of Humane Grandeur. Insolence
shrinks its Head, Power disappears; Pain, Poverty, and Death, fly before them.
In short, the Mind that is habituated to the lively Sense of an Hereafter, can
hope for what is the most terrifying to the Generality of Mankind, and rejoice
in what is the most afflicting.

The TATLER. [No 157.
-- Facile est inventis addere --
From Saturd. April 8. to Tuesd. April 11. 1710.
From my own Apartment, April 10.
I Was last Night in an Assembly of very Fine Women. How I came among them, is
of no great Importance to the Reader. I shall only let him know, that I was
betrayed into so good Company by the Device of an old Friend, who had promised
to give some of his Female Acquaintance a Sight of Mr. Bickerstaff. Upon
hearing my Name mentioned, a Lady who sat by me told me, they had brought
together a Female Consort for my Entertainment. You must know, says she, that
we all of us look upon our selves to be Musical Instruments, though we do not
yet know of what Kind, which we hope to learn from you, if you will give us
Leave to play before you. This was followed by a general Laugh, which I always
look upon as a necessary Flourish in the Opening of a Female Consort. They then
struck up together, and played a whole Hour upon Two Grounds, viz. the Trial,
and the Opera. I could not but observe, that several of their Notes were more
soft, and several more sharp, than any that ever I heard in a Male Consort;
though I must confess, there was not any Regard to Time, nor any of those Rests
and Pauses which are frequent in the Harmony of the other Sex. Besides, that
the Music was generally full, and no particular Instrument permitted to play
long by its self.

I seemed so very well pleased with what every one said, and smiled with so
much Complaisance at all their pretty Fancies, that though I did not put one
Word into their Discourse, I have the Vanity to think, they looked upon me as
very agreeable Company. I then told 'em, That if I were to draw the Picture of
so many charming Musicians, it should be like one I had seen of the Muses, with
their several Instruments in their Hands. Upon which the Lady Kettle-Drum
tossed back her Head, and cried, A very pretty Simile! The Consort again
revived; in which, with Nods, Smiles, and Approbations, I bore the Part rather
of one who beats the Time, than of a Performer.

I was no sooner retired to my Lodgings, but I ran over in my Thoughts the
several Characters of this Fair Assembly, which I shall give some Account of,
because they are various in their Kind, and may each of them stand as a Sample
of a whole Species.

The Person who pleased me most was a Flute, an Instrument that, without any
great Compass, has something exquisitely sweet and soft in its Sound: It lulls
and sooths the Ear, and fills it with such a gentle Kind of Melody, as keeps
the Mind awake without startling it, and raises a most agreeable Passion
between Transport and Indolence. In short, the Music of the Flute is the
Conversation of a mild and amiable Woman, that has nothing in it very elevated,
or at the same Time any Thing mean or trivial.

I must here observe, that the Hautboy is the most perfect of the
Flute-Species, which, with all the Sweetness of the Sound, has a great
Strength and Variety of Notes; though at the same Time I must observe, that the
Hautboy in one Sex is as scarce as the Harpsicord in the other.

By the Side of the Flute there sat a Flageolet, for so I must call a certain
young Lady, who fancying her self a Wit, despised the Music of the Flute as
low and insipid, and would be entertaining the Company with tart ill-natured
Observations, pert Fancies, and little Turns, which she imagined to be full of
Life and Spirit. The Flageolet therefore does not differ from the Flute so much
in the Compass of its Notes, as in the Shrilness and Sharpness of the Sound. We
must however take Notice, that the Flageolets among their own Sex are more
valued and esteemed than the Flutes.

There chanced to be a Coquet in the Consort, that with a great many skittish
Notes, affected Squeaks, and studied Inconsistencies, distinguished her self
from the rest of the Company. She did not speak a Word during the whole Trial;
but I thought she would never have done upon the Opera. One while she would
break out upon, That hideous King! Then upon the charming Black-moor! Then, Oh
that dear Lion! Then would hum over Two or Three Notes; then run to the Window
to see what Coach was coming. The Coquet therefore I must distinguish by that
Musical Instrument which is commonly known by the Name of a Kit, that is more
jiggish than the Fiddle it self, and never sounds but to a Dance.

The Fourth Person who bore a Part in the Conversation was a Prude, who stuck
to the Trial, and was silent upon the whole Opera. The Gravity of her Censures,
and Composure of her Voice, which were often attended with supercilious Casts
of the Eye, and a seeming Contempt for the Lightness of the Conversation, put
me in Mind of that ancient serious Matron-like Instrument the Virginal.

I must not pass over in Silence a Lancashire Hornpipe, by which I would
signify a young Country Lady, who with a great deal of Mirth and Innocence
diverted the Company very agreeably; and, if I am not mistaken, by that Time
the Wildness of her Notes is a little softened, and the Redundancy of her
Music restrained by Conversation and good Company, will be improved into one
of the most amiable Flutes about the Town. Your Romps and Boarding-School Girls
fall likewise under this Denomination.

On the Right Hand of the Hornpipe sat a Welsh Harp, an Instrument which very
much delights in the Tunes of old Historical Ballads, and in celebrating the
Renowned Actions and Exploits of ancient British Heroes. By this Instrument I
therefore would describe a certain Lady, who is one of those Female Historians
that upon all Occasions enters into Pedigrees and Descents, and finds her self
related, by some Off-shoot or other, to almost every great Family in England:
For which Reason she jarrs and is out of Tune very often in Conversation, for
the Company's Want of due Attention and Respect to her.

But the most sonorous Part of our Consort was a She-Drum, or (as the Vulgar
call it) a Kettle-Drum, who accompanied her Discourse with Motions of the Body,
Tosses of the Head, and Brandishes of the Fan. Her Music was loud, bold, and
masculine. Every Thump she gave, alarmed the Company, and very often set some
Body or other in it a Blushing.

The last I shall mention was a certain Romantic Instrument called a Dulcimer,
who talked of nothing but shady Woods, flowery Meadows, purling Streams, Larks
and Nightingals, with all the Beauties of the Spring, and the Pleasures of a
Country Life. This Instrument has a fine melancholy Sweetness in it, and goes
very well with the Flute.

I think most of the conversable Part of Womankind may be found under one of
the foregoing Divisions; but it must be confessed, that the Generality of that
Sex, notwithstanding they have naturally a great Genius for being talkative,
are not Mistresses of more than one Note; with which however, by frequent
Repetition, they make a greater Sound than those who are possessed of the whole
Gammut, as may be observed in your Larums or Household Scolds, and in your
Castanets or impertinent Tittle-Tattles, who have no other Variety in their
Discourse but that of talking slower or faster.

Upon communicating this Scheme of Music to an old Friend of mine, who was
formerly a Man of Gallantry and a Rover, he told me, That he believed he had
been in Love with every Instrument in my Consort. The first that smit him was a
Hornpipe, who lived near his Father's House in the Country; but upon his
failing to meet her at an Assize, according to Appointment, she cast him off.
His next Passion was for a Kettle-Drum, whom he fell in Love with at a Play;
but when he became acquainted with her, not finding the Softness of her Sex in
her Conversation, he grew cool to her; though at the same Time he could not
deny, but that she behaved her self very much like a Gentlewoman. His Third
Mistress was a Dulcimer, who he found took great Delight in sighing and
languishing, but would go no further than the Preface of Matrimony; so that she
would never let a Lover have any more of her than her Heart, which, after
having won, he was forced to leave her, as despairing of any further Success. I
must confess, says my Friend, I have often considered her with a great deal of
Admiration; and I find her Pleasure is so much in this first Step of an Amor,
that her Life will pass away in Dream, Solitude, and Soliloquy, till her Decay
of Charms makes her snatch at the worst Man that ever pretended to her. In the
next Place, says my Friend, I fell in Love with a Kit, who led me such a Dance
through all the Varieties of a familiar, cold, fond, and indifferent Behavior,
that the World began to grow censorious, though without any Cause. For which
Reason, to recover our Reputations, we parted by Consent. To mend my Hand, says
he, I made my next Application to a Virginal, who gave me great Encouragement,
after her cautious Manner, till some malicious Companion told her of my long
Passion for the Kit, which made her turn me off as a scandalous Fellow. At
length, in Despair, (says he) I betook my self to a Welsh Harp, who rejected me
with Contempt, after having found that my Great Grandmother was a Brewer's
Daughter. I found by the Sequel of my Friend's Discourse, that he had never
aspired to a Hautboy; that he had been exasperated by a Flageolet; and that to
this very Day, he pines away for a Flute.

Upon the Whole, having thoroughly considered how absolutely necessary it is,
That Two Instruments, which are to play together for Life, should be exactly
tuned, and go in perfect Consort with each other, I would propose Matches
between the Music of both Sexes, according to the following Table of Marriage.
1. Drum and Kettle-Drum. 2. Lute and Flute. 3. Harpsicord and Hautboy. 4.
Violin and Flageolet. 5. Bass-Viol and Kit. 6. Trumpet and Welsh Harp. 7.
Hunting-Horn and Horn-Pipe. 8. Bagpipe and Castanets. 9. Passing Bell and
Virginal.


Mr. Bickerstaff, in Consideration of his ancient Friendship and Acquaintance
with Mr. Betterton, and great Esteem for his Merit, summons all his Disciples,
whether dead or living, mad or tame, Toasts, Smarts, Dappers, pretty Fellows,
Musicians or Scrapers, to make their Appearance at the Playhouse in the
Haymarket on Thursday next; when there will be a Play acted for the Ben fit of
the said Mr. Betterton.

The TATLER. [No 158.
Faciunt nae intelligendo, ut nihil intelligant.
Ter.
From Tuesd. April 11. to Thursd. April 13. 1710.
From my own Apartment, April 12.
TOm Folio is a Broker in Learning, employed to get together good Editions, and
stock the Libraries of great Men. There is not a Sale of Books begins till Tom
Folio is seen at the Door. There is not an Auction where his Name is not heard,
and that too in the very Nick of Time, in the Critical Moment, before the last
decisive Stroke of the Hammer. There is not a Subscription goes forward, in
which Tom is not privy to the first rough Draught of the Proposals; nor a
Catalogue printed, that does not come to him wet from the Press. He is an
universal Scholar, so far as the Title Page of all Authors, knows the
Manuscripts in which they were discovered, the Editions through which they have
passed, with the Praises or Censures which they have received from the several
Members of the Learned World. He has a greater Esteem for Aldus and Elzevir,
than for Virgil and Horace. If you talk of Herodotus, he breaks out into a
Panegyric upon Harry Stephans. He thinks he gives you an Account of an Author,
when he tells you the Subject he treats of, the Name of the Editor, and the
Year in which it was printed. Or if you draw him into further Particulars, he
cries up the Goodness of the Paper, extols the Diligence of the Corrector, and
is transported with the Beauty of the Letter. This he looks upon to be sound
Learning and substantial Criticism. As for those who talk of the Fineness of
Style, and the Justness of Thought, or describe the Brightness of any
particular Passages; nay, though they write themselves in the Genius and Spirit
of the Author they admire, Tom looks upon them as Men of superficial Learning,
and flashy Parts.

I had Yesterday Morning a Visit from this learned Idiot, (for that is the
Light in which I consider every Pedant) when I discovered in him some little
Touches of the Coxcomb, which I had not before observed. Being very full of the
Figure which he makes in the Republic of Letters, and wonderfully satisfied
with his great Stock of Knowledge, he gave me broad Intimations, that he did
not believe in all Points as his Forefathers had done. He then communicated to
me a Thought of a certain Author upon a Passage of Virgil's Account of the
Dead, which I made the Subject of a late Paper. This Thought has taken very
much among Men of Tom's Pitch and Understanding, though universally exploded by
all that know how to construe Virgil, or have any Relish of Antiquity. Not to
trouble my Reader with it, I found upon the whole, that Tom did not believe a
future State of Rewards and Punishments, because Aeneas, at his leaving the
Empire of the Dead, passed through the Gate of Ivory, and not through that of
Horn. Knowing that Tom had not Sense enough to give up an Opinion which he had
once received, that he might avoid wrangling, I told him, That Virgil possibly
had his Oversights as well as another Author. Ah^ Mr. Bickerstaff, says he, you
would have another Opinion of him, if you would read him in Dani^ Heinsius's
Edition. I have perused him my sel^ several Times in that Edition, continued
he; an^ after the strictest and most malicious Examination, could find but Two
Faults in him: One o^ them is in the Aeneids, where there are Tw^ Comma's
instead of a Parenthesis; and anoth^ in the Third Georgick, where you may find
a Semicolon turned upside down. Perhaps, said I, these were not Virgil's
Thoughts, but those of the Transcriber. I do not design it, says Tom, as a
Reflection on Virgil: On the contrary, I know that all the Manuscripts reclaim
against such a Punctuation. Oh! Mr. Bickerstaff, says he, what would a Man give
to see one Simile of Virgil writ in his own Hand? I asked him which was the
Simile he meant; but was answered, Any Simile in Virgil. He then told me all
the secret History in the Commonwealth of Learning; of Modern Pieces that had
the Names of ancient Authors annexed to them; of all the Books that were now
writing or printing in the several Parts of Europe; of many Amendments which
are made, and not yet published; and a Thousand other Particulars, which I
would not have my Memory burdened with for a Vatican.

At length, being fully persuaded that I thoroughly admired him, and looked
upon him as a Prodigy of Learning, he took his Leave. I know several of Tom's
Class who are professed Admirers of Tasso without understanding a Word of
Italian; and one in particular, that carries a Pastor-Fido in his Pocket, in
which I am sure he is acquainted with no other Beauty but the Clearness of the
Character.

There is another Kind of Pedant, who, with all Tom Folio's Impertinencies,
has greater Superstructures and Embellishments of Greek and Latin, and is
still more insupportable than the other, in the same Degree as he is more
learned. Of this Kind very often are Editors, Commentators, Interpreters,
Scholiasts, and Critics; and in short, all Men of deep Learning without common
Sense. These Persons set a greater Value on themselves for having found out the
Meaning of a Passage in Greek, than upon the Author for having written it; nay,
will allow the Passage it self not to have any Beauty in it, at the same Time
that they would be considered as the greatest Men of the Age for having
interpreted it. They will look with Contempt upon the most beautiful Poems that
have been composed by any of their Contemporaries; but will lock themselves up
in their Studies for a Twelvemonth together, to correct, publish, and expound,
such Trifles of Antiquity as a modern Author would be contemned for. Men of the
strictest Morals, severest Lives, and the gravest Professions, will write
Volumes upon an idle Sonnet that is originally in Greek or Latin; give Editions
of the most immoral Authors, and spin out whole Pages upon the various Readings
of a lewd Expression. All that can be said in Excuse for them, is, That their
Works sufficiently show they have no Taste of their Authors; and that what they
do in this Kind, is out of their great Learning, and not out of any Levity or
Lasciviousness of Temper.

A Pedant of this Nature is wonderfully well described in Six Lines of Boileau,
with which I shall conclude his Character.

Un Pedant enyvre de sa vain science,
Tout herisse de Grec, tout bouffi d'arrogance,
Et qui de mill Auteurs retenus mot pour mot,
Danssa tete entassez n'a souvent fait qu'un Sot,
Croit qu'un Livre fait tout, and que sans Aristot^
La Raison ne voit gout, and le bon Sens radote.
The TATLER. [No 159.
Nitor in adversum; nec me, qui caetera, vinoit
Impetus, --
Ovid. Met. Lib. 2.
From Thursd. April 13. to Saturd. April 15. 1710.
From my own Apartment April 14.
THE Wits of this Island, for above Fifty Years past, instead of correcting the
Vices of the Age, have done all they could to inflame them. Marriage has been
one of the common Topics of Ridicule that every Stage-Scribbler has found his
Account in; for whenever there is an Occasion for a Clap, an impertinent Jest
upon Matrimony is sure to raise it. This has been attended with very
pernicious Consequences. Many a Country 'Squire, upon his setting up for a Man
of the Town, has gone Home in the Gaiety of his Heart and beat his Wife. A kind
Husband has been looked upon as a Clown, and a good Wife as a Domestic
Animal, unfit for the Company or Conversation of the Beau Monde. In short,
Separate Beds, Silent Tables, and Solitary Homes, have been introduced by your
Men of Wit and Pleasure of the Age.

As I shall always make it my Business to stem the Torrents of Prejudice and
Vice, I shall take particular Care to put an honest Father of a Family in
Countenance, and endeavor to remove all the Evils out of that State of Life,
which is either the most happy, or most miserable, that a Man can be placed in.
In order to this, let us, if you please, consider the Wits and well-bred
Persons of former Times. I have shown in another Paper, That Pliny, who was a
Man of the greatest Genius, as well as of the First Quality of his Age, did not
think it below nim to be a kind Husband, and to treat his Wife as a Friend,
Companion and Counselor. I shall give the like Instance of another, who in all
Respects was a much greater Man than Pliny, and has written a whole Book of
Letters to his Wife. They are not so full of Turns as those translated out of
the former Author, who writes very much like a Modern, but are full of that
beautiful Simplicity which is altogether natural, and is the distinguishing
Character of the best ancient Writers. The Author I am speaking of, is Cicero;
who, in the following Passages which I have taken out of his Letters, shows,
that he did not think it inconsistent with the Politeness of his Manners, or
the Greatness of his Wisdom, to stand upon Record in his Domestic Character.

These Letters were written at a Time when he was banished from his Country, by
a Faction that then prevailed at Rome.

Cicero to Terentia.
I Learn from the Letters of my Friends, as well as from common Report, that
you give incredible Proofs of Virtue and Fortitude, and that you are
indefatigable in all Kinds of good Offices. How unhappy a Man am I, that a
Woman of your Virtue, Constancy, Honor, and good Nature, should fall into so
great Distresses upon my Account; and that my dear Tulliola should be so much
afflicted for the Sake of a Father, with whom she had once so much Reason to be
pleased! How can I mention little Cicero, whose first Knowledge of Things began
with the Sense of his own Misery? If all thi^ had happened by the Decrees of
Fate, as yo^ would kindly persuade me, I could have bor^ it. But, alas! it is
all befallen me by my ow^ Indiscretion, who thought I was beloved by those that
envied me, and did not join with them who sought my Friendship. -- At present,
since my Friends bid me hope, I shall take Care of my Health, that I may enjoy
the Benefit of your affectionate Services. -- Plancius hopes we may some Time
or other come together into Italy. If I ever live to see that Day; if I ever
return to your dear Embraces; in short, if I ever again recover you and my
self, I shall think our Conjugal Piety very well rewarded. -- As for what you
write to me about selling your Estate, consider, (my dear Terentia) consider,
alas! what would be the Event of it. If our present Fortune continues to
oppress us, what will become of our poor Boy! My Tears flow so fast, that I am
not able to write any further; and I would not willingly make you weep with me.
-- Let us take Care not to undo the Child that is already undone: If we can
leave him any Thing, a little Virtue will keep him from Want, and a little
Fortune raise him in the World. Mind your Health, and let me know frequently
what you are doing. -- Remember me to Tulliola and Cicero.


II.
DOn't fancy that I write longer Letters to any one than to your self, unless
when I chance to receive a longer Letter from another, which I am indispensibly
obliged to answer in every Particular. The Truth of it is, I have no Subject
for a Letter at present; and as my Affairs now stand, there is nothing more
painful to me than Writing. As for you and our dear Tulliola, I cannot write to
you without Abundance of Tears, for I see both of you miserable, whom I always
wished to be happy, and whom I ought to have made so. -- I must acknowledge,
you have done every Thing for me with the utmost Fortitude, and the utmost
Affection; nor indeed is it more than I expected from you; though at the same
Time it is a great Aggravation of my ill Fortune, that the Afflictions I suffer
can be relieved only by those which you undergo for my Sake. For honest
Valerius has written me a Letter, which I could not read without weeping very
bitterly; wherein he gives me an Account of the public Procession which you
have made for me at Rome. Alas! my dearest Life, must then Terentia, the
Darling of my Soul, whose Favor and Recommendations have been so often sought
by others; must my Terentia droop under the Weight of Sorrow, appear in the
Habit of a Mourner, pour out Floods of Tears, and all this for my Sake; for my
Sake, who have undone my Family, by consulting the Safety of others! -- As for
what you write about felling your House, I am very much afflicted, that what is
laid out upon my Account may any way reduce you to Misery and Want. If we can
bring about our Design, we may indeed recover every Thing; but if Fortune
persists in persecuting us, how can I think of your sacrificing for me the poor
Remainder of your Possessions? No, my dearest Life, let me beg you to let those
bear my Expenses who are able, and perhaps willing to do it; and i^ you would
show your Love to me, do not injure your Health, which is already too much
impaired. You present your self before my Eyes Day and Night; I see you
laboring amid^ innumerable Difficulties; I am afraid lest yo^ should sink
under them; but I find in you a^ the Qualifications that are necessary to
suppor^ you: Be sure therefore to cherish your Health^ that you may compass the
End of your Hope and your Endeavors. -- Farewell my T^rentia, my Heart's
Desire, farewell.


III.
ARistocritus has delivered to me Three of your Letters, which I have almost
defaced with my Tears. Oh! my Terentia, I am consumed with Grief, and feel the
Weight of your Sufferings more than of my own. I am more miserable than you
are, notwithstanding you are very much so; and that for this Reason, because
though our Calamity is common, it is my Fault that brought it upon us. I ought
to have died rather than have been driven out of the City: I am therefore
overwhelmed not only with Grief, but with Shame. I am ashamed that I did not do
my utmost for the best of Wives, and the dearest of Children. You are ever
present before my Eyes in your Mourning, your Affliction, and your Sickness.
Amidst all which, there scarce appears to me the least Glimmering of Hope. --
However, as long as you hope, I will not despair. -- I will do what you advise
me. I have returned my Thanks to those Friends whom you mentioned, and have let
them know, That you have acquainted me with their good Offices. I am sensible
of Piso's extraordinary Zeal and Endeavors to serve me. Oh! would the Gods
grant that you and I might live together in the Enjoyment of such a Son-in-Law,
and of our dear Children. -- As for what you write of your coming to me if I
desire it, I would rather you should be where you are, because I know you are
my principal Agent at Rome. If you succeed, I shall come to you: If not -- But
I need say no more. Be careful of your Health, and be assured, that nothing is,
or ever was, so dear to me as your self. Farewell my Terentia; I fancy that I
see you, and therefore cannot command my Weakness so far as to refrain from
Tears.


IV.
I Don't write to you as often as I might, because notwithstanding I am
afflicted at all Times, I am quite overcome with Sorrow whilst I am writing to
you, or reading any Letters that I receive from you. -- If these Evils are not
to be removed, I must desire to see you, my dearest Life, as soon as possible,
and to die in your Embraces; since neither the Gods, whom you always
religiously worshipped; nor the Men, whose Good I always promoted, have
rewarded us according to our Deserts. -- What a distressed Wretch am I? Should
I ask a weak Woman, oppressed with Cares and Sickness, to come and live with
me, or shall I not ask her? Can I live without you? But I find I must. If there
be any Hopes of my Return, help it forward, and promote it as much as you are
able. But if all that is over, as I fear it is, find out some Way or other of
coming to me. This you may be sure of, that I shall not look upon my self as
quite undone whilst you are with me^ But what will become of Tulliola? You mus^
look to that; I must confess, I am entirely at a Loss about her. Whatever
happens, we mus^ take Care of the Reputation and Marriage o^ that dear
unfortunate Girl. As for Cicero, h^ shall live in my Bosom and in my Arms. I
cannot write any further, my Sorrows will not le^ me. -- Support your self, my
dear Terentia as well as you are able. We have lived an^ flourished together
amidst the greatest Honours^ It is not our Crimes, but our Virtues that have
distressed us. -- Take more than ordinar^ Care of your Health; I am more
afflicted wit^ your Sorrows than my own. Farewell my T^rentia; thou dearest,
faithfulest, and best (...) Wives.


Methinks it is a Pleasure to see this great Man in his Family, who makes so
different a Figure in the Forum or Senate of Rome. Every one admires the Orator
and the Consul; but for my Part, I esteem the Husband and the Father. His
private Character, with all the little Weaknesses of Humanity, is as amiable,
as the Figure he makes in public is awful and majestic. But at the same Time
that I love to surprise so great an Author in his private Walks, and to survey
him in his most familiar Lights, I think it would be barbarous to form to our
selves any Idea of mean Spiritedness from these natural Openings of his Heart,
and disburthening of his Thoughts to a Wife. He has written several other
Letters to the same Person, but none with so great Passion as these of which I
have given the foregoing Extracts.

It would be ill Nature not to acquaint the English Reader, that his Wife was
successful in her Solicitations for this great Man, and saw her Husband return
to the Honors of which he had been deprived, with all the Pomp and Acclamation
that usually attended the greatest Triumph.

The TATLER. [No 160.
From Saturd. April 15. to Tuesd. April 18. 1710.
From my own Apartment, April 17.
A Common Civility to an impertinent Fellow often draws upon one a great many
unforeseen Troubles; and if one does not take particular Care, will be
interpreted by him as an Overture of Friendship and Intimacy. This I was very
sensible of this Morning. About Two Hours before Day, I heard a great Rapping
at my Door, which continued some Time, till my Maid could get her self ready to
go down and see what was the Occasion of it. She then brought me up Word, That
there was a Gentleman who seemed very much in Haste, and said he must needs
speak with me. By the Description she gave me of him, and by his Voice, which I
could hear as I lay in my Bed, I fancied him to be my old Acquaintance the
Upholsterer, whom I met the other Day in St. James's- Park. For which Reason, I
bid her tell the Gentleman, whoever he was, That I was indisposed, that I could
see no Body, and that, if he had any Thing to say to me, I desired he would
leave it in Writing. My Maid, after having delivered her Message, told me, That
the Gentleman said he would stay at the next Coffee-house till I was stirring,
and bid her be sure to tell me, That the French were driven from the Scarp, and
that Douay was invested. He gave her the Name of another Town, which I found
she had dropped by the Way.

As much as I love to be informed of the Success of my brave Countrymen, I do
not care for hearing of a Victory before Day, and was therefore very much out
of Humor at this unseasonable Visit. I had no sooner recovered my Temper, and
was falling asleep, but I was immediately startled by a Second Rap; and upon my
Maid's opening the Door, heard the same Voice ask her, If her Master was yet
up? and at the same Time bid her tell me, That he was come on Purpose to talk
with me about a Piece of Home-News that every Body in Town will be full of Two
Hours hence. I ordered my Maid as soon as she came into the Room, without
hearing her Message, to tell the Gentleman, That whatever his News is, I would
rather hear it Two Hours hence than now; and that I persisted in my Resolution
not to speak with any Body that Morning. The Wench delivered my Answer
presently, and shut the Door. It was impossible for me to compose my self to
Sleep after Two such unexpected Alarms; for which Reason I put on my Clothes in
a very peevish Humor. I took several Turns about my Chamber, reflecting with a
great deal of Anger and Contempt on these Volunteers in Politics, that undergo
all the Pain, Watchfulness, and Disquiet of a First Minister, without turning
it to the Advantage either of themselves or their Country; and yet it is
surprising to consider how numerous this Species of Men is. There is nothing
more frequent than to find a Tailor breaking his Rest on the Affairs of Europe,
and to see a Cluster of Porters sitting upon the Ministry. Our Streets swarm
with Politicians, and there is scarce a Shop which is not held by a Statesman.
As I was musing after this Manner, I heard the Upholsterer at the Door
delivering a Letter to my Maid, and begging her, in a very great Hurry, to give
it to her Master as soon as ever he was awake, which I opened, and found as
follows:

Mr. Bickerstaff,
I Was to wait upon you about a Week ago, to let you know, That the honest
Gentlemen whom you conversed with upon the Bench at the End of the Mall, having
heard that I had received Five Shillings of you, to give you a Hundred Pounds
upon the Great Turk's being driven out of Europe, desired me to acquaint you,
That every one of that Company would be willing to receive Five Shillings, to
pay a Hundred Pounds on the same Conditions. Our last Advices from Muscovy
making this a fairer Bet than it was a Week ago, I do not question but you will
accept the Wager.

But this is not my present Business. If you remember, I whispered a Word in
your Ear as we were walking up the Mall, and you see what has happened since.
If I had seen you this Morning. I would have told you in your Ear another
Secret. I hope you will be recovered of your Indisposition by to Morrow
Morning, when I will wait on you at the same Hour as I did this; my private
Circumstances being such, that I cannot well appear in this Quarter of the Town
after it is Day.

I have been so taken up with the late good News from Holland, and Expectation
of further Particulars, as well as with other Transactions, of which I will
tell you more to Morrow Morning, that I have not slept a Wink these Three
Nights.

I have Reason to believe, that Picardy will soon follow the Example of Artois,
in case the Enemy continue in their present Resolution of flying away from us.
I think I told you last Time we were together my Opinion about the Deulle.

The honest Gentlemen upon the Bench bid me tell you, they would be glad to see
you often among them. We shall be there all the warm Hours of the Day, during
the present Posture of Affairs.

This happy Opening of the Campaign will, I hope, give us a very joyful Summer;
and I propose to take many a pleasant Walk with you, if you will sometimes come
into the Park; for that is the only Place in which I can be free from the
Malice of my Enemies. Farewell till Three a Clock to Morrow Morning. I am,

Your most humble Servant, etc.
P. S. The King of Sweden is still at Bender.




I should have fretted my self to Death at this Promise of a Second Visit, if I
had not found in his Letter an Intimation of the good News which I have since
heard at large. I have however ordered my Maid to tie up the Knocker of my Door
in such a Manner as she would do if I was really indisposed. By which Means I
hope to escape breaking my Morning's Rest.

Since I have given this Letter to the Public, I shall communicate One or Two
more, which I have lately received from others of my Correspondents. The
following is from a Coquet, who is very angry at my having disposed of her in
Marriage to a Bass-Viol.

Mr. Bickerstaff,
I Thought you would never have descended from the Censor of Great Britain, to
become a Match-Maker. But pray, Why so severe upon the Kit? Had I been a
Jews-Harp, that is nothing but Tongue, you could not have used me worse. Of all
Things, a Bass-Viol is my Aversion. Had you married me to a Bagpipe, or a
Passing Bell, I should have been better pleased. Dear Father Isaac, either
choose me a better Husband, or I will live and die a Dulcimer. In Hopes of
receiving Satisfaction from you, I am yours, whilst

Isabella Kit.


The Pertness which this Fair Lady has shown in this Letter, was one Occasion
of my joining her to the Bass-Viol, which is an Instrument that wants to be
quickened by these little Vivacities; as the Sprightliness of the Kit ought to
be checked and curbed by the Gravity of the Bass-Viol.

My next Letter is from Tom Folio, who it seems takes it amiss that I have
published a Character of him so much to his Disadvantage.

SIR,
I Suppose you meant Tom Fool, when you called me Tom Folio in a late trifling
Paper of yours; for I find, it is your Design to run down all useful and solid
Learning. The Tobacco-Paper on which your own Writings are usually printed, as
well as the Incorrectness of the Press, and the Scurvy Letter, sufficiently
show the Extent of your Knowledge. I question not but you look upon John
Morphew to be as great a Man as Elzevir; and Aldus, to have been such another
as Bernard Lintott. If you would give me my Revenge, I would only desire of you
to let me publish an Account of your Library, which I dare say would furnish
out an extraordinary Catalogue.

Tom Folio.


It has always been my Way to baffle Reproach with Silence, though I cannot but
observe the disingenuous Proceedings of this Gentleman, who is not content to
asperse my Writings, but has wounded, through my Sides, those eminent and
worthy Citizens, Mr. John Morphew, and Mr. Bernard Lintott.

The TATLER. [No 161.
-- Nunquam Libertas gratior exstat
Quam sub Rege pio. --

From Tuesday April 18. to Thursday April 20. 1710.
From my own Apartment, April 19.
I Was walking Two or Three Days ago in a very pleasing Retirement, and amusing
my self with the Reading of that ancient and beautiful Allegory, called, The
Table of Cebes. I was at last so tired with my Walk, that I sat down to rest my
self upon a Bench that stood in the Midst of an agreeable Shade. The Music of
the Birds, that filled all the Trees about me, lulled me asleep before I was
aware of it; which was followed by a Dream, that I impute in some Measure to
the foregoing Author, who had made an Impression upon my Imagination, and put
me into his own Way of Thinking.

I fancied my self among the Alps, and, as it is natural in a Dream, seemed
every Moment to bound from one Summit to another, till at last, after having
made this Airy Progress over the Tops of several Mountains, I arrived at the
very Center of those broken Rocks and Precipices. I here, methought, faw a
prodigious Circuit of Hills, that reached above the Clouds, and encompassed a
large Space of Ground, which I had a great Curiosity to look into. I thereupon
continued my former Way of traveling through a great Variety of Winter Scenes,
till I had gained the Top of these white Mountains, which seemed another Alps
of Snow. I looked down from hence into a spacious Plain, which was surrounded
on all Sides by this Mound of Hills, and which presented me with the most
agreeable Prospect I had ever seen. There was a greater Variety of Colors in
the Embroidery of the Meadows, a more lively Green in the Leaves and Grass, a
brighter Crystal in the Streams, than what I ever met with in any other
Region. The Light it self had something more shining and glorious in it than
that of which the Day is made in other Places. I was wonderfully astonished at
the Discovery of such a Paradise amidst the Wildness of those cold, hoary
Landskips which lay about it; but found at length, that this happy Region was
inhabited by the Goddess of Liberty; whose Presence softened the Rigours of the
Climate, enriched the Barrenness of the Soil, and more than supplied the
Absence of the Sun. The Place was covered with a wonderful Profusion of
Flowers, that without being disposed into regular Borders and Parterres, grew
promiscuously, and had a greater Beauty in their natural Luxuriancy and
Disorder, than they could have received from the Checks and Restraints of Art.
There was a River that arose out of the South Side of the Mountain, that by an
infinite Number of Turns and Windings, seemed to visit every Plant, and cherish
the several Beauties of the Spring, with which the Fields abounded. After
having run to and fro in a wonderful Variety of Meanders, as unwilling to leave
so charming a Place, it at last throws it self into the Hollow of a Mountain,
from whence it passes under a long Range of Rocks, and at length rises in that
Part of the Alps where the Inhabitants think it the First Source of the Rhone.
This River, after having made its Progress through those free Nations,
stagnates in a huge Lake at the leaving of them, and no sooner enters into the
Regions of Slavery, but runs through them with an incredible Rapidity, and
takes its shortest Way to the Sea.

I descended into the happy Fields that lay beneath me, and in the midst of
them, beheld the Goddess fitting upon a Throne. She had nothing to enclose her
but the Bounds of her own Dominions, and nothing over her Head but the Heavens.
Every Glance of her Eye cast a Track of Light where it fell, that revived the
Spring, and made all Things smile about her. My Heart grew cheerful at the
Sight of her, and as she looked upon me, I found a certain Confidence growing
in me, and such an inward Resolution as I never felt before that Time.

On the Left Hand of the Goddess sat the Genius of a Commonwealth, with the Cap
of Liberty on her Head, and in her Hand a Wand like that with which a Roman
Citizen used to give his Slaves their Freedom. There was something mean and
vulgar, but at the same Time exceeding bold and daring, in her Air; her Eyes
were full of Fire, but had in them such Casts of Fierceness and Cruelty, as
made her appear to me rather dreadful than amiable. On her Shoulders she wore a
Mantle, on which there was wrought a great Confusion of Figures. As it flew in
the Wind, I could not discern the particular Design of them, but saw Wounds in
the Bodies of some, and Agonies in the Faces of others; and over one Part of it
could read in Letters of Blood, The Ides of March.

On the Right Hand of the Goddess was the Genius of Monarchy. She was clothed
in the whitest Ermin, and wore a Crown of the purest Gold upon her Head. In her
Hand she held a Scepter like that which is born by the British Monarchs. A
Couple of tame Lions lay crouching at her Feet: Her Countenance had in it a
very great Majesty without any Mixture of Terror: Her Voice was like the Voice
of an Angel, filled with so much Sweetness, and accompanied with such an Air of
Condescension, as tempered the Awfulness of her Appearance, and equally
inspired Love and Veneration into the Hearts of all that beheld her.

In the Train of the Goddess of Liberty were the several Arts and Sciences, who
all of them flourished underneath her Eye. One of them in particular made a
greater Figure than any of the rest, who held a Thunderbolt in her Hand, which
had the Power of melting, piercing, or breaking every Thing that stood in its
Way. The Name of this Goddess was Eloquence.

There were Two other dependent Goddesses, who made a very conspicuous Figure
in this blissful Region. The First of them was seated upon an Hill, that had
every Plant growing out of it, which the Soil was in its own Nature capable of
producing. The Other was seated in a little Island, that was covered with
Groves of Spices, Olives, and Orange Trees; and in a Word, with the Products of
every Foreign Clime. The Name of the First was Plenty, of the Second Commerce.
The First leaned her Right Arm upon a Plough, and under her Left held a huge
Horn, out of which she poured a whole Autumn of Fruits. The Other wore a
rostral Crown upon her Head, and kept her Eyes fixed upon a Compass.

I was wonderfully pleased in ranging through this delightful Place, and the
more so, because it was not incumbered with Fences and Enclosures; till at
length, methoughts, I sprung from the Ground, and pitched upon the Top of an
Hill, that presented several Objects to my Sight which I had not before taken
Notice of. The Winds that passed over this flowery Plain, and through the Tops
of the Trees which were full of Blossoms, blew upon me in such a continued
Breeze of Sweets, that I was wonderfully charmed with my Situation. I here saw
all the inner Declivities of that great Circuit of Mountains, whose Outside was
covered with Snow, overgrown with huge Forests of Fir-Trees, which indeed are
very frequently found in other Parts of the Alps. These Trees were inhabited
by Storks, that came thither in great Flights from very distant Quarters of the
World. Methoughts, I was pleased in my Dream to see what became of these Birds,
when, upon leaving the Places to which they make an annual Visit, they rise in
great Flocks so high till they are out of Sight; and for that Reason have been
thought by some modern Philosophers to take a Flight to the Moon. But my Eyes
were soon diverted from this Prospect, when I observed Two great Gaps that led
through this Circuit of Mountains, where Guards and Watches were posted Day and
Night. Upon Examination I found, that there were Two formidable Enemies
encamped before each of these Avenues, who kept the Place in a perpetual Alarm,
and watched all Opportunities of invading it.

Tyranny was at the Head of one of these Armies, dressed in an Eastern Habit,
and grasping in her Hand an Iron Scepter. Behind her was Barbarity, with the
Garb and Complexion of an Ethiopian; Ignorance with a Turbant upon her Head;
and Persecution holding up a bloody Flag, embroidered with Flower-de-Luces.
These were followed by Oppression, Poverty, Famine, Torture, and a dreadful
Train of Appearances, that made me tremble to behold them. Among the Baggage of
this Army, I could discover Racks, Wheels, Chains, and Gibbets, with all the
Instruments Art could invent to make humane Nature miserable.

Before the other Avenue I saw Licentiousness, dressed in a Garment not unlike
the Polish Cassock, and leading up an whole Army of Monsters, such as Clamor,
with a hoarse Voice and a Hundred Tongues; Confusion, with a misshapen Body and
a Thousand Heads; Impudence, with a Forehead of Brass; and Rapine, with Hands
of Iron. The Tumult, Noise, and Uproar in this Quarter, were so very great,
that they disturbed my Imagination more than is consistent with Sleep, and by
that Means awaked me.

The TATLER. [No 162.
Tertius e Caelo cecidit Cato.
Juv. Sat. 2.
From Thursd. April 20. to Saturd. April 22. 1710.
From my own Apartment, April 21.
IN my younger Years I used many Endeavors to get a Place at Court, and indeed
continued my Pursuits till I arrived at my Grand Climacterick: But at length
altogether despairing of Success, whether it were for Want of Capacity,
Friends, or due Application, I at last resolved to erect a new Office, and for
my Encouragement, to place my self in it. For this Reason, I took upon me the
Title and Dignity of Censor of Great Britain, reserving to my self all such
Perquisites, Profits, and Emoluments, as should arise out of the Discharge of
the said Office. These in Truth have not been inconsiderable; for, besides
those Weekly Contributions which I receive from John Morphew, and those annual
Subscriptions which I propose to my self from the most elegant Part of this
great Island, I daily live in a very comfortable Affluence of Wine, Stale Beer,
Hungary Water, Beef, Books, and Marrow-Bones, which I receive from many
well-disposed Citizens; not to mention the Forfeitures which accrue to me from
the several Offenders that appear before me on Court-Days.

Having now enjoyed this Office for the Space of a Twelvemonth, I shall do what
all good Officers ought to do, take a Survey of my Behavior, and consider
carefully, whether I have discharged my Duty, and acted up to the Character
with which I am invested. For my Direction in this Particular, I have made a
narrow Search into the Nature of the old Roman Censors, whom I must always
regard, not only as my Predecessors, but as my Patterns in this great
Employment; and have several Times asked my own Heart with great Impartiality,
Whether Cato will not bear a more venerable Figure among Posterity than
Bickerstaff.

I find the Duty of the Roman Censor was Twofold. The first Part of it
consisted in making frequent Reviews of the People, in casting up their
Numbers, ranging them under their several Tribes, disposing them into proper
Classes, and subdividing them into their respective Centuries.

In Compliance with this Part of the Office, I have taken many curious Surveys
of this great City. I have collected into particular Bodies the Dappers and the
Smarts, the Natural and Affected Rakes, the Pretty Fellows and the very pretty
Fellows. I have likewise drawn out in several distinct Parties your Pedants and
Men of Fire, your Gamesters and Politicians. I have separated Cits from
Citizens, Free-Thinkers from Philosophers, Wits from Snuff-Takers, and
Duellists from Men of Honor. I have likewise made a Calculation of Esquires,
not only considering the several distinct Swarms of them that are settled in
the different Parts of this Town, but also that more rugged Species that
inhabit the Fields and Woods, and are often found in Pot-houses, and upon
Haycocks.

I shall pass the Soft Sex over in Silence, having not yet reduced them into
any tolerable Order; as likewise the softer Tribe of Lovers, which will cost me
a great deal of Time, before I shall be able to cast them into their several
Centuries and Sub-divisions.

The Second Part of the Roman Censor's Office was to look into the Manners of
the People, and to check any growing Luxury, whether in Diet, Dress, or
Building. This Duty likewise I have endeavored to discharge, by those
wholesome Precepts which I have given my Countrymen in regard to Beef and
Mutton, and the severe Censures which I have passed upon Ragouts and Frigacies.
There is not, as I am informed, a Pair of Red Heols to be seen within Ten Miles
of London, which I may likewise ascribe, without Vanity, to the becoming Zeal
which I expressed in that Particular. I must own, my Success with the Petticoat
is not so great: But as I have not yet done with it, I hope I shall in a little
Time put an effectual Stop to that growing Evil. As for the Article of
Building, I intend hereafter to enlarge upon it, having lately observed several
Warehouses, nay private Shops, that stand upon Corinthian Pillars, and whole
Rows of Tin Pots showing themselves, in order to their Sale, through a
Sash-Window.

I have likewise followed the Example of the Roman Censors, in punishing
Offenses according to the Quality of the Offender. It was usual for them to
expel a Senator who had been guilty of great Immoralities out of the
Senate House, by omitting his Name when they called over the List of his
Brethren. In the same Manner, to remove effectually several worthless Men who
stand possessed of great Honors, I have made frequent Draughts of dead Men out
of the vicious Part of the Nobility, and given them up to the new Society of
Upholders, with the necessary Orders for their Interrment. As the Roman Censors
used to punish the Knights or Gentlemen of Rome, by taking away their Horses
from them, I have seized the Canes of many Criminals of Figure, whom I had just
Reason to animadvert upon. As for the Offenders among the Common People of
Rome, they were generally chastised, by being thrown out of a higher Tribe, and
placed in one which was not so honorable. My Reader cannot but think I have
had an Eye to this Punishment, when I have degraded one Species of Men into
Bombs, Squibs, and Crackers, and another into Drums, Bass-Viols, and Bagpipes;
not to mention whole Packs of Delinquents whom I have shut up in Kennels, and
the new Hospital which I am at present erecting, for the Reception of those my
Countrymen who give me but little Hopes of their Amendment, on the Borders of
Moor-Fields. I shall only observe upon this last Particular. That since some
late Surveys I have taken of this Island, I shall think it necessary to enlarge
the Plan of the Buildings which I design in this Quarter.

When my great Predecessor Cato the Elder stood for the Censorship of Rome,
there were several other Competitors who offered themselves; and to get an
Interest among the People, gave them great Promises of the mild and gentle
Treatment which they would use toward them in that Office. Cato on the
contrary told them, he presented himself as a Candidate, because he knew the
Age was sunk in Immorality and Corruption; and that if they would give him
their Votes, he would promise them to make use of such a Strictness and
Severity of Discipline as should recover them out of it. The Roman Historians,
upon this Occasion, very much celebrate the Publick-Spiritedness of that
People, who chose Cato for their Censor, notwithstanding his Method of
recommending himself. I may in some Measure extol my own Countrymen upon the
same Account, who, without any Rrspect to Party, or any Application from my
self, have made such generous Subscriptions for the Censor of Great Britain, as
will give e Magnificence to my old Age, and which I esteem more than I would
any Post in Europe of an Hundred Times the Value. I shall only add, That upon
looking into my Catalogue of Subscribers, which I intend to print
Alphabetically in the Front of my Lucubrations, I find the Names of the
greatest Beauties and Wits in the whole Island of Great Britain, which I only
mention for the Benefit of any of them who have not yet subscribed, it being my
Design to close the Subscription in a very short Time.

The TATLER. [No 163.
Idem Inficeto est inficetior Rure
Simul Poemata attigit; neque idem unquam
Aeque est beatus, ac Poema cum scribit:
Tam gaudet in se, tamque se ipse miratur.
Nimirum idem omnes fallimur; neque est quisquam
Quem non in aliqua re videre Soffenum
Possis. --
Catul. de Suffeno.
From Saturd. April 22. to Tuesd. April 25. 1710.
Will's Coffee-house, April 24.
I Yesterday came hither about Two Hours before the Company generally make
their Appearance, with a Design to read over all the Newspapers; but upon my
sitting down, I was accosted by Ned Softly, who saw me from a Corner in the
other End of the Room, where I found he had been writing something. Mr.
Bickerstaff, says he, I observe by a late Paper of yours, that you and I are
just of a Humor; for you mu^t know, of all Impertinencies, there is nothing
which I so much hate as News. I never read a Gazette in my Life; and never
trouble my Head about our Armies, whether they win or lose, or in what Part of
the World they he encamped. Without giving me Time to reply, he drew a Paper of
Verses out of his Pocket, telling me, That he had something which would
entertain me more agreeably, and that he would desire my Judgment upon every
Line, for that we had Time enough before us till the Company came in.

Ned Softly is a very pretty Poet, and a great Admirer of easy Lines. Waller is
his Favorite: And as that admirable Writer has the best and worst Verses of
any among our great English Poets, Ned Softly has got all the bad Ones without
Book, which he repeats upon Occasion, to show his Reading, and garnish his
Conversation. Ned is indeed a true English Reader, incapable of relishing the
great and masterly Strokes of this Art; but wonderfully pleased with the little
Gothic Ornaments of Epigrammatical Conceits, Turns, Points, and Quibbles,
which are so frequent in the most admired of our English Poets, and practiced
by those who want Genius and Strength to represent, after the Manner of the
Ancients, Simplicity in its natural Beauty and Perfection.

Finding my self unavoidably engaged in such a Conversation, I was resolved to
turn my Pain into a Pleasure, and to divert my self as well as I could with so
very odd a Fellow. You must understand, says Ned, that the Sonnet I am go ng to
read to you was written upon a Lady, wi^ showed me some Verses of her own
making, and is perhaps the best Poet of our Age. But you shall hear it. Upon
which he begun to read as follows:

To Mira, on her incomparable Poems. 1.
When dressed in Laurel Wreaths you shine,
And tune your soft melodious Notes,
You seem a Sister of the Nine,
Or Phoebus self in Petticoats.
2.
I fancy, when your Song you sing,
(Your Song you sing with so much Art)
Your Pen was plucked from Cupid's Wing;
For ah! it wounds me like his Dart.
Why, says I, this is a little Nosegay of Conceits, a very Lump of Salt: Every
Verse has something in it that piques; and then the Dart in the last Line is
certainly as pretty a Sting in the Tail of an Epigram (for so I think your
Critics call it) as ever entered into the Thought of a Poet. Dear Mr.
Bickerstaff, says he, shaking me by the Hand, every Body knows you to be a
Judge of these Things; and to tell you truly, I read over Roscommon's
Translation of Horace's Art of Poetry Three several Times, before I sat down to
write the Sonnet which I have shown you. But you shall hear it again, and pray
observe every Line of it, for not one of them shall pass without your
Approbation.

When dressed in Laurel Wreaths you shine.
That is, says he, when have your Garland on; when you are Writing Verses. To
which I replied, I know your Meaning: A Metaphor! The same, said he, and went
on.

And tune your soft melodious Notes.
Pray observe the Gliding of that Verse; there is scarce a Consonant in it: I
took Care to make it run upon Liquids. Give me your Opinion of it. Truly, said
I, I think it as good as the former. I am very glad to hear you say so, says
he; but mind the next.

You seem a Sister of the Nine.
That is, says he, you seem a Sister of the Muses; for if you look into ancient
Authors, you will find it was their Opinion, that there were Nine of them. I
remember it very well, said I; but pray proceed.

Or Phoebus self in Petticoats.
Phoebus, says he, was the God of Poetry. These little Instances, Mr.
Bickerstaff, show a Gentleman's Reading. Then to take off from the Air of
Learning, which Phoebus and the Muses have given to this first Stanza, you may
observe, how it falls all of a sudden into the Familiar; in Petticoats!

Or Phoebus self in Petticoats.
Let us now, says I, enter upon the Second Stanza. I find the First Line is
still a Continuation of the Metaphor.

I fancy, when your Song you sing,
It is very right, says he; but pray observe the Turn of Words in those Two
Lines. I was a whole Hour in adjusting of them, and have still a Doubt upon me,
Whether in the Second Line it should be, Your Song you sing; or, You sing your
Song? You shall hear them both: I fancy, when your Song you sing,
(Your Song you sing with so much Art.)
OR, I fancy, when your Song you sing,
You sing your Song with so much Art.


Truly, said I, the Turn is so natural either Way, that you have made me almost
giddy with it. Dear Sir, said he, grasping me by the Hand, you have a great
deal of Patience; but pray what do you think of the next Verse?

Your Pen was plucked from Cupid's Wing.
Think! says I; I think you have made Cupid look like a little Goose. That was
my Meaning, says he; I think the Ridicule is well enough hit off But we now
come to the last, which sums up the whole Matter:

For Ah! it wounds me like his Dart.
Pray how do you like that Ah! Does it not make a pretty Figure in that Place?
Ah! It looks as if I felt the Dart, and cried out at being pricked with it.

For Ah! it wounds me like his Dart.
My Friend Dick Easy, continued he, assured me, he would rather have written
that Ah! than to have been the Author of the Aeneid. He indeed objected, that I
made Mira's Pen like a Quill in one of the Lines, and like a Dart in the other.
But as to that -- Oh! as to that, says I, it is but supposing Cupid to be like
a Porcupine, and his Quills and Darts will be the same Thing. He was going to
embrace me for the Hint; but half a Dozen Critics coming into the Room, whose
Faces he did not like, he conveyed the Sonnet into his Pocket, and whispered me
in the Ear, he would show it me again as soon as his Man had written it over
fair.

The TATLER. [No 164.
Qui sibi promittit Cives, Urbem, sibi Curae
Imperium fore, and Italiam, and Delubra Deorum,
Quo Patre sit natus, number ignot a Matre inhonestus,
Omnes Mortales curare and quaerere cogit.
Hor.
From Tuesd. April 25. to Thursd. April 27. 1710.
From my own Apartment April 26.
I HAVE lately been looking over the many Pacquets of Letters which I have
received from all Quarters of Great Britain, as well as from Foreign Countries,
since my entering upon the Office of Censor, and indeed am very much surprised
to see so great a Number of them, and pleased to think that I have so far
increased the Revenue of the Post Office. As this Collection will grow daily, I
have digested it into several Bundles, and made proper Endorsements on each
particular Letter, it being my Design, when I lay down the Work that I am now
engaged in, to erect a Paper Office, and give it to the Public.

I could not but make several Observations upon reading over the Letters of my
Correspondents: As first of all, on the different Tastes that reign in the
different Parts of this City. I find, by the Approbations which are given me,
That I am seldom famous on the same Days on both Sides of Temple Bar; and that
when I am in the greatest Repute within the Liberties, I dwindle at the Court
End of the Town. Sometimes I sink in both these Places at the same Time; but
for my Comfort, my Name has then been up in the Districts of Wapping and
Rotherhithe. Some of my Correspondents desire me to be always serious, and
others to be always merry. Some of them entreat me to go to Bed and fall into a
Dream, and like me better when I am asleep than when I am awake: Others advise
me to fit all Night upon the Stars, and be more frequent in my Astrological
Observations; for that a Vision is not properly a Lucubration. Some of my
Readers thank me for filling my Paper with the Flowers of Antiquity, others
desire News from Flanders. Some approve my Criticisms on the Dead, and others
my Censures on the Living. For this Reason, I once resolved in the new Edition
of my Works, to range my several Papers under distinct Heads, according as
their principal Design was to benefit and instruct the different Capacities of
my Readers, and to follow the Example of some very great Authors, by writing at
the Head of each Discourse, Ad Aulam, Ad Academiam, Ad Populum, Ad Clerum.

There is no Particular in which my Correspondents of all Ages, Conditions,
Sexes, and Complexions, universally agree, except only in their Thirst after
Scandal. It is impossible to conceive how many have recommended their
Neighbors to me upon this Account, or how unmercifully I have been abused by
several unknown Hands, for not publishing the secret Histories of Cuckoldom
that I have received from almost every Street in Town.

It would indeed be very dangerous for me to read over the many Praises and
Eulogiums which come Post to me from all the Corners of the Nation, were they
not mixed with many Checks, Reprimands, Scurrilities, and Reproaches, which
several of my good-natured Countrymen cannot forbear sending me, though it
often costs them Twopence or a Groat before they can convey them to my Hands:
So that sometimes when I am put into the best Humor in the World, after having
read a Panegyric upon my Performance, and looked upon my self as a Benefactor
to the British Nation, the next Letter perhaps I open, begins with, You old
Doting Scoundrel -- Are not you a sad Dog -- Sirrah, you deserve to have your
Nose slit. And the like ingenious Conceits. These little Mortifications are
necessary to surpass that Pride and Vanity which naturally arise in the Mind of
a received Author, and enable me to bear the Reputation which my courteous
Readers bestow upon me, without becoming a Coxcomb by it. It was for the same
Reason, that when a Roman General entered the City in the Pomp of a Triumph,
the Commonwealth allowed of several little Drawbacks to his Reputation, by
conniving at such of the Rabble as repeated Libels and Lampoons upon him within
his Hearing, and by that Means engaged his Thoughts upon his Weakness and
Imperfections, as well as on the Merits that advanced him to so great Honors.
The Conqueror however was not the less esteemed for being a Man in some
Particulars, because he appeared as a God in others.

There is another Circumstance in which my Countrymen have dealt very
perversely with me; and that is, in Searching not only into my own Life, but
also into the Lives of my Ancestors. If there has been a Blot in my Family for
these Ten Generations, it has been discovered by some or other of my
Correspondents. In short, I find the ancient Family of the Bickerstaffs has
suffered very much through the Malice and Prejudice of my Enemies. Some of them
twit me in the Teeth with the Conduct of my Aunt Margery: Nay, there are some
who have been so disingenuous, as to throw Maud the Milk-Maid into my Dish,
notwithstanding I my self was the first who discovered that Alliance. I reap
however many Benefits from the Malice of these my Enemies, as they let me see
my own Faults, and give me a View of my self in the worst Light; as they hinder
me from being blown up by Flattery and Self-Conceit: as they make me keep a
watchful Eye over my own Actions, and at the same Time make me cautious how I
talk of others, and particularly of my Friends and Relations, or value my self
upon the Antiquity of my Family.

But the most formidable Part of my Correspondents are those whose Letters are
filled with Threats and Menaces. I have been treated so often after this
Manner, that not thinking it sufficient to fence well, in which I am now
arrived at the utmost Perfection, and carry Pistols about me, which I have
always tucked within my Girdle; I several Months since made my Will, settled my
Estate, and took Leave of my Friends, looking upon my self as no better than a
dead Man. Nay, I went so far as to write a long Letter to the most intimate
Acquaintance I have in the World, under the Character of a departed Person,
giving him an Account of what brought me to that untimely End, and of the
Fortitude with which I met it. This Letter being too long for the present
Paper, I intend to print it by it self very suddenly; and at the same Time I
must confess, I took my Hint of it from the Behavior of an old Soldier in the
Civil Wars, who was Corporal of a Company in a Regiment of Foot, about the same
Time that I my self was a Cadet in the King's Army.

This Gentleman was taken by the Enemy; and the Two Parties were upon such
Terms at that Time, that we did not treat each other as Prisoners of War, but
as Traitors and Rebels. The poor Corporal being condemned to die, wrote a
Letter to his Wife when under Sentence of Execution. He writ on the Thursday,
and was to be executed on the Friday: But considering that the Letter would not
come to his Wife's Hands till Saturday, the Day after Execution, and being at
that Time more scrupulous than ordinary in speaking exact Truth, he formed his
Letter rather according to the Posture of his Affairs when she should read it,
than as they stood when he sent it: Though it must be confessed, there is a
certain Perplexity in the Style of it, which the Reader will easily pardon,
considering his Circumstances.

Dear Wife,
HOping you are in good Health, as I am at this present Writing, This is to let
you know, that Yesterday, between the Hours of Eleven and Twelve, I was hanged,
drawn and quartered. I died very penitently, and every Body thought my Case
very hard. Remember me kindly to my poor Fatherless Children.

Yours till Death, W. B.


It so happened, that this honest Fellow was relieved by a Party of his
Friends, and had the Satisfaction to see all the Rebels hanged who had been his
Enemies. I must not omit a Circumstance which exposed him to Raillery his whole
Life after. Before the Arrival of the next Post, that would have set all Things
clear, his Wife was married to a Second Husband, who lived in the peaceable
Possession of her; and the Corporal, who was a Man of plain Understanding, did
not care to stir in the Matter, as knowing that she had the News of his Death
under his own Hand, which she might have produced upon Occasion.

The TATLER. [No 165.
From Thursd. April 27. to Saturd. April 29. 1710.
From my own Apartment, April 28.
IT has always been my Endeavor to distinguish between Realities and
Appearances, and to separate true Merit from the Pretense to it. As it shall
ever be my Study to make Discoveries of this Nature in Humane Life, and to
settle the proper Distinctions between the Virtues and Perfections of Mankind,
and those false Colors and Resemblances of them that shine alike in the Eyes
of the Vulgar; so I shall be more particularly careful to search into the
various Merits and Pretenses of the learned World. This is the more necessary,
because there seems to be a general Combination among the Pedants to extol one
another's Labors, and cry up one another's Parts; while Men of Sense, either
through that Modesty which is natural to them, or the Scorn they have for such
trifling Commendations, enjoy their Stock of Knowledge like a hidden Treasure,
with Satisfaction and Silence. Pedantry indeed in Learning is like Hypocrisy in
Religion, a Form of Knowledge without the Power of it, that attracts the Eyes
of the Common People, breaks out in Noise and Show, and finds its Reward not
from any inward Pleasure that attends it, but from the Praises and Approbations
which it receives from Men.

Of this shallow Species there is not a more importunate, empty, and conceited
Animal, than that which is generally known by the Name of a Critic. This, in
the common Acceptance of the Word, is one that, without entering into the
Sense and Soul of an Author, has a few general Rules, which, like mechanical
Instruments, he applies to the Works of every Writer, and as they quadrate with
them, pronounces the Author perfect or defective. He is Master of a certain Set
of Words, as Unity, Style, Fire, Phlegm, Easy, Natural, Turn, Sentiment, and the
like; which he varies, compounds, divides, and throws together, in every Part
of his Discourse, without any Thought or Meaning. The Marks you may know him by
are, an elevated Eye, and dogmatical Brow, a positive Voice, and a Contempt for
every Thing that comes out, whether he has read it or not. He dwells altogether
in Generals. He praises or dispraises in the Lump. He shakes his Head very
frequently at the Pedantry of Universities, and bursts into Laughter when you
mention an Author that is not known at Will's. He has formed his Judgment upon
Homer, Horace, and Virgil, not from their own Works, but from those of Rapin
and Bossu. He knows his own Strength so well, that he never dares praise any
Thing in which he has not a French Author for his Voucher.

With these extraordinary Talents and Accomplishments, Sir Timothy Tittle puts
Men in Vogue, or condemns them to Obscurity, and sits as Judge of Life and
Death upon every Author that appears in Public. It is impossible to represent
the Pangs, Agonies, and Convulsions, which Sir Timothy expresses in every
Feature of his Face, and Muscle of his Body, upon the reading of a bad Poet.

About a Week ago I was engaged at a Friend's of mine in an agreeable
Conversation with his Wife and Daughters, when in the Height of our Mirth, Sir
Timothy, who makes Love to my Friend's eldest Daughter, came in amongst us
puffing and blowing as if he had been very much out of Breath. He immediately
called for a Chair, and desired Leave to sit down, without any further
Ceremony. I asked him, Where he had been? Whether he was out of Order? He only
replied, That he was quite spent, and fell a cursing in Soliloquy. I could hear
him cry, A Wicked Rogue -- An execrable Wretch -- Wat there ever such a Monster
-- The young Ladies upon this began to be affrighted, and asked, Whether any
one had hurt him? He answered nothing, but still talked to himself. To lay the
first Scene, says he, in St. James 's Park, and the last in Northamptonshire!
Is that all, says I? Then I suppose you have been at the Rehearsal of a Play
this Morning. Been! says he; I have been at Northampton, in the Park, in a
Lady's Bed Chamber, in a Dining Room, every where; the Rogue has led me such a
Dance -- Though I could scarce forbear laughing at his Discourse, I told him I
was glad it was no worse, and that he was only Metaphorically weary. In short,
Sir, says he, the Author has not observed a single Unity in his whole Play; the
Scene shifts in every Dialogue; the Villain has hurried me up and down at such
a Rate, that I am tired off my Legs. I could not but observe with some
Pleasure, that the young Lady whom he made Love to, conceived a very just
Aversion toward him, upon seeing him so very passionate in Trifles. And as she
had that natural Sense which makes her a better Judge than a Thousand Critics,
she began to rally him upon this foolish Humor. For my Part, says she, I never
knew a Play take that was written up to your Rules, as you call them. How
Madam! says he, Is that your Opinion? I am sure you have a better Taste. It is a
pretty Kind of Magic, says she, the Poets have, to transport an Audience from
Place to Place without the Help of a Coach and Horses. I could travel round the
World at such a Rate. It Is such an Entertainment as an Enchantress finds when
she fancies her self in a Wood, or upon a Mountain, at a Feast, or a Solemnity;
though at the same Time she has never stirred out of her Cottage. Your Simile,
Madam, says Sir Timothy, is by no Means just. Pray, says she, let my Similies
pass without a Criticism. I must confess, continued she, (for I found she was
resolved to exasperate him) I laughed very heartily at the last new Comedy
which you found so much Fault with. But Madam, says he, you ought not to have
laughed; and I defy any one to show me a single Rule that you could laugh by.
Ought not to laugh! says she: Pray who should hinder me. Madam, says he, there
are such People in the World as Rapin, Dacier, and several others, that ought
to have spoiled your Mirth. I have heard, says the young Lady, That your great
Critics are always very bad Poets: I fancy there is as much Difference between
the Works of one and the other, as there is between the Carriage of a Dancing
Master and a Gentleman. I must confess, continued she, I would not be troubled
with so fine a Judgment as yours is; for I find you feel more Vexation in a bad
Comedy, than I do in a deep Tragedy. Madam, says Sir Timothy, That is not my
Fault, they should learn the Art of Writing. For my Part, says the young Lady,
I should think the greatest Art in your Writers of Comedies is to please. To
please! says Sir Timothy, and immediately fell a laughing. Truly, says she,
that is my Opinion. Upon this, he composed his Countenance, looked upon his
Watch, and took his Leave.

I hear that Sir Timothy has not been at my Friend's House since this notable
Conference, to the great Satisfaction of the young Lady, who by this Means has
got rid of a very impertinent Fop.

I must confess, I could not but observe, with a great deal of Surprise, how
this Gentleman, by his ill Nature, Folly, and Affectation, has made himself
capable of suffering so many imaginary Pains, and looking with such a senseless
Severity upon the common Diversions of Life.

The TATLER. [No 166.
-- Dicenda, Tacenda, Loquutus.
Hor.
From Saturd. April 29. to Tuesd. May 2. 1710.
White's Chocolate-house, May 1.
THE World is so overgrown with Singularities in Behavior, and Method of
Living, that I have no sooner laid before Mankind the Absurdity of one Species
of Men, but there starts up to my View some new Sect of Impertinents that had
before escaped Notice. This Afternoon, as I was talking with fine Mrs.
Sprightly's Porter, and desiring Admittance upon an extraordinary Occasion, it
was my Fate to be spied by Tom Modely riding by in his Chariot. He did me the
Honor to stop, and asked, What I did there of a Monday? I answered, That I had
Business of Importance, which I wanted to communicate to the Lady of the House.
Tom is one of those Fools who look upon Knowledge of the Fashion to be the only
Liberal Science; and was so rough as to tell me, That a well-bred Man would as
soon call upon a Lady (who keeps a Day) at Midnight, as on any Day but that on
which she professes being at Home. There are Rules and Decorums which are never
to be transgressed by those who understand the World; and he who offends in
that Kind, ought not to take it ill if he is turned away, even when he sees the
Person look out at her Window whom he enquires for. Nay, said he, my Lady
Dimple is so positive in this Rule, that she takes it for a Piece of good
Breeding and Distinction to deny her self with her own Mouth. Mrs. Comma, the
great Scholar, insists upon it; and I my self have heard her assert, That a
Lord's Porter, or a Lady's Woman, cannot be said to lie in that Case, because
they act by Instruction; and their Words are no more their own, than those of a
Puppet.

He was going on with this Ribaldry, when on a sudden he looked on his Watch,
and said, ho had Twenty Visits to make, and drove away without further
Ceremony. I was then at Leisure to reflect upon the Tastless Manner of Life,
which a Set of idle Fellows lead in this Town, and spend Youth it self with
less Spirit, than other Men do their old Age. These Expletives in Humane
Society, though they are in themselves wholly insignificant, become of some
Consideration when they are mixed with others. I am very much at a Loss how to
define, or under what Character, Distinction, or Denomination, to place them,
except you give me Leave to call them the Order of the Insipids. This Order is
in its Extent like that of the Jesuits, and you see of them in every Way of
Life, and in every Profession. Tom Modely has long appeared to me at the Head
of this Species. By being habitually in the best Company, he knows perfectly
well when a Coat is well cut, or a Periwig well mounted. As soon as you enter
the Place where he is, he tells the next Man to him who is your Tailor, and
judges of you more from the Choice of your Periwig-maker than of your Friend.
His Business in this World was to be well dressed; and the greatest
Circumstance that is to be recorded in his Annals is, That he wears Twenty
Shirts a Week. Thus, without ever speaking Reason among the Men, or Passion
among the Women, he is every where well received; and without any one Man's
Esteem, he has every Man's Indulgence.

This Order has produced great Numbers of tolerable Copiers in Painting, good
Rhimers in Poetry, and harmless Projectors in Politics. You may see them at
first Sight grow acquainted by Sympathy, insomuch that one who had not studied
Nature, and did not know the true Cause of their sudden Familiarities, would
think that they had some secret Intimation of each other, like the Free Masons.
The other Day at Will's, I heard Modely, and a Critic of the same Order, show
their equal Talents with great Delight. The Learned Insipid was commending
Racine's Turns; the Genteel Insipid, Devillier's Curls.

These Creatures, when they are not forced into any particular Employment, for
want of Idea's in their own Imaginations, are the constant Plague of all they
meet with by Enquiries for News and Scandal, which makes them the Heroes of
Visiting Days, where they help the Design of the Meeting, which is to pass away
that odious Thing called Time, in Discourses too trivial to raise any
Reflections which may put well-bred Persons to the Trouble of Thinking.

From my own Apartment, May 1.
I was looking out of my Parlour-Window this Morning, and receiving the Honors
which Margery, the Milk-maid to our Lane, was doing me, by dancing before my
Door with the Plate of half her Customers on her Head, when Mr. Clayton, the
Author of Arsinoe, made me a Visit, and desired me to insert the following
Advertisement in my ensuing Paper.

The Pastoral Masque composed by Mr. Clayton, Author of Arsinoe, will be
performed on Wednesday the 3d Instant, in the great Room at York-Buildings.
Tickets are to be had at White's Chocolate-house, St. James's Coffee-house in
St. James's street, and Young Man's Coffee-house.

Note, The Tickets delivered out for the 27th of April, will be taken then.

When I granted his Request, I made one to him, which was, That the Performers
should put their Instruments in Tune before the Audience came in; for that I
thought the Resentment of the Eastern Prince, who, according to the old Story,
took Tuning for Playing, to be very just and natural. He was so civil, as not
only to promise that Favor, but also to assure me, that he would order the
Heels of the Performers to be muffled in Cotton, that the Artists in so polite
an Age as ours, may not intermix with their Harmony a Custom which so nearly
resembles the Stamping Dances of the West-Indians or Hottentots.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
A Bass-Viol of Mr. Bickerstaff's Acquaintance, whose Mind and Fortune do not
very exactly agree, proposes to set himself to Sale by Way of Lottery. Ten
Thousand Pounds is the Sum to be raised, at Threepence a Ticket, in
Consideration that there are more Women who are willing to be married than that
can spare a greater Sum. He has already made over his Person to Trustees for
the said Money to be forthcoming, and ready to take to Wife the fortunate
Woman that wins him.

N. B. Tickets are given out by Mr. Charles Lilly, and Mr. John Morphew. Each
Adventurer must be a Virgin, and subscribe her Name to her Ticket.

Whereas the several Churchwardens of most of the Parishes within the Bills of
Mortality, have in an earnest Manner applied themselves by Way of Petition, and
have also made a Presentment, of the vain and loose Deportment during Divine
Service, of Persons of too great Figure in all their said Parishes, for their
Reproof. And whereas it is therein set forth, That by Salutations given each
other, Hints, Shrugs, Ogles, Playing of Fans, and feeling with Canes at their
Mouths, and other wanton Gesticulations, their whole Congregation appears
rather a Theatrical Audience, than an House of Devotion. It is hereby ordered,
That all Canes, Cravats, Bosom-Laces, Muffs, Fans, Snuff-Boxes, and all other
Instruments made use of to give Persons unbecoming Airs, shall be immediately
forfeited and sold; and of the Sum arising from the Sale thereof, a Ninth Part
shall be paid to the Poor, and the rest to the Overseers.

The TATLER. [No 167.
Seguius irritant Animos dimissa per Aures,
Quam quae sunt Oculis submisso fidelibus. --
Hor.
From Tuesday May 2. to Thursday May 4. 1710.
From my own Apartment, May 2.
HAving received Notice, That the famou^ Actor Mr. Betterton was to be interred
thi^ Evening in the Cloisters near Westminster-Abbey^ I was resolved to walk
thither, and see the la^ Office done to a Man whom I had always ver^ much
admired, and from whose Action I had r^ceived more strong Impressions of what
is gre^ and noble in Humane Nature, than from the A^guments of the most solid
Philosophers, or the D^scriptions of the most charming Poets I had ev^ read. As
the rude and untaught Multitude are no Way wrought upon more effectually than
by seeing public Punishments and Executions; so Men of Letters and Education
feel their Humanity most forcibly exercised, when they attend the Obsequies of
Men who had arrived at any Perfection in Liberal Accomplishments. Theatrical
Action is to be esteemed as such, except it be objected, that we cannot call
that an Art which cannot be attained by Art. Voice, Stature, Motion, and other
Gifts, must be very bountifully bestowed by Nature, or Labor and Industry will
but push the unhappy Endeavourer, in that Way, the further off his Wishes.

Such an Actor as Mr. Betterton ought to be recorded with the same Respect as
Roscius among the Romans. The greatest Orator has thought fit to quote his
Judgment, and celebrate his Life. Roscius was the Example to all that would
form themselves into proper and winning Behavior. His Action was so well
adapted to the Sentiments he expressed, that the Youth of Rome thought they
wanted only to be virtuous to be as graceful in their Appearance as Roscius.
The Imagination took a lovely Impression of what was great and good; and they
who never thought of setting up for the Arts of Imitation, became themselves
imitable Characters.

There is no Humane Inventions so aptly calculated for the forming a Freeborn
People as that of a Theater. Tully reports, That the celebrated Player of whom
I am speaking used frequently to say, The Perfection of an Actor is only to
become what he is doing. Young Men, who are too unattentive to receive
Lectures, are irresistibly taken with Performances. Hence it is, that I
extremely lament the little Relish the Gentry of this Nation have at present
for the just and noble Representations in some of our Tragedies. The Opera's,
which are of late introduced, can leave no Trace behind them that can be of
Service beyond the present Moment. To sing and to dance, are Accomplishments
very few have any Thoughts of practicing; but to speak justly, and move
gracefully, is what every Man thinks he does perform, or wishes he did.

I have hardly a Notion, that any Performer of Antiquity could surpass the
Action of Mr. Betterton in any of the Occasions in which he has appeared on our
Stage. The wonderful Agony which he appeared in, when he examined the
Circumstance of the Handkerchief in Othello; the Mixture of Love that intruded
upon his Mind upon the innocent Answers Desdemona makes, betrayed in his
Gesture such a Variety and Vicissitude of Passions, as would admonish a Man to
be afraid of his own Heart, and perfectly convince him, that it is to stab it,
to admit that worst of Daggers, Jealousy. Whoever reads in his Closet this
admirable Scene, will find that he cannot, except he has as warm an Imagination
as Shakespeare himself, find any but dry, incoherent, and broken Sentences: But
a Reader that has seen Bettterton act it, observes there could not be a Word
added; that longer Speech had been unnatural, nay impossible, in Othello's
Circumstances. The charming Passage in the same Tragedy, where he tells the
Manner of winning the Affection of his Mistress, was urged with so moving and
graceful an Energy, that while I walked in the Cloisters, I thought of him with
the same Concern as if I waited for the Remains of a Person who had in real
Life done all that I had seen him represent. The Gloom of the Place and faint
Lights before the Ceremony aypeared contributed to the melancholy Disposition I
wa^ in; and I began to be extremely afflicted, tha^ Brutus and Cassius had any
Difference; that Hotspur's Gallantry was so unfortunate; and that the Mirth and
good Humor of Falstaff, could no^ exempt him from the Grave. Nay, this
Occasion in me, who look upon the Distinctions amongst Men to be merely
Scenical, raised Reflections upon the Emptiness of all Humane Perfection and
Greatness in general; and I could not but regret, that the Sacred Heads which
lie buried in the Neighborhood of this little Portion of Earth in which my
poor old Friend is deposited, are returned to Dust as well as he, and that
there is no Difference in the Grave between the Imaginary and the Real Monarch.
This made me say of Humane Life it self with Mackbeth:

To Morrow, to Morrow, and to Morrow,
Creeps in a stealing Pace from Day to Day,
To the last Moment of recorded Time!
And all our Yesterdays have lighted Fools
To their eternal Night! Out, out short Candle!
Life's but a walking Shadow, a poor Player
That struts and frets his Hour upon the Stage,
And then is heard no more.
The Mention I have here made of Mr. Betterton, for whom I had, as long as I
have known any Thing, a very great Esteem and Gratitude for the Pleasure he
gave me, can do him no Good; but it may possibly be of Service to the unhappy
Woman he has left behind him, to have it known, that this great Tragedian was
never in a Scene half so moving, as the Circumstances of his Affairs created at
his Departure. His Wife, after the Cohabitation of Forty Years in the strictest
Amity, has long pined away with a Sense of his Decay, as well in his Person as
his little Fortune; and in Proportion to that, she has herself decayed both in
her Health and Reason. Her Husband's Death, added to her Age and Infirmities,
would certainly have determined her Life, but that the Greatness of her
Distress has been her Relief, by a present Depravation of her Senses. This
Absence of Reason is her best Defense against Age, Sorrow, Poverty, and
Sickness. I dwell upon this Account so distinctly, in Obedience to a certain
great Spirit, who hides her Name, and has by Letter applied to me to recommend
to her some Object of Compassion, from whom she may be concealed.

This, I think, is a proper Occasion for exerting such heroic Generosity; and
as there is an ingenuous Shame in those who have known better Fortune to be
reduced to receive Obligations, as well as a becoming Pain in the truly
Generous to receive Thanks in this Case, both those Delicacies are preserved;
for the Person obliged is as incapable of knowing her Benefactress, as her
Benefactress is unwilling to be known by her.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Whereas it has been signified to the Censor, That under the Pretense that he
has encouraged the Moving Picture, and particularly admired the Walking Statue,
some Persons within the Liberties of Westminster have vended Walking Pictures,
insomuch that the said Pictures have within few Days after Sales by Auction
returned to the Habitation of their first Proprietors; that Matter has been
narrowly locked into, and Orders are given to Pacolet to take Notice of all who
are concerned in such Frauds, with Directions to draw their Pictures, that they
may be hanged in Effigy, in Terrorem of all Auctions for the future.

The TATLER. [No 168.
From Thursday May 4. to Saturday May 6. 1710.
From my own Apartment, May 5.
NEver was Man so much teazed, or suffered half the Uneasiness, as I have done
this Evening, between a Couple of Fellows with whom I was unfortunately engaged
to sup, where there were also several others in Company. One of them is the
most invincibly impudent, and the other as incorrigibly absurd. Upon hearing my
Name, the Man of Audacity, as he calls himself, began to assume an awkward Way
of Reserve, by Way of Ridicule upon me as a Censor, and said, He must have a
Care of his Behavior, for there would Notes be writ upon all that should pass.
The Man of Freedom and Ease (for such the other thinks himself) asked me,
Whether my Sister Jenny was breeding or not? After they had done with me, they
were impertinent to a very smart, but well-bred Man, who stood his Ground very
well, and let the Company see they ought, but could not be out of Countenance.
I look upon such a Defense as a real good Action; for while he received their
Fire, there was a modest and worthy young Gentleman sat secure by him, and a
Lady of the Family at the same Time, guarded against the nauseous Familiarity
^f the one, and the more painful Mirth of the ^ther. This Conversation, where
there were Thousand Things said not worth repeating, ^ade me consider with my
self, How it is that ^en of these disagreeable Characters often go ^eat Lengths
in the World, and seldom fail of ^tstripping Men of Merit; nay, succeed so
well, that with a Load of Imperfections on their Heads, they go on in
Opposition to general Disesteem, while they who are every Way their Superiors,
languish away their Days, though possessed of the Approbation and Good Will of
all who know them.

If we would examine into the Secret Springs of Action in the Impudent and the
Absurd, we shall find, though they bear a great Resemblance in their Behavior,
that they move upon very different Principles. The Impudent are pressing, though
they know they are disagreeable; the Absurd are importunate, because they think
they are acceptable, Impudence is a Vice, and Absurdity a Folly. Sir Francis
Bacon talks very agreeably upon the Subject of Impudence. He takes Notice, That
the Orator being asked, What was the First, Second, and Third Requisite, to
make a fine Speaker? Still answered, Action. This, said he, is the very outward
Form of Speaking, and yet it is what with the Generality has more Force than
the most consummate Abilities. Impudence is to the rest to Mankind of the same
Use which Action is to Orators.

The Truth is, the Gross of Men are governed more by Appearances than
Realities, and the Impudent Man in his Air and Behavior undertakes for himself
that he has Ability and Merit, while the Modest or Diffident gives himself up
as one who is possessed of neither. For this Reason, Men of Front carry Things
before 'em with little Opposition, and make so skilful an Use of their Talent,
that they can grow out of Humor like Men of Consequence, and be sour, and make
their Dissatisfaction do them the same Service as Desert. This Way of Thinking
has often furnished me with an Apology for great Men who confer Favors on the
Impudent. In carrying on the Government of Mankind, they are not to consider
what Men they themselves approve in their Closets and private Conversations,
but what Men will extend themselves furthest, and more generally pass upon the
World for such as their Patrons want in such and such Statious, and
consequently take so much Work off the Hands of those who employ them.

Far be it that I should attempt to lessen the Acceptance which Men of this
Character meet with in the World; but I humbly propose only, that they who have
Merit of a different Kind, would accomplish themselves in some Degree with this
Quality of which I am now treating. Nay, I allow these Gentlemen to press as
forward as they please in the Advancement of their Interests and Fortunes, but
not to intrude upon others in Conversation also: Let them do what they can with
the Rich and the Great, as far as they are suffered, but let them not interrupt
the Easy and Agreeable. They may be useful as Servants in Ambition, but never
as Associates in Pleasure. However, as I would still drive at something
instructive in every Lucubration, I must recommend it to all Men who feel in
themselves an Impulse toward attempting laudable Actions, to acquire such a
Degree of Assurance, as never to lose the Possession of themselves in public
or private, so far as to be incapable of acting with a due Decorum on any
Occasion they are called to. It is a mean Want of Fortitude in a good Man, not
to be able to do a virtuous Action with as much Confidence as an impudent
Fellow does an ill One. There is no Way of mending such false Modesty, but by
laying it down for a Rule, That there is nothing shameful but what is criminal.

The Jesuits, an Order whose Institution is perfectly calculated for making a
Progress in the World, take Care to accomplish their Disciples for it, by
breaking them of all impertinent Bashfulness, and accustoming them to a ready
Performance of all indifferent Things. I remember in my Travels, when I was
once at a public Exercise in one of their Schools, a young Man made a most
admirable Speech, with all the Beauty of Action, Cadence of Voice, and Force of
Argument imaginable, in Defense of the Love of Glory. We were all enamoured
with the Grace of the Youth, as he came down from the Desk, where he spoke, to
present a Copy of his Speech to the Head of the Society. The Principal received
it in a very obliging Manner, and bid him go to the Marketplace and fetch a
Joint of Meat, for he should dine with him. He bowed, and in a Trice the Orator
returned, full of the Sense of Glory in this Obedience, and with the best
Shoulder of Mutton in the Market.

This Treatment capacitates them for every Scene of Life. I therefore recommend
it to the Consideration of all who have the Instruction of Youth, Which of the
Two is the more inexcusable, he who does every Thing by the mere Force of his
Impudence, or who performs nothing through the Oppression of his Modesty? In a
Word, it is a Weakness not to be able to attempt what a Man thinks he ought,
and there is no Modesty but in Self-Denial.

P. S. Upon my coming Home I received the following Petition and Letter:

The humble Petition of Sarah Lately;
Shows,
THat your Petitioner has been one of those Ladies who has had fine Things
constantly spoken to her in general Terms, and lived, during her most blooming
Years, in daily Expectation of Declarations of Marriage, but never had one made
to her.

That she is now in her Grand Climacterick; which being above the Space of Four
Virginities, accounting at 15 Years each,

Your Petitioner most humbly prays, That in the Lottery for the Bass-Viol she
may have Four Tickets, in Consideration that her Single Life has been
occasioned by the Inconstancy of her Lovers, and not through the Cruelty or
Frowardness of your Petitioner.

And your Petitioner shall, etc.
May 3. 1710. Mr. Bickerstaff,
ACcording to my Fancy, you took a much better Way to dispose of a Bass Viol in
Yesterday's Paper than you did in your Table of Marriage. I desire the Benefit
of a Lottery for my self too -- The Manner of it I leave to your own
Discretion: Only if you can -- allow the Tickets at above Five Farthings
apiece. Pray accept of one Ticket for your Trouble, and I wish you may be the
fortunate Man that wins.

Your very humble Servant till then, Isabella Kit.


I must own the Request of the aged Petitioner to be founded upon a very
undeserved Distress; and since she might, had she had Justice done her, been
Mother of many Pretenders to this Prize, instead of being one her self, I do
readily grant her Demand; but as for the Proposal of Mrs. Isabella Kit, I
cannot project a Lottery for her, 'till I have Security she will surrender her
self to the Winner.

The TATLER. [No 169.
O Rus! Quando ego te aspiciam, quandoqui licebit
Nunc veterum Libris, nunc Somno, and inertibus Horis,
Ducere sollicitae Jucunda Oblivia Vitae?
Hor.
From Saturd. May 6. to Tuesd. May 9. 1710.
From my own Apartment, May 8.
THE Summer Season now approaching, several of our Family have invited me to
pass away a Month or Two in the Country, and indeed nothing could be more
agreeable to me than such a Recess, did I not consider that I am by Two Quarts
a worse Companion than when I was last among my Relations: And I am admonished
by some of our Club, who have lately visited Staffordshire, that they drink at
a greater Rate than they did at that Time. As every Soil does not produce every
Fruit or Tree, so every Vice is not the Growth of every Kind of Life; and I
have, ever since I could think, been astonished, that Drinking should be the
Vice of the Country. If it were possible to add to all our Senses, as we do to
that of Sight, by Perspectives, we should methinks more particularly labor to
improve them in the midst of the Variety of beauteous Objects which Nature has
produced to entertain us in the Country; and do we in that Place destroy the
Use of what Organs we have? As for my Part, I cannot but lament the Destruction
that has been made of the Wild Beasts of the Field, when I see large Tracts of
Earth possessed by Men who take no Advantage of their being rational, but lead
mere Animal Lives, making it their whole Endeavor to kill in themselves all
they have above Beasts; to wit, the Use of Reason, and Taste of Society. It is
frequently boasted in the Writings of Orators and Poets, That it is to
Eloquence and Poesy we owe that we are drawn out of Woods and Solitudes into
Towns and Cities, and from a wild and savage Being become acquainted with the
Laws of Humanity and Civility. If we are obliged to these Arts for so great
Service, I could wish they were employed to give us a Second Turn; that as they
have brought us to dwell in Society, (a Blessing which no other Creatures know)
so they would persuade us, now they have settled us, to lay out all our
Thoughts in surpassing each other in those Faculties in which only we excel
other Creatures. But it is at present so far otherwise, that the Contention
seems to be, who shall be most eminent in Performances wherein Beasts enjoy
greater Abilities than we have. I Will undertake, were the Butler and Swineherd,
at any true Esquire's in Great Britain, to keep and compare Accounts of what
Wash is drank up in so many Hours in the Parlour and the Pigsty, it would
appear, the Gentleman of the House gives much more to his Friends than his Hogs.

This, with many other Evils, arises from the Error in Men's Judgments, and not
making true Distinctions between Persons and Things. It is usually thought,
That a few Sheets of Parchment, made before a Male and Female of wealthy Houses
come together, give the Heirs and Descendants of that Marriage Possession of
Lands and Tenements; but the Truth is, there is no Man who can be said to be
Proprietor of an Estate, but he who knows how to enjoy it. Nay, it shall never
be allowed, that the Land is not a Waste, when the Master is uncultivated.
Therefore, to avoid Confusion, it is to be noted, that a Peasant with a great
Estate is but an Incumbent, and that he must be a Gentleman to be a Landlord. A
Landlord enjoys what he has with his Heart, an Incumbent with his Stomach.
Gluttony, Drunkenness, and Riot, are the Entertainments of an Incumbent;
Benevolence, Civility, Social and Humane Virtues, the Accomplishments of a
Landlord. Who, that has any Passion for his native Country, does not think it
worse than conquered, when so large Diversions of it are in the Hands of
Salvages, that know no Use of Property but to be Tyrants; or Liberty, but to be
unmannerly? A Gentleman in a Country Life enjoys Paradise with a Temper fit for
it; a Clown is cursed in it with all the cutting and unruly Passions Man could
be tormented with when he was expelled from it.

There is no Character more deservedly esteemed than that of a Country
Gentleman, who understands the Station in which Heaven and Nature have placed
him. He is Father to his Tenants, and Patron to his Neighbors, and is more
superior to those of lower Fortune by his Benevolence than his Possessions. He
justly divides his Time between Solitude and Company, so as to use the one for
the other. His Life is spent in the good Offices of an Advocate, a Referee, a
Companion, a Mediator, and a Friend. His Counsel and Knowledge are a Guard to
the Simplicity and Innocence of those of lower Talents, and the Entertainment
and Happiness of those of equal. When a Man in a Country Life has this Turn, as
it is to be hoped Thousands have, he lives in a more happy Condition than any
is described in the Pastoral Descriptions of Poets, or the vainglorious
Solitudes recorded by Philosophers.

To a Thinking Man it would seem prodigious, that the very Situation in a
Country Life does not incline Men to a Scorn of the mean Gratifications some
take in it. To stand by a Stream, naturally lulls the Mind into Composure and
Reverence; to walk in Shades, diversifies that Pleasure; and a bright Sunshine
makes a Man consider all Nature in Gladness, and himself the happiest Being in
it, as he is the most conscious of her Gifts and Enjoyments. It would be the
most impertinent Piece of Pedantry imaginable to form our Pleasures by
Imitation of others. I will not therefore mention Scipio and Laelius, who are
generally produced on this Subject as Authorities for the Charms of a Rural
Life. He that does not feel the Force of agreeable Views and Situations in his
own Mind, will hardly arrive at the Satisfactions they bring from the
Reflections of others. However, they who have a Taste that Way, are more
particularly inflamed with Desire when they see others in the Enjoyment of it,
especially when Men carry into the Country a Knowledge of the World as well as
of Nature. The Leisure of such Persons is endeared and refined by Reflection
upon Cares and Inquietudes. The Absence of past Labors doubles present
Pleasures, which is still augmented, if the Person in Solitude has the
Happiness of being addicted to Letters. My Cousin Frank Bickerstaff gives me a
very good Notion of this sort of Felicity in the following Letter.

SIR,
I Write this to communicate to you the Happiness I have in the Neighborhood
and Conversation of the noble Lord, whose Health you enquired after in your
last. I have bought that little Hovel which borders upon his Royalty; but am so
far from being oppressed by his Greatness, that I who know no Envy, and he who
is above Pride, mutually recommend our selves to each other by the Difference
of our Fortunes. He esteems me for being so well pleased with a little, and I
admire him for enjoying so handsomely a great deal. He has not the little Taste
of observing the Color of a Tulip, or the Edging of a Leaf of Box, but
rejoices in open Views, the Regularity of this Plantation, and the Wildness of
another as well as the Fall of a River, the Rising of a Promontory, and all
other Objects fit to entertain a Mind like his, that has been long versed in
great and public Amusements. The Make of the Soul is as much seen in Leisure
as in Business. He has long lived in Courts, and been admired in Assemblies, so
that he has added to Experience a most charming Eloquence; by which he
communicates to me the Idea's of my own Mind upon the Objects we meet with, so
agreeably, that with his Company in the Fields, I at once enjoy the Country,
and a Landscape of it. He is now altering the Course of Canals and Rivulets, in
which he has an Eye to his Neighbor's Satisfaction, as well as his own. He
often makes me Presents by turning the Water into my Grounds, and sends me Fish
by their own Streams. To avoid my Thanks, he makes Nature the Instrument of his
Bounty, and does all good Offices so much with the Air of a Companion, that his
Frankness hides his own Condescension, as well as my Gratitude. Leave the World
to it self, and come see us.

Your Affectionate Cousin, Francis Bickerstaff.


The TATLER. [No 170.
Fortuna saevo laeta negotio,
Et Ludum insolentem ludere pertinax,
Transmutat incertos Honores,
Nunc mihi, nunc alii, benigna.
Hor.
From Tuesday May 9. to Thursday May 11. 1710.
From my own Apartment, May 10.
HAving this Morning spent some Time in reading on the Subject of the
Vicissitude of humane Life, I laid aside my Book, and began to ruminate on the
Discourse which raised in me those Reflections. I believed it a very good
Office to the World, to sit down and show others the Road in which I am
experienced by my Wanderings and Errors. This is Seneca's Way of Thinking, and
he had half convinced me, how dangerous it is to our ^ue Happiness and
Tranquillity to fix our Minds upon any Thing which is in the Power of Fortune.
It is excusable only in Animals who have not the Use of Reason, to be catched
by Hooks and Baits. Wealth, Glory, and Power, which the ordinary People look up
at with Admiration, the Learned and Wise know to be only so many Snares laid to
enslave them. There is nothing further to be sought for with Earnestness, than
what will cloth and feed us. If we pamper our selves in our Diet, or give our
Imaginations a Loose in our Desires, the Body will no longer obey the Mind. Let
us think no further than to defend our selves against Hunger, Thirst, and Cold.
We are to remember, that every Thing else is despicable, and not worth our
Care. To want little is true Grandeur, and very few Things are great to a great
Mind. Those who form their Thoughts in this Manner, and abstract themselves
from the World, are out of the Way of Fortune, and can look with Contempt both
on her Favors and her Frowns. At the same Time, they who separate themselves
from the immediate Commerce with the busy Part of Mankind, are still beneficial
to them, while by their Studies and Writings they recommend to them the small
Value which ought to be put upon what they pursue with so much Labor and
Disquiet. Whilst such Men are thought the most idle, they are the most usefully
employed. They have all Things, both Humane and Divine, under Consideration. To
be perfectly free from the Insults of Fortune, we should arm our selves with
their Reflections. We should learn, That none but intellectual Possessions are
what we can properly call our own. All Things from without are but borrowed.
What Fortune gives us, is not ours; and whatever she gives, she can take away.

It is a common Imputation to Seneca, that though he declaimed with so much
Strength of Reason, and a Stoical Contempt of Riches and Power, he was at the
same Time one of the richest and most powerful Men in Rome. I know no Instance
of his being insolent in that Fortune, and can therefore read his Thoughts on
those Subjects with the more Deference. I will not give Philosophy so poor a
Look, as to say it cannot live in Courts; but I am of Opinion, that it is there
in the greatest Eminence, when amidst the Affluence of All the World can
bestow, and the Add esses of a Crowd who follow him for that Reason, a Man can
think both of himself and those about him abstracted from these Circumstances.
Such a Philosopher is as much above an Anchorite, as a wise Matron, who passes
through the World with Innocence, is preferable to the Nun who locks her self
up from it.

Full of these Thoughts I left my Lodgings, and took a Walk to the Court End of
the Town; and the Hurry and Busy Faces I met with about Whitehall, made me form
to my self Ideas of the different Prospects of all I saw, from the Turn and
Cast of their Countenances. All, methought, had the same Thing in View, but
prosecuted their Hopes with a different Air: Some showed an unbecoming
Eagerness, some a surly Impatience, some a winning Deference, but the
Generality a servile Complaisance.

I could not but observe, as I roved about the Offices, That all who were still
but in Expectation, murmured at Fortune; and all who had obtained their Wishes,
immediately began to say, there was no such Being. Each believed it an Act of
blind Chance that any other Man was preferred, but owed only to Service and
Merit what he had obtained himself. It is the Fault of studious Men to appear
in public with too contemplative a Carriage; and I began to observe, that my
Figure, Age, and Dress, made me particular: For which Reason I thought it
better to remove a studious Countenance from among busy ones, and take a Turn
with a Friend in the Privy-Garden.

When my Friend was alone with me there, Isaac, said he, I know you came Abroad
only to Moralize and make Observations, and I will carry you hard by, where you
shall see all that you have your self considered or read in Authors, or
collected from Experience, concerning blind Fortune and irresistible Destiny,
illustrated in real Persons and proper Mechanisms. The Graces, the Muses, the
Fates, all the Beings which have a good or ill Influence upon Humane Life, are,
you will say, very justly figured in the Persons of Women; and where I am carrying
you, you will see enough of that Sex together, in an Employment which will have so
important an Effect upon those who are to receive their Manufacture, as will
make them be respectively called Deities or Furies, as their Labor shall prove
disadvantagious or successful to their Votaries. Without waiting for my Answer,
he carried me to an Apartment contiguous to the Banqueting House, where there
were placed at Two long Tables a large Company of young Women, in decent and
agreeable Habits, making up Tickets for the Lottery appointed by the
Government. There walked between the Tables a Person who presided over the
Work. This Gentlewoman seemed an Emblem of Fortune, she commanded as if
unconcerned in their Business; and though every Thing was performed by her
Direction, she did not visibly interpose in Particulars. She seemed in Pain at
our near Approach to her, and most to approve us, when we made her no Advances.
Her Height, her Mein, her Gesture, her Shape, and her Countenance, had
something that spoke both Familiarity and Dignity. She therefore appeared to me
not only a Picture of Fortune, but of Fortune as I liked her; which made me
break out in the following Words:

MADAM,
I Am very glad to see the Fate of the many who now languish in Expectation of
what will be the Event of your Labors in the Hands of one who can act with so
impartial an Indifference. Pardon me, that have often seen you before, and have
lost you for Want of the Respect due to you. Let me beg of you, who have both
the funishing and turning of that Wheel of Lots, to be unlike the rest of your
Sex, repulse the Forward and the Bold, and favor the Modest and the Humble. I
know you fly the Importunate, but smile no more on the Careless. Add not to the
Coffers of the Usurer, but give the Power of Bestowing to the Generous.
Continue his Wants who cannot enjoy or communicate Plenty; but turn away his
Poverty, who can bear it with more Ease than he can see it in another.


ADVERTISEMENT.
Whereas Philander signified to Clarinda by Letter bearing Date Thursday 12 a
Clock, That he had lost his Heart by a Shot from her Eyes, and desired she
would condescend to meet him the same Day at Eight in the Evening at Rosamond's
Pond, faithfully protesting, that in case she would not do him that Honor, she
might see the Body of the said Philander the next Day floating on the said Lake
of Love, and that he desired only Three Sighs upon View of his said Body: It is
desired, if he has not made away with himself accordingly, that he would
forthwith show himself to the Coroner of the City of Westminster; or Clarinda,
being an old Offender, will be found guilty of wilful Murder.

The TATLER. [No 171.
Alter Rixatus de lana saepe caprina
Propugnat nugis Armatus. --
Hor.
From Thursday May 11. to Saturday May 13. 1710.
Grecian Coffee-house, May 12.
IT has happened to be for some Days the Deliberation at the Learned Board
in this House, whence Honor and Title had its first Original. Timoleon, who is
very particular in his Opinions, but is thought particular for no other Cause
but that he acts against depraved Custom, by the Rules of Nature and Reason, in
a very handsome Discourse gave the Company to understand, That in those Ages
which first degenerated from Simplicity of Life, and Natural Justice, the Wise
among them thought it necessary to inspire Men with the Love of Virtue, by
giving them who adhered to the Interests of Innocence and Truth, some
distinguishing Name to raise them above the common Level of Mankind. This Way
of fixing Appellations of Credit upon eminent Merit, was what gave Being to
Titles and Terms of Honor. Such a Name, continued he, without the Qualities
which should give a Man Pretense to be exalted above others, does but turn him
to Jest and Ridicule. Should one see another cudgelled, or scurvily treated, Do
you think a Man so used would take it kindly to be called Hector, or Alexander?
Every Thing must bear a Proportion with the outward Value that is set upon it;
or instead of being long had in Veneration, that very Term of Esteem will
become a Word of Reproach. When Timoleon had done speaking, Urbanus pursued the
same Purpose, by giving an Account of the Manner in which the Indian Kings, who
were lately in Great Britain, did Honor to the Person where they lodged. They
were placed, said he, in an handsome Apartment, at an Upholsterer's in
King Street, Covent Garden. The Man of the House, it seems, had been very
observant of them, and ready in their Service. These just and generous Princes,
who act according to the Dictates of natural Justice, thought it proper to
confer some Dignity upon their Landlord before they left his House. One of them
had been sick during his Residence there, and having never before been in a
Bed, had a very great Veneration for him who made that Engine of Repose, so
useful and so necessary in his Did ress. It was consulted among the Four
Princes' by what Name to dignify his great Me^ and Services. The Emperor of the
Mohocks, and the other Three Kings, stood up, and in that Posture recounted the
Civilities they had received, and particularly repeated the Care which was
taken of their Sick Brother. This, in their Imagination, who are used to know
the Injuries of Weather, and the Vicissitudes of Cold and Heat, gave them very
great Impressions of a skilful Upholsterer, whose Furniture was so well
contrived for their Protection on such Occasions. It is with these less
instructed (I will not say less knowing) People, the Manner of doing Honor, to
impose some Name significant of the Qualities of the Person they distinguish,
and the good Offices received from him. It was therefore resolved, to call
their Landlord Cadaroque, which is the Name of the strongest Fort in their Part
of the World. When they had agreed upon the Name, they sent for their Landlord,
and as he entered into their Presence, the Emperor of the Mohocks taking him by
the Hand, called him Cadaroque. After which the other Three Princes repeated
the same Word and Ceremony.

Timoleon appeared much satisfied with this Account, and having a Philosophic
Turn, began to argue against the Modes and Manners of those Nations which we
esteem polite, and express himself with Disdain at our unusual Method of
calling such as are Strangers to our Innovations, barbarous. I have, says he,
so great a Deference for the Distinction given by these Princes, that Cadaroque
shall be my Upholsterer. -- He was going on, but the intended Discourse was
interrupted by Minucio who sat near him, a small Philosopher, who is also
somewhat of a Politician; one of those who sets up for Knowledge by Doubting,
and has no other Way of making himself considerable, but by contradicting all
he hears said. He has, besides much Doubt and Spirit of Contradiction, a
constant Suspicion as to State Affairs. This accomplished Gentleman, with a
very awful Brow, and a Countenance full of Weight, told Timoleon, That it was a
great Misfortune Men of Letters seldom looked into the Bottom of Things. Will
any Man, continued he, persuade me, that this was not from the Beginning to the
End a concerted Affair? Who can convince the World, that Four Kings shall come
over here, and lie at the Two Crowns and Cushion, and one of them fall sick,
and the Place be called King Street, and all this by mere Accident? No, no: To
a Man of very small Penetration, it appears, that Tee Ye Neen He Ga Row,
Emperor of the Mohocks, was prepared for this Adventure beforehand. I do not
care to contradict any Gentleman in his Discourse; but I must say, however, Sa
Ga Yeath Rua Geth Ton, and E Tow Oh Koam, might be surprised in this Matter;
nevertheless, He Nec Yeth Taw No Row knew it before he set Foot on the English
Shore.

Timoleon looked steadfastly at him for some Time, then shaked his Head, paid
for his Tea, and marched off. Several others who sat round him, were in their
Turns attacked by this ready Disputant. A Gentleman who was at some Distance,
happened in Discourse to say it was Four Miles to Hammersmith. I must beg your
Pardon, says Minucio, when we say a Place is so far off, we do not mean exactly
from the very Spot of Earth we are in, but from the Town where we are; so that
you must begin your Account from the End of Piccadilly; and if you do so, I Will
lay any Man Ten to One, it is not above Three good Miles off. Another, about
Minucio's Level of Understanding, began to take him up in this important
Argument, and maintained, That considering the Way from Pimlico at the End of
St. James's Park, and the Crossing from Chelsea by Earl's- Court, he would
stand to it, that it was full Four Miles. But Minucio replied with great
Vehemence, and seemed so much to have the better of the Dispute, that this
Adversary quitted the Field, as well as the other. I sat till I saw the Table
almost all vanished, where, for Want of Discourse, Minucio asked me, How I did?
To which I answered, Very well. That Is very much, said he; I assure you, you
look paler than ordinary. Nay, thought I, if he will not allow me to know whether
I am well or not, there is no staying for me neither. Upon which I took my
Leave, pondering as I went Home at this strange Poverty of Imagination, which
makes Men run into the Fault of giving Contradiction. They want in their Minds
Entertainment for themselves or their Company, and therefore build all they
speak upon what is started by others; and since they cannot improve that
Foundation, they strive to destroy it. The only Way of dealing with these
People is, to answer in Monosyllables, or by Way of Question. When one of them
tells you a Thing that he thinks extraordinary, I go no further than, Say you
so, Sir? Indeed! Heyday! Or, Is it come to that! These little Rules, which
appear but silly in the Repetition, have brought me with great Tranquillity to
this Age. And I have made it an Observation, that as Assent is more agreeable
than Flattery, so Contradiction is more odious than Calumny.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Mr. Bickerstaff's Aereal Messenger has brought him a Report of what passed at
the Auction of Pictures which was in Somerset House Yard on Monday last, and
finds there were no Screens present, but all transacted with great Justice.

N. B. All false Buyers at Auctions being employed only to hide others, are
from this Day forward to be known in Mr. Bickerstaff's Writings by the Word
Screens.

The TATLER. [No 172.
Quod quisque vitet, nunquam Homini satis
Cautum est in Horas. --
Hor.
From Saturd. May 13. to Tuesd. May 16. 1710.
From my own Apartment, May 15.
WHEN a Man is in a serious Mood, and ponders upon his own Make, with a
Retrospect to the Actions of his Life, and the many fatal Miscarriages in it,
which he owes to ungoverned Passions, he is then apt to say to himself, That
Experience has guarded him against such Errors for the future: But Nature often
recurs in Spite of his best Resolutions, and it is to the very End of our Days
a Struggle between our Reason and our Temper, which shall have the Empire over
us. Hewever, this is very much to be helped by Circumspection, and a constant
Alarm against the first Onsets of Passion. As this is in general a necessary
Care to make a Man's Life easy and agreeable to himself, so it is more
particularly the Duty of such as are engaged in Friendship and more near
Commerce with others. Those who have their Joys, have also their Griefs in
Proportion, and none can extremely exalt or depress Friends, but Friends. The
harsh Things which come from the rest of the World, are received and repulsed
with that Spirit which every honest Man bears for his own Vindication; but
Unkindness in Words or Actions among Friends, affect us at the first Instant in
the inmost Recesses of our Souls. Indifferent People, if I may so say, can
wound us only in heterogeneous Parts, maim us in our Legs or Arms; but the
Friend can make no Pass but at the Heart it self. On the other Side, the most
impotent Assistance, the mere well Wishes of a Friend, gives a Man Constancy
and Courage against the most prevailing Force of his Enemies. It is here only a
Man enjoys and suffers to the Quick. For this Reason, the most gentle Behavior
is absolutely necessary to maintain Friendship in any Degree above the common
Level of Acquaintance. But there is a Relation of Life much more near than the
most strict and sacred Friendship, that is to say, Marriage. This Union is of
too close and delicate a Nature to be easily conceived by those who do not know
that Condition by Experience. Here a Man should, if possible, soften his
Passions; if not for his own Ease, in Compliance to a Creature formed with a
Mind of a quite different Make from his own. I am sure, I do not mean it an
Injury to Women, when I say there is a Sort of Sex in Souls. I am tender of
offending them, and know it is hard not to do it on this Subject; but I must go
on to say, That the Soul of a Man and that of a Woman, are made very unlike,
according to the Employments for which they are designed. The Ladies will
please to observe, I say, our Minds have different, not superior Qualities to
theirs. The Virtues have respectively a Masculine and a Feminine Cast. What we
call in Men Wisdom, is in Women Prudence. It is a Partiality to call one
greater than the other. A prudent Woman is in the same Class of Honor as a
wise Man, and the Scandals in the Way of both are equally dangerous. But to
make this State any Thing but a Burden, and not hang a Weight upon our very
Beings, it is very proper each of the Couple should frequently remember, that
there are many Things which grow out of their very Natures that are pardonable,
nay becoming, when considered as such, but without that Reflection must give
the quickest Pain and Vexation. To manage well a great Family, is as worthy an
Instance of Capacity, as to execute a great Employment; and for the Generality,
as Women perform the considerable Part of their Duties, as well as Men do
theirs; so in their common Behavior, those of ordinary Genius are not more
trivial than the common Rate of Men; and in my Opinion, the playing of a Fan is
every whit as good an Entertainment as the beating a Snuff Box.

But however I have rambled in this Libertine Manner of Writing by way of
Essay, I now sat down with an Intention to represent to my Readers, how
pernicious, how sudden, and how fatal Surprises of Passion are to the Mind of
Man; and that in the more intimate Commerces of Life they are most liable to
arise, even in our most sedate and indolent Hours. Occurrences of this Kind
have had very terrible Effects; and when one reflects upon 'em, we cannot but
tremble to consider what we are capable of being wrought up to against all the
Ties of Nature, Love, Honor, Reason, and Religion, though the Man who breaks
through them all, had, an Hour before he did so, a lively and virtuous Sense of
their Dictates. When unhappy Catastrophe's make up Part of the History of
Princes, and Persons who act in high Spheres, or are represented in the moving
Language, and well wrought Scenes of Tragedians, they do not fail of striking
us with Terror; but then they affect us only in a transient Manner, and pass
through our Imaginations, as Incidents in which our Fortunes are too humble to be
concerned, or which Writers form for the Ostentation of their own Force; or, at
most, as Things fit rather to exercise the Powers of our Minds, than to create
new Habits in them. Instead of such high Passages, I was thinking it would be
of great Use (if any Body could hit it) to lay before the World such Adventures
as befall Persons not exalted above the common Level. This, methought, would
better prevail upon the ordinary Race of Men, who are so prepossessed with
outward Appearances, that they mistake Fortune for Nature, and believe nothing
can relate to them that does not happen to such as live and look like
themselves.

The unhappy End of a Gentleman whose Story an Acquaintance of mine was just
now telling me, would be very proper for this End if it could be related with
all the Circumstances as I heard it this Evening; for it touched me so much,
that I cannot forbear entering upon it.

Mr. Eustace, a young Gentleman of a good Estate near Dublin in Ireland,
married a Lady of Youth, Beauty, and Modesty, and lived with her in general
with much Ease and Tranquillity; but was in his secret Temper impatient of
Rebuke: She is apt to fall into little Sallies of Passion, yet as suddenly
recalled by her own Reflection on her Fault, and the Consideration of her
Husband's Temper. It happened, as he, his Wife, and her Sister, were at Supper
together about Two Months ago, that in the Midst of a careless and familiar
Conversation, the Sisters fell into a little Warmth and Contradiction. He, who
was one of that Sort of Men who are never unconcerned at what passes before
them, fell into an outrageous Passion on the Side of the Sister. The Person
about whom they disputed was so near, that they were under no Restraint from
running into vain Repetitions of past Heats: On which Occasion all the
Aggravations of Anger and Distaste boiled up, and were repeated with the
Bitterness of exasperated Lovers. The Wife observing her Husband extremely
moved, began to turn it off, and rally him for interposing between Two People
who from their Infancy had been angry and pleased with each other every Half
Hour. But it descended deeper into his Thoughts, and they broke up with a
sullen Silence. The Wife immediately retired to her Chamber, whither her
Husband soon after followed. When they were in Bed, he soon dissembled a Sleep,
and she, pleased that his Thoughts were composed, fell into a real one. Their
Apartment was very distant from the rest of their Family, in a lonely Country
House. He now saw his Opportunity, and with a Dagger he had brought to Bed with
him, stabbed his Wife in the Side. She awaked in the highest Terror; but
immediately imagined it was a Blow designed for her Husband by Ruffians, began
to grasp him, and strove to awake and rouse him to defend himself. He still
pretended himself sleeping, and gave her a second Wound.

She now drew open the Curtains, and by the Help of Moonlight saw his Hand
lifted up to stab her. The Horror disarmed her from further Struggling; and he
enraged anew at being discovered, fixed his Poniard in her Bosom. As soon as he
believed he had dispatched her, he attempted to escape out of the Window: But
she, still alive, called to him not to hurt himself; for she might live. He was
so stung with the insupportable Reflection upon her Goodness and his own
Villainy, that he jumped to the Bed, and wounded her all over with as much Rage
as if every Blow was provoked by new Aggravations. In this Fury of Mind he fled
away. His Wife had still Strength to go to her Sister's Apartment, and give her
an Account of this wonderful Tragedy; but died the next Day. Some Weeks after,
an Officer of Justice, in attempting to seize the Criminal, fired upon him, as
did the Criminal upon the Officer. Both their Balls took Place, and both
immediately expired.

The TATLER. [No 173.
-- Sapientia prima est
Stultitia caruisse. --
Hor.
From Tuesday May 16. to Thursday May 18. 1710
Sheer-Lane, May 17.
WHEN I first began to learn to push this last Winter, my Master had a great
deal of Work upon his Hands to make me unlearn the Postures and Motions which I
had got by having ^n my younger Years practiced Back-Sword, with ^ little Eye
to the Single Falchion. Knock down, was the Word in the Civil Wars, and we
gene^ally added to this Skill the Knowledge of the Cornish Hug, as well as the
Grapple, to play with Hand and Foot. By this Means I was for defend^ng my Head
when the French Gentleman was making a full Pass at my Bosom, insomuch that he
^old me I was fairly killed Seven Times in one Morning, without having done my
Master any ^ther Mischief than one Knock on the Pate. This was a great
Misfortune to me; and I believe I ^ay say, without Vanity, I am the first who
ever ^shed so erroneously; and yet conquered the Pre^dice of Education so well,
as to make my Passes (...) clear, and recover Hand and Foot with that ^gility,
as I do at this Day. The Truth of it is, ^e first Rudiments of Education are
given very ^discreetly by most Parents, as much with Rela^on to the more
important Concerns of the Mind, (...) the Gestures of the Body. Whatever
Chil^en are designed for, and whatever Prospects the ^tune or Interest of their
Parents may give them in their future Lives, they are all promiscuously
instructed the same Way; and Horace and Virgil must be thrummed by a Boy as
well before he goes to an Apprenticeship as to the University. This ridiculous
Way of treating the Underaged of this Island has very often raised both my
Spleen and Mirth, but I think never both at once so much as to Day. A good
Mother of our Neighborhood made me a Visit with her Son and Heir, a Lad
somewhat above Five Foot, and wants but little of the Height and Strength of a
good Musquetier in any Regiment in the Service. Her Business was to desire I
would examine him, for he was far gone in a Book, the first Letters of which
she often saw in my Papers. The Youth produced it, and I found it was my Friend
Horace. It was very easy to turn to the Place the Boy was learning in, which
was the Fifth Ode of the First Book of Pyrrha. I read it over aloud, as well
because I am always delighted when I turn to the beautiful Parts of that
Author, as also to gain Time for considering a little how to keep up the
Mother's Pleasure in her Child, which I thought Barbarity to interrupt. In the
(...) Place I asked him, Who this same Pyrrhus was? He answered very readily,
She was the Wife of Pyrrhus, one of Alexander's Captains I lifted up my Hands.
The Mother courtesies -- Nay, says she, -- I knew you would stand in
Admiration. -- I assure you, continued she, for all he looks so tall, he is but
very young Pray ask him some more, never spare him. Win that I took the Liberty
to ask him, What was the Character of this Gentlewoman? He read the Three first
Verses:

Quis multa gracilis te Puer in rosa
Perfusus liquidis urget Odoribus
Grate, Pyrrha, sub Antro?
And very gravely told me, She lived at the Sign of the Rose in a Cellar. I
took Care to be very much astonished at the Lad's Improvements; but withal
advised her, as soon as possible, to take him from School, for he could learn
no more there. This very silly Dialogue was a lively Image of the impertinent
Method used in breeding Boys without Genius or Spirit, to the reading Things
for which their Heads were never framed. But this is the natural Effect of a
certain Vanity in the Minds of Parents, who are wonderfully delighted with the
Thought of breeding their Children to Accomplishments, which they believe
nothing but Want of the same Care in their own Fathers prevented them from
being Masters of. Thus it is, that the Part of Life most fir for Improvement,
is generally 'employed in a Method against the Bent of Nature; and a Lad of
such Parts as are fit for an Occupation, where there can be no Calls out of the
beaten Path, is Two or Three Years of his Time wholly taken up in knowing how
well Ovid's Mistress became such a Dress; how such a Nymph for her Cruelty was
changed into such an Animal; and how it is made generous in Aeneas to put
Turnus to Death. Gallantries that can no more come within the Occurrences of
the Lives of ordinary Men, than they can be relished by their Imaginations.
However, still the Humor goes on from one Generation to another; and the
Pastry-Cook here in the Lane the other Night told me, He would not yet take
away his Son from his Learning, but has resolved, as soon as he had a little
Smattering in the Greek, to put him Apprentice to a Soap-boyler. These wrong
Beginnings determine our Success in the World; and when our Thoughts are
originally falsely biassed, their Agility and Force do but carry us the further
out of our Way in Proportion to our Speed. But we are half Way our Journey when
we have got into the right Road. If all our Days were usefully employed, and we
did not set out impertinently, we should not have so many grotesque Proressors
in all the Arts of Life, but every Man would be in a proper and becoming Method
of distinguishing or entertaining himself suitably to what Nature designed him.
As they go on now, our Parents do not only force us upon what is against our
Talents, but our Teachers are also as injudicious in what they put us to learn.
I have hardly ever since suffered so much by the Charms of any Beauty, as I did
before I had a Sense of Passion, for not apprehending that the Smile of Lalage
was what pleased Horace; and I verily believe, the Stripes I suffered about
Digito male p rtinaci, has given that irreconcilable Aversion, which I shall
carry to my Grave, against Coquets.

As for the elegant Writer of whom I am talking, his Excellencies are to be
observed as they relate to the different Concerns of his Life; and he is always
to be looked upon as a Lover, a Courtier, or a Man of Wit. His admirable Odes
have numberless Instances of his Merit in each of these Characters. His
Epistles and Satyrs are full of proper Notices for the Conduct of Life in a
Court; and what we call Good Breeding, most agreeably intermixed with his
Morality. His Addresses to the Persons who favored him are so inimitably
engaging, that Augustus complained of him for so seldom writing to him, and
asked him, Whether he was afraid Posterity should read their Names together?
Now for the Generality of Men to spend much Time in such Writings, is as
pleasant a Folly as any he ridicules. Whatever the Crowd of Scholars may
pretend, if their Way of Life, or their own Imaginations, do not lead then to a
Taste of him, they may read, nay write, Fifty Volumes upon him, and be just as
they were when they began. I remember to have heard a great Painter say, There
are certain Faces for certain Painters, as well as certain Subjects for certain
Poets. This is as true in the Choice of Studies, and no one will ever relish an
Author thoroughly well, who would not have been fit Company for that Author had
they lived at the same Time. All others are Mechanics in Learning, and take
the Sentiments of Writers like Waiting-Servants, who report what passed at
their Masters Table; but debase every Thought and Expression, for want of the
Air with which they were uttered.

The TATLER. [No 174.
Quem mala Stultitia, aut quaecunque Inscitia Very,
Caecum agit, insanum Chrysippt Porticus, and Grex
Autumat --
Hor.
From Thursday May 18. to Saturday May 20. 1710
From my own Apartment, May 19.
THE Learned Scotus, to distinguish the Race of Mankind, gives every Individual
of that Species what he calls a Seity, something peculiar to himself, which
makes him different from all other Persons in the World. This Particularity
renders him either venerable or ridiculous, according as he uses his Talents,
which always grow out into Faults, or improve into Virtues. In the Office I
have undertaken, you are to observe, That I have hitherto presented only the
more insignificant and lazy Part of Mankind under the Denomination of Dead Men,
together with the Degrees toward Nonexistence, in which others can neither be
said to live or be defunct, but are only Animals merely dressed up like Men,
and differ from each other but as Flies do by a little Coloring or Fluttering
of their Wings. Now as our Discourses heretofore have chiefly regarded the
Indolent Part of the Species, it remains that we do Justice also upon the
impertinently Active and Enterprizing. Such as these I shall take particular
Care to place in safe Custody, and have used all possible Diligence to run up
my Edifice in Moorfields for that Service.

We who are adept in Astrology, can impute it to several Causes in the Planets,
That this Quarter of our great City is the Region of such Persons as either
never had, or have lost, the Use of Reason. It has indeed been Time out of Mind
the Receptacle of Fools as well as Madmen. The Care and Information of the
former I assign to other learned Men, who have for that End taken up their
Habitation in those Parts; as, among others, to the famous Dr. Trotter, and my
ingenious Friend Dr. Langham. These oraculous Proficients are Day and Night
employed in deep Searches, for the Direction of such as run astray after their
lost Goods: But at present they are more particularly serviceable to their
Country, in foretelling the Fate of such as have Chances in the Public
Lottery. Dr. Langham shows a peculiar Generosity on this Occasion, taking only
one Half-Crown for a Prediction, Eighteen Pence of which to be paid out of the
Prizes; which Method the Doctor is willing to comply with in Favor of every
Adventurer in the whole Lottery. Leaving therefore the whole Generation of such
Enquirers to such Litcrati as I have now mentioned, we are to proceed toward
Peopling our House, which we have erected with the greatest Cost and Care
imaginable.

It is necessary in this Place to premise, That the Superiority and Force of
Mind which is born with Men of great Genius; and which, when it falls in with a
noble Imagination, is called Poetical Fury, does not come under my
Consideration: but the Pretense to such an Impulse without natural Warmth,
shall be allowed a fit Object of this Charity; and all the Volumes written by
such Hands, shall be from Time to Time placed in proper Order upon the Rails of
the unhoused Booksellers within the District of the College, (who have long
inhabited this Quarter) in the same Manner as they are al eady disposed soon
after their Publication. I promise my self from these Writings my best Opiates
for those Patients, whose high Imaginations, and hot Spirits, have waked them
into Distraction. Their boiling Tempers are not to be wrought upon by my Gruels
and Julips, but must ever be employed, or appear to be so, or their Recovery
will be impracticable. I shall therefore make Use of such Poets as preserve so
constant a Mediocrity, as never to elevate the Mind into Joy, or depress it
into Sadness, yet at the same Time keep the Faculties of the Readers in
Suspense, though they introduce no Idea's of their own. By this Means, a
disordered Mind, like a broken Limb, will recover its Strength by the sole
Benefit of being out of Use, and lying without Motion. But as Reading is not an
Entertainment that can take up the full Time of my Patients, I have now in
Pension a proportionable Number of Story-Tellers, who are by Turns to walk
about the Galleries of the House, and by their Narrations second the Labors of
my pretty good Poets. There are among these Story-Tellers some that have so
earnest Countenances, and weighty Brows, that they will draw a Madman, even
when his Fit is just coming on, into a Whisper, and by the Force of Shrugs,
Nods, and busy Gestures, make him stand amazed so long as that we may have Time
to give him his Broth without Danger.

But as Fortune has the Possession of Men's Minds, a Physician may cure all the
sick People of ordinary Degree in the whole Town and never come into
Reputation. I shall therefore begin with Persons of Condition; and the first I
shall undertake, shall be the Lady Fidget, the general Visitant, and Will
Voluble, the fine Talker. These Persons shall be first locked up, for the Peace
of all whom the one visits, and all whom the other talks to.

The Passion which first touched the Brain of both these Persons, was Envy; and
has had such wondrous Effects, that to this, Lady Fidget owes that she is so
courteous; to this, Will Voluble that he is eloquent. Fidget has a restless
Torment in hearing of any one's Prosperity, and cannot know any Quiet till she
visits her, and is Eyewitness of something that lessens it. Thus her Life is a
continual Search after what does not concern her, and her Companions speak
kindly even of the Absent and the Unfortunate, to teaze her. She was the first
that visited Flavia after the Smallpox, and has never seen her since because
she is not altered. Call a young Woman handsome in her Company, and she tells
you, It is pity she has no Fortune: Say she is rich, and she is as sorry that
she is silly. With all this ill Nature, Fidget is her self young, rich, and
handsome; but loses the Pleasure of all those Qualities, because she has them
in common with others.

To make up her Misery, she is well-bred, she hears Commendations till she is
ready to faint for Want of venting her self in Contradictions. This Madness is
not expressed by the Voice; but is uttered in the Eyes and Features: Its first
Symptom is upon beholding an agreeable Object, a sudden Approbation immediately
checked with Dislike.

This Lady I shall take the Liberty to conduct into a Bed of Straw and
Darkness, and have some Hopes, that after long Absence from the Light, the
Pleasure of seeing at all may reconcile her to what she shall see, though it
proves to be never so agreeable.

My Physical Remarks on the Distraction of Envy in other Persons, and
particularly in Will Voluble, is interrupted by a Visit from Mr. Kidney, with
Advices which will being Matter of new Disturbance to many possessed with this
Sort of Disorder, which I shall publish to bring out the Symptoms more kindly,
and lay the Distemper more open to my View.

St. James's Coffee-house, May 19.
This Evening a Mail from Holland brought the following Advices:

From the Camp before Douay, May 26. N. S. On the 23d the French assembled
their Army, and encamped with their Right near Bouchain, and their Left near
Creuveuceur. Upon this Motion of the Enemy, the Duke of Marlborough and Prince
Eugene made a Movement with their Army on the 24th, and encamped from Arlieux
to Vitry and Isez-Esquerchien, where they are so advantagiously posted, that
they not only cover the Siege, secure our Convoys of Provisions, Forage, and
Ammunition, from Lisle and Tournay, and the Canals and Dikes we have made to
turn the Water of the Scarp and La Cense to Bouchain; but are in a Readiness,
by marching from the Right, to possess themselves of the Field of Battle marked
out betwixt Vitry and Montigny, or from the Left to gain the Lines of
Circumvallation betwixt Fierin and Dechy: So that whatever Way the Enemy shall
approach to attack us whether by the Plains of Lens, or by Bouchain and
Valenciennes, we have but a very small Movement to make, to possess our selves
of the Ground on which it will be most advantageous to receive them. The Enemy
marched this Morning from their Left, and are encamped with their Right at
Oisy, and their Left toward Aeras, and, according to our Advices, will pass
the Scarp to Morrow and enter on the Plains of Lens, though several Regiments
of Horse, the German and Liege Troops, which are destined to compose Part of
their Army, have not yet joined them. If they pass the Scarp, we shall do the
like at the same Time, to possess our selves with all possible Advantage of the
Field of Battle: But if they continue where they are, we shall not remove,
because in our present Station we sufficiently cover from all Insults both our
Siege and Convoys.

Monsieur Villars cannot yet go without Crutches, and it is believed will have
much Difficulty to ride. He and the Duke of Berwick are to command the French
Army, the rest of the Mareschals being only to assist in Council.

Last Night we entirely perfected Four Bridges over the Avaunt Fosse at both
Attacks; and our Saps are so far advanced, that in Three or Four Days Batteries
will be raised on the Glacis, to batter in Breach both the Outworks and
Ramparts of the Town.

Letters from the Hague of the 27th, N. S. say, That the Deputies of the States
of Holland, who set out for Gertruydenberg on the 23d, to renew the Conferences
with the French Ministers, returned on the 26th, and had communicated to the
States General the new Overtures that were made on the Part of France, which it
is believed, if they are in Earnest, may produce a general Treaty.

The TATLER. [No 175.
From Saturd. May 20. to Tuesd. May 23. 1710.
From my own Apartment, May 22.
IN the Distribution of the Apartments in the New Bedlam, proper Regard is had
to the different Sexes, and the Lodgings accommodated accordingly. Among other
Necessaries, as I have thought fit to appoint Story-Tellers to sooth the Men,
so I have allowed Tale-Bearers to indulge the Intervals of my Female Patients.
But before I enter upon disposing of the Main of the great Body that wants my
Assistance, it is necessary to consider the Humane Race abstracted from all
other Distinctions and Considerations except that of Sex. This will lead us to
a nearer View of their Excellencies and Imperfections, which are to be
accounted the one or the other, as they are suitable to the Design for which
the Persons so defective or accomplished came into the World.

To make this Enquiry aright, we must speak of the Life of People of Condition,
and the proportionable Applications to those below them will be easily made, so
as to value the whole Species by the same Rule. We will begin with the Woman,
and behold her as a Virgin in her Father's House. This State of her Life is
infinitely more delightful than that of her Brother at the same Age. While she
is entertained with learning melodious Airs at her Spinet, is led round a Room
in the most complaisant Manner to a Fiddle, or is entertained with Applauses of
her Beauty and Perfection in the ordinary Conversation she meets with, the
young Man is under the Dictates of a rigid Schoolmaster or Instructor.
contradicted in every Word he speaks, and curbed in all the Inclinations he
discovers. Mrs. Elizabeth is the Object of Desire and Admiration looked upon
with Delight, courted with all the Powers of Eloquence and Address, approached
with a certain Worship, and defended with a certain Loyalty. This is her Case
as to the World: In her Domestic Character, she is the Companion, the Friend,
and Confident of her Mother, and the Object of a Pleasure something like the
Love between Angels, to her Father. Her Youth, her Beauty, her Air, are by him
looked upon with an ineffable Transport beyond any other Joy in this Life, with
as much Purity as can be met with in the next.

Her Brother William, at the same Years, is but in the Rudiments of those
Acquisitions which must gain him Esteem in the World. Hi Heart beats for
Applause among Men, yet is he fearful of every Step toward it. If he proposes
to himself to make a Figure in the World, his Youth is damped with a Prospect
of Difficulties, Dangers, and Dishonours; and an Opposition in all generous
Attempts, whether they regard his Love or his Ambition.

In the next Stage of Life she has little else to do, but (what she is
accomplished for by the mere Gifts of Nature) to appear lovely and agreeable to
her Husband, tender to her Children, and affable to her Servants: But a Man,
when he enters into this Way, is but in the first Scene, far from the
Accomplishment of his Designs. He is now in all Things to act for others as
well as himself. He is to have Industry and Frugality in his private Affairs,
and Integrity and Addresses in Public. To these Qualities, he must add a
Courage and Resolution to support his other Abilities, lest he be interrupted
in the Prosecution of his just Endeavors, in which the Honor and Interest of
Posterity are as much concerned as his own personal Welfare.

This little Sketch may in some Measure give an Idea of the different Parts
which the Sexes have to act, and the advantageous as well as inconvenient Terms
on which they are to enter upon their several Parts of Life. This may also be
some Rule to us in the Examination of their Conduct. In short, I shall take it
for a Maxim, That a Woman who resigns the Purpose of being pleasing, and the
Man who gives up the Thoughts of being wise, do equally quit their Claim to the
true Causes of Living; and are to be allowed the Diet and Discipline of my
charitable Structure to reduce them to Reason.

On the other Side, the Woman who hopes to please by Mothods which should make
her odious, and the Man who would be thought wise by a Behavior that renders
him ridiculous, are to be taken into Custody for their false Industry, as
Justly as they ought for their Negligence.

N. B. Mr. Bickerstaff is taken extremely ill with the Toothache, and cannot
proceed in this Discourse.

St. James's Coffee-house, May 22.
Advices from Flanders of the 30th Instant, N. S. say, That the Duke of
Marlborough having Intelligence of the Enemy's passing the Scarp on the 29th in
the Evening, and their March toward the Plains of Lens, had put the
Confederate Army in Motion, which was advancing toward the Camp on the North
Side of that River between Vitry and Henin-Lietard. The Confederates, since the
Approach of the Enemy, have added several new Redoubts to their Camp, and drawn
the Cannon out of the Lines of Circumvallation in a Readiness for the Batteries.

It is not believed, notwithstanding these Appearances, that the Enemy will
hazard a Battle for the Relief of Douay; the Siege of which Place is carried on
with all the Success that can be expected, considering the Difficulties they
meet with occasioned by the Inundations. On the 28th at Night we made a
Lodgment on the Saliant Angle of the Glacis of the Second Counterscarp, and our
Approaches are so far advanced, that it is believed the Town will be obliged to
surrender before the 8th of the next Month.

The TATLER. [No 176.
Nullum Numen abest si sit Prudentia.
Juv.
From Tuesday May 23. to Thursday May 25. 1710.
From my own Apartment, May 23.
THIS Evening, after a little Ease from the raging Pain caused by so small an
Organ as an aching Tooth, under which I had behaved my self so ill as to have
broke Two Pipes and my Spectacles, I began to reflect with Admiration on those
Heroic Spirits, which in the Conduct of their Lives seem to live so much above
the Condition of our Make, as not only under the Agonies of Pain to forbear any
intemperate Word or Gesture, but also in their general and ordinary Behavior
to resist the Impulses of their very Blood and Constitution. This Watch over a
Man's self, and the Command of his Temper, I take to be the greatest of Humane
Perfections, and is the Effect of a strong and resolute Mind. It is not only
the most expedient Practice for carrying on our own Designs, but is also very
deservedly the most amiable Quality in the Sight of others. It is a winning
Deference to Mankind, which creates an immediate Imitation of it self wherever
it appears, and prevails upon all (who have to do with a Person endued with it)
either through Shame or Emulation. I do not know how to express this Habit of
Mind, except you will let me call it Equanimity. It is a Virtue, which is
necessary at every Hour, in every Place, and in all Conversations, and is the
Effect of a regular and exact Prudence. He that will look back upon all the
Acquaintances he has had in his whole Life, will find, he has seen more Men
capable of the greatest Employments and Performances, than such as could in the
general Bent of their Carriage act otherwise than according to their own
Complexion and Humor. But the Indulgence of our selves in wholly giving Way to
our natural Propensity, is so unjust and improper a License, that when People
take it up, there is very little Difference, with Relation to their Friends and
Families, whether they are good or ill-natured Men: For he that errs by being
wrought upon by what we call the Sweetness of his Temper, is as guilty as he
that offends through the Perverseness of it.

It is not therefore to be regarded what Men are in themselves, but what they
are in their Actions. Eucrates is the best-natured of all Men; but that natural
Softness has Effects quite contrary to it self, and for Want of due Bounds to
his Benevolence, while he has a Will to be a Friend to all, he has the Power of
being such to none. His constant Inclination to please, makes him never fail of
doing so; though (without being capable of Falsehood) he is a Friend only to those
who are present; for the same Humor which makes him the best Companion,
renders him the worst Correspondent. It is a melancholy Thing to consider, that
the most engaging Sort of Men in Conversation are frequently the most
tyrannical in Power, and least to be depended upon in Friendship. It is certain
this is not to be imputed to their own Disposition; but he that is to be led by
others, has only good Luck if he is not the worst, though in himself the best
Man living. For this Reason, we are no more wholly to indulge our good, than
our ill Dispositions. I remember a crafty old Cit, one Day speaking of a
well-natured young Fellow who set up with a good Stock in Lombard Street, "I
will, says he, lay no more Money in his Hands, for he never denied me any
Thing." This was a very base, but with him a prudential Reason for breaking off
Commerce: And this Acquaintance of mine carried this Way of Judging so far,
that he has often told me, he never cared to deal with a Man he liked, for that
our Affections must never enter into our Business.

When we look round us in this populous City, and consider how Credit and
Esteem are lodged, you find Men have a great Share of the former, without the
least Portion of the latter. He who knows himself for a Beast of Prey, looks
upon others in the same Light, and we are so apt to judge of others by our
selves, that the Man who has no Mercy, is as careful as possible never to want
it. Hence it is, that in many Instances Men gain Credit by the very contrary
Methods by which they do Esteem; for wary Traders think every Affection of the
Mind a Key to their Cash.

But what led me into this Discourse, was my Impatience of Pain; and I have, to
my great Disgrace, seen an Instance of the contrary Carriage in so high a
Degree, that I am out of Countenance that I ever read Seneca. When I look upon
the Conduct of others in such Occurrences, as well as behold their Equanimity
in the general Tenor of their Life, it very much abates the Self-Love, which
is seldom well governed by any Sort of Men, and least of all by us Authors.

The Fortitude of a Man who brings his Will to the Obedience of his Reason, is
conspicuous, and carries with it a Dignity in the lowest State imaginable. Poor
Martius, who now lies languishing in the most violent Fever, discovers in the
faintest Moments of his Distemper such a Greatness of Mind, that a perfect
Stranger who should now behold him, would indeed see an Object of Pity, but at
the same Time that it was lately an Object of Veneration. His gallant Spirit
resigns, but resigns with an Air that speaks a Resolution which could yield to
nothing but Fate it self. This is Conquest in the Philosophic Sense; but the
Empire over our selves is, methinks, no less laudable in common Life, where the
whole Tenor of a Man's Carriage is in Subservience to his own Reason, and
Conformity both to the good Sense and Inclination of other Men.

Aristaeus is in my Opinion a perfect Master of himself in all Circumstances.
He has all the Spirit that Man can have, and yet is as regular in his Behavior
as a mere Machine. He is sensible of every Passion, but ruffled by none. In
Conversation, he frequently seems to be less knowing to be more obliging, and
chooses to be on a Level with others rather than oppress with the Superiority of
his Genius. In Friendship, he is kind without Profession. In Business,
expeditious without Ostentation. With the greatest Softness and Benevolence
imaginable, he is impartial in Spite of all Importunity, even that of his own
good Nature. He is ever clear in his Judgment; but in Complaisance to his
Company, speaks with Doubt, and never shows Confidence in Argument, but to
support the Sense of another. Were such an Equality of Mind the general
Endeavor of all Men, How sweet would be the Pleasures of Conversation? He that
is loud would then understand, that we ought to call a Constable, and know,
that spoiling good Company is the most heinous Way of breaking the Peace. We
should then be relieved from these Zealots in Society, who take upon them to be
angry for all the Company, and quarrel with the Waiters to show they have no
Respect for any Body else in the Room. To be in a Rage before you, is in a Kind
being angry with you. You may as well stand naked before Company, as to use
such Familiarities; and to be careless of what you say, is the most clownish
Way of being undressed.

Sheer-Lane, May 24.
When I came Home this Evening, I found the following Letters; and because I
think one a very good Answer to the other, as well as that it is the Affair of
a young Lady, it must be immediately dismissed.

SIR,
I Have a good Fortune, partly paternal, and partly acquired. My younger Years
I spent in Business; but Age coming on, and having no more Children than one
Daughter, I resolved to be a Slave no longer: And accordingly I have disposed
of my Effects, placed my Money in the Funds, bought a pretty Seat in a pleasant
Country, am making a Garden, and have set up a Pack of little Beagles. I live
in the Midst of a good many wellbred Neighbors, and several well-tempered
Clergymen. Against a rainy Day I have a little Library; and against the Gout
in my Stomach, a little good Claret. With all this I am the miserablest Man in
the World; not that I Have lost the Relish of any of these Pleasures, but am
distracted with such a Multiplicity of entertaining Objects, that I am lost in
the Variety. I am in such a Hurry of Idleness, that I do not know with what
Diversion to begin. Therefore, Sir, I must beg the Favor of you, when your
more weighty Affairs will permit, to put me in some Method of doing Nothing;
for I find Pliny makes a great Difference betwixt Nihil agere and Agere nihil;
and I fancy, if you would explain him, you would do a very great Kindness to
many in Great Britain, as well as to

Your humble Servant, J. B.


SIR,
THE Enclosed is written by my Father in one of his pleasant Humors. He bids
me seal it up, and send you a Word or Two from my self, which he will not desire
to see till he hears of it from you. Desire him before he begins his Method of
doing Nothing, to have Nothing to do; that is to say, let him marry off his
Daughter. I am

Your gentle Reader, S. B.


The TATLER. [No 177.
-- Male si palpere, recalcitrat undique tutu^
Hor.
From Thursd. May 25. to Saturd. May 27. 1710.
Sheer-Lane, May 26.
THE ingenious Mr. Penkethman; the Comedian, has lately left here a Paper or
Ticket, to which is affixed a small Silver Medal, which is to entitle the
Bearer to see One and twenty Plays at his Theater for a Guinea. Greenwith is
the Place where, it seems, he has erected h s House; and his Time of Action is
to be so contrived, that it is to fall in with going and returning with the
Tide. Besides, that the Bearer of this Ticket may carry down with him a
particular Set of Company to the Play, striking off for each Person so
introduced one of his Twenty one Times of Admittance. In this Warrant of his,
he has made me an high Compliment in a facetious Distich, by Way of Dedication
of his Endeavors, and desires I would recommend them to the World. I must
needs say, I have not for some Time seen a properer Choice than he has made of
a Patron: Who more fit to publish his Work than a Novelist? Who to recommend it
than a Censor? This Honor done me, has made me turn my Thoughts upon the
Nature of Dedications in general, and the Abuse of that Custom, as well by a
long Practice of my Predecessors, as the continued Folly of my contemporary
Authors.

In ancient Times, it was the Custom to address their Works to some eminent for
their Merit to Mankind, or particular Patronage of the Writers themselves, or
Knowledge in the Matter of which they treated. Under these Regards, it was a
memorable Honor to both Parties, and a very agreeable Record of their Commerce
with each other. These Applications were never stuffed with impertinent
Praises, but were the native Product of their Esteem, which was implicitly
received, or generally known to be due to the Patron of the Week: But vain
Flourishes came into the World, with other barbarous Embellishments; and the
Enumeration of Titles, and great Actions, in the Patrons themselves, or their
Sires, are as foreign to the Matter in Hand as the Ornaments are in a Gothic
Building. This is clapping together Persons which have no Manner of Alliance,
and can for that Reason have no other Effect than making both Parties justly
ridiculous. What Pretense is there in Nature for me to write to a great Man,
and tell him, My Lord, because your Grace is a Duke, your Grace's Father before
you was an Earl, his Lordship's Father was a Baron, and his Lordship's Father
both a wise and a rich Man; I Isaac Bickerstaff am obliged, and could not
possibly forbear addressing to you the following Treatise. Though this is the
plain Exposition of all I could possibly say to him with a good Conscience, yet
the silly Custom has so universally prevailed, that my Lord Duke and I must
necessarily be particular Friends from this Time forward, or else I have just
Room for being disobliged, and may turn my Panegyric into a Libel. But to
carry this Affair still more Home; were it granted that Praises in Dedications
were proper Topics, What is it that gives a Man Authority to commend, or what
makes it a Favor to me that he does commend me? It is certain, that there is
no Praise valuable but from the Praiseworthy. Were it otherwise, Blame might
be as much in the same Hands. Were the Good and Evil of Fame laid upon a Level
among Mankind, the Judge on the Bench, and the Criminal at the Bar, would
differ only in their Stations; and if one's Word is to pass as much as the
other's, their Reputation would be much alike to the Jury. Pliny speaking of
the Death of Martial, expresses himself with great Gratitude to him for the
Honors done him in the Writings of that Author; but he begins it with an
Account of his Character, whsch only made the Applause valuable. He indeed in
the same Epistle says, It is Sign we have left off doing Things which deserve
Praise, when we think Commendation impertinent. This is asserted with a just
Regard to the Persons whose good Opinion we wish for; otherwise Reputation
would be valued according to the Number of Voices a Man has for it, which are
not always to be insured on the more virtuous Side. But however we pretend to
model these nice Affairs, true Glory will never attend any Thing but Truth; and
there is something so peculiar in it, that the very self-same Action done by
different Men cannot merit the same Degree of Applause. The Roman, who was
surprised in the Enemy's Camp before he had accomplished his Design, and thrust
his bare Arm into a flaming Pile, telling the General, There were many as
determined as himself who (against Sense of Danger) had conspired his Death,
wrought in the very Enemy an Admiration of his Fortitude, and a Dismission with
Applause. But the condemned Slave who represented him in the Theater, and
consumed his Arm in the same Manner, with the same Resolution, did not raise in
the Spectators a great Idea of his Virtue, but of him whom imitated in an
Action no Way differing from that of the real Scaevola, but in the Motive to it.

Thus true Glory is inseparable from true Merit, and whatever you call Men,
they are are no more than what they are in themselves; but a Romantcik Sense
has crept into the Minds of the Generality, who will ever mistake Words and
Appearances for Persons and Things.

The Simplicity of the Ancients was as conspicuous in the Address of their
Writings, as in any other Monuments they have left behind them. Caesar and
Augustus were much more high Words of Respect, when added to Occasions fit for
their Characters to appear in, than any Appellations which have ever been since
thought of. The latter of these great Men had a very pleasant Way of dealing
with Applications of this Kind. When he received Pieces of Poetry which he
thought had Worth in them, he rewarded the Writer; but where he thought them
empty, he generally returned the Compliment made him with some Verses of his
own.

This latter Method I have at present Occasion to imitate. A Female Author has
dedicated a Piece to me, wherein she would make my Name (as she has others) the
Introduction of whatever is to follow in her Book; and has spoke some
Panegyrical Things which I know not how to return, for Want of better
Acquaintance with the Lady, and consequently being out of a Capacity of giving
her Praise or Blame. All therefore that is left for me, according to the
foregoing Rules, is to lay the Picture of a good and evil Woman before her
Eyes, which are but meet Words if they do not concern her. Now you are to
observe, the Way in a Dedication is to make all the rest of the World as little
like the Person we address to as possible, according to the following Epistle:

MADAM,
But, M -- -- Memorabile nullum
Faminea in Pana est. --



The TATLER. [No 178.
From Saturd. May 27. to Tuesd. May 30. 1710.
Sheer-Lane, May 29.
WHEN we look into the delightful History of the most ingenious Don Quixot of
the Mancha, and consider the Exercises and Manner of Life of that renowned
Gentleman, we cannot but admire the exquisite Genius and discerning Spirit of
Michael Cervantes, who has not only painted his Adventurer with great Mastery
in the conspicuous Parts of his Story, which relate to Love and Honor, but
also intimated in his ordinary Life, Economy and Furniture, the infallible
Symptoms he gave of his growing Phrensy, before he declared himself a
Knight Errant. His Hall was furnished with old Lances, Halbards, and Morrions;
his Food, Lentils; his Dress, amorous. He slept moderately, rose early, and
spent his Time in Hunting. When by Watchfulness and Exercise he was thus
qualified for the Hardships of his intended Peregrinations, he had nothing more
to do but to fall hard to study; and before he should apply himself to the
Practical Part, get into the Methods of making Love and War by reading Books of
Knighthood. As for raising tender Passion in him, Cervantes reports, That he
was wonderfully delighted with a smooth intricate Sentence; and when they
listened at his Study-Door, they could frequently hear him read aloud, The
Reason of the Unreasonableness, which against my Reason is wrought, does so
weaken my Reason, as with all Reason I do justly complain on your Beauty.
Again, he would pause till he came to another charming Sentence, and with the
most pleasing Accent imaginable be loud at a new Paragraph: The high Heavens,
which, with your Divinity, do fortify you divinely with the Stars, make you
Deserveress of the Deserts that your Greatness deserves. With these, and other
such Passages, (says my Author) the poor Gentleman grew distracted, and was
breaking his Brains Day and Night to understand and unravel their Sense.

As much as the Case of this distempered Knight is received by all the Readers
of his History as the most incurable and ridiculous of all Phrensies, it is
very certain we have Crowds among us far gone in as visible a Madness as his,
though they are not observed to be in that Condition. As great and useful
Discoveries are sometimes made by accidental and small Beginnings, I came to
the Knowledge of the most Epidemick Ill of this Sort, by falling into a
Coffee-house where I saw my Friend the Upholsterer, whose Crack toward
Politics I have heretofore mentioned. This Touch in the Brain of the British
Subject, is as certainly owing to the reading Newspapers, as that of the
Spanish Worthy abovementioned to the reading Works of Chivalry. My
Contemporaries the Novelists have, for the better spinning out Paragraphs, and
working down to the End of their Columns, a most happy Art in Saying and
Unsaying, giving Hints of Intelligence, and Interpretations of indifferent
Actions, to the great Distur bance of the Brains of ordinary Readers. This Way
of going on in the Words, and making no Progress in the Sense, is more
particularly the Excellence of my most ingenious and renowned Fellow Laborer,
the Post-Man; and it as to this Talent in him that I impute the Loss of my
Upholsterer's Intellects. That unfortunate Tradesman has for Years past been
the chief Orator in ragged Assemblies, and the Reader in Al^y Coffee-houses. He
was Yesterday surrounded by an Audience of that Sort, among whom I sat
unobserved through the Favor of a Cloud of Tobacco, and saw him with the
Post-Man in his Hand, and all the other Papers safe under his Left Elbow. He
was intermixing Remarks, and reading the Paris Article of May 30. which says,
That it is given out that an Express arrived this Day, with Advice, that the
Armies were so near in the Plain of Lens, that they cannonaded each other. (Ay,
ay, here we shall have Sport.) And that it was highly probable the next Express
would bring us an Account of an Engagement. (They are welcome as soon as they
please.) The some others say, That the same will be put off ti^ the 2 d or 3 d
of June, because the Marshall Villars expects some further Reinforcements from
Germany, and other Parts, before that Time. What-a-Pox does he put it off for?
Does he think our Horse is not marching up at the same Time? But let us see
what he says further. They hope, that Monsieur Albergotti, being encouraged by
the Presence of so great an Army, will make an extraordinary Defense. Why then
I find, Albergun is one of those that love to have a great many on their Side
-- Nay, I Will say that for this Paper, he makes the most natural Inferences of
any of them all. The Elector of Bavaria being uneasy to be without any Command,
has desired Leave to come to Court to communicate a certain Project to his
Majesty -- Whatever it be, it is said, that Prince is suddenly expected, and
then we shall have a more certain Account of his Project, if this ^port has any
Foundation. Nay, this Paper new imposes upon us, he goes upon sure Grounds; for
he will not be positive the Elector has a Project, or that he will come, or if he
does come at all; for he doubts, you see, whether the Report has any Foundation.

What makes this the more lamentable is, that this Way of Writing falls in with
the Imagination of the cooler and duller Part of Her Majesty's Subjects. The
being kept up with one Line contradicting another, and the whole, after many
Sentences of Conjecture, vanishing in a Doubt whether there is any Thing at all
in what the Person has been reading of, puts an ordinary Head into a Vertigo,
which his natural Dullness would have secured him from. Next to the Labors of
the Post-Man, the Upholsterer took from under his Elbow honest Icabod Dawks's
Letter, and there, among other Speculations, the Historian takes upon him to
say, That it is discoursed that there will be a Battle in Flanders before the
Armies separate, and many will have it to be to Morrow, the great Battle of
Ramelies being fought on a Whit-Sunday. A Gentleman who was a Wag in this
Company laughed at the Expression, and said, By Mr. Dawks's Favor, I warrant
ye, ^f we meet them on Whit-Sunday or M^nday, we shall not stand upon the Day
with them, whether it be before or after the Holidays. An Admirer of this
Gentleman stood up, and told a Neighbor at a distant Table the Conceit, at
which indeed we were all very merry. These Reflections in the Writers of the
Transactions of the Times, seize the Noddles of such as were ^ot born to have
Thoughts of their own, and ^onsequently lay a Weight upon every Thing which
they read in Print. But Mr. Dawks con^luded this Paper with a courteous
Sentence, which was very well taken and applauded by ^he whole Company. We
wish, says he, all our ^ustomers a merry Whitsuntide, and many of them. Honest
Icabod is as extraordinary a Man ^s any of our Fraternity, and as particular.
His ^tyle is a Dialect between the Familiarity of Talk^g and Writing, and his
Letter such as you cannot distinguish whether Print or Manuscript, which gives
us a Refreshment of the Idea from that has been told us from the Press by
others. This wishing a good Tide had its Effect upon us^ and he was commended
for his Salutation, a^ showing as well the Capacity of a Bell-man a^ an
Historian. My distempered old Acquaintanc^ read in the next Place the Account
of the Affairs abroad in the Courant; but the Matter was told so distinctly,
that these Wanderers thought there was no News in it; this Paper differing from
the rest as an History from a Romance. The Tautology, the Contradictions, the
Doubts, and Wants of Confirmations, are what keep up imaginary Entertainments
in empty Heads, and produce Neglect of their own Affairs, Poverty, and
Bankrupcy, in many of the Shop-Statesmen; but turn the Imaginations of those of
a little higher Orb into Deliriums of Dissatisfaction, which is seen in a
continual Fret upon all that touches their Brains, but more particularly upon
any Advantage obtained by their Country, where they are considered as
Lunaticks, and therefore tolerated in their Ravings.

What I am now warning the People of is, That the Newspapers of this Island
are as pernicious to weak Heads in England as ever Books of Chivalry to Spain;
and therefore shall do all that in me lies, with the utmost Care and Vigilance
imaginable, to prevent these growing E^ A framing Instance of this Malady
appeared in my old Acquaintance at this Time, who, after he had done reading
all his Papers, ended with a Thoughtful Air. If we should have a Peace, we
should then know for certain whether it was the King of Sweden that lately came
to Dunkirk I whispered him, and desired him to step aside a little with me.
When I had Opportunity, I deceived him into a Coach, in order for his mo^ easy
Conveyance to Moorfields. The Man (...) very quietly with me; and by that Time
he had brought the Swede from the Defeat by the (...) to the Boristhenes, we
were passing by Will's Coffee house, where the Man of the House beckoned to us.
We made a full Stop, and could hear from above a very loud Voice swearing, with
some Expressions toward Treason, That the Subject in France was as free as in
England. His Distemper would not let him reflect, that his own Discourse was an
Argument of the contrary. They told him, One would speak with him below. He
came immediately to our Coach-Side. I whispered him, That I had an Order to
carry him to the Bastile. He immediately obeyed with great Resignation: For to
this Sort of Lunatic, whose Brain is touched for the French, the Name of a
Gaol in that Kingdom has a more agreeable Sound than that of a Paternal Seat in
this their own Country. It happened a little unluckily bringing these Lunaticks
together, for they immediately fell into a Debate concerning the Greatness of
their respective Monarchs; one for the King of Sweden, the other for the Grand
Monarch of France. This Gentleman from Will's is now next Door to the
Upholsterer, safe in his Apartment in my Bedlam, with proper Medicaments, and
the Mercure Gallant to sooth his Imagination that he is actually in France. If
therefore he should escape to Covent Garden again, all Persons are desired to
lay hold of him, and deliver him to Mr. Morphew, my Overseer. At the same Time,
I desire all true Subjects to forbear Discourse with him, any otherwise than
when he begins to fight a Battle for France, to say, Sir, I hope to see you in
England.

The TATLER. [No 179
-- Oh! quis me gelidis sub Montibus Haem
Sistat, and ingenti Ramorum protegat Umbra?

From Tuesday May 30. to Thursday June 1. 1710
From my own Apartment, May 31.
IN this parched Season, next to the Pleasure (...) going into the Country, is
that of heari^ from it, and partaking the Joys of it in Descri^tion, as in the
following Letter:

SIR,
I Believe you will forgive me, though I wri^ to you a very long Epistle, since
it relates (...) the Satisfaction of a Country Life, which ^ know you would
lead, if you could. In t^ first Place I must confess to you, That I a^ one of
the most luxurious Men living; and (...) I am such, I take Care to make my
Pleasu^ lasting, by following none but such as are i^nocent and refined, as
well as, in some Measu^ improving. You have in your Labors been (...) much
concerned to represent the Actions (...) Passions of Mankind, that the whole
Veget^ World has almost escaped your Observati^ But sure there are
Gratifications to be dr^ from thence, which deserve to be recom^ded. For your
better Information, I wish (...) could visit your old Friend in Cornwall: (...)
would be pleased to see the many Alter^ I have made about my House, and how
(...) I have improved my Estate without raising (...) Rents of it.

As the Winter ingrosses with us near a double Portion of the Year, (the Three
delightful Vicissitudes being crowded almost within the Space of Six Months)
there is nothing upon which I have bestowed so much Study and Expense, as in
contriving Means to soften the Severity of it, and, if possible, to establish
Twelve cheerful Months about my Habitation. In order to this, the Charges I
have been at in building and furnishing a Green-House, will, perhaps, be
thought somewhat extravagant by a great many Gentlemen whose Revenues exceed
mine. But when I consider, that all Men of any Life and Spirit have their
Inclinations to gratify, and when I compute the Sums laid out by the Generality
of the Men of Pleasure (in the Number of which I always rank my self) in
riotous Eating and Drinking, in Equipage and Apparel, upon Wenching, Gaming,
Racing and Hunting; I find, upon the Balance, that the indulging of my Humor
comes at a reasonable Rate.

Since I communicate to you all Incidents serious and trifling, even to the
Death of a Butterfly, that fall out within the Compass of my little Empire, you
will not, I hope, be ill pleased with the Draught I now send you of my little
Winter Paradise, and with an Account of my Way of amusing my self and others in
it.

The younger Pliny, you know, writes a long Letter to his Friend Gallus, in
which he gives him a very particular Plan of the Situation, the Conveniences,
and the Agreeableness of his Villa. In my last, you may remember, I promised
you something of this Kind. Had Pliny lived in a Northern Climate, I doubt not
but we should have found a very complete Orangery amongst his Epistles; and I,
probably, should have copied his Model, instead of Building after my own Fancy,
and you had been referred to him for the History of my late Exploits in
Architecture: By which Means my Performances would have made a better Figure,
at least in Writing, than they are like to make at present.

The Area of my Green-house is a Hundred Paces long, Fifty broad, and the Roof
Thirty Foot high. The Wall toward the North is of solid Stone. On the South
Side, and at both the Ends, the Stone-work rises but Three Foot from the
Ground, excepting the Pilasters, placed at convenient Distances to strengthen
and beautify the Building. The intermediate Spaces are filled up with large
Sashes of the strongest and most transparent Glass. The Middle Sash (which is
wider than any of the other) serves for the Entrance, to which you mount by Six
easy Steps, and descend on the Inside by as many. This opens and shuts with
greater Ease, keeps the Wind out better, and is at the same Time more uniform
than Folding-Doors.

In the Middle of the Roof there runs a Cieling Thirty Foot broad from one End
to the other. This is enlivened by a Masterly Pencil, with all the Variety of
Rural Scenes and Prospects, which he has peopled with the whole Tribe of Silvan
Deities. Their Characters and their Stories are so well expressed, that the
whole seems a Collection of all the most beautiful Fables of the ancient Poets
translated into Colors. The remaining Spaces of the Roof, Ten Foot on each
Side of the Cieling, are of the clearest Glass, to let in the Sky and Clouds
from above. The Building points full East and West, so that I enjoy the Sun
while he is about the Horizon. His Rays are improved through the Glass, and I
receive through it what is desirable in a Winter-Sky, without the coarse Allay
of the Season, which is a Kind of sifting or straining the Weather. My Greens
and Flowers are as sensible as I am of this Benefit: They flourish and look
cheerful as in the Spring, while their Fellow Creatures abroad are starved to
Death. I must add, that a moderate Expense of Fire, over and above the
Contributions I receive from the Sun, serves to keep this large Room in a due
Temperature; it being sheltered from the cold Winds by a Hill on the North, and
a Wood on the East.

The Shell, you see, is both agreeable and convenient; and now you shall judge,
whether I have laid out the Floor to Advantage. There goes through the whole
Length of it a spacious Walk of the finest Gravel, made to bind and unite so
firmly, that it seems one continued Stone; with this Advantage, that it is
easier to the Foot, and better for walking, than if it were what it seems to
be. At each End of the Walk, on the one and on the other Side of it, lies a
square Plot of Grass of the finest Turf, and brightest Verdure. What Ground
remains on both Sides, between these little smooth Fields of Green, is flagged
with large Quarries of white Marble, where the blue Veins trace out such a
Variety of irregular Windings through the clear Surface, that these bright Plains
seem full of Rivulets and Streaming Meanders. This to my Eye, that delights in
Simplicity, is inexpressibly more beautiful, than the chequered Floors which
are so generally admired by others. Upon the Right and upon the Left, along the
Gravel Walk, I have ranged interchangeably the Bay, the Myrtle, the Orange and
the Lemon Trees, intermixed with painted Hollies, Silver Firs, and Pyramids of
Yew; all so disposed, that every Tree receives an additional Beauty from its
Situation; besides the Harmony that rises from the Disposition of the whole, no
Shade cuts too strongly, or breaks in harshly upon the other; but the Eye is
cheare^ with a mild rather than gorgeous Diversity (...) Greens.

The Borders of the Four Grass-Plots are garnished with Pots of Flowers: Those
Delicacie^ of Nature recreate Two Senses at once, an^ leve such delightful and
gentle Impression^ upon the Brain, that I cannot help thinking them of equal
Force with the softest Airs o^ Music, toward the smoothing of our Tempers. In
the Center of every Plot is a Statue^ The Figures I have made Choice of are a
Venus, an Adonis, a Diana, and an Apollo; such excellent Copies, as to raise
the same Delight as we should draw from the Sight of the ancient Originals.

The North Wall would have been but a tiresome Waste to the Eye, if I had not
diversified it with the most lively Ornaments, suitable to the Place. To this
Intent, I have been at the Expense to lead over Arches from a neighboring Hill
a plentiful Store of Spring Water, which a beautiful Naiade, placed as high as
is possible in the Center of the Wall, pours out from an Urn. This, by a Fall
of above Twenty Foot, makes a most delightful Cascade into a Basin, that opens
wide within the Marble-Floor on that Side. At a reasonable Distance, on either
Hand of the Cascade, the Wall is hollowed into Two spreding Scallops, each of
which receives a Couch of green Velvet, and forms at the same Time a Canopy
over them. Next to them come Two large Aviaries, which are likewise let into
the Stone. These are succeeded by Two Grotto's, set off with all the pleasing
Rudeness of Shells and Moss, and cragged Stones, imitating in Miniature Rocks
and Precipices, the most dreadful and gigantick Works of Nature. After the
Grotto's, you have Two Niches, the one inhabited by Ceres, with her Sickle and
Sheaf of Wheat; and the other by Pomona, who, with a Countenance full of good
Cheer, pours a bounteous Autumn of Fruits out of her Horn. Last of all come Two
Colonies of Bees, whose Stations lying East and West, the one is saluted by the
Rising, the other by the Setting Sun. These, all of them being placed at
proportioned Intervals, furnish out the whole Length of the Wall; and the
Spaces that lie between are painted in Fresco, by the same Hand that has
enriched my Cieling.

Now, Sir, you see my whole Contrivance to elude the Rigor of the Year, to
bring a Northern Climate nearer the Sun, and to exempt my self from the common
Fate of my Countrymen. I must detain you a little longer, to tell you, That I
never enter this delicious Retirement, but my Spirits are revived, and a sweet
Complacency diffuses it self over my whole Mind. And how can it be otherwise,
with a Conscience void of Offense, where the Music of Falling Waters, the
Symphony of Birds, the gentle Humming of Bees, the Breath of Flowers, the fine
Imagery of Painting and Sculpture: In a Word, the Beauties and the Charms of
Nature and of Art court all my Faculties, refresh the Fibers of the Brain, and
smooth every Avenue of Thought. What pleasing Meditations, what agreeable
Wanderings of the Mind, and what delicious Slumbers, have I enjoyed here? And
when I turn up some Masterly Writer to my Imagination, methinks here his
Beauties appear in the most advantageous Light, and the Rays of his Genius
shoot upon me with greater Force and Brightness than ordinary. This Place
likewise keeps the whole Family in good Humor, in a Season wherein Gloominess
of Temper prevails universally in this Island. My Wife does often touch her
Lute in one of the Grotto's, and my Daughter sings to it, while the Ladies with
you, amidst all the Diversions of the Town, and in the most affluent Fortunes,
are fretting and repining beneath a lowering Sky for they know not what. In
this Green House we often dine, we drink Tea, we dance Country-Dances; and what
is the chief Pleasure of all, we entertain our Neighbors in it, and by this
Means contribute very much to mend the Climate Five or Six Miles about us. I am

Your most humble Servant, T. S.


The TATLER. [No 180.
Stultitiam patiuntur Opes. --
Hor
From Thursd. June 1. to Saturd. June 3. 1710.
From my own Apartment, June 2.
I Have received a Letter which accuses me of Partiality in the Administration
of the Censorship, and says, That I have been very free with the lower Part of
Mankind, but extremely cautious in Representations of Matters which concern Men
of Condition. This Correspondent takes upon him also to say, the Upholsterer
was not undone by turning Politician, but became Bankrupt by trusting his Goods
to Persons of Quality; and demands of me, that I should do Justice upon such as
brought Poverty and Distress upon the World below them, while they themselves
were sunk in Pleasures and Luxury, supported at the Expense of those very
Persons whom they treated with a Negligence, as if they did not know whether
they dealt with them or not. This is a very heavy Accusation, both of me and
such as the Man aggrieved accuses me of tolerating. For this Reason, I resolved
to take this Matter into Consideration, and upon very little Meditation could
call to my Memory many Instances which made this Complaint far from being
groundless. The Root of this Evil does not always proceed from Injustice in the
Men of Figure, but often from a false Grandeur which they take upon them in
being unacquainted with their own Business, not considering how mean a Part
they act when their Names and Characters are subjected to the little Arts of
their Servants and Dependants. The Overseers of the Poor are a People who have
no great Reputation for the Discharge of their Trust, but are much less
scandalous than the Overseers of the Rich. Ask a young Fellow of a great
Estate, Who was that odd Fellow spoke to him in a public Place? He answers,
One that does any Business. It is, with many, a natural Consequence of being a
Man of Fortune, that they are not to understand the Disposal of it; and they
long to come to their Estates, only to put themselves under new Guardianship.
Nay, I have known a young Fellow who was regularly bred an Attorney, and was a
very expert one till he had an Estate fallen to him. The Moment that happened,
he who could before prove the next Land he cast his Eye upon his own, and was
so sharp, that a Man at first Sight would give him a small Sum for a general
Receipt, whether he owed him any Thing or not: Such a one, I say, have I seen,
upon coming to an Estate, forget all (...) Diffidence of Mankind, and become
the most manageable Thing breathing. He immediately wanted a stirring Man to
take upon him his A^fairs, to receive and pay, and do every Thi^ which he
himself was now too fine a Gentleman to understand. It is pleasant to consider,
The he who would have got an Estate had he n^ come to one, will certainly
starve because o^ fell to him: But such Contradictions are we (...) our selves,
and any Change of Life is insupportable to some Natures.

It is a mistaken Sense of Superiority, to believ^ a Figure or Equipage gives
Men Precedence (...) their Neighbors. Nothing can create Respe^ from Mankind,
but laying Obligations upon them; and it may very reasonably be conclude^ that
if it were put into a due Balance, accordin^ to the true State of the Account,
many who b^lieve themselves in Possession of a large Share (...) Dignity in the
World, must give Place to the^ Inferiors. The greatest of all Distinctions i^
Civil Life is that of Debtor and Creditor, an^ there needs no great Progress in
Logic to kno^ which, in that Case, is the advantageous Sid^ He who can say to
another, Pray Master, o^ Pray my Lord, give me my own, can as justl^ tell him,
It is a Fantastical Distinction you tak^ upon you, to pretend to pass upon the
World for my Master or Lord, when at the same Tim^ that I wear your Livery, you
owe me Wages^ or, while I wait at your Door, you are ashame^ to see me till you
have paid my Bill.

The good old Way among the Gentry of England to maintain their Preeminence
over the lower Rank, was by their Bounty, Munificence^ and Hospitality; and it
is a very unhappy Change^ if at present, by themselves or their Agents, (...)
Luxury of the Gentry is supported by the Credit of the Trader. This is what my
Correspondent pretends to prove out of his own Books, and those of his whole
Neighborhood. He has the Confidence to say, That there is a Mug-House hear
Long-Acre, where you may every Evening hear an exact Account of Distresses of
this Kind. One complains, That such a Lady's Finery is the Occasion that his
own Wife and Daughter appear so long in the same Gown: Another, That all the
Furniture of her Visiting Apartment are no more here is, than the Scenery of a
Play are the proper Goods of the Actress. Nay, at the lower End of the same
Table, you may hear a Butcher and Poulterer say, That at their proper Charge,
all that Family has been maintained since they last came to Town:

The free Manner in which People of Fashion are discoursed on at such Meetings,
is but a just Reproach for their Failures in this Kind; but the melancholy
Relations of the great Necessities Tradesmen are driven to, who support their
Credit in Spite of the faithless Promises which are made them, and the
Abatement which they suffer when paid, by the Extortion of Upper Servants, is
what would stop the most thoughtless Man in the Career of his Pleasures, if
rightly represented to him.

If this Matter be not very speedily amended, I shall think fit to print exact
Lists of all Persons who are not at their own Disposal, though above the Age of
Twenty one; and as the Trader is made Bankrupt for Absence from his Abode, so
shall the Gentleman for being at Home, ^f, when Mr. Morphew calls, he cannot
give him an exact Account of what passes in his own Family. After this fair
Warning, no one ought to think himself hardly dealt with, if I take upon me to
pronounce him no longer Master of his Estate, Wife, or Family, than he
continues to ^mprove, cherish, and maintain them upon the ^asis of his own
Property, without Incursions upon his Neighbor in any of these Particu^.

According to that excellent Philosopher Epict^tus, we are all but acting Parts
in a Play; and (...) is not a Distinction in it self to be high or lo^ but to
become the Parts we are to perform. ^ am by my Office Prompter on this
Occasion, a^ shall give those who are a little out in their Part such soft
Hints as may help them to procee^ without letting it be known to the Audien^
they were out: But if they run quite out (...) Character, they must be called
off the Stag^ and receive Parts more suitable to their Geniu^ Servile
Complaisance shall degrade a Man from his Honor and Quality, and Haughtiness
be ye^ more debased. Fortune shall no longer appropriate Distinctions, but
Nature direct us in the Disposition both of Respect and Discountenance^ As
there are Tempers made for Command, and others for Obedience; so there are Men
born for acquiring Possessions, and others incapable of being other than mere
Lodgers in the Houses of their Ancestors, and have it not in their very
Composition to be Proprietors of any Thing. These Men are moved only by the
mere Effects of Impulse: Their Good Will and Disesteem are to be regarded
equally, for neither is the Effect of their Judgment. This loose Temper is that
which makes a Man, what Sallust so well remarks to happen frequently in the
same Person, to be covetous of what is another's, and profuse of what is his
own. This Sort of Men is usually amiable to ordinary Eyes; but in the Sight of
Reason, nothing is laudable but what is guided by Reason. The covetous Prodigal
is of all others the worst Man in Society: If he would but take Time to look
into himself, he would find his Soul all over gashed with broken Vows, and
Promises, and his Retrospect on his Action^ would not consist of Reflections
upon those good Resolutions after mature Thought, which are the true Life of a
reasonable Creature, but the nauseous Memory of imperfect Pleasures, idle
Dreams, and occasional Amusements. To follow such dissatisfying Pursuits, is it
possible to suffer the Ignominy of being unjust? I remember in Tully's Epistle,
in the Recommendation of a Man to an Affair which had no Manner of Relation to
Money, it is said, You may trust him, for he is a frugal Man. It is certain, he
who has not a Regard to strict Justice in the Commerce of Life, can be capable
of no good Action in any other Kind; but he who lives below his Income, lays up
every Moment of Life Armor against a base World, that will cover all his
Frailties while he is so fortified, and exaggerate them when he is naked and
defenseless.

ADVERTISEMENT.
A Stage-Coach sets out exactly at Six from Nando's Coffee-house to Mr.
Tiptoe's Dancing-School, and returns at Eleven every Evening, for 16 d.

N. B. Dancing-Shoes not exceeding Four Inches Height in the Heel, and Periwigs
not exceeding Three Foot in Length, are carried in the Coach-Box gratis.

The TATLER. [No 181.
-- Dies, ni fallor, adest, quem semper acerbum,
Semper honoratum; sic, Dii, voluistis, habebo.
Virg.
From Saturday June 3. to Tuesday June 6. 1710.
From my own Apartment June 5.
THere are those among Mankind, who can enjoy no Relish of their Being, except
the World is made acquainted with all that relates to them, and think every
Thing lost that passes unobserved; but others find a solid Delight in stealing
by the Crowd, and modelling their Life after such a Manner, as is as much above
the Approbation as the Practice of the Vulgar. Life being too short to give
Instances great enough of true Friendship or Good Will, some Sages have thought
it pious to preserve a certain Reverence for the Manes of their deceased
Friends, and have withdrawn themselves from the rest of the World at certain
Seasons, to commemorate in their own Thoughts such of their Acquaintance who
have gone before them out of this Life: And indeed, when we are advanced in
Years, there is not a more pleasing Entertainment, than to recollect in a
gloomy Moment the many we have parted with that have been dear and agreeable to
us, and to cast a melancholy Thought or Two after those with whom, perhaps, we
have indulged our selves in whole Nights of Mirth and Jollity. With such
Inclinations in my Heart I went to my Closet yesterday in the Evening and
resolved to be sorrowful; upon which Occasion, I could not but look with
Disdain upon my self, that though all the Reasons which I had to lament the
Loss of many of my Friends are now as forcible as at the Moment of their
Departure, yet did not my Heart swell with the same Sorrow which I felt at that
Time; but I could, without Tears, reflect upon many pleasing Adventures I have
had with some who have long been blended with common Earth. Though it is by the
Benefit of Nature that Length of Time thus blots out the Violence of
Afflictions; yet with Tempers too much given to Pleasure, it is almost
necessary to revive the old Places of Grief in our Memory, and ponder Step by
Step on past Life, to lead the Mind into that Sobriety of Thought which poises
the Heart, and makes it beat with due Time, without being quickened with
Desire, or retarded with Despair, from its proper and equal Motion. When we
wind up a Clock that is out of Order, to make it go well for the future, we do
not immediately set the Hand to the present Instant, but we make it strike the
Round of all its Hours, before it can recover the Regularity of its Time. Such,
thought I, shall be my Method this Evening; and since it is that Day of the
Year which I dedicate to the Memory of such in another Life as I much delighted
in when living, an Hour or Two shall be sacred to Sorrow and their Memory,
while I run over all the melancholy Circumstances of this Kind which have
occurred to me in my whole Life.

The first Sense of Sorrow I ever knew was upon the Death of my Father, at
which Time I was not quite Five Years of Age; but was rather amazed at what all
the House meant, than possessed with a real Understanding why no Body was
willing to play with me. I remember I went into the Room where his Body lay,
and my Mother sat weeping alone by it. I had my Battledore in my Hand, and
fell a beating the Coffin, and calling Papa; for I know not how I had some
slight Idea that he was locked up there. My Mother catched me in her Arms, and
transported beyond all Patience of the silent Grief she was before in, she
almost smothered me in her Embrace, and told me in a Flood of Tears, Papa could
not hear me, and would play with me no more, for they were going to put him
under Ground, whence he could never come to us again. She was a very beautiful
Woman, of a noble Spirit, and there was a Dignity in her Grief amidst all the
Wildness of her Transport, which, methought, struck me with an Instinct of
Sorrow, which, before I was sensible of what it was to grieve, seized my very
Soul, and has made Pity the Weakness of my Heart ever since. The Mind in
Infancy is, methinks, like the Body in Embrio, and receives Impressions so
forcible, that they are as hard to be removed by Reason, as any Mark with which
a Child is born is to be taken away by any future Application. Hence it is,
that Goodnature in me is no Merit; but having been so frequently overwhelmed
with her Tears before I knew the Cause of any Affliction, or could draw
Defenses from my own Judgment, I imbibed Commiseration, Remorse, and an unmanly
Gentleness of Mind, which has since ensnared me into Ten Thousand Calamities,
and from whence I can reap no Advantage, except it be, that in such an Humor
as I am now in, I can the better indulge my self, in the Softnesses of
Humanity, and enjoy that sweet Anxiety which arises from the Memory of past
Afflictions.

We that are very old, are better able to remember Things which befell us in our
distant Youth, than the Passages of later Days. For this Reason it is, that the
Companions of my strong and vigorous Years present themselves more immediately
to me in this Office of Sorrow. Untimely or unhappy Deaths are what we are most
apt to lament, so little are we able to make it indifferent when a Thing
happens, though we know it must happen. Thus we groan under Life, and bewail
those who are relieved from it. Every Object that returns to our Imagination
raises different Passions, according to the Circumstance of their Departure.
Who can have lived in an Army, and in a serious Hour reflect upon the many gay
and agreeable Men that might long have flourished in the Arts of Peace, and not
join with the Imprecations of the Fatherless and Widow on the Tyrant to whose
Ambition they fell Sacrifices? But gallant Men, who are cut off by the Sword,
move rather our Veneration than our Pity, and we gather Relief enough from
their own Contempt of Death, to make it no Evil, which was approached with so
much Cheerfulness, and attended with so much Honor. But when we turn our
Thoughts from the great Parts of Life on such Occasions, and instead of
lamenting those who stood ready to give Death to those from whom they had the
Fortune to receive it; I say, when we let our Thoughts wander from such noble
Objects, and consider the Havoc which is made among the Tender and the
Innocent, Pity enters with an unmixed Softness, and possesses all our Souls at
once.

Here (were there Words to express such Sentiments with proper Tenderness) I
should record the Beauty, Innocence, and untimely Death, of the first Object my
Eyes ever beheld with Love. The beauteous Virgin! How ignorantly did she charm,
how carelessly excel? Oh Death! Thou have Right to the Bold, to the Ambitious,
to the High, and to the Haughty; but why this Cruelty to the Humble, to the
Meek, to the Undiscerning, to the Thoughtless? Nor Age, nor Business, nor
Distress, can erase the dear Image from my Imagination. In the same Week, I saw
her dressed for a Ball, and in a Shroud. How ill did the Habit of Death become
the Prerty Trifler? I still behold the smiling Earth -- A large Train of
Disasters were coming on to my Memory, when my Servant knocked at my Closer
Door, and interrupted me with a Letter, attended with a Hamper of Wine, of the
same Sort with that which is to be put to Sale on Thursday next at Garraway's
Coffee-house. Upon the Receipt of it, I sent for Three of my Friends. We are so
intimate, that we can be Company in whatever State of Mind we meet, and can
entertain each other without expecting always to rejoice. The Wine we found to
be generous and warming, but with such an Heat as moved us rather to be
cheerful than frolicksome. It revived the Spirits without firing the Blood. We
commended it till Two of the Clock this Morning, and having to Day met a little
before Dinner, we found, that though we drank Two Bottles a Man, we had much
more Reason to recollect than forget what had passed the Night before.

The TATLER. [No 182.
Spectaret Populum Ludis attentius ipsis.
Hor.
From Tuesd. June 6. to Thursd. June 8. 1710.
Sheer-Lane, June 7.
THE Town grows so very empty, that the greater Number of my gay Character are
fled out of my Sight into the Country. My Beaus are now Shepherds, and my
Belles Wood Nymphs. They are lolling over Rivulets, and covered with Shades,
while we who remain in Town hurry through the Dust about Impertinencies,
without knowing the Happiness of Leisure and Retirement. To add to this
Calamity even the Actors are going to desert us for a Season, and we shall not
shortly have so much as a Landscape or Frost-Scene to refresh our selve within
the Midst of our Fatigues. This may not perhaps be so sensible a Loss to any
other as to me; for I confess it is one of my greatest Delights to sit
unobserved and unknown in the Gallery, and entertain my self either with what
is personated on the Stage or observe what Appearances present themselves in
the Audience. If there were no other good Consequences in a Playhouse, than
that so many Persons of different Ranks and Conditions are placed there in
their most pleasing Aspects, that Prospect only would be very far from being
below the Pleasures of a wise Man. There is not one Person you can see, in
whom, if you look with an Inclination to be pleased, you may not behold
some^hing worthy or agreeable. Our Thoughts are ^n our Features; and the Visage
of these in whom Love, Rage, Anger, Jealousy or Envy, have their frequent
Mansions, carries the Traces of those Passions wherever the Amorous, the
Choleric, the Jealous, or the Envious, are pleaed to make their Appearance.
However, the Assembly at a Play is usually made up of such as have a Sense of
some Elegance in Pleasure, by which Means the Audience is generally composed of
those who have gentle Affections, or at least of such as at that Time are in
the best Humor you can ever find them. This has insensibly a good Effect upon
our Spirits; and the Musical Airs which are played to us, put the whole Company
into a Participation of the same Pleasure, and by Consequence for that Time
equal in Hunour, in Fortune, and in Quality. Thus far we gain only by coming
into an Audience; but if we find added to this, the Beauties of proper Action,
the Force of Eloquence, and the Gaiety of well-placed Lights and Scenes, it is
being happy, and seeing others happy for Two Hours; ^ Duration of Bliss not at
all to be slighted by (...) short-lived a Creature as Man. Why then should not
the Duty of the Player be had in much more Esteem than it is at present? If the
Merit of a Performance be to be valued according ^o the Talents which are
necessary to it, the Qualifications of a Player should raise him much ^bove the
Arts and Ways of Life which we call Mercenary or Mechanic. When we look round
^ full House, and behold so few that can (though ^ey set themselves out to Show
as much as the Persons on the Stage do) come up to what the would appear even
in dumb Show, How much does the Actor deserve our Approbation, who adds to the
Advantage of Looks and Motions the Tone of Voice, the Dignity, the Humiliry,
the Sorrow, the Triumph suitable to the Character he personates?

It may possibly be imagined by severe Men, that I am too frequent in the
Mention of the Theatrical Representations; But who is not excessive in the
Discourse of what he extremely likes? Eugenio can lead you to a Gallery of fine
Pictures, which Collection he is always increasing: Crassus through Woods and
Forests, to which he designs to add the neighboring Counties. These are great
and noble Instances of their Magnificence. The Players are my Pictures, and
their Scenes my Territories. By communicating the Pleasure I take in them, it
may in some Measure add to Men's Gratifications this Way, as viewing the Choice
and Wealth of Engenio and Crassus augments the Enjoyments of those whom they
entertain, with a Prospect of such Possessions as would not otherwise fall
within the Reach of their Fortunes.

It is a very good Office one Man does another when he tells him the Manner of
his being pleased; and I have often thought, that a Comment upon the Capacities
of the Players would very much improve the Delight that Way, and impart it to
those who otherwise have no Sense of it.

The First of the present Stage are Wilks and Cibber, perfect Actors in their
different Kinds. Wilks has a singular Talent in representing the Graces of
Nature, Cibber the Deformity in the Affectation of them. Were I a Writer of
Plays^ I should never employ either of them in Pai^ which had not their Bent
this Way. This (...) seen in the immitable Strain and Ruin of go^ Humor which
is kept up in the Character of Wildair, and in the nice and delicate Abuse of
Understanding in that of Sir Novelty. Cibber, in another Light, hits
exquisitely the flat Civility of an affected Gentleman Usher, and Wilks the
easy Frankness of a Gentleman.

If you would observe the Force of the same Capacities in higher Life, Can any
Thing be more ingenuous, than the Behavior of Prince Harry when his Father
checks him? Any Thing more exasperating, than that of Richard, when he insults
his Superiors? To beseech gracefully, to approach respectfully, to pity, to
mourn, to love, are the Places wherein Wilks may be made to shine with the
utmost Beauty: To rally pleasantly, to scorn artfully, to flatter, to ridicule,
and to neglect, are what Cibber would perform with no less Excellence.

When Actors are considered with a View to their Talents, it is not only the
Pleasure of that Hour of Action which the Spectators gain from their
Performance, but the Opposition of Right and Wrong on the Stage would have its
Force (...) the Assistance of our Judgments on other Oc^asions. I have at
present under my Tutelage a ^oung Poet, who, I design, shall entertain the Town
the ensuing Winter. And as he does me ^he Honor to let me see his Comedy as he
writes it, I shall endeavor to make the Parts fit ^he Genio's of the several
Actors, as exactly as their Habits can their Bodies: And because the Two I have
mentioned are to perform the prin^ipal Parts, I have prevailed with the House
to ^t the Careless Husband be acted on Tuesday ^ext, that my young Author may
have a View ^f a Play which is acted to Perfection, both (...) them and all
concerned in it, as being born ^ithin the Walls of the Theater, and written
^ith an exact Knowledge of the Abilities of the Performers. Mr. Wilks will do
his best in this Play, because it is for his own Benefit; and Mr. Cibber,
because he writ it. Besides which, all the great Beauties we have left in Town,
or within Call of it, will be present, because it is the last Play this Season.
This Opportunity will, I hope, inflame my Pupil with such generous Notions from
seeing this fair Assembly as will be then present, that his Play may be
composed of Sentiments and Characters proper to be presented to such an
Audience. His Drama at present has only the Out-Lines drawn. There are, I find,
to be in it all the Reverend Offices of Life, such as Regard to Parents,
Husbands, and honorable Lovers, preserved with the utmost Care; and at the
same Time that Agreeableness of Behavior, with the Intermixture of pleasing
Passions as arise from Innocence and Virtue, interspersed in such a Manner, as
that to be charming and agreeable shall appear the natural Consequence of being
virtuous. This great End is one of those i propose to do in my Censorship; but
if I ^d a thin House, on an Occasion when such a Work is to be promoted, my
Pupil shall return to his Commons at Oxford, and Sheer-Lane and the Theaters be
no longer Correspondents.

The TATLER. [No 183.
-- Fuit haec Sapientia quondam
Publica Privatis secernere. --
Hor.
From Thursd. June 8. to Saturd. June 10. 1710.
From my own Apartment, June 9.
WHEN Men look into their own Bosoms, and consider the generous Seeds which are
there planted, that might, if rightly cultivated, ennoble their Lives, and make
their Virtue venerable to Futurity; How can they, without Tears, reflect on the
universal Degeneracy from that public Spirit, which ought to be the first and
principal Motive of all their Actions? In the Grecian and Roman Nations, they
were wise enough to keep up this great Incentive, and it was impossible to be
in the Fashion without being a Patriot. All Gallantry had its first Source from
hence; and to want a Warmth for the Public Welfare, was a Defect so
scandalous, that he who was guilty of it had no Pretense to Honor or Manhood.
What makes the Depravity among us in this Behalf the more vexatious and irksome
to reflect upon, is, that the Contempt of Life is carried as far amongst us, as
it could be in those memorable People; and we want only a proper Application of
the Qualities which are frequent among us to be as worthy as they. There is
hardly a Man to be found who will not light upon any Occasion which he thinks
may taint his own Honor. Were this Motive as strong in every Thing that
regards the Public, as it is in this our private Case, no Man would pass his
Life away without having distinguished himself by some gallant Instance of his
Zeal toward it in the respective Incidents of his Life and Profession. But it
is so far otherwise, that there cannot at present be a more ridiculous Animal
than one who seems to regard the Good of others. He in Civil Life whose
Thoughts turn upon Schemes which may be of general Benefit, without further
Reflection, is called a Projector; and the Man whose Mind seems intent upon
glorious Achievements, a Knight Errant. The Ridicule among us runs strong
against laudable Actions. Nay, in the ordinary Course of Things and the common
Regards of Life, Negligence of the Public is an Epidemick Vice. The Brewer in
his Excise, the Merchant in his Customs, and for ought we know the Soldier in
his Muster-Rolls, think never the worse of themselves for being guilty of their
respective Fraud toward the Public. This Evil is come to such a fantastical
Height, that he is a Man of a public Spirit, and heroically affected to his
Country, who can go so far as even to turn Usure with all he has in her Funds.
There is not a Citizen in whose Imagination such a one does no^ appear in the
same Light of Glory, as Codr^ Scaevola, or any other great Name in Old Rom^
Were it not for the Heroes of so much per Cen^ as have Regard enough for
themselves and the^ Nation to trade with her with their Wealth, the very Notion
of public Love would long e'^ now have vanished from among us. But ho^ ever
general Custom may hurry us away in the Stream of a common Error, there is no
Evil, (...) Crime, so great as that of being cold in Ma^ters which relate to
the common Good. This (...) in nothing more conspicuous than in a certa^
Willingness to receive any Thing that tends (...) the Diminution of such as
have been conspicuo^ Instruments in our Service. Such Inclination proceed from
the most low and vile Corruption of which the Soul of Man is capable. This
effaces not only the Practice, but the very Approbation of Honor and Virtue;
and has had such an Effect, that to speak freely, the very Sense of Public
Good has no longer a Part even in our Conversations. Can then the most generous
Motive of Life, the Good of others, be so easily banished the Breast of Man? Is
it possible to draw all our Passions inward? Shall the boiling Heat of Youth be
sunk in Pleasures, the Ambition of Manhood in selfish Intrigues? Shall all that
is glorious, all that is worth the Pursuit of great Minds, be so easily rooted
out? When the universal Bent of a People seems diverted from the Sense of their
common Good and common Glory, it looks like a Fatality, and Crisis of impending
Misfortune.

The generous Nations we just now mentioned understood this so very well, that
there was hardly an Oration ever made which did not turn upon this general
Sense, That the Love of their Country was the first and most essential Quality
in an honest Mind. Demosthenes, in a Cause wherein his Fame, Reputation and
Fortune, were embarked, puts his All upon this Issue; Let the Athenians, says
he, be benevolent to me, as they think I have been zealons for them. This great
and discerning Orator knew there was nothing else in Nature could bear him up
against his Adversaries, but this one Quality of having shown himself willing
or able to serve his Country. This certainly is the Test of Merit; and the
first Foundation for deserving Good Will, is having it your self. The Adversary
of this Orator at that Time was Aeschines, a Man of wily Arts and Skill in the
World, who could, as Occasion served, fall in with a National Start of Passion,
or Sullenness of Humor, (which a whole Nation is sometimes taken with as well
as a private Man) and by that Means divert them from their common Sense, into
an Aversion for receiving any Thing in its true Light. But when Demosthenes had
awaked his Audience with tha^ one Hint of judging by the general Tenor of hi^
Life toward them, his Services bore down hi^ Opponent before him, who fled to
the Covert o^ his mean Arts till some more favorable Occasion should offer,
against the superior Merit o^ Demosthenes.

It were to be wished, that Love of their Country were the first Principle of
Action in Men o^ Business, even for their own Sakes; for when the World begins
to examine into their Conduct the Generality, who have no Share in, or Hope^ of
any Part in Power or Riches, but what is the Effect of their own Labor or
Property, will judge of them by no other Method, than that o^ how profitable
their Administration has been (...) the Whole. They who are out of the
Influenc^ of Men's Fortune or Favor, will let them stan^ or fall by this one
only Rule; and Men who ca^ bear being tried by it, are always Popular i^ their
Fall: Those who cannot suffer such a Scrutiny, are contemptible in their
Advancement.

But I am here running into Shreds of Maxim^ from reading Tacitus this Morning,
which ha^ driven me from my Recommendation of public^ Spirit, which was the
intended Purpose of the Lucubration. There is not a more glorious Instance of
it, than in the Character of Regulu^ This same Regulus was taken Prisoner by
the Carthaginians, and was sent by them to Rom^ in order to demand some Punick
Noblemen wh^ were Prisoners in Exchange for himself, and wa^ bound by an Oath
that he would return to Carthage if he failed in his Commission. He proposes
this to the Senate, who were in Suspen^ upon it; which Regulus observing,
(without h^ving the least Notion of putting the Care of h^ own Life in
Competition with the public Good) desired them to consider that he was old,
and almost useless; that those demanded in Exchange were Men of daring Tempers,
and great Merit in Military Affairs, and wondered they would make any Doubt of
permitting him to go back to the short Tortures prepared for him at Carthage,
where he should have the Advantage of ending a long Life both gloriously and
usefully. This generous Advice was consented to, and he took his Leave of his
Country and his weeping Friends to go to certain Death, with that cheerful
Composure, as a Man, after the Fatigue of Business in a Court or a City,
retires to the next Village for the Air.

The TATLER. [No 184.
Una de multis Face Nuptiali
Digna --
Hor.
From Saturday June 10. to Tuesday June 13. 1710.
From my own Apartment, June 12.
THere are certain Occasions of Life which give propitious Omens of the future
good Conduct of it, as well as others which explain our present inward State,
according to our Behavior in them. Of the latter Sort are Funerals; of the
former, Weddings. The Manner of our Carriage when we lose a Friend, shows very
much our Temper, in the Humility of our Words and Actions, and a general Sense
of our destitute Condition, which runs through all our Deportment. This gives a
solemn Testimony of the generous Affection we bore our Friends, when we seem to
disrelish every Thing now we can no more enjoy them, or see them partake in our
Enjoyments. It is very proper and humane to put our selves as it were in their
Livery after their Decease, and wear a Habit unsuitable to Prosperity, while
those we loved and honored are mouldring in the Grave. As this is laudable on
the sorrowful Side; so on the other, Incidents of Success may no less justly be
represented and acknowledged in our outward Figure and Carriage. Of all such
Occasions, that great Change of a Single Life into Marriage is the most
important, as it is the Source of all Relations, and from whence all other
Friendship and Commerce do principally arise. The general Intent of both Sexes
is to dispose of themselves happily and honorably in this State; and as all
the good Qualities we have are exerted to make our Way into it, so the best
Appearance, with Regard to their Minds, their Persons, and their Fortunes, at
the first Entrance into it, is a Due to each other in the married Pair, as well
as a Compliment to the rest of the World. It was an Instruction of a wise
Lawgiver. That unmarried Women should wear such loose Habits, which, in the
flowing of their Garb, should incite their Beholders to a Desire of their
Persons; and that the ordinary Motion of their Bodies might display the Figure
and Shape of their Limbs in such a Manner, as at once to preserve the strictest
Decency, and raise the warmest Inclinations.

This was the Economy of the Legislator for the Increase of People, and at the
same Time for the Preservation of the Genial Bed. She who was the Admiration of
all who beheld her while unmarried, was to bid adieu to the Pleasure of shining
in the Eyes of many, as soon as she took upon her the wedded Condition.
However, there was a Festival of Life allowed the Newmarried, a Sort of
intermediate State between Celibacy and Matrimony, which continued certain
Days. During that Time, Entertainments, Equipages, and other Circumstances of
Rejoicing, were encouraged, and they were permitted to exceed the common Mode
of Living, that the Bride and Bridegroom might learn from such Freedoms of
Conversation to run into a general Conduct to each other, made out of their
past and future State, so to temper the Cares of the Man and the Wife with the
Gieties of the Lover and Mistress.

In those wise Ages the Dignity of Life was kept up, and on the Celebration of
such Solemnities there were no impertinent Whispers and senseless
Interpretations put upon the unaffected Cheerfulness or accidental Seriousness
of the Bride; but Men turned their Thoughts upon the general Reflections, upon
what Issue might probably be expected from such a Couple in the succeeding
Course of their Life, and felicitated them accordingly upon such Prospects.

I must confess, I cannot from any ancient Manuscripts, Sculptures, or Medals,
deduce the Rise of our celebrated Custom of throwing the Stocking; but have a
faint Memory of an Account a Friend gave me of an original Picture in the
Palace of Aldobrandini in Rome. This seems to show a Sense of this Affair very
different from what is usual among us. It is a Grecian Wedding, and the Figures
represented are, a Person offering Sacrifice, a beautiful Damsel dancing, and
another playing on the Harp. The Bride is placed in her Bed, the Bridegroom
sits at the Feet of it, with an Aspect which intimates, his Thoughts were not
only entertained with the Joys with which he was surrounded, but also with a
noble Gratitude, and Divine Pleasure in the Offering, which was then made to
the Gods to invoke their influence on his new Condition. There appears in the
Face of the Woman a Mixture of Fear, Hope, and Modesty; in the Bridegroom, a
wellgoverned Rapture. As you see in great Spirits, Grief which discovers it
self the more by forbearing Tears and Complaints, you may observe also the
highest Joy is too big for Utterance, the Tongue being of all the Organs the
least capable of expressing such a Circumstance. The Nuptial Torch, the Bower,
the Marriage Song, are all Particulars which we meet with in the Allusions of
the ancient Writers; and in every one of them something is to be observed,
which denotes their Industry to aggrandize and adorn this Occasion above all
others.

With us all Order and Decency in this Point is perverted, by the insipid Mirth
of certain Animals we usually call Wags. These are a Species of all Men the
most insupportable. One cannot without some Reflection say, whether their flat
Mirth provokes us more to Pity or to Scorn; but if one considers with how great
Affectation they utter their frigid Conceits, Commiseration immediately changes
it self into Contempt.

A Wag is the last Order even of Pretenders to Wit and good Humor. He has
generally his Mind prepared to receive some Occasion of Merriment, but is of
himself too empty to draw any out of his own Set of Thoughts, and therefore
laughs at the next Thing he meets, not because i^ is ridiculous, but because he
is under a Necessit^ of Laughing. A Wag is one that never in its Lif^ saw a
beautiful Object, but sees, what it does see^ in the most low and most
inconsiderable Light (...) can be placed. There is a certain Ability nece^sary
to behold what is amiable and worthy (...) our Approbation, which little Minds
want, an^ attempt to hide by a general Disregard to ever^ Thing they behold
above what they are able (...) relish. Hence it is, that a Wag in an Assembl^
is ever guessing, how well such a Lady slept la^ Night, and how much such a
young Fellow (...) pleased with himself. The Wag's Gaiety consists in a certain
professed ill Breeding, as if it were an Excuse for committing a Fault, that a
Man knows he does so. Though all public Places are full of Persons of this
Order, yet, because I will not allow Impertinence and Affectation to get the
better of native Innocence and Simplicity of Manners, I have, in Spite of such
little Disturbers of public Entertainments, persuaded my Brother Tranquillus
and his Wife my Sister Jenny, in Favor of Mr. Wilks, to be at the Play to
Morrow Evening.

They, as they have so much good Sense as to act naturally, without Regard to
the Observation of others, will not, I hope, be discomposed if any of the Fry
of Wags should take upon them to make themselves merry upon the Occasion of
their coming, as they intend, in their Wedding Clothes. My Brother is a plain,
worthy, and honest Man, and as it is natural for Men of that Turn to be
mightily taken with sprightly and airy Women, my Sister has a Vivacity which
may perhaps give Hopes to Impertinents, but will be esteemed the Effect of
Innocence among wife Men. They design to sit with me in the Box, which the
House have been so complaisant to offer me whenever I think fit to come thither
in my public Character.

I do not in the least doubt, but the true Figure of Conjugal Affection will
appear in their Looks and Gestures. My Sister does not affect to be gorgeous in
her Dress, and thinks the Happiness of a Wife is more visible in a cheerful
Look than a gay Apparel. It is a hard Task to speak of Persons so nearly
related to one with Decency, but I may say, all who shall be at the Play will
allow him to have the Mien of a worthy English Gentleman; her, that of a
notable and deserving Wife.

The TATLER. [No 185.
Notitiam primosque Gradus Vicinia fecit,
Tempore crevit Amor, Taedae quoque forte coissent,
Sed vetuere Patres, quod non potuere vetare,
Ex aequo captis ardebant Mentibus ambo.
Ovid. de Pyr. and This.
From Tuesday June 13. to Thursday June 15. 1710.
From my own Apartment, June 14.
AS soon as I was up this Morning, my Man gave me the following Letter, which,
since it leads to a Subject that may prove of common Use to the World, I shall
take Notice of with as much Expedition as my Fair Petitioner could desire.

Mr. Bickerstaff,
SInce you have so often declared your self a Patron of the Distressed, I must
acquaint you, that I am Daughter to a Country Gentleman of good Sense, and may
expect 3 or 4000 l for my Fortune. I love and am beloved by Philander, a young
Gentleman who has an Estate of 500 l. per Annum, and is our near Neighbor in
the Country every Summer. My Father^ though he has been a long Time acquainted
with it, constantly refuses to comply with ou^ mutual Inclinations: But what
most of all torments me, is, That if ever I speak in Commendation of my Lover,
he is much louder in hi^ Praises than my self; and professes, that it is ou^ of
pure Love and Esteem for Philander, as wel^ as his Daughter, that he can never
consent w^ should marry each other; when (as he terms it) we may both do so
much better. It must indeed be confessed, that Two Gentlemen of considerable
Fortunes, made their Addresses to me last Winter, and Philander (as I have
since learned) was offered a young Heiress with 15000 l. but it seems we could
neither of us think, that accepting those Matches would be doing better than
remaining constant to our first Passion. Your Thoughts upon the Whole may
perhaps have some Weight with my Father, who is one of your Admirers, as is

Your Humble Servant, Silvia.
P. S. You are desired to be speedy, since my Father daily presses me to accept
of what he calls an Advantageous Offer.




There is no Calamity in Life that falls heavier upon humane Nature than a
Disappointment in Love, especially when it happens between Two Persons whose
Hearts are mutually engaged to each other. It is this Distress which has given
Occasion to some of the finest Tragedies that were ever written, and daily
fills the World with Melancholy, Discontent, Phrensy, Sickness, Despair, and
Death. I have often admired at the Barbarity of Parents, who so frequently
interpose their Authority in this grand Article of Life. I would fain ask
Silvia's Father, Whether he thinks he can bestow a greater Favor on his
Daughter, than to put her in a Way to live happily? Whether a Man of
Philander's Character, with 500 l. per Annum, is not more likely to contribute
to that End, than many a young Fellow whom he may have in his Thoughts with so
many Thousands? Whether he can make Amends to his Daughter by any Increase of
Riches, for the Loss of that Happiness she proposes to her self in her
Philander? Or whether a Father should compound with his Daughter to be
miserable, though she were to get 20000 l. by the Bargain: I suppose he would
have her reflect with Esteem on his Memory after his Death: And does he think
this a proper Method to make her do so, when, as often as she thinks on the
Loss of her Philander, she must at the same Time remember him as the cruel
Cause of it? Any transientill Humor is soon forgotten; but the Reflection of
such a Cruelty must continue to raise Resentments as long as Life it self; and
by this one Piece of Barbarity, an indulgent Father loses the Merit of all his
past Kindnesses. It is not impossible but she may deceive her self in the
Happiness which she proposes from Philander; but as in such a Case she can have
no one to blame but her self, she will bear the Disappointment with greater
Patience; but if she never makes the Experiment, however happy she may be with
another, she will still think she might have been happier with Philander. There
is a kind of Sympathy in Souls that fits them for each other; and we may be
assured, when we see Two Personsengaged in the Warmths of a mutual Affectation,
that there are certain Qualities in both their Minds which bear a Resemblance
to one another. A generous and constant Passion in an agreeable Lover, where
there is not too great a Disparity in other Circumstances, is the greatest
Blessing that can befall the Person beloved; and if overlooked in one, may
perhaps never be found in another. I shall conclude this with a celebrated
Instance of a Father's Indulgence in this Particular, which, though carried to
an Extravagance, has something in it so tender and amiable, as may justly
reproach the Hardness of Temper that is to be met with in many a British Father.

Antiochus, a Prince of great Hopes, fell passionately in Love with the young
Queen Stratonice, who was his Mother-in-Law, and had bore a Son to the old King
Seleucus his Father. The Prince finding it impossible to extinguish his
Passion, fell sick, and refused all manner of Nourishment, being determined to
put an End to that Life which was become insupportable.

Erasistratus the Physician soon found that Love was his Distemper; and
observing the Alteration in his Pulse and Countenance whenever Stratonice made
him a Visit, was soon satisfied that he was dying for his young Mother-in-Law.
Knowing the old King's Tenderness for his Son, when he one Morning enquired of
his Health, he told him, That the Prince's Distemper was Love; but that it was
incurable, because it was impossible for him to possess the Person whom he
loved. The King, surprised at this Account, desired to know how his Son's
Passion could be incurable? Why Sir, replied Erasistratus, because he is in
Love with the Person I am married to.

The old King immediately conjured him by all his past Favors to save the Life
of his Son and Successor. Sir, said Erasistratus, Would your Majesty but fancy
your self in my Place, you would see the Unreasonableness of what you desire?
Heaven is my Witness, said Seleucus, I could resign even my Stratonice to save
my Antiochus. At this the Tears ran down his Cheeks, which when the Physician
saw, taking him by the Hand, Sir, says he, If these are your real Sentiments,
the Prince's Life is out of Danger; it is Stratonice for whom he dies. Seleucus
immediately gave Orders for folemnizing the Marriage; and the young Queen, to
show her Obedience, very generously exchanged the Father for the Son.

The TATLER. [No 186.
Emitur sola Virtute Potestas. Claud.
From Thursday June 15. to Saturday June 17. 1710.
Sheer-Lane, June 16.
AS it has been the Endeavor of these our Labors to extirpate from among the
polite or busy Part of Mankind, all such as are either prejudicial or
insignificant to Society; so it ought to be no less our Study to supply the
Havoc we have made by an exact Care of the growing Generation. But when we
begin to inculcate proper Precepts to the Children of this Island, except we
could take them out of their Nurses Arms, we see an Amendment is almost
impracticable; for we find the whole Species of our Youth and grown Men is
incorrigibly prepossessed with Vanity, Pride, or Ambition, according to the
respective Pursuits to which they turn themselves: By which Means the World is
infatuated with the Love of Appearance instead of Things. Thus the vain Man
takes Praise for Honor, the proud Man Ceremony for Respect, the ambitious Man
Power for Glory. These three Characters are indeed of very near Resemblance,
but differently received by Mankind. Vanity makes Men ridiculous; Pride,
odious; and Ambition, terrible. The Foundation of all which is, That they are
grounded upon Falsehood: For if Men, instead of studying to appear considerable,
were in their own Hearts Possessors of the Requisites for Esteem, the
Acceptance they otherwise unfortunately aim at would be as inseparable from
them, as Approbation is from Truth it self. By this Means they would have some
Rule to walk by; and they may ever be assured, that a good Cause of Action will
certainly receive a suitable Effect. It may be an useful Hint in such Cases for
a Man to ask of himself, Whether he really is what he has a Mind to be thought?
If he is, he need not give himself much further Anxiety. What will the World
say? is the common Question in Matters of Difficulty; as if the Terror lay
wholly in the Sense which others, and not we our selves, shall have of our
Actions. From this one Source arise all the Impostors in every Art and
Profession, in all Places, among all Persons in Conversation, as well as in
Business. Hence it is, that a vain Fellow takes twice as much Pains to be
ridiculous, as would make him sincerely agreeable.

Can any one be better fashioned, better bred, or has any one more good Nature,
than Damasippus? But the whole Scope of his Looks and Actions tends so
immediately to gain the good Opinion of all he converses with, that he loses it
for that only Reason. As it is the Nature of Vanity to impose false Shows for
Truths, so does it also turn Real Possessions into Imaginary Ones. Damasippus,
by assuming to himself what he has not, robs himself of what he has.

There is nothing more necessary to establish Reputation, than to suspend the
Enjoyment of it. He that cannot bear the Sense of Merit with Silence, must of
Necessity destroy it: For Fame being the general Mistress of Mankind, whoever
gives it to himself, insults all to whom he relates any Circumstances to his
own Advantage. He is considered as an open Ravisher of that Beauty, for whom
all others pine in Silence. But some Minds are so incapable of any Temperance
in this Particular, that on every Second in their Discourse you may observe an
Earnestness in their Eyes, which shows they wait for your Approbation, and
perhaps the next Instant cast an Eye on a Glass to see how they like
themselves. Walking the other Day in a neighboring Inn of Court, I saw a more
happy and more graceful Orator than I ever before had heard, or read of. A
Youth, of about Nineteen Years of Age, was in an Indian Nightgown and
Laced-Cap^ pleading a Cause before a Glass: The young Fellow had a very good
Air, and seemed to hold his Brief in his Hand rather to help his Action, than
that he wanted Notes for his further Information. When I first began to observe
him, I feared he would soon be alarmed; but he was so zealous for his Client,
and so favorably received by the Court, that he went on with great Fluency to
inform the Bench, That he humbly hoped they would not let the Merit of the
Cause suffer by the Youth and Inexperience of the Pleader; that in all Things
he submitted to their Candor; and modestly desired they would not conclude,
but that Strength of Argument and Force of Reason may be consistent with Grace
of Action and Comeliness of Person.

To me, who see People every Day in the midst of Crowds (whomsoever they seem
to address to) talk only to themselves and of themselves, this Orator was not
so extravagant a Man as perhaps another would have thought him; but I took Part
in his Success, and was very glad to find he had in his Favor Judgment and
Costs without any Manner of Opposition.

The Effects of Pride and Vanity are of Consequence only to the Proud and the
Vain, and tend to no further Ill than what is Personal to themselves, in
preventing their Progress in any Thing that is worthy and laudable, and
creating Envy instead of Emulation of superior Virtue. These ill Qualities are
to be found only in such as have so little Minds, as to circumscribe their
Thoughts and Designs within what properly relates to the Value which they think
due to their dear and amiable selves: But Ambition, which is the Third great
Impediment to Honor and Virtue, is a Fault of such as think themselves born
for moving in an higher Orb, and prefer being Powerful and Mischievous to being
Virtuous and Obscure. The Parent of this Mischief in Life, so far as to
regulate it into Schemes, and make it possess a Man's whole Heart, without his
believing himself a Demon, was Machiavil. He first taught, That a Man must
necessarily appear weak to be honest. Hence it gains upon the Imagination, that
a great is not so despicable as a little Villain; and Men are insensibly led to
a Belief, that the Aggravation of Crimes is the Diminution of them. Hence the
Impiety of thinking one Thing and speaking another. In Pursuance of this empty
and unsatisfying Dream, to betray, to undermine, to kill in themselves all
natural Sentiments of Love to Friends or Country, is the willing Practice of
such as are thirsty of Power, for any other Reason than that of being useful
and acceptable to Mankind.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Whereas Mr. Bickerstaff has lately received a Letter out of Ireland, dated
June 9. importing. That he is grown very dull, for the Postage of which Mr.
Morphew charges One Shilling; and another without Date of Place or Time, for
which he the said Morphew charges Two pence: It is desired, That for the future
his courteous and uncourteous Readers will go a little further in expressing
their good and ill Will, and pay for the Carriage of their Letters, otherwise
the intended Pleasure or Pain which is designed for Mr. Bickerstaff, will be
wholly disappointed.

The TATLER. [No 187.
-- Pudet haec Opprobria nobis
Et dici potuisse and non potuisse refelli.
Ovid.
From Saturd. June 17. to Tuesd. June 20. 1710.
From my own Apartment, June 19.
Pasquin of Rome to Isaac Bickerstaff of London.
HIS Holiness is gone to Castle Gandolpho, much discomposed at some late
Accounts from the Missionaries in your Island: For a Committee of Cardinals,
which lately sat for the reviving the Force of some obsolete Doctrines, and
drawing up Amendments to certain Points of Faith, have represented the Church
of Rome to be in great Danger, from a Treatise written by a learned Englishman,
which carries Spiritual Power much higher than we could have dared to have
attempted even here. His Book is called, An Epistolary Discourse, proving from
the Scriptures and the First Fathers, That the Soul (...) a Principle naturally
Mortal: Wherein is proved, That none have the Power of giving this Divine
immortalizing Spirit since the Apostles, but the Bishops. By Henry Dodwell, A.
M. The Affection appeared to our Literati so short and effectual a Method of
subjecting the Laiety, that it is feared Auricular Confession and Absolution
will not be capable of keeping the Clergy of Rome in any Degree of Greatness,
in Competition with such Teachers whose Flocks shall receive this Opinion. What
gives the greater Jealousy here is, that in the Catalogue of Treatises which
have been lately burnt within the British Territories, there is no Mention made
of this learned Work; which Circumstance is a sort of Implication, that the
Tenet is not held Erroneous, but that the Doctrine is received amongst you as
Orthodox. The Youth of this Place are very much divided in Opinion, Whether a
very memorable Quotation which the Author repeats out of Tertullian, be not
rather of the Style and Manner of Meursius? In illo ipso Voluptatis ultimae
aestu quo genitale Virus expellitur, Nonne aliquid de Anima quoque sentimus
exire, atque adeo marcessimus and devigescimus cum Luic Detrimento? This Piece
of Latin goes no further than to tells us how our Fathers got us, so that we
are still at a Loss how we afterward commence eternal; for Creando infunditur,
and infundendo creatur, which is mentioned soon after, may allude only to Flesh
and Blood as well as the former. Your Readers in this City, some of whom have
very much approved the Warmth with which you have attacked Free-Thinkers,
Atheists, and other Enemies to Religion and Virtue, are very much disturbed
that you have given them no Account of this remarkable Dissertation: And I am
employed by them to desire you would with all possible Expedition send me over
the Ceremony of the Creation of Souls, as well as a List of all the Mortal and
Immortal Men within the Dominions of Great Britain. When you have done me this
Favor, I must trouble you for other Tokens of your Kindness, and particularly
I desire you would let me have the Religious Handkerchief, which is of late so
much worn in England, for I have promised to make a Present of it to a
Courtesan of a French Minister.

Letters from the Frontiers of France inform us, That a young Gentleman who was
to have been created a Cardinal on the next Promotion, has put off his Design
of coming to Rome so soon as was intended, having, as it is said, received
Letters from Great Britain, wherein several Vertuosi of that Island have
desired him to suspend his Resolutions toward a Monastic Life, till the
British Grammarians shall publish their Explication of the Words Indefeazible
and Revolution. According as these Two hard Terms are made to fit the Mouths of
the People, this Gentleman takes his Measures for his Journey hither.

Your New Bedlam has been read and considered by some of your Countrymen among
us; and one Gentleman, who is now here as a Traveller, says, your Design is
impracticable, for that there can be no Place large enough to contain the
Number of your Lunaticks. He advises you therefore to name the Ambient Sea for
the Boundary of your Hospital. If what he says be true, I do not see how you
can think of any other Enclosure; for according to his Discourse, the whole
People are taken with a Vertigo; great and popular Actions are received with
Coldness and Discontent; ill News hoped for with Impatience; Heroes in your
Service are treated with Calumny, while Criminals pass through your Towns with
Acclamations.

This Englishman went on to say, you seemed^ at present to flag under a Satiety
of Success, is if you wanted Misfortune as a necessary Vicissitude. Yet, alas!
though Men have but a cold Relish of Prosperity, quick is the Anguish o^ the
contrary Fortune. He proceeded to make Comparisons of Times, Seasons, and great
Incidents. After which he grew too learned (...) my Understanding, and talked
of Hanno (...) Carthaginian, and his irreconcilable Hatred (...) the glorious
Commander Hannibal. Hannibal, said he, was able to march to Rome it self, and
brought that ambitious People, which designed no less than the Empire of the
World, to sue for Peace in the most abject and servile Manner; when Faction at
Home detracted from the Glory of his Actions, and after many Artifices, at last
prevailed with the Senate to recall him from the midst of his Victories, and in
the very Instant when he was to reap the Benefit of all his Toils, by reducing
the then common Enemy of all Nations which had Liberty to Reason. When Hannibal
heard the Message of the Carthaginian Senators who were sent to recall him, he
was moved with a generous and disdainful Sorrow, and is reported to have said,
Hannibal then must be conquered not by the Arms of the Romans, whom he has
often put to Flight, but by the Envy and Detraction of his Countrymen. Nor
shall Scipio triumph so much in his Fall as Hanno, who will smile to have
purchased the Ruin of Hannibal, though attended with the Fall of Carthage.

I am, Sir, etc. PASQUIN.


Will's Coffee-house, June 19.
There is a sensible Satisfaction in observing the Countenance and Action of
the People on some Occasions. To gratify my self in this Pleasure, I came
hither with all Speed this Evening with an Account of the Surrender of Douay.
As soon as the Battel-Criticks heard it, they immediately drew some Comfort, in
that it must have cost us a great deal of Men. Others were so negligent of the
Glory of their Country, that they went on in their Discourse on the full House
which is to be at Othello on Thursday, and the Curiosity they should go with to
see Wilks play a Part so very different from what he had ever before appeared
in, together with the Expectation that wa^ raised in the gay Part of the Town
on that Occasion.

This universal Indolence and Inattention amon^ us to Things that concern the
Public, made m^ look back with the highest Reverence on the glorious Instances
in Antiquity, of a contrary Behavior in the like Circumstances. Harry Englis^
upon observing the Room so little roused on the News, fell into the same Way of
Thinking. How unlike, said he, Mr. Bickerstaff, are we to the ol^ Romans? There
was not a Subject of their Sta^ but thought himself as much concerned in the
Honor of his Country, as the first Officer of th Commonwealth. How do I admire
the Messenger, who ran with a Thorn in his Foot to tell th News of a Victory to
the Senate! He had no Leisure for his private Pain, till he had expresse^ his
public Joy; nor could he suffer as a Man, (...) he had triumphed as a Roman.

The TATLER. [No 188
Quae Regio in Terris nostri non Plena Laboris?
Virg
From Tuesday June 20. to Thursday June 22. 1710
From my own Apartment, June 21.
I Was this Morning looking over my Letters the I have lately received from my
several Co^respondents; some of which referring to my la^ Papers, I have laid
aside, with an Intent to give m^ Reader a Sight of them. The First criticizes
upon my Green-house, and is as follows:

South Wales, June 7. Mr. Bickerstaff,
THis Letter comes to you from my Orangery, which I intend to reform as much as
I can, according to your ingenious Model, and shall only beg of you to
communicate to me your Secret of preserving Grass-plots in a covered Room; for
in the Climate where my Country-Seat lies, they require Rain and Dews as well
as Sun and fresh Air, and cannot live upon such fine Food as your Sifted
Weather. I must likewise desire you to write over your Green-house the
following Motto; Hic Ver perpetuum, atque alienis Mensibus Aestas.
Instead of your O! Quis me gelidis sub Montibus Haemi
Sistat, and ingenti Ramorum protegat umbra?
Which, under Favor, is the panting of one in Summer after cool Shades, and
not of one in Winter after a Summer House. The rest of your Plan is very
beautiful; and that your Friend who has so well described it, may enjoy it many
Winters, is the hearty Wish of

His and your unknown, etc.


This Oversight of a Grass plot in my Friend's Green-house, puts me in Mind of
a like Inconsistency in a celebrated Picture, where Moses is represented as
striking a Rock, and the Children of Israel quenching their Thirst at the
Waters that flow from it, and run through a beautiful Landscape of Groves and
Meadows, which could not flourish in a Place where Water was to have been found
only by a Miracle.

The next Letter comes to me from a Kentish Yeoman, who is very angry with me
for my Advice to Parents, occasioned by the Amors of Silvia and Philander, as
related in my Paper, No 185.

'Squire Bickerstaff,
I Don't know by what Chance, one of your Tatlers is got into my Family, and
has almost turned the Brains of my eldest Daughter Winifred, who has been so
undutiful as to fall in Love of her own Head, and tells me a foolish Heathen
Story that she has read in your Paper to persuade me to give my Consent. I am
too wise to let Children have their own Wills in a Business like Marriage. It
is a Matter in which neither I my self, nor any of my Kindred, were ever
humoured. My Wife and I never pretended to love one another like your Silvia's
and Philanders; and yet if you saw our Fire Side, you would be satisfied we are
not always a squabbling. For my Part, I think that where Man and Woman come
together by their own good Liking, there is so much Fondling and Fooling, that
it hinders young People from minding their Business. I must therefore desire
you to change your Note, and instead of advising us old Folks^ who perhaps have
more Wit than your self, to let Silvia know, that she ought to act like a
dutiful Daughter, and marry the Man that she does not care for. Our Great
Grandmother^ were all bid to marry first, and Love would come afterward; and I
don't see why their Daughters should follow their own Invention^ I am resolved
Winifred shall not.

Yours, etc


This Letter is a natural Picture of ordinary Contracts, and of the Sentiments
of those Minds tha^ lie under a Kind of intellectual Rusticity. The trifling
Occasion made me run over in my Imagination the many Scenes I have observed of
the married Condition, wherein the Quintessence (...) Pleasure and Pain are
represented as they accompany that State, and no other. It is certain, the are
a Thousand Thousand like the abovementioned Yeoman and his Wife, who are never
highly pleased or distasted in their whole Lives: But when we consider the more
informed Part of Mankind, and look upon their Behavior, it then appears that
very little of their Time is indifferent, but generally spent in the most
anxious Vexation, or the highest Satisfaction. Shakespeare has admirably
represented both the Aspects of this State in the most excellent Tragedy of
Othello. In the Character of Desdemona, he runs through all the Sentiments of a
virtuous Maid, and a tender Wife. She is captivated by his Virtue, and faithful
to him, as well from that Motive, as Regard to her own Honor. Othello is a
great and noble Spirit, misled by the Villainy of a false Friend to suspect her
Innocence, and resents it accordingly. When after the many Instances of Passion
the Wife is told her Husband is jealous, her Simplicity makes her incapable of
believing it, and say, after such Circumstances as would drive another Woman
into Distraction,

I think the Sun where he was born
Drew all such Humors from him.
This Opinion of him is so just, that his noble and tender Heart beats it self
to Pieces before he can affront her with the Mention of his Jealousy; and owns,
this Suspicion has blotted out all the Sense of Glory and Happiness which
before it was possessed with, when he laments himself in the warm Allusions of
a Mind accustomed to Entertainments so very different from the Pangs of
Jealousy and Revenge. How moving is his Sorrow, when he cries out as follows!

I had been happy, if the general Camp.
Pioneers and all, ^ad tasted her sweet Body,
So I had nothing known. Oh now! for ever
Farewell the tranquil Mind! Farewell Content,
Farewell the plumed Troops, and the big Wars,
That make Ambition Virtue! Oh Farewell!
Farewell the neighing Steed and the shrill Trump,
The Spirit-stirring Drum, the Ear-piercing Fife,
The Royal Banner, and all Quality,
Pride, Pomp, and Circumstance, of glorious War.
And Oh ye Mortal Engines! whose rude Throats
The Immortal Jove's dread Clamours counterfeit,
Farewell! Othello's Occupation's gone.
I believe I may venture to say, There is not in any other Part of Shakespeare's
Works more strong and lively Pictures of Nature than in this. I shall therefore
steal incog. to see it, out of Curiosity to observe how Wilks and Cibber touch
those Places where Betterton and Sandford so very highly excelled. But now I am
got into a Discourse o^ Acting, with which I am so professedly pleased^ I shall
conclude this Paper with a Note I have ju^ received from the Two ingenious
Friends, Mr Penkethman, and Mr. Bullock.

SIR,
FInding by your Paper, No 182, that you a^ drawing Parallels between the
greate^ Actors of the Age; as you have already begu^ with Mr. Wilks and Mr.
Cibber, we desire yo^ would do the same Justice to your humble Servants,

William Bullock, and William Penkethman


For the Information of Posterity, I shall comply with this Letter, and set
these Two great Me^ in such a Light as Sallust has placed his Cato an^ Caesar.

Mr. William Bullock and Mr. William Penkethman are of the same Age,
Profession, and Se^ They both distinguish themselves in a very particular
Manner under the Discipline of the Crab-Tree, with this only Difference, That
Mr. Bullock has the most agreeable Squawl, and Mr. Penkethman the more graceful
Shrug. Penkethman devours a cold Chick with great Applause; Bullock's Talent
lies chiefly in Sparagrass. Penkethman is very dext'rous at conveying himself
under a Table; Bullock is no less active at jumping over a Stick. Mr.
Penkethman has a great deal of Money, but Mr. Bullock is the taller Man.

The TATLER. [No 189.
Est in Juvencis, est in Equis Patrum
Virtus; nec imbellem feroces
Progenerant Aquilae Columbam.
Hor.
From Thursday June 22. to Saturday June 24. 1710.
From my own Apartment, June 23.
HAving lately turned my Thoughts upon the Consideration of the Behavior of
Parents to Children in the great Affair of Marriage, I took much Delight in
turning over a Bundle of Letters which a Gentleman's Steward in the Country had
sent me some Time ago. This Parcel is a Collection of Letters written by the
Children of the Family (to which he belongs) to their Father, and contain all
the little Passages of their Lives, and the new Idea's they received as their
Years advanced. There is in them an Account of their Diversions as well as
their Exercises; and what I thought very remarkable, is, That Two Sons of the
Family, who now make considerable Figures in the World, gave Omens of that Sort
of Character which they now bear, in the first Rudiments of Thought which they
show in their Letters. Were one to point out a Method of Education, one could
not, methinks, frame one more pleasing or improving than this; where the
Children get an Habit of communicating their Thoughts and Inclinations to their
best Friend with so much Freedom, that he can form Schemes for their future
Life and Conduct from an Observation of their Tempers, and by that Means be
early enough in choosing their Way of Life, to make them forward in some Art or
Science at an Age when others have not determined what Profession to follow. As
to the Persons concerned in this Packet I am speaking of, they have given great
Proofs of the Force of this Conduct of their Father in the Effect it has had
upon their Lives and Manners. The elder, who is a Scholar, showed from his
Infancy a Propensity to polite Studies, and has made a suitable Progress in
Literature; but his Learning is so well woven into his Mind, that from the
Impressions of it, he seems rather to have contracted an Habit of Life, than
Manner of Discourse. To his Books he seems to owe a good Economy in his
Affairs, and a Complacency in his Manners, though in others that Way of
Education has commonly a quite different Effect. The Epistles of the other Son
are full of Accounts of what he thought most remarkable in his Reading. He
sends his Father for News the ^ast noble Story he had read. I observe, he is
particularly touched with the Conduct of Codrus, who plotted his own Death,
because the Oracle had said, If he were not killed, the Enemy should prevail
over his Country. Many other Incidents in his little Letters give Omens of a
Soul capable of generous Undertakings; and what makes it the more particular,
is, That this Gentleman had, in the present War, the Honor and Happiness of
doing an Action for which only it was worth coming into the World. Their Father
is the most intimate Friend they have, and they always consult him rather than
any other, when any Error has happened in their Conduct through Youth and
Inadvertency. The Behavior of this Gentleman to his Sons, has made his Life
pass away with the Pleasures of a second Youth; for as the Vexations which Men
receive from their Children hasten the Approach of Age, and double the Force of
Years; so the Comforts which they reap from them, are Balm to all other
Sorrows, and disappoint the Injuries of Time. Parents of Children repeat their
Lives in their Offspring, and their Concern for them is so near, that they feel
all their Sufferings and Enjoyments as much as if they regarded their own
proper Persons. But it is generally so far otherwise, that the common Race of
'Squires in this Kingdom use their Sons as Persons that are waiting only for
their Funerals, and Spies upon their Health and Happiness; as indeed they are
by their own making them such. In Cases where a Man takes the Liberty after
this Manner to reprehend others, it is commonly said, Let him look at Home. I
am sorry to own it; but there is one Branch of the House of the Bickerstaffs,
who have been as erroneous in their Conduct this Way as any other Family
whatsoever. The Head of this Branch is now in Town, and has brought up with him
his Son and Daughter (who are all the Children he has) in order to be put some
Way into the World, and see Fashions. They are both very ill-bred Cubs, and
having lived together from their Infancy without Knowledge of the Distinctions
and Decencies that are proper to be paid to each other's Sex, they squabble
like two Brothers. The Father is one of those who knows no better than that all
Pleasure is Debauchery, and imagines, when he sees a Man become his Estate,
that he will certainly spend it. This Branch are a People who never had among
them one Man eminent either for Good or Ill; however, have all along kept their
Heads just above Water, not by a prudent and regular Economy, but by
Expedients in the Matches they have made into their House. When one of the
Family has, in the Pursuit of Foxes, and in the Entertainment of Clowns, ran
out the Third Part of the Value of his Estate, such a Spendthrist has dressed
up his eldest Son, and married what they call a Good Fortune, who has supported
the Father as a Tyrant over them, during his Life, in the same House or
Neighborhood. The Son in Succession has just taken the same Method to keep up
his Dignity, till the Mortgages he has eat and drank himself into, have reduced
him to the Necessity of sacrificing his Son also, in Imitation of his
Progenitor. This had been for many Generations the whole that had happened in
the Family of Sam. Bickerstaff, till the Time of my present Cousin Samuel, the
Father of the young People we have just now spoken of.

Samuel Bickerstaff Esquire is so happy, as that by several Legacies from distant
Relations, Deaths of Maiden Sisters, and other Instances of good Fortune, he
has, besides his real Estate, a great Sum of ready Money. His Son at the same
Time knows he has a good Fortune, which the Father cannot alienate, though he
strives to make him believe he depends only on his Will for Maintenance. Tom is
now in his Nineteenth Year, Mrs. Mary in her Fifteenth. Cousin Samuel, who
understands no one Point of good Behavior as it regards all the rest of the
World, is an exact Critic in the Dress, the Motion, the Looks and Gestures of
his Children. What adds to their Misery, is, That he is excessively fond of
them, and the greatest Part of their Time is spent in the Presence of this nice
Observer. Their Life is one continued Constraint. The Girl never turns her
Head, but she is warned not to follow the proud Minxes of the Town. The Boy is
not to turn Fop, or be quarrelsom; at the same Time not to take an Affront. I
had the good Fortune to dine with him to day, and heard his fatherly Table-Talk
as we sat at Dinner, which, if my Memory does not fail me, for the Benefit of
the World, I shall set down as he spoke it, which was much as follows, and may
be of great Use to those Parents who seem to make it a Rule, That their
Children's Turn to enjoy the World is not to commence, till they themselves
have left it.

Now, Tom, I have bought you Chambers in the Inns of Court. I allow you to take
a Walk once or twice a Day round the Garden. If you mind your Business, you
need not study to be as great a Lawyer as Cook upon Littleton. I have that that
will keep you; but be sure you keep an exact Account of your Linen. Write down
what you give out to your Landress, and what she brings Home again. Go as
little as possible to the other End of the Town; but if you do, come Home early.
I believe I was as sharp as you for your Ears, and I had my Hat snatched off my
Head coming Home late at a Stop by St. Clement's Church, and I don't know from
that Day to this who took it. I do not care if you learn to fence a little, for
I would not have you be made a Fool of. Let me have an Account of every Thing
every Post; I am willing to be at that Charge, and I think you need not spare
your Pains. As for you, Daughter Molly, don't mind one Word that is said to you
in London, for it is only for your Money. The End of the Third Volume.
AN INDEX TO THE TATLERS.
Vol. III.
A.
ABsurdity, its Importunity and Folly. Page 266 -- It resembles Impudence.
ibid. Advertisement, of a Play, called Love for Love, to be acted for Mr.
Dogget's Benefit. 32 -- Of Pasquin and Morforio. 81 -- Of the Silent Woman, for
the Benefit of Mr. Eastcourt. ibid. -- To the Lady who chose Mr. Bickerstaff
for her Valentine. 116 -- Concerning the Whetters near the Royal Exchange. 120
-- About New Bedlam. 121 -- To all such as delight in soft Lines. 143 -- To
some Midnight Rakes. ibid. -- About Ladies wrought Shoes, and Slippers. 144 --
To his Correspondent in Scotland. 149 Advertisement, from a Well behaved young
Gentleman in Cornhill. Page 153 -- Of the Sale of a Bass-Viol, by Way of
Lottery, 259 -- Of walking Pictures, sold by Auction. 264, 283 -- To Philander,
upon his Letter to Clarinda. 279 -- Of a Stage-Coach, and Dancing-Shoes. 329 --
Concerning Two Letters sent to Mr. Bickerstaff. 355 Aeneas, his Descent into
the Empire of Death. 194 -- His Adventures there. 195, 196, etc. Aesop, a Fable
of his, applied upon the Receipt of a Letter sent to Mr. Bickerstaff. 6
Afflictions imaginary often prove the most insupportable. 155, 156, and seq.
Agamemnon, his Invective against the Female Sex. 185 Age, the Glory of the
Present Age, in Relation to England. 78 Album Graecum, prescribed to a sick
Dog. 35 Allegories profitable to the Mind, in the same manner as Hunting to the
Body. 159 The Application of an Allegorical Fable out of Homer. 161 Ambition,
what Age of Man most addicted to it. 26 -- In the Good it becomes true Honor.
ibid. -- The Effects of Ambition. 352 -- The Foundation of it. ibid. Anticyra,
an Island, assigned by the Romans as an Habitation for Madmen. 55 -- The
Product of it. 56 -- Compared to Montpellier. ibid. Antiochus, in Love with his
Mother in Law. 351 Apology for great Men in the conferring of their Favors.
266 A^istaeus, his great Mastery over himself. 305 Arthur (King), the first
that ever sat down to a whole roasted Ox. 163 Athenians, an Instance of the
Public Spirit, and Virtue of that People. 40 Avarice, what Age of Man most
devoted to it. Page 26 -- Its Region described. 45 -- Its Temple, Attendants,
and Officers. 46, 47 -- An Effect of the Author's Discourse upon it. 53
Audience, what ought to be the Behavior of an Audience at the Representation
of a Play. 39 Autumn (Lady), her Behavior at Church. 130
B.
Bagpipe, to what Persons applied in Conversation. 191 -- A Club of Bagpipes.
192 Bacon (Sir Francis), his Legacy. 95 Balance, a Merchant, his Treatment of
a young Lawyer, that endeavored to debauch his Wife. 107 Barbarity an
Attendant on Tyranny. 237 Barnes (Joshua), his new Edition of Homer. 144
Bass-Viol, the Part it bears in Conversation. 191 -- Where most likely to be
found. 192 -- With what other Instrument to be matched. 216 -- Exposed to Sale
by Way of Lottery. 259 Bawbles, by whom brought first to Perfection. 138 Bedlam
(New), to be erected by Mr. Bickerstaff in Moorfields. 56. 294 -- For whom
designed. 65, 295 -- The Distribution of its Apartments. 299 Beef-Eaters (the
Order of). 164 Belvidera, her Character. 58 Betterton (Mr.) his Funeral. 260
Bickerstaff (Isaac), his Reception at the Playhouse. 38 -- His Advice to an
Audience. 39 -- His Speech to Poverty. 48 -- He purchases a Ticket in the
State Lottery. 49 -- His Proposals for a New Bedlam. 56 -- His Description of a
Prude, and Coquet. 60 -- His Reflections upon a Visit to Bedlam. 65 Bickerstaff
(Isaac), his Entertainment at a Friend's House, who eats well. Page 166 -- His
Maxim. 167 Censor of Great Britain. 238, etc. Bickerstaff (Margery), the
Methods used to divert her Thoughts from Marriage. 181 Bickerstaff, (Samuel),
his Advice to his Son and Daughter. 369 Black-Horse Ordinary in Holborn, an
Adventure there. 106, 107 Bladder and String, a modern Music; how applied. 192
Bourignon (Madam de) Foundress of the Pietists. 60 -- Her Extraordinary Gift,
or Talent. ibid. Bribery, a Solicitor in the Temple of Avarice. 47
C.
Cadaroque, the Meaning of the Word, and to whom applied by the Indian Kings.
281 Cambray (Archbishop of) Author of Telemachus. 205 Canes, different in their
Kinds and Value. 139 Castabella, an eminent Prude. 59 Cebes, his Table. 233
Censor, a Comparison between the Roman and British Censor. 239, 240 Censurers,
why punished more severely after Death. 207 Cervantes (Michael) his discerning
Spirit. 312 Cestus of Venus described. 160 Chanticleer (Job), his Petition to
Mr. Bickerstaff. 98 Charles, the Toyman, his great Genius. 137 -- A nice Judge
of Canes. 139 -- His new Edition of Gold Snuff-Boxes. 140 Chicken, a modern
Diet. 164 Cibber, the Comedian, his Talent in Acting. 236 Cicero, his Letters
to his Wife. 222 City Politicians reproved by Mr. Bickerstaff. 205 Coaches to
be taxed, Page 146 What Coaches to be called in by Mr. Bickerstaff. 148 Cobbler
upon Ludgate Hill, his Contrivance to gratify his Pride. 63 Colchester (the
Corporation of), their Offer to Mr. Bickerstaff. 21 Comma (Mrs.), asubtle
Casuist. 257 Command of our Temper, its Excellence. 302, etc. Commerce, a
Goddess in the Region of Liberty. 235 Commonwealth (Genius of), seated on the
Left Hand of the Goddess of Liberty. 234 -- Described. 235 Competency, a Guide
in the Temple of Avarice, 46 Complacency, a Guard to one of the Gates belonging
to Hymen's Temple. 30 Complainers, their Importunacy. 154 Contention, her Garb
and Station. 30 Contradiction, an Occasion of it. 283 Coquets (Labyrinth of).
28 -- A mischievous Sect among Women. 49 -- A Coquet compared to a Prude. 60 --
A Story of a Coquet Widow. 61 -- A Coquet compared to a Kit. 213 Corruption, an
Office in the Temple of Avarice. 46 Country, the modern Entertainments and
Diversions in it. 271 -- The true Pleasures of a Country Life. 273, etc. -- The
Character of a true Country Gentleman. 272 Courant, in what Manner it differs
from the other Newspapers. 316 Credit in the City, how obtained. 304 Critic
described. 252, 253 Cupid, a Lap-Dog, dangerously ill. 33
D.
Daniel, the Historian, the Provisions taxed in his Time. 164 St. David's-Day,
why observed by Mr. Bickerstaff. Page 126 Dawks (Icabod), his double Capacity
of Bellman and Historian. 316 Dead Men dressed in Lace, etc. contrary to the
Act. 16 -- A Letter from one to Mr. Bickerstaff. 17 -- Another resuscitated. 18
-- What Part of Mankind called dead by Mr. Bickerstaff. 293 Dedications, the
Difference betwixt Ancient and Modern Dedications. 309 Degeneracy of the
present Age. 339 Delicates (false), their contradictory Rules. 165 Demosthenes,
his Speech to the Athenians. 341 Destinies, their Present to Jupiter. 156 --
The Speech of one of them to that God. 158 Diet, the Difference betwixt our
Modern Diet and that of our Ancestors. 163 Dimple (Lady), her good Breeding.
257 Discourse, different Talents in it. 189 -- How shadowed out. ibid. and seq.
Discretion, a Guard to one of Hymen's Gates. 30 Dodwell, some Account of his
Epistolary Discourse, from Pasquin. 356 Dogget, the Comedian, his Letter to Mr.
Bickerstaff. 32 -- His great Civilities to him. 38 Dover-Cliff, described by
Shakespeare. 15 Dream, of the Band of Lovers. 26, 27, etc. -- Of the Temple of
Virtue. 43 -- Of Honor. ibid. and 44 -- Of Vanity. 44 -- Of Virtue. 45 -- Of
Avarice. 46, and seq. -- Of Jupiter, and the Destinies. 156, 157, 158 -- Of the
Alps, etc. 233, and seq. Drum, who may be called Drums in Conversation. 189,
190 -- With what other Instrument matched. 216 Dulcimer, a Romantic
Instrument, of a melancholy Sweetness. Page 214 Dutch, their Manner of
expressing their Wit. 72
E.
Education, the wrong Method of it. 365 Elpenor, his untimely Death a Warning
to Drunkards. 183 Elysium, the Joys of it, as described by the Author of
Telemachus. 209 England, the Figure it makes at present. 78, 79 Equipage, its
Expense and Affectation censured. 145, etc. Esquires, for what Reason professed
Enemies to Mr. Bickerstaff. 3 Esteem, how distinguished from Credit. 304
Eucrates, his Character. 303 -- The Effects of the natural Softness of his
Temper. ibid. Eutrapelus, his mischievous Present. 181 Extortion (the Office
of), in the Temple of Avarice. 47
F.
Female Consort, its Music described. 211, etc. Fidget (Lady), a general
Visitant. 296 -- The Occasion of her Madness. ibid. Flageolet, an Instrument in
the Female Consort. 212 -- How esteemed by that Sex. 213 Flattery of Women, its
ill Consequences. 122 -- Instanced in Flavia. 124, 125 Flavia, a Coquet, her
Interview with Mirtillo, the Ogler at the Play. 151, 152 Flea, a Skeleton of.
24 Flute, its extraordinary Effects in a Female Consort. 212 -- With what other
Instrument matched. 216 Folio (Tom), a Broker in Learning; some Account of him.
217 -- His Visit to Mr. Bickerstaff. 218 Folio (Tom), his Criticisms upon
Virgil. Page 218, 219 -- His Letter to Mr. Bickerstaff. 232 Fortitude, when
most conspicuous. 305 Fortune, the Way to be above her. 276 -- An Emblem of
that Goddess. 278 -- Addressed to by Mr. Bickerstaff. Ibid. Fraud, an Officer
in the Temple of Avarice. 47 Free-Thinkers, a Distinction between the ancient
and modern Free-Thinkers. 101 Friendship, the Tenderness of it. 284 Funerals,
our Behavior in them discover the inward State of our Minds. 343 Future State,
as described by Homer. 183, etc. -- By Virgil. 194, etc. -- From whence the
Happiness and Torments of it arise, according to the Platonists. 198 --
Described by the Author of Telemachus. 205, etc. -- The Benefits arising from
the Prospects of Futurity. 210
G.
Gascon, an Adventure of a Gascon. 61 Ghost of Anticlea, Ulysses's Mother. 183
Ghosts, of Beauties. 185 -- Of Heroes. ibid. and deinc. 198, 199 -- Of the
Damned. 188 -- Of Lovers. 198 -- Of Tyrants. 206, 208 -- Of good Princes. 209
Glare (Tom), his Paisson for Admiration. 218 Glory (true) inseparable from
Merit. 311 Good nature often unseasonable. 304 Grandeur, wherein it truly
consists. 275 Grief, the Benefit of it. 330 Gyges, his Ring. 118 --
Allegorically applied. 119
H.
Handkerchief (Religious) in England. ^ Hannibal the Carthaginian, his Speech
upon his being recalled out of Italy. Page 359 Harpsichord, the Excellency of
its Music. 192 -- With what Instrument matched. 216 Heart, the Actor, his
Observation. 117 Hautboy, a proper Instrument in a Female Consort. 212 --
Matched with the Harpsichord. 216 History, the Usefulness of it. 12 -- Its
Variety. 77 Homer, his Description of a Future State. 183 186, 187, 188 Horace,
his Excellencies considered under different Views. 292 Hornpipe, its Part in a
Female Consort. 213 -- With what other Instruments matched. 216 Husbands, ill
Ones private Tyrants. 168 An ill Husband the greatest Affliction that can
happen to a Woman. 169 -- What makes a Man so. ibid. 170 Hymen, the God of
Marriage, placed as a Guard at the Gate of the Temple of virtuous Love. 29 --
His Habit. ibid. Hymn to the Supreme Being, what. 22
I.
Jambee, the best sort of Canes. 139 Idolatry inverted, in what Manner. 63
Jealousy, her Garments, Complexion, and Office. 30, 31 Jenny, Mr. Bickerstaff's
Sister, her Visit and Behavior. 141 -- Her Character. 347 Jesuits, their
Discipline. 267 Imperceptibles (a natural History of) 23 Incumbent, the
Difference between a Landlord and Incumbent. 272 Indian Kings, their Return to
the Civilities of their Landlord. 280 Infrigidation (the Gift of) 60 Insipids
(the Order of). Page 257 Juno, her Method to regain Jupiter's Affection. 160
K.
Kettle Drum, and Kit, Instruments in a Female Consort. 214 -- Matched. 216
Kings (wicked), their Punishment in a future State. 208
L.
Lamb, a modern Diet. 164 Landlord, the Difference betwixt a Landlord and an
Incumbent. 272 Lawgiver, the Instruction of a Lawgiver, in relation to
unmarried Women. 344 Letter, to Isaac Bickerstaff, from a Well-wisher. 5 --
From one who designs to be an Adventurer in the Lottery. 52 -- From John
Hammond upon the Recovery of his Watch. 53 From a Fortune-Hunter. 67 -- From
Statira. 70 -- From Strephon. 128 -- From Dorothy Drumstick. 129 -- From Lidia.
ibid. -- From Chloe. 130 -- About Whetters. 132 -- From his Valentine. 134 --
From his Kinsman, in Behalf of Charles Bubbleboy. 137 -- From a young Gentleman
in Cornhill. 153 -- From one upon Wedlock. 173 -- From Nich. Humdrum. 194 --
From the Upholsterer. 229 -- From Isabella Kit. 231, 269 -- From Tom Folio. 232
-- From his Cousin Frank Bickerstaff. 273 -- From I. B. 306 -- From T. S. out
of Cornwall. 318 -- From Silvia. 348 Letter, about a Green-House. Page 361 --
From a Yeoman of Kent. 362 -- From Mr. Bickerstaff to Chole. 131 -- To his
Brother. 142 -- From Pliny to Calphurnia. 171, etc. -- From Cicero to Terentia.
222, etc. -- From a Corporal to his Wife. 251 Levity, her Post. 30 Liberty, its
Region described. 233, etc. Lightening in Opera's, of what it must be made. 116
-- The true perfumed, where sold. ibid. Love, the Effects of Disappointments in
it. 349 Lovemore, a happy Husband. 177 Lovers (the Band of). 27 Lucretia, her
Story. 13 Lust, in whom virtuous Love. 26 Lute, the Part it bears in a Consort
or Conversation. 189 -- Where to be found. 192 -- With what other Instrument
matched. 216 Lydia, a Coquet, her Character. 58
M.
Machiavel, his Office. 45 -- Author of a mischievous Sect. 355 Madmen, who. 54
-- Whether sent by the Romans. 55 -- Mr. Bickerstaff's intended Edifice for
their Reception and Cure. 56, 57 -- The first Symptom of Madness. 296 Meids of
Honor, their Allowance of Beef for their Breakfast in Queen Elizabeth's Time.
164 Marriage, an Account of it in a Letter to Mr. Bickerstaff. 173 -- A Table
of Marriage. 216 -- By whom ridiculed. 221 -- Some Reasons for the Misfortunes
accompanying it. 362 Marrow-bone and Clever, a modern Musical Instrument. 192
Matchlock, a Member of the Club at the Trumpet in Sheer-Lane, Page 88
Mecahnicks in Learning. 293 Microscopes, their Use. 21 Minucio, his Character.
281 -- And Spirit of Contradiction. 283 Minute Philosophers, who. 111, etc.
Mirtillo, the Ogler, his Interview with Flavia at an Opera. 151, etc. Mite, a
Dissection of one. 24 Modely (Tom), his Knowledge of the Fashion. 256 -- Head
of the Order of the Insipids. 257 Monarchy, the Genius of it described in the
Region of Liberty. 235 Mopsa, her good Fortune in the Lottery prognosticated by
Mr. Bickerstaff. 51 -- A Letter to her. 61 -- In great Danger of her Life, and
for what. 155 Mourning, a proper Dress for a beautiful Lady. 178
N.
Nature, its Prevalency. 284 Nicolini, his Excellencies on the Stage. 12
Northern Parts fruitful in Bagpipes. 191 Notch (Sir Jeoffrey), a Member of Mr.
Bickerstaff's Club. 88 Novelists, the Effect of their Writings. 313
O.
Oglers complained of by the Ladies. 149 -- The Danger of them. 150, 151 Opera
aground in the Female Consort. 211 Oppression, an Attendant on Tyranny. 237
Orator, in a Nightgown and laced Cap. 354
P.
Parsimony, a Favorite in the Temple of Avarice. 46 Partridge (John), his
Letter to Mr. Bickerstaff. 17 -- His Symptoms of Resuscitation. 18 Pasquin, his
Letters to Mr. Bickerstaff. 73, 356 -- An Account of him to prevent Mistakes.
81 Passing-Bells, why so called, Page 192 Passion, the Surprise of it fatal.
286 -- A Tragical Instance of it. 287 Peasant, who properly so. 272 Pedants,
their several Classes. 219, 220 Pedantry compared to Hypocrisy. 252 Persecution
an Attendant on Tyranny. 237 Petitions to Mr. Bickerstaff from Job Chanticleer.
98 -- From Deborah Hark, and others. 111 -- From the Parish of Goatham. 135 --
From Sarah Lately. 268 -- And Isabella Kit. 269 Petticoat, its Cause tried. 6,
7, 8, 10 -- How long to be worn. 37 Philosophy, the Excellency of it. 276
Platonists, their Opinion. 200 Plenty, a Goddess in the Region of Liberty. 235
Pliny, his Compliment, and Advice to Trojan. 77 Pluto, his Palace, and Throne.
207 Politicians incapable of Reproof. 121 Pope sick of the Toothache. 75 -- His
Modesty overcome. 76 Post-Man, his extraordinary Talent. 313 Poverty, a
terrible Spectre in the Temple of Avarice. 47 -- An Attendant on Tyranny. 237
Powell (Mr.) his Disingenuity. 3 Present of Wine to Mr. Bickerstaff. 162
Pretenders to Poetry a kind of Madmen. 295 Pride, an Instance of it in a Cobbler
on Ludgate Hill. 63 -- Its Cause, and Consequence. 64, 66, etc. -- Makes Wen
odious. 352 -- Creates Envy. 354 -- Found only in narrow Souls. ibid. Prim
Penelope, her Petition. 19 Prude distinguished from a Coquet. 60 -- Bears the
Part of a Virginal in a Female Consort. 213 prudence in Women the same with
Wisdom in a Man. Page 285 Punch, Rival to Nicolini. 2 -- His ill Manners to Mr.
Bickerstaff. 3 -- His Original. ibid. Puppets in Mr. Powell's Show, from whence
taken. ib. Puzzlepost (Ned), how he came to be improved in Writing. 138
Q.
Quality, its Weaknesses. 324, 325 Quixot (Don) the first Symptoms of his
Madness. 312
R.
Ragoust, prejudicial to the Stomach. 165 Rapin, his Observations upon the
English Theater. 100 Rapine, an Attendant on Licentiousness. 237 Read (Sir
William) an eminent Oculist. 153 Reading, the Exercise of the Mind. 159
Regulus, a great Instance of a public Spirit. 342 Religious War. 204 Reptile
(Dick) a Member of the Club in Sheer-Lane. 89 -- His Character. ibid. -- And
Reflection upon the Abuse of Speech. 112 Reputation how established. 353
Romans, an Instance of their generous Virtue, 40 Ruffs wherein necessary. 20 --
Recommended to be worn with the Fardingal. 21 Rural Wits Hunting-Horns in a
Male-Consort. 191
S.
Scaevola, his great Fortitude. 310 Scandal, the universal Thrist after it. 248
Scotus, his Way distinguishing Mankind. 293 Seneca, his Moderation in his
Fortune. 276 Sex in Souls. 285 Shallow (Sir Timothy) Customer to Charles
Bubbleboy. 139 Sheep-Biter, why a Term of Reproach. Page 164 Silence
significant on many Occasions. 92 -- Instances of it. 93, 94 Sippet (Harry), an
expert Wine-Brewer. 85 Snuff-Boxes, a new Edition of them. 140 Socrates, his
Behavior in the Athenian Theater. 41 -- The Doctrines he labored to inculcate
into the Minds of the Ancients. 102 Softly (Ned), a very pretty Poet. 243 --
His Sonnet. 244 Speech, the Abuse of it. 112 Stage, or Theater, the
Conveniences of it. 334, etc. Statira, her Letter to Mr. Bickerstaff. 70
Stocking, the Custom of throwing it at a Wedding. 349 Story-Tellers, the
Bagpipes in Conversation. 191 -- Their Employment in Mr. Bickerstaff's Bedlam.
295 Swearing, a Folly without any Temptation. 114
T.
Tale-Bearers, the Use of them in Mr. Bickerstaff's Bedlam. 299 Tea not used in
Queen Elizabeth's Days. 164 Telemachus, his Adventures. 205 Temple of Hymen. 29
-- Of Lust. 31 -- Of Virtue. 43 -- Of Honor. 44 -- Of Vanity. ibid. -- Of
Avarice. 46 Timoleon, his Discourse at the Grecian. 279 Tintoret (Tom.) a great
Master in the Art of Coloring. 84 Instances of it. 85 Tiresias, his Advice to
Ulysses. 184 Tittle (Sir Timothy), a profound Critic. 253 -- His Indignation,
and Discourse with his Mistress. 254, 255 Toasts, a new religious Order in
England. 75 Tories, a new religious Order in England. ibid. Toys, by whom
brought first into Fashion. Page 137, 138 Trumpet, what Sort of Men are the
Trumpets in Conversation. 190 -- Where to be found. 193 Tyranny commands an
Army against the Region of Liberty. 237 Tweezer-Cases, the best, where to be
bought. 139
V.
Varnish (Tom.) his Adventure. 108 Veal, a modern Diet. 164 Vicissitude of
humane Life. 275 Violins, who in Conversation. 190 -- Where to be found. 192 --
With what other Instrument matched, 216 Virginal, an Instrument in a Female
Consort. 213 Ulysses, his Voyage to the Regions of the Dead. ^ -- His
Adventures there. ibid. and seq. Upholders Company, of their Civility to Mr.
Bickerstaff. ^ Upholsterer, Mr. Bickerstaff's Neighbor, a great Newsmonger.
201 -- Broke. ibid. -- His Conversation with Mr. Bickerstaff in the Park. 202,
and seq. -- His early Visit to Mr. Bickerstaff. ^ -- The Reason of it. 228,
etc. -- Much esteemed in Alley-Coffee-houses. ^ -- Carried to Bedlam. 316
W.
Waggs, the despicable Order of. 346 Welch-Harp an Instrument in a Female
Consort. ^ -- Matched with the Trumpet. 216 Whetters reproved. 120, ^ Whigs and
Tories religious Orders in England. 74, ^ Wilks, the Co^, his Excellencies. ^
Wine (a Present of) to Mr. Bickerstaff. 162, 333 Wine-Browers a Fraternity. 82
-- Tried before Mr. Bickerstaff. ^ -- J. B.'s Request to 'em. ^ Women, their
ill Fancies in their Dress. ^
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
There is now published, ATlas Geographus; or a complete System of Geography,
ancient and modern; done from the best Authorities; and above 100 curious Maps,
done by Mr. Moll, according to the latest Discoveries; and as many Cuts.
Sanson's Tables, etc. All Europe, except Great Britain and Ireland, are now
finished, and may be had in Quires, or bound in Two handsome Volumes. All Asia
is just finished, with an Index, and near 40 Maps, Cuts, and Tables. Africa
will be 12 Months more, and America the last Volume; with each as many Maps,
Cuts, Index, etc. Those that have Europe, or now buy it, know the Charge of the
rest. Note, Great Britain and Ireland, or the Atlas for those Kingdoms, (which
will make Two handsome Volumes) are now in the Press; each Person describing
the Places they live in; and will be illustrated with about 100 New Maps, and
many Cuts. We have had Accounts from near 200 Gentlemen. Any one that sends
what is proper to be inserted, to J. Nutt, Printer, in the Savoy; o^ those that
live near Oxford, may send to Mr. Anthony Hall, of Queen's-College there, ^ying
Postage; and Care will be taken to have them inserted in their proper Places.

Bibliotheca Anatomica, Medica, Chirurgica, etc. Containing above 100
particular Tracts; done by one or more eminent Physician or Surgeon, on every
Part of the Body; with their Diseases and Cures: The First Volume is
completed; containing the Anatomy, Diseases, and Cures of the Bones; with
about 60 several Tracts, and 25 large Copper Plates, in which are above 300
Figures. Note, The Second Volume is now finished, a^ the Third Volume, which
will be Twelve Mont^ more, finishes this Work, and contains what cannot (...)
bought for Forty Pounds. Both these Works a^ continued Monthly till the whole
be finishe^ Printed by John Nutt in the Savoy, and sold b^ John Morphew near
Stationers' Hall. A New Treatise of Arithmetic. In Thr^ Parts. 1. Containing
all the Common Ru^ thereof in whole Numbers and Fractions, bo^ Vulgar and
Decimal. 2. Their Demonstration^ 3. The Use and Application of it in the
Exch^quer, Custom-House, Excise, Pay-Offices, etc^ with some Practical Rules,
Notes, and Questions not hitherto Published. By William Allingham late Teacher
of the Mathematics. Printed for W. Freeman, at the Bible against the Middle
Temple-Gate in Fleetstreet. LIVES, English and Foreign. In 2 Volume^ Vol. I.
contains that of William Lord Burleigh^ Sir Walter Releigh. George Duke of
Buckingham^ Marquess of Montross. Oliver Cromwell. Admiral Coligni. Don John of
Austria, Son of Charl^ the Fifth. William the First, Prince of Orang^ Alexander
Farnese, Prince of Parma. Albe^ Count Wallenstein. Vol. II. Duke of Ham^ton.
General Blake. Duke of Albemarle. Ea^ of Shaftsbury. Duke of Monmouth. Admiral
Ruyter. Viscount Turenne. Prince of Cond^ Admiral Tromp. Duke of Lorrain.
Including the History of England, and other Nations of Europe, from the Year
1550, to the Year 1690. By several Hands. Sold by E. Sanger, at the Post House
at the Middle-Temple-Gate; and J. Pemberton, at the Golden Buck and Sun in
Fleetstreet. Price 6 s. each Volume.



