THE LUCUBRATIONS OF Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire

VOL. IV.

THE LUCUBRATIONS OF Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire

Revised and Corrected by the Author.

VOL. IV.

(...)
Homer. LONDON, Printed by John Nutt, and sold by John Morphew, near Stationers
Hall. MDCCXII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE CHARES Lord Hallifax.
From the Hovel at Hampton-Wick, April 7. 1711. My LORD,
WHEN I first resolved upon doing my self this Honor, I could not but indulge
a certain Vanity in dating from this little Covert, where I have frequently had
the Honor of your Lordship's Company, and received from you very many
Obligations. The elegant Solitude of this Place, and the greatest Pleasures of
it I owe to its being so near those Beautiful Manors wherein you sometimes
reside: It is not retiring from the World, but enjoying its most valuable
Blessings, when a Man is permitted to share in your Lordship's Conversations in
the Country. All the bright Images which the Wits of past Ages have left behind
them in their Writings, the noble Plans which the greatest Statesmen have laid
down for Administration of Affairs, are equally the familiar Objects of your
Knowledge. But what is peculiar to your Lordship above all the illustrious
Personages that have appeared in any Age, is, that Wit and Learning have from
your Example fallen into a new Era. Your Patronage has produced those Arts,
which before shunned the Commerce of the World, into the Service of Life; and
it is to you we owe, that the Man of Wit has turned himself to be a Man of
Business. The false Delicacy of Men of Genius, and the Objections which others
were apt to insinuate against their Abilities for entering into Affairs, have
equally vanished. And Experience has shown, that Men of Letters are not only
qualified with a greater Capacity, but also a greater Integrity in the Dispatch
of Business. Your own Studies have been diverted from being the highest
Ornament, to the highest Use to Mankind, and the Capacities which would have
rendered you the greatest Poet of your Age, have to the Advantage of Great
Britain been employed in Pursuits which have made you the most able and
unbiassed Patriot. A vigorous Imagination, an extensive Apprehension, and a
ready Judgment, have distinguished you in all the illustrious Parts of
Administration, in a Reign attended with such Difficulties, that the same
Talents without the same Quickness in the Possession of them would have been
incapable of Conquering. The natural Success of such Abilities has advanced you
to a Seat in that illustrious House, where you were received by a Crowd of your
Relations. Great as you are in your Honors, and Personal Qualities, I know you
will forgive, an humble Neighbor, the Vanity of pretending to a Place in your
Friendship, and subscribing himself,

My LORD, Your Lordship's Most Obliged, and Most Devoted Servant, Richard
Steel.

THE PREFACE.
IN the last Tatler I promised some Explanation of Passages and Persons
mentioned in this Work, as well as some Account of the Assistances I have had
in the Performance. I shall do this in very few Words; for when a Man has no
Design but to speak plain Truth, he may say a great deal in a very narrow
Compass. I have in the Dedication of the First Volume made my Acknowledgments
to Dr. Swift, whose pleasant Writings, in the Name of Bickerstaff, created an
Inclination in the Town toward any Thing that could appear in the same
Disguise. I must acknowledge also, that at my first entering upon this Work, a
certain uncommon Way of Thinking, and a Turn in Conversation peculiar to that
agreeable Gentleman, rendered his Company very advantageous to one whose
Imagination was to be continually employed upon obvious and common Subjects,
though at the same Time obliged to treat of them in a new and unbeaten Method.
His Verses on the Shower in Town, and the Description of the Morning, are
Instances of the Happiness of that Genius, which could raise such Pleasing
Idea's upon Occasions so barren to an ordinary Invention.

When I am upon the House of Bickerstaff, I must not forget that Genealogy of
the Family sent to me by the Post, and written, as I since understand, by Mr.
Twisden, who died at the Battle of Mons, and has a Monument in
Westminster-Abbey suitable to the Respect which is due to his Wit and his
Valor. There are through the Course of the Work very many Incidents which were
written by unknown Correspondents. Of this Kind is the Tale in the Second
Tatler, and the Epistle from Mr. Downs the Prompter, with others which were
very well received by the Public. But I have only one Gentleman, who will be
nameless, to thank for any frequent Assistance to me, which indeed it would
have been barbarous in him to have denied to one with whom he has lived in an
Intimacy from Childhood, considering the great Ease with which he is able to
dispatch the most entertaining Pieces of this Nature. This good Office he
performed with such Force of Genius, Humor, Wit and Learning, that I fared
like a distressed Prince who calls in a powerful Neighbor to his Aid; I was
undone by my Auxiliary; when I had once called him in, I could not subsist
without Dependence on him.

The same Hand writ the distinguishing Characters of Men and Women under the
Names of Musical Instruments, the Distress of the News-Writers, the Inventory
of the Playhouse, and the Description of the Thermometer, which I cannot but
look upon as the greatest Embellishments of this Work.

Thus for I thought necessary to say relating to the great Hands which have
been concerned in these Volumes, with Relation to the Spirit and Genius of the
Work; and am far from pretending to Modesty in making this Acknowledgment. What
a Man obtains from the good Opinion and Friendship of worthy Men, is a much
greater Honor than he can possibly reap from any Accomplishments of his own.
But all the Credit of Wit which was given me by the Gentlemen abovementioned
(with whom I have now accounted) has not been able to atone for the Exceptions
made against me for some Raillery in Behalf of that learned Advocate for the
Episcopacy of the Church, and the Liberty of the People, Mr. Hoadley. I mention
this only to defend my self against the Imputation of being moved rather by
Party than Opinion; and I think it is apparent, I have with the utmost
Frankness allowed Merit wherever I found it, though joined in Interests
different from those for which I have declared my self. When my Favonius is
acknowledged to be Dr. Smalridge, and the amiable Character of the Dean in the
Sixty sixth Tatler drawn for Dr. Atterbury, I hope I need say no more as to my
Impartiality.

I really have acted in these Cases with Honesty, and am concerned it should be
thought otherwise: For Wit, if a Man had it, unless it be directed to some
useful End, is but a wanton frivolous Quality; all that one should value
himself upon in this Kind is, that he had some honorable Intention in it.

As for this Point, never Hero in Romance was carried away with a more furious
Ambition to conquer Giants and Tyrants, than I have been in extirpating
Gamesters and Duellists And indeed, like one of those Knights too, though I was
calm before, I am apt to fly out again, when the Thing that first disturbed me
is presented to my Imagination. I shall therefore leave off when I am well, and
fight with Windmills no more: Only shall be so Arrogant as to say of my self,
that in Spite of all the Force of Fashion and Prejudice, in the Face of all the
World, I alone bewailed the Condition of an English Gentleman, whose Fortune
and Life are at this Day precarious; while His Estate is liable to the Demands
of Gamesters, through a false Sense of Justice; and to the Demands of
Duellists, through a false Sense of Honor. As to the First of these Orders of
Men, I have not one Word more to say of them: As to the latter, I shall
conclude all I have more to offer aginst them (with Respect to their being
prompted by the Fear of Shame) by applying to the Duellist what I think Dr.
South says somewhere of the Liar, He is a Coward to Man, and a Brave to God.

THE [No 190. TATLER:
BY Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
VOL. IV.
-- Timeo Danaos and Dona ferentes.
Virg.
From Saturday June 24. to Tuesday June 27. 1710.
Sheer-Lane, June 26.
THERE are some Occasions in Life, wherein Regards to a Man's self is the most
pitiful and contemptible of all Passions; and such a Time certainly is when the
true public Spirit of a Nation is run into a Faction against their Friends and
Benefactors. I have hinted heretofore some Things which discover the real
Sorrow I am in at the Observation, that it is now very much so in Great
Britain, and have had the Honor to be pelted with several Epistles to
expostulate with me on that Subject. Among others, one from a Person of the
Number of those they call Quakers, who seems to admonish me out of pure Zeal
and Good Will. But as there is no Character so unjust as that of talking in
Party upon all Occasions, without Respect to Merit or Worth on the contrary
Side, so there is no Part we can act so justifiable as to speak our Mind when
we see Things urged to Extremity, against all that is Praiseworthy or valuable
in Life, upon general and groundless Suggestions. But if I have talked too
frankly upon such Reflections, my Correspondent has laid before me, after his
Way, the Error of it in a Manner that makes me indeed thankful for his
Kindness, but the more inclinable to repeat the Imprudence from the Necessity
of the Circumstance.

The 23d of the 6th Month, which is the Month June. Friend Isaac,
FOrasmuch as I love thee, I cannot any longer refrain declaring my Mind unto
thee concerning some Things. Thou did thy self indite the Epistle inserted in
one of thy late Lucubrations, as thou would have us call them: For verily thy
Friend of Stone, and I speak according to Knowledge, has no Fingers; and though
he has a Mouth, yet speaks he not therewith; nor yet did that Epistle at all
come unto thee from the Mansion House of the Scarlet Whore. It is plain
therefore, that the Truth is not in thee: But since thou would lie, could
thou not lie with more Discretion? Wherefore should thou insult over the
Afflicted, or add Sorrow unto the Heavy of Heart? Truly this Gall proceeds
not from the Spirit of Meekness. I tell thee moreover, the People of this Land
be marvelously given to Change; insomuch that it may lightly come to pass, that
before thou art many Years nearer to thy Dissolution, thou may behold him
sitting on a high Place whom thou now laughest to Scorn: And then how will thou
be glad to humble thy self to the Ground, and lick the Dust of his Feet, that
thou may find Favor in his Sight? If thou did meditate as much upon the
Word as thou do upon the profane Scribblings of the wise Ones of this
Generation, thou would have remembered what happened unto Shimei, the Son of
Gera the Benjamite, who cursed the good Man David in his Distress. David
pardoned his Transgression, yet was he afterward taken as in a Snare by the
Words of his own Mouth, and fell by the Sword of Solomon the chief Ruler.
Furthermore, I do not remember to have heard in the Days of my Youth and
Vanity, when, like thine, my Conversation was with the Gentiles, that the Men
of Rome, which is Babylon, ever sued unto the Men of Carthage for Tranquillity,
as thou do aver: Neither was Hannibal, the Son of Hamilcar, called Home by
his Countrymen, till these saw the Sword of their Enemies at their Gates; And
then was it not Time for him, think thou, to return? It appears therefore
that thou do prophesy backwards, thou do row one Way, and look another; and
indeed in all Things art thou too much a Time-server; yet seem thou not to
consider what a Day may bring forth. Think of this, and take Tobacco.

Thy Friend, Aminadab.


If the zealous Writer of the above Letter has any Meaning, it is of too high a
Nature to be the Subject of my Lucubrations. I shall therefore wave such high
Points, and be as useful as I can to Persons of less Moment than any he hints
at. When a Man runs into a little Fame in the World, as he meets with a great
deal of Reproach which he does not deserve, so does he also a great deal of
Esteem to which he has in himself no Pretensions. Were it otherwise, I am sure
no one would offer to put a Law-Case to me: But because I am an Adept in
Physic and Astrology, they will needs persuade me that I am no less a
Proficient in all other Sciences. However, the Point mentioned in the following
Letter is so plain a one, that I think I need not trouble my self to cast a
Figure to be able to discuss it.

Mr. Bickerstaff,
IT is some Years ago since the Entail of the Estate of our Family was altered,
by passing a Fine in Favor of me (who now am in Possession of it) after some
others deceased. The Heirs-General, who live beyond Sea, were excluded by this
Settlement, and the whole Estate is to pass in a new Channel after me and my
Heirs. But several Tenants of the Lordship persuade me to let them hereafter
hold their Lands of me according to the old Customs of the Barony, and not
oblige them to act by the Limitations of the last Settlement. This, they say,
will make me more popular among my Departments, and the ancient Vassals of the
Estate, to whom any Deviation from the Line of Succession is always invidious.

Yours, etc.


Sheer-Lane, June 24. SIR,
YOU have by the Fine a plain Right, in which none else of your Family can be
your Competitor; for which Reason, by all Means demand Vassalage upon that
Title. The contrary Advice can be given for no other Purpose in Nature but to
betray you, and favor other Pretenders, by making you place a Right which is
in you only, upon a Level with a Right which you have in common with others. I
am,

SIR, Your most Faithful Servant till Death, I. B.


There is nothing so dangerous or so pleasing, as Compliments made to us by our
Enemies: And my Correspondent tells me, That though he knows several of those
who give him this Counsel were at first against passing the Fine in Favor of
him; yet is he so touched with their Homage to him, that he can hardly believe
they have a Mind to set it aside, in order to introduce the Heirs-General into
his Estate.

These are great Evils; but since there is no proceeding with Success in this
World, without complying with the Arts of it, I shall use the same Method as my
Correspondent's Tenants did with him, in Relation to one whom I never had a
Kindness for; but shall, notwithstanding, presume to give him my Advice.

Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire of Great Britain, to Lewis XIV. of France.
SIR,
YOUR Majesty will pardon me while I take the Liberty to acquaint you, that
some Passages written from your Side of the Water do very much obstruct your
Interests. We take it very unkindly that the Prints of Paris are so very
partial in Favor of one Set of Men among us, and treat the others as
irreconcilable to your Interests. Your Writers are very large in recounting
any Thing which relates to the Figure and Power of one Party, but are dumb when
they should represent the Actions of the other. This is a trifling Circumstance
many here are apt to lay some Stress upon; therefore I thought fit to offer it
to your Consideration before you dispatch the next Courier.

I. B.


The TATLER. [No 191.
-- Propter Vitam vivendi perdere Causas.
Juv.
From Tuesday June 27. to Thursday June 29. 1710.
From my own Apartment, June 28.
OF all the Evils under the Sun, that of making Vice commendable is the
greatest: For it seems to be the Basis of Society, that Applause and Contempt
should be always given to proper Objects. But in this Age we behold Things for
which we ought to have an Abhorrence, not only received without Disdain, but
even valued as Motives of Emulation. This is naturally the Destruction of
Simplicity of Manners, Openness of Heart, and Generosity of Temper. When one
gives ones self the Liberty to range, and run over in ones Thoughts the
different Genius's of Men which one meets in the World, one cannot but observe,
that most of the Indirection and Artifice which is used among Men, does not
proceed so much from a Degeneracy in Nature, as an Affectation of appearing Men
of Consequence by such Practices. By this Means it is, that a cunning Man is so
far from being ashamed of being esteemed such, that he secretly rejoices in it.
It has been a Sort of Maxim, That the greatest Art is to conceal Art; but I
know not how, among some People we meet with, their greatest Cunning is to
appear cunning. There is Polypragmon makes it the whole Business of his Life to
be thought a cunning Fellow, and thinks it a much greater Character to be
terrible than agreeable. When it has once entered into a Man's Head to have an
Ambition to be thought crafty, all other Evils are necessary Consequences. To
deceive, is the immediate Endeavor of him who is proud of the Capacity of
doing it. It is certain, Polypragmon does all the Ill he possibly can, but
pretends to much more than he performs. He is contented in his own Thoughts,
and hugs himself in his Closet, that though he is locked up there and doing
nothing, the World does not know but that he is doing Mischief. To favor this
Suspicion, he gives Half-Looks and Shrugs in his general Behavior, to give you
to understand that you don't know what he means. He is also wonderfully
adverbial in his Expressions, and breaks off with a Perhaps and a Nod of the
Head, upon Matters of the most indifferent Nature. It is a mighty Practice with
Men of this Genius to avoid frequent Appearance in Public, and to be as
mysterious as possible when they do come into Company. There is nothing to be
done, according to them, the common Way; and let the Matter in Hand be what it
will, it must be carried with an Air of Importance, and transacted, if we may
so speak, with an ostentatious Secrecy. These are your Persons of long Heads,
who would fain make the World believe their Thoughts and Idea's are very much
superior to their Neighbors, and do not value what these their Neighbors
think of them, provided they do not reckon them Fools. These have such a
Romantic Touch in Business, that they hate to perform any Thing like other
Men. Were it in their Choice, they had rather bring their Purposes to bear by
overreaching the Persons they deal with, than by a plain and simple Manner.
They make Difficulties for the Honor of surmounting them. Polypragmon is
eternally busied after this Manner, with no other Prospect than that he is in
Hopes to be thought the most cunning of all Men, and fears the Imputation of
Want of Understanding much more than that of the Abuse of it. But alas! How
contemptible is such an Ambition, which is the very Reverse of all that is
truly laudable; and the very Contradiction to the only Means to a just
Reputation, Simplicity of Manners? Cunning can in no Circumstance imaginable be
a Quality worthy a Man, except in his own Defense, and merely to conceal
himself from such as are so; and in such Cases it is no longer Craft, but
Wisdom. The monstrous Affectation of being thought artful, immediately kills
all Thoughts of Humanity and Goodness, and gives Men a Sense of the soft
Affections and Impulses of the Mind (which are imprinted in us for our mutual
Advantage and Succor) as of mere Weaknesses and Follies. According to the Men
of Cunning, you are to put off the Nature of a Man as fast as you can, and
acquire that of a Demon, as if it were a more eligible Character to be a
powerful Enemy, than an able Friend. But it ought to be a Mortification to Men
affected this Way, that there wants but little more than Instinct to be
considerable in it; for when a Man has arrived at being very bad in his
Inclination, he has not much more to do, but to conceal himself, and he may
revenge, cheat, and deceive, without much Employment for Understanding, and go
on with great Cheerfulness with the high Applause of being a prodigious cunning
Fellow. But indeed, when we arrive at that Pitch of false Taste, as not to
think Cunning a contemptible Quality, it is, methinks, a very great Injustice
that Pickpockets are had in so little Veneration, who must be admirably well
turned, not only for the Theoretick, but also the Practical Behavior of
cunning Fellows. After all the Endeavor of this Family of Men, whom we call
cunning, their whole Work falls to Pieces, if others will lay down all Esteem
for such Artifices, and treat it as an unmanly Quality, which they forbear to
practice only because they abhor it. When the Spider is ranging in the
different Apartments of his Web, it is true that he only can weave so fine a
Thread; but it is in the Power of the meerest Drone that has Wings to fly
through and destroy it.

Will's Coffee-house, June 28.
Though the Taste of Wit and Pleasure is at present but very low in this Town,
yet there are some that preserve their Relish undebauched with common
Impressions, and can distinguish between Reality and Imposture. A Gentleman was
saying here this Evening, That he would go to the Play to Morrow Night to see
Heroism, as it has been represented by some of our Tragedians, represented in
Burlesque. It seems, the Play of Alexander is to be then turned into Ridicule
for its Bombast, and other false Ornaments in the Thought as well as the
Language. The Bluster Alexander makes, is as much inconsistent with the
Character of an Hero, as the Roughness of Clytus an Instance of the Sincerity
of a bold artless Soldier. To be plain is not to be rude, but rather inclines a
Man to Civility and Deference; not indeed to show it in the Gestures of the
Body, but in the Sentiments of the Mind. It is among other Things from the
impertinent Figures unskilful Dramatists draw of the Characters of Men, that
Youth are bewildered and prejudiced in their Sense of the World, of which they
have no Notions but what they draw from Books and such Representations. Thus
talk to a very young Man, let him be of never so good Sense, and he shall smile
when you speak of Sincerity in a Courtier, good Sense in a Soldier, or Honesty
in a Politician. The Reason of this is, That you hardly see one Play wherein
each of these Ways of Life is not drawn by Hands that know nothing of any one
of them: And the Truth is so far of the opposite Side to what they paint, that
it is more impracticable to live in Esteem in Courts than any where else
without Sincerity. Good Sense is the great Requisite in a Soldier, and Honesty
the only Thing that can support a Politician. This Way of Thinking made the
Gentleman of whom I was just now speaking say, He was glad any one had taken
upon him to depreciate such unnatural Fustian as the Tragedy of Alexander. The
Character of that Prince indeed was, That he was unequal, and given to
Intemperance; but in his sober Moments, when he had warm in his Imagination the
Precepts of his great Instructor, he was a Pattern of generous Thoughts and
Dispositions, in Opposition to the strongest Desires which are incident to a
Youth and Conqueror. But instead of representing that Hero in the glorious
Character of Generosity and Chastity, in his Treatment of the beauteous Family
of Darius, he is drawn all along as a Monster of Lust, or of Cruelty; as if the
Way to raise him to the Degree of an Hero, were to make his Character as little
like that of a worthy Man as possible. Such rude and indigested Draughts of
Things are the proper Objects of Ridicule and Contempt, and depreciating
Alexander, as we have him drawn, is the only Way of restoring him to what he
was in himself. It is well contrived of the Players to let this Part be
followed by a true Picture of Life, in the Comedy called, The Chances, wherein
Don John and Constantia are acted to the utmost Perfection. There need not be a
greater Instance of the Force of Action than in many Incidents of this Play,
where indifferent Passages, and such that conduce only to the tacking of the
Scenes together, are enlivened with such an agreeable Gesture and Behavior, as
apparently shows what a Play might be, though it is not wholly what a Play should
be.

The TATLER. [No 192.
Tecum vivere amem, tecum obeam libens.
Hor.
From Thursd. June 29. to Saturd. July 1. 1710.
From my own Apartment, June 30.
SOme Years since I was engaged with a Coach full of Friends to take a Journey
as far as the Land's-End. We were very well pleased with one another the first
Day, every one endeavoring to recommend himself by his good Humor and
Complaisance to the rest of the Company. This good Correspondence did not last
long; one of our Party was sowred the very first Evening by a Plate of Butter
which had not been melted to his Mind, and which spoiled his Temper to such a
Degree, that he continued upon the Fret to the End of our Journey. A Second
fell off from his good Humor the next Morning, for no other Reason that I
could imagine, but because I chanced to step into the Coach before him, and
place my self on the shady Side. This however was but my own private Guess, for
he did not mention a Word of it, nor indeed of any Thing else, for Three Days
following. The rest of our Company held out very near half the Way, when of a
sudden Mr. Sprightly fell asleep; and instead of endeavoring to divert and
oblige us, as he had hitherto done, carried himself with an unconcerned,
careless, drowzy Behavior, till we came to uur last Stage. There were Three of
us who still held up our Heads, and did all we could to make our Journey
agreeable; but, to my Shame be it spoken, about Three Miles on this Side
Exeter, I was taken with an unaccountable Fit of Sullenness, that hung upon me
for above Threescore Miles; whether it were for Want of Respect, or from an
accidental. Tread upon my Foot, or from a foolish Maid's calling me The old
Gentleman. I cannot tell. In short, there was but one who kept his good Humor
to the Land's-End.

There was another Coach that went along with us, in which I likewise observed,
that there were many secret Jealousies, Heart-burnings, and Animosities: For
when we joined Companies at Night, I could not but take Notice, that the
Passengers neglected their own Company, and studied how to make themselves
esteemed by us, who were altogether Strangers to them; till at length they grew
so well acquainted with us, that they liked us as little as they did one
another. When I reflect upon this Journey, I often fancy it to be a Picture of
Humane Life, in Respect to the several Friendships, Contracts, and Alliances,
that are made and dissolved in the several Periods of it. The most delightful
and most lasting Engagements are generally those which pass between Man and
Woman; and yet upon what Trifles are they weakened, or entirely broken?
Sometimes the Parties fly asunder, even in the Midst of Courtship, and
sometimes grow cool in the very Honey Month. Some separate before the First
Child, and some after the Fifth; others continue good till Thirty, others till
Forty; while some few, whose Souls are of an happier Make, and better fitted to
one another, travel on together to the End of their Journey in a continual
Intercourse of kind Offices and mutual Endearments.

When we therefore choose our Companions for Life, if we hope to keep both them
and our selves in good Humor to the last Stage of it, we must be extremely
careful in the Choice we make, as well as in the Conduct on our own Part. When
the Persons to whom we join our selves can stand an Examination, and bear the
Scrutiny, when they mend upon our Acquaintance with them, and discover new
Beauties the more we search into their Characters, our Love will naturally rise
in Proportion to their Perfections.

But because there are very few possessed of such Accomplishments of Body and
Mind, we ought to look after those Qualifications both in our selves and
others, which are indispensibly necessary toward this happy Union, and which
are in the Power of every one to acquire, or at least to cultivate and improve.
These, in my Opinion, are Cheerfulness and Constancy. A cheerful Temper joined
with Innocence, will make Beauty attractive, Knowledge delightful, and Wit
good-natured. It will lighten Sickness, Poverty, and Affliction; convert
Ignorance into an amiable Simplicity, and render Deformity it self agreeable.

Constancy is natural to Persons of even Tempers and uniform Dispositions, and
may be acquired by those of the greatest Fickleness, Violence and Passion, who
consider seriously the Terms of Union upon which they come together, the mutual
Interest in which they are engaged, with all the Motives that ought to incite
their Tenderness and Compassion toward those who have their Dependence upon
them, and are embarked with them for Life in the same State of Happiness or
Misery. Constancy, when it grows in the Mind upon Considerations of this
Nature, becomes a Moral Virtue, and a kind of good Nature, that is not subject
to any Change of Health, Age, Fortune, or any of those Accidents which are apt
to unsettle the best Dispositions that are founded rather in Constitution than
in Reason. Where such a Constancy as this is wanting, the most enflamed Passion
may fall away into Coldness and Indifference, and the most melting Tenderness
degenerate into Hatred and Aversion. I shall conclude this Paper with a Story
that is very well known in the North of England.

About Thirty Years ago, a Packet-Boat that had several Passengers on Board was
cast away upon a Rock, and in so great Danger of sinking, that all who were in
it endeavored to save themselves as well at they could, though only those who
could swim well had a bare Possibility of doing it. Among the Passengers there
were Two Women of Fashion, who seeing themselves in such a disconsolate
Condition, begged of their Husbands not to leave them. One of them chose rather
to die with his Wife, than to forsake her; the other, though he was moved with
the utmost Compassion for his Wife, told her, That for the Good of their
Children it was better one of them should live, than both perish. By a great
Piece of good Luck, next to a Miracle, when one of our good Men had taken the
last and long Farewell in order to save himself, and the other held in his Arms
the Person that was dearer to him than Life, the Ship was preserved. It is with
a secret Sorrow and Vexation of Mind that I must tell the Sequel of the Story,
and let my Reader know, that this faithful Pair who were ready to have died in
each others Arms, about Three Years after their Escape, upon some trifling
Disgust, grew to a Coldness at first, and at length fell out to such a Degree,
that they left one another, and parted for ever. The other Couple lived
together in an uninterrupted Friendship and Felicity; and what was remarkable,
the Husband whom the Shipwreck had like to have separated from his Wife, died a
few Months after her, not being able to survive the Loss of her.

I must confess, there is something in the Changeableness and Inconstancy of
Humane Nature, that very often both dejects and terrifies me. Whatever I am at
present, I tremble to think what I may be. While I find this Principle in me,
How can I assure my self that I shall be always true to my God, my Friend, or
my self? In short, without Constancy there is neither Love, Friendship, or
Virtue, in the World.

The TATLER. [No 193.
Qui didicit Patriae quid debeat, and quid Amicis,
Quo sit Amore Parens, quo Frater Amandus, and Hospes.
Scribere Personae scit Convenientia cuique.
Hor.
From Saturday July 1. to Tuesday July 4. 1710.
Will's Coffee-house, July 3.
I Have of late received many Epistles, wherein the Writers treat me as a
mercenary Person for some late Hints concerning Matters which they think I
should not have touched upon but for sordid Considerations. It is apparent,
that my Motive could not be of that Kind; for when a Man declares him self
openly on one Side, that Party will take no more Notice of him, because he is
sure; and the Set of Men whom he declares against, for the same Reason are
violent against him. Thus it is Folly in a Plain-Dealer to expect, that either
his Friends will reward him, or his Enemies forgive him. For which Reason, I
thought it was the shortest Way to Impartiality, to put my self beyond further
Hopes or Fears, by declaring my self, at a Time when the Dispute is not about
Persons and Parties, but Things and Causes. To relieve my self from the
Vexation which naturally attends such Reflections, I came hither this Evening
to give my Thoughts quite a new Turn, and converse with Men of Pleasure and
Wit, rather than those of Business and Intrigue. I had hardly entered the Room,
when I was accosted by Mr. Thomas Dogget, who desired my Favor in Relation to
the Play which was to be acted for his Benefit on Thursday. He pleased me in
saying it was The Old Bachelor, in which Comedy there is a necessary
Circumstance observed by the Author, which most other Poets either overlook or
do not understand, that is to say, the Distinction of Characters. It is very
ordinary with Writers to indulge a certain Modesty of believing all Men as
witty as themselves, and making all the Persons of the Play speak the
Sentiments of the Author, without any Manner of Respect to the Age, Fortune, or
Quality, of him that is on the Stage. Ladies talk like Rakes, and Footmen make
Similes: But this Writer knows Men. which makes his Plays reasonable
Entertainments, while the Scenes of most others are like the Tunes between the
Acts. They are perhaps agreeable Sounds, but they have no Idea's affixed to
them. Dogget thanked me for my Visit to him in the Winter, and, after his
Comic Manner, spoke his Request with so arch a Leer, that I promised the Drole
I would speak to all my Acquaintance to be at his Play.

Whatever the World may think of the Actors, whether it be that their Parts
have an Effect on their Lives, or whatever it is, you see a wonderful
Benevolence among them toward the Interests and Necessities of each other.
Dogget therefore would not let me go, without delivering me a Letter from poor
old Downs the Prompter, wherein that Retainer to the Theater desires my Advice
and Assistance in a Matter of Concern to him. I have sent him my private
Opinion for his Conduct; but the Stage and the State Affairs being so much
canvassed by Parties and Factions, I shall for some Time hereafter take Leave
of Subjects which relate to either of them, and employ my Care in the
Consideration of Matters which regard that Part of Mankind who live without
interesting themselves with the Troubles or Pleasures of either. However, for a
mere Notion of the present Posture of the Stage, I shall give you the Letter at
large as follows:

July 1. 1710. Honored Sir,
FInding by diverse of your late Papers, that you are a Friend to the Profession
of which I was many Years an unworthy Member, I the rather make bold to crave
your Advice, touching a Proposal that has been lately made me of coming again
into Business, and the Sub-Administration of Stage Affairs. I have, from my
Youth, been bred up behind the Curtain, and been a Prompter from the Time of
the Restoration. I have seen many Changes, as well of Scenes as of Actors, and
have known Men within my Remembrance arrive to the highest Dignities of the
Theater, who made their Entrance in the Quality of Mutes, Joint-stools,
Flower-pots, and Tapestry Hangings. It cannot be unknown to the Nobility and
Gentry, That a Gentleman of the Inns of Court, and a deep Intriguer, had some
Time since worked himself into the sole Management and Direction of the
Theater. Nor is it less notorious, That his restless Ambition, and subtle
Machinations, did manifestly tend to the Extirpation of the good old British
Actors, and the Introduction of foreign Pretenders; such as Harlequins, French
Dancers, and Roman Singers; which, though they impoverished the Proprietors,
and imposed on the Audience, were for some Time tolerated, by Reason of his
dextrous Insinuations, which prevailed upon a few deluded Women, especially the
Vizard Masks, to believe that the Stage was in Danger. But his Schemes were
soon exposed, and the Great Ones that supported him withdrawing their Favor,
he made his Exit, and remained for a Season in Obscurity. During this Retreat
the Machiavilian was not idle, but secretly fomented Divisions, and wrought
over to his Side some of the inferior Actors, reserving a Trap Door to himself,
to which only he had a Key. This Entrance secured, this cunning Person, to
complete his Company, bethought himself of calling in the most eminent of
Strollers from all Parts of the Kingdom. I have seen them all ranged together
behind the Scenes; but they are many of them Persons that never trod the Stage
before, and so very awkward and ungainly, that it is impossible to believe the
Audience will bear them. He was looking over his Catalogue of Plays, and indeed
picked up a good tolerable Set of grave Faces for Counselors, to appear in the
famous Scene of Venice Preserved, when the Danger is over; but they being but
mere Outsides, and the Actors having a great Mind to play The Tempest, there is
not a Man of them, when he is to perform any Thing above Dumb Show, is capable
of acting with a good Grace so much as the Part of Trincalo. However, the
Master persists in his Design, and is fitting up the old Storm; but I am afraid
he will not be able to procure able Sailors or experienced Officers for Love or
Money.

Besides all this, when he comes to cast the Parts, there is so great a
Confusion amongst them for Want of proper Actors, that for my Part I am wholly
discouraged. The Play with which they design to open is, The Duke and no Duke;
and they are so put to it, that the Master himself is to act the Conjurer, and
they have no one for the General but honest George Powell.

Now, Sir, they being so much at a Loss for the Dramatis Personae, viz. the
Persons to enact, and the whole Frame of the House being designed to be
altered, I desire your Opinion, whether you think it advisable for me to
undertake to prompt 'em? For though I can clash Swords when they represent a
Battle, and have yet Lungs enough left to huzza their Victories, I question, if
I should prompt 'em right, whether they would act accordingly. I am

Your Honor's most humble Servant, J. Downs.
P. S. Sir, Since I writ this, I am credibly informed, That they design a new
House in Lincolns-Inn-Fields, near the Popish Chapel, to be ready by Michaelmas
next; which indeed is but repairing an old one that has already failed. You
know the honest Man who kept the Office is gone already.




The TATLER. [No 194.
Militat omnis amans.
Ovid.
From Tuesday July 4. to Thursday July 6. 1710.
From my own Apartment, July 5.
I Was this Morning reading the Tenth Canto in the Fourth Book of Spencer, in
which Sir Scudamore relates the Progress of his Courtship to Amoret under a
very beautiful Allegory, which is one of the most natural and unmixed of any in
that most excellent Author. I shall transprose it, to use Mr. Bays's Term, for
the Benefit of many English Lovers, who have by frequent Letters desired me to
lay down some Rules for the Conduct of their virtuous Amors; and shall only
premise, That by the Shield of Love, (...) meant a generous, constant Passion
for the Person beloved.

When the Fame, says he, of this celebrated Beauty first flew Abroad, I went in
Pursuit of her to the Temple of Love. This Temple, continues he, bore the Name
of the Goddess Venus, and was seated in a most fruitful Island, walled by
Nature against all Invaders. There was a single Bridge that led into the
Island, and before it a Castle garrisoned by Twenty Knights. Near the Castle
was an open Plain, and in the midst of it a Pillar, on which was hung the
Shield of Love; and underneath it, in Letters of Gold, was this Inscription:

Happy the Man who well can use his Bliss;
Whose ever be the Shield, Fair Amoret be his.
My Heart panted upon reading the Inscription: I struck upon the Shield with my
Spear. Immediately issued forth a Knight well mounted, and completely armed,
who, without speaking, ran fiercely at me. I received him as well as I could,
and by good Fortune threw him out of the Saddle. I encountered the whole Twenty
successively, and leaving them all extended on the Plain, carried off the
Shield in Token of Victory. Having thus vanquished my Rivals, I passed on
without Impediment, till I came to the outermost Gate of the Bridge, which I
found locked and barred. I knocked and called, but could get no Answer. At last
I saw one on the other Side of the Gate, who stood peeping through a small
Crevice. This was the Porter; he had a double Face resembling a Janus, and was
continually looking about him, as if he mistrusted some sudden Danger. His
Name, as I afterward learned, was Doubt. Over Against him sat Delay, who
entertained Passengers with some idle Story, while they lost such Opportunities
as were never to be recovered. As soon as the Porter saw my Shield, he opened
the Gate; but upon my entering, Delay caught hold of me, and would fain have
made me listen to her Fooleries. However, I shook her off, and passed forward
till I came to the Second Gate, The Gate of good Desert, which always stood
wide open, but in the Porch was an hideous Giant, that stopped the Entrance: His
Name was Danger. Many Warriors of good Reputation, not able to bear the
Sternness of his Look, went back again. Cowards fled at the first Sight of him,
except some few, who watching their Opportunity, slipped by him unobserved. I
prepared to assault him; but upon the first Sight of my Shield, he immediately
gave Way. Looking back upon him, I found his hinder Parts much more deformed
and terrible than his Face; Hatred, Murder, Treason, Envy, and Detraction,
lying in Ambush behind him, to fall upon the Heedless and Unwary.

I now entered The Island of Love, which appeared in all the Beauties of Art
and Nature, and feasted every Sense with the most agreeable Objects. Amidst a
pleasing Variety of Walks and Allies, shady Seats, and flowery Banks, sunny
Hills, and gloomy Valleys, were Thousands of Lovers sitting, or walking
together in Pairs, and singing Hymns to the Deity of the Place.

I could not forbear envying this happy People, who were already in Possession
of all they could desire. While I went forward to the Temple, the Structure was
beautiful beyond Imagination. The Gate stood open. In the Entrance sat a most
amiable Woman, whose Name was Concord.

On either Side of her stood Two young Men, both strongly armed, as if afraid
of each other. As I afterward learned they were both her Sons, but begotten of
her by Two different Fathers; their Names, Love and Hatred.

The Lady so well tempered and reconciled them both, that she forced them to
join Hands, though I could not but observe, that Hatred turned aside his Face, as
not able to endure the Sight of his younger Brother.

I at length entered the Inmost Temple, the Roof of which was raised upon an
Hundred Marble Pillars, decked with Crowns, Chains, and Garlands. The Ground
was strowed with Flowers. An Hundred Altars, at each of which stood a Virgin
Priestess clothed in White, blazed all at once with the Sacrifice of Lovers,
who were perpetually sending up their Vows to Heaven in Clouds of Incense.

In the Midst stood the Goddess her self, upon an Altar, whose Substance was
neither Gold nor Stone, but infinitely more precious than either. About her
Neck flew numberless Flocks of little Loves, Joys, and Graces; and all about
her Altar lay scattered Heaps of Lovers, complaining of the Disdain, Pride, or
Treachery, of their Mistresses. One among the rest, no longer able to contain
his Griefs, broke out into the following Prayer: ' Venus, Queen of Grace and
Beauty, Joy of Gods and Men, who with a Smile becalmest the Seas, and renewest
all Nature; Goddess, whom all the different Species in the Universe obey with
Joy and Pleasure, grant I may at last obtain the Object of my Vows.'

The impatient Lover pronounced this with great Vehemence; but I in a soft
Murmur besought the Goddess to lend me her Assistance. While I was thus
praying, I chanced to cast my Eye on a Company of Ladies, who were assembled
together in a Corner of the Temple waiting for the Anthem.

The foremost seemed something elder, and of a more composed Countenance than
the rest, who all appeared to be under her Direction. Her Name was Womanhood.
On one Side of her sat Shamefacedness, with Blushes rising in her Cheeks, and
her Eyes fixed upon the Ground: On the other was Cheerfulness, with a smiling
Look, that infused a secret Pleasure into the Hearts of all that saw her. With
these sat Modesty, holding her Hand on her Heart; Courtesy, with a graceful
Aspect, and obliging Behavior; and the Two Sisters, who were always linked
together, and resembled each other, Silence and Obedience.

Thus sat they all around in seemly Rate,
And in the Midst of them a goodly Maid;
Even in the Lap of Womanhood there sat,
The which was all in Lilly-white arrayed,
Where Silver Streams among the Linen strayed;
Like to the Morn, when first her shining Face
Has to the Gloomy World it self bewrayed.
That same was fairest Amoret in Place,
Shining with Beauty's Light, and Heavenly Virtue's Grace.
As soon as I beheld the charming Amoret, my Heart throbbed with Hopes. I
stepped to her, and seized her Hand; when Womanhood immediately rising up,
sharply rebuked me for offering in so rude a Manner to lay hold on a Virgin. I
excused my self as modestly as I could, and at the same Time displayed my
Shield; upon which, as soon as she beheld the God emblazoned with his Bow and
Shafts, she was struck mute, and instantly retired.

I still held fast the fair Amoret, and turning my Eyes toward the Goddess of
the Place, saw that she favored my Pretensions with a Smile, which so
emboldened me, that I carried off my Prize.

The Maid, sometimes with Tears, sometimes with Smiles, entreated me to let her
go: But I led her through the Temple-Gate, where the Goddess Concord, who had
favored my Entrance, befriended my Retreat.

This Allegory is so natural, that it explains it self. The Persons in it are
very artfully described, and disposed in proper Places. The Posts assigned to
Doubt, Delay, and Danger, are admirable. The Gate of Good Desert has something
noble and instructive in it. But above all, I am most pleased with the
beautiful Grouppe of Figures in the Corner of the Temple. Among these,
Womanhood is drawn like what the Philosophers call an Universal Nature, and is
attended with beautiful Representatives of all those Virtues that are the
Ornaments of the Female Sex, considered in its natural Perfection and Innocence.

The TATLER. [No 195.
From Thursd. July 6. to Saturd. July 8. 1710.
Grecian Coffee-house, July 7.
THE Learned World are very much offended at many of my Ratiocinations, and
have but a very mean Opinion of me as a Politician. The Reason of this is, That
some erroneously conceive a Talent for Politics to consist in the Regard to a
Man's own Interest; but I am of quite another Mind, and think the first and
essential Quality toward being a Statesman is to have a public Spirit. One of
the Gentlemen who are out of Humor with me, imputes my falling into a Way
wherein I am so very awkward to a Barrenness of Invention, and has the Charity
to lay new Matter before me for the future. He is at the Bottom my Friend, but
is at a Loss to know whether I am a Fool or a Physician, and is pleased to
expostulate with me with Relation to the latter. He falls heavy upon
Licentiates, and seems to point more particularly at us who are not regularly
of the Faculty. But since he has been so civil to me as to meddle only with
those who are employed no further than about Men's Lives, and not reflected
upon me as of the Astrological Sect, who concern our selves about Lives and
Fortunes also, I am not so much hurt as to stifle any Part of his fond Letter.

SIR,
I Am afraid there is something in the Suspicions of some People, that you
begin to be short of Matter for your Lucubrations. Though several of them now and
then did appear somewhat dull and insipid to me, I was always charitably
inclined to believe the Fault lay in my self, and that I wanted the true Key to
uncipher your Mysteries, and remember your Advertisement upon this Account. But
since I have seen you fall in an unpardonable Error, yea, with a Relapse: I
mean, since I have seen you turn Politician in the present unhappy Dissentions.
I have begun to stagger, and could not choose but lessen the great Value I had
for the Censor of our Isle. How is it possible that a Man, whom Interest did
naturally lead to a constant Impartiality in these Matters, and who has Wit
enough to judge, that his Opinion was not like to make many Proselytes? How is
it possible, I say, that a little Passion (for I have still too good an Opinion
of you to think you was bribed by the Staggering Party) could blind you so far
as to offend the very better half of the Nation, and to lessen off so much the
Number of your Friends? Mr. Morphew will not have Cause to thank you, unless
you give over, and endeavor to regain what you have lost. There is still a
great many Themes you have left untouched; such as the ill Managements of
Matters relating to Law and Physic, the setting down Rules for knowing the
Quacks in both Professions. What a large Field is there left in discovering the
Abuses of the College, who had a Charter and Privileges granted them to hinder
the creeping in and prevailing of Quacks and Pretenders; and yet grant Licenses
to Barbers, and write Letters of Recommendation in the Country Towns, out of
the Reach of their Practice, in Favor of mere Boys; valuing the Health and
Lives of their Countrymen no farther than they get Money by them. You have said
very little or nothing about the Dispensation of Justice in Town and Country,
where Clerks are the Counselors to their Masters.

But as I cannot expect that the Censor of Great Britain should publish a
Letter, wherein he is censured with too much Reason himself; yet I hope you
will be the better for it, and think upon the Themes I have mentioned, which
must certainly be of greater Service to the World, your self, and Mr. Morphew,
than to let us know whether you are a Whig or a Tory. I am still

Your Admirer and Servant, Cato Junior.


This Gentleman and I differ about the Words, Staggering and Better Part; but
instead of answering to the Particulars of this Epistle, I shall only acquaint
my Correspondent, That I am at present forming my Thoughts upon the Foundation
of Sir Scudamore's Progress in Spencer, which has led me from all other
Amusements, to consider the State of Love in this Island; and from the
Corruptions in the Government of that, to deduce the chief Evils of Life. In
the mean Time that I am thus employed, I have given positive Orders to Don
Saltero of Chelsea the Tooth-Drawer, and Dr. Thomas Smith the Corn-Cutter of
King Street, Westminster, (who have the Modesty to confine their Pretensions to
Manual Operations) to bring me in, with all convenient Speed, complete Lists of
all who are but of equal Learning with themselves, and yet administer Physic
beyond the Feet and Gums. These Advices I shall reserve for my future Leisure;
but have now taken a Resolution to dedicate the remaining Part of this Instant
July to the Service of the Fair Sex, and have almost finished a Scheme for
settling the whole Remainder of that Sex who are unmarried, and above the Age
of Twenty five.

In order to this good and public Service, I shall consider the Passion of
Love in its full Extent, as it is attended both with Joys and Inquietudes; and
lay down, for the Conduct of my Lovers, such Rules as shall banish the Cares,
and heighten the Pleasures, which flow from that amiable Spring of Life and
Happiness. There is no less than an absolute Necessity that some Provision be
made to take off the dead Stock of Women in City, Town, and Country. Let there
happen but the least Disorder in the Streets. and in an Instant you see the
Inequality of the Numbers of Males and Females. Besides that the Feminine Crowd
on such Occasions is more numerous in the open Way, you may observe them also
to the very Garrets huddled together, Four at least at a Casement. Add to this,
that by an exact Calculation of all that have come to Town by Stage-Coach or
Wagon for this Twelvemonth last, Three Times in Four the treated Persons have
been Males. This over-stock of Beauty, for which there are so few Bidders,
calls for an immediate Supply of Lovers and Husbands; and I am the studious
Knight Errant who have suffered long Nocturnal Contemplations to find out
Methods for the Relief of all British Females, who at present seem to be
devoted to involuntary Virginity. The Scheme upon which I design to act, I have
communicated to none but a beauteous young Lady, (who has for some Time left
the Town) in the following Letter:

To Amanda in Kent.
MADAM,
I Send with this, my Discourse of Ways and Means for encouraging Marriage, and
repeopling the Island. You will soon observe, that according to these Rules,
the mean Considerations (which make Beauty and Merit cease to be the Objects of
Love and Courtship) will be fully exploded. I have unanswerably proved, that
Jointures and Settlements are the Bane of Happiness; and not only so, but the
Ruin even of their Fortunes who enter into them. I beg of you therefore to come
to Town upon the Receipt of this, where I promise you, you shall have as many
Lovers as Toasters; for there needed nothing but to make Men's Interests fall
in with their Inclinations, to render you the most courted of your Sex. As many
as love you will now be willing to marry you: Hasten then, and be the
honorable Mistress of Mankind. Cassander, and many others, stand in the Gate
of Good Descrt to receive you. I am,

MADAM, Your most Obedient, Most Humble Servant, Isaac Bickerstaff.


The TATLER. [No 196.
Dulcis inexperto cultura potentis Amici
Expertus metuit --
Hor.
From Saturd. July 8. to Tuesd. July 11. 1710.
From my own Apartment, July 10.
THE intended Course of my Studies was altered this Evening by a Visit from an
old Acquaintance, who complained to me, mentioning one upon whom he had long
depended, that he found his Labor and Perseverance in his Patron's Service and
Interests wholly ineffectual; and he thought now, after his best Years were
spent in a professed Adherence to him and his Fortunes, he should in the End be
forced to break with him, and give over all further Expectations from him. He
sighed, and ended his Discourse, by saying, 'You, Mr. Censor, some Time ago,
gave us your Thoughts of the Behavior of great Men to their Creditors.' This
Sort of Demand upon them, for what they invite Men to expect, is a Debt of
Honor, which, according to Custom, they ought to be most careful of paying,
and would be a very worthy Subject for a Lucubration.

Of all Men living, I think, I am the most proper to treat of this Matter;
because in the Character and Employment of Censor, I have had Encouragement so
infinitely above my Desert, that what I say cannot possibly be supposed to
arise from Peevishness, or any Disappointment in that Kind which I my self have
met with. When we consider Patrons and their Clients, those who receive
Addresses, and those who are addressed to, it must not be understood that the
Dependants are such as are worthless in their Natures, abandoned to any Vice or
Dishonor, or such as without a Call thrust themselves upon Men in Power; nor
when we say Patrons, do we mean such as have it not in their Power, or have no
Obligation to assist their Friends; but we speak of such Leagues where there
are Power and Obligation on the one Part, and Merit and Expectation on the
other. Were we to be very particular on this Subject, I take it, that the
Division of Patron and Client may include a Third Part of our Nation. The Want
of Merit and real Worth will strike out about Ninety nine in the Hundred of
these, and Want of Ability in the Patron will dispose of as many of that Order.
He who out of mere Vanity to be applied to will take up another's Time and
Fortune in his Service, where he has no Prospect of returning it, is as much
more unjust as those who took up my Friend the Upholder's Goods without paying
him for them. I say, he is much more unjust, as our Life and Time is more
valuable than our Goods and Movables. Among many whom you see about the Great,
there is a contented wellpleased Set, who seem to like the Attendance for its
own Sake, and are early at the Abodes of the powerful, out of mere Fashion.
This Sort of Vanity is as well grounded, as if a Man should lay aside his own
plain Suit, and dress himself up in a gay Livery of another.

There are many of this Species who exclude others of just Expectation, and
make those proper Dependants appear impatient, because they are not so cheerful
as those who expect nothing. I have made use of the Penny-Post for the
Instruction of these voluntary Slaves, and informed them, that they will never
be provided for; but they double their Diligence upon Admonition. Will Afterday
has told his Friends, that he was to have the next Thing these Ten Years; and
Harry Linger has been Fourteen within a Month of a considerable Office.
However, the fantastic Complaisance which is paid to them may blind the Great
from seeing themselves in a just Light, they must needs (if they in the least
reflect) at some Times have a Sense of the Injustice they do in raising in
others a false Expectation. But this is so common a Practice in all the Stages
of Power, that there are not more Cripples come out of the Wars, than from the
Attendance of Patrons. You see in one a settled Melancholy, in another a
bridled Rage, a Third has lost his Memory, and a Fourth his whole Constitution
and Humor. In a Word, when you see a particular Cast of Mind or Body, which
looks a little upon the Distracted, you may be sure the poor Gentleman has
formerly had great Friends. For this Reason, I have thought it a prudent Thing
to take a Nephew of mine out of a Ladies Service, where he was a Page, and have
bound him to a Shoemaker.

But what of all the Humors under the Sun is the most pleasant to consider,
is, That you see some Men lay as it were a Set of Acquaintance by them, to
converse with when they are out of Employment, who had no Effect of their Power
when they were in. Here Patrons and Clients both make the most fantastical
Figure imaginable. Friendship indeed is most manifested in Adversity; but I do
not know how to behave my self to a Man who thinks me his Friend at no other
Time but that. Dick Reptile of our Club had this in his Head the other Night,
when he said, I am afraid of ill News when I am visited by any of my old
Friends. These Patrons are a little like some fine Gentlemen, who spend all
their Hours of Gaiety with their Wenches, but when they fall sick, will let no
one come near them but their Wives. It seems, Truth and Honor are Companions
too sober for Prosperity. It is certainly the most black Ingratitude to accept
of a Man's best Endeavors to be pleasing to you, and return it with
Indifference.

I am so much of this Mind, that Dick Eastcourt the Comedian, for coming one
Night to our Club, though he laughed at us all the Time he was there, shall have
our Company at his Play on Thursday. A Man of Talents is to be favored, or
never admitted. Let the ordinary World truck for Money and Wares, but Men of
Spirit and Conversation should in every Kind do others as much Pleasure as they
receive from them. But Men are so taken up with outward Forms, that they do not
consider their Actions; else how should it be, that a Man shall deny that to
the Entreaties and almost Tears of an old Friend, which he shall solicit a new
one to accept of? I remember, when I first came out of Staffordshire, I had an
Intimacy with a Man of Quality, in whose Gift there fell a very good
Employment. All the Town cried, There Is a Thing for Mr. Bickerstaff! When, to
my great Astonishment, I found my Patron had been forced upon Twenty Artifices
to surprise a Man with it who never thought of it: But sure it is a Degree of
Murder to amuse Men with vain Hopes. If a Man takes away another's Life, where
is the Difference, whether he does it by taking away the Minutes of his Time,
or the Drops of his Blood? But indeed, such as have Hearts barren of Kindness
are served accordingly by those whom they employ, and pass their Lives away
with an empty Show of Civility for Love, and an insipid Intercourse of a
Commerce in which their Affections are no way concerned. But on the other Side,
How beautiful is the Life of a Patron who performs his Duty to his Inferiors? A
worthy Merchant, who employs a Crowd of Artificers? A great Lord, who is
generous and merciful to the several Necessities of his Tenants? A Courtier,
who uses his Credit and Power for the Welfare of his Friends? These have in
their several Stations a quick Relish of the exquisite Pleasure of doing Good.
In a Word, good Patrons are like the Guardian Angels of Plato, who are ever
busy, though unseen, in the Care of their Wards; but ill Patrons are like the
Deities of Epicurus, supine, indolent, and unconcerned, though they see Mortals
in Storms and Tempests even while they are offering Incense to their Power.

The TATLER. [No 197.
Semper ego Auditor tantum? --
Juv.
From Tuesday July 11. to Thursday July 13. 1710.
Grecian Coffee-house, July 12.
WHEN I came hither this Evening, the Man of the House delivered me a Book very
finely bound. When I received it, I overheard one of the Boys whisper another,
and say, It was a fine Thing to be a great Scholar! What a pretty Book that is!
It has indeed a very gay Outside, and is dedicated to me by a very ingenious
Gentleman, who does not put his Name to it. The Title of it (for the Work is in
Latin) is, Epistolarum Obscurorum Virorum, ad Dm. M. Ortuinum Gratium, Volumina
II. etc. "The Epistles of the Obscure Writers to Ortuinus, etc." The Purpose of
the Work is signified in the Dedication, in very elegant Language, and fine
Raillery. It seems, this is a Collection of Letters which some profound
Blockheads, who lived before our Times, have written in Honor of each other,
and for their mutual Information in each others Absurdities. They are mostly of
the German Nation, whence from Time to Time Inundations of Writers have flowed,
more pernicious to the Learned World than the Swarms of Goths and Vandals to
the Politic. It is, methinks, wonderful, that Fellows could be awake, and
utter such incoherent Conceptions, and converse with great Gravity like learned
Men, without the least Taste of Knowledge or good Sense. It would have been an
endless Labor to have taken any other Method of exposing such Impertinencies,
than by an Edition of their own Works, where you see their Follies, according
to the Ambition of such Virtuosi, in a most correct Edition.

Looking over these accomplished Labors, I could not but reflect upon the
immense Load of Writings which the Commonalty of Scholars have pushed into the
World, and the Absurdity of Parents, who educate Crowds to spend their Time in
Pursuit of such cold and sprightless Endeavors to appear in Public. It seems
therefore a fruitless Labor to attempt the Correction of the Taste of our
Contemporaries, except it was in our Power to burn all the senseless Labors of
our Ancestors. There is a secret Propensity in Nature from Generation to
Generation in the Blockheads of one Age to admire those of another; and Men of
the same Imperfections are as great Admirers of each other, as those of the
same Abilities.

This great Mischief of voluminous Follies proceeds from a Misfortune which
happens in all Ages, that Men of barren Genius's, but fertile Imaginations, are
bred Scholars. This may at first appear a Paradox; but when we consider the
talking Creatures we meet in public Places, it will no longer be such. Ralph
Shallow is a young Fellow, that has not by Nature any the least Propensity to
strike into what has not been observed and said every Day of his Life by
others; but with that Inability of speaking any Thing that is uncommon, he has
a great Readiness at what he can speak of, and his Imagination runs into all
the different Views of the Subject he treats of in a Moment. If Ralph had
Learning added to the common Chit-Chat of the Town, he would have been a
Disputant upon all Topics that ever were considered by Men of his own Genius.
As for my Part, I never am teazed by an empty Town-Fellow, but I bless my Stars
that he was not bred a Scholar. This Addition, we must consider, would have
made him capable of maintaining his Follies. His being in the Wrong would have
been protected by suitable Arguments; and when he was hedged in by Logical
Terms, and false Appearances, you must have owned your self convinced before
you could then have got rid of him, and the Shame of his Triumph had been added
to the Pain of his Impertinence.

There is a Sort of Littleness in the Minds of Men of wrong Sense, which makes
them much more insufferable than mere Fools, and has the further Inconvenience
of being attended by an endless Loquacity. For which Reason, it would be a very
proper Work, if some Well-wisher to humane Society would consider the Terms
upon which People meet in public Places, in order to prevent the unseasonable
Declamations which we meet with there. I remember, in my Youth it was an Humor
at the University, when a Fellow pretended to be more eloquent than ordinary,
and had formed to himself a Plot to gain all our Admiration, or triumph over us
with an Argument, to either of which he had no Manner of Call; I say, in either
of these Cases, it was the Humor to shut one Eye. This whimsical Way of taking
Notice to him of his Absurdity, has prevented many a Man from being a Coxcomb.
If amongst us, on such an Occasion each Man offered a voluntary Rhetorician
some Snuff, it would probably produce the same Effect. As the Matter now
stands, whether a Man will or no, he is obliged to be informed in whatever
another pleases to entertain him with, though the Preceptor makes these Advances
out of Vanity, and not to instruct, but insult him.

There is no Man will allow him who wants Courage to be called a Soldier; but
Men who want good Sense, are very frequently not only allowed to be Scholars,
but esteemed for being such. At the same Time it must be granted, that as
Courage is the natural Parts of a Soldier, so is a good Understanding of a
Scholar. Such little Minds as these, whose Productions are collected in the
Volume to which I have the Honor to be Patron, are the Instruments for artful
Men to work with, and become popular with the unthinking Part of Mankind. In
Courts, they make transparent Flatterers; in Camps, ostentatious Bullies; in
Colleges, unintelligible Pedants; and their Faculties are used accordingly by
those who lead them.

When a Man who wants Judgment is admitted into the Conversation of reasonable
Men, he shall remember such improper Circumstances, and draw such groundless
Conclusions from their Discourse, and that with such Color of Sense, as would
divide the best Set of Company that can be got together. It is just thus with a
Fool who has a Familiarity with Books, he shall quote and recite one Author
against another, in such a Manner as shall puzzle the best Understanding to
refute him; though the most ordinary Capacity may observe, that it is only
Ignorance which makes the Intricacy. All the true Use of that we call Learning,
is to ennoble and improve our natural Faculties, and not to disguise our
Imperfections. It is therefore in vain for Folly to attempt to conceal it self
by the Refuge of Learned Languages. Literature does but make a Man more
eminently the Thing which Nature made him; and Polyglottes, had he studied less
than he has, and writ only in his Mother Tongue, had been known only in Great
Britain for a Pedant.

Mr. Bickerstaff thanks Dorinda, and will both answer her Letter, and take her
Advice.

The TATLER. [No 198.
Quale sit id quod amas celeri circumspice Mente,
Et tua caesura substrahe Colla Jugo.
Hor.
From Thursday July 13. to Saturday July 15. 1710.
From my own Apartment, July 14.
The History of Caelia.
IT is not necessary to look back into the First Years of this young Lady,
whose Story is of Consequence only as her Life has lately met with Passages
very uncommon. She is now in the Twentieth Year of her Age, and owes a strict,
but cheerful Education, to the Care of an Aunt, to whom she was recommended by
her dying Father, whose Decease was hastened by an inconsolable Affliction for
the Loss of her Mother. As Caelia is the Offspring of the most generous Passion
that has been known in our Age, she is adorned with as much Beauty and Grace as
the most celebrated of her Sex possess; but her Domestic Life, moderate
Fortune, and religious Educaiton, gave her but little Opportunity, and less
Inclination, to be admired in public Assemblies. Her Abode has been for some
Years a convenient Distance from the Cathedral of St. Paul's, where her Aunt
and she chose to reside, for the Advantage of that rapturous Way of Devotion
which gives Ecstasy to the Pleasures of Innocence, and, in some Measure, is the
immediate Possession of those Heavenly Enjoyments for which they are addressed.

As you may trace the usual Thoughts of Men in their Countenances, there
appeared in the Face of Caelia a Cheerfulness, the constant Companion of
unaffected Virtue; and a Gladness, which is as inseparable from true Piety. Her
every Look and Motion spoke the peaceful, mild, resigning, humble Inhabitant,
that animated her beauteous Body. Her Air discovered her Body a mere Machine of
her Mind, and not that her Thoughts were employed in studying Graces and
Attractions for her Person. Such was Caelia when she was first seen by Palamede
at her usual Place of Worship. Palamede is a young Man of Two and twenty,
well-fashioned, learned, genteel, and discreet, the Son and Heir of a Gentleman
of a very great Estate, and himself possessed of a plentiful one by the Gift of
an Uncle. He became enamoured with Caelia, and after having learned her
Habitation, had Address enough to communicate his Passion and Circumstances
with such an Air of good Sense and Integrity, as soon obtained Permission to
visit and profess his Inclinations toward her. Palamede's present Fortune and
future Expectations were no Way prejudicial to his Addresses; but after the
Lovers had passed some Time in the agreeable Entertainments of a successful
Courtship, Caelia one Day took Occasion to interrupt Palamede in the Midst of a
very pleasing Discourse of the Happiness he promised himself in so accomplished
a Companion, and assuming a serious Air, told him, there was another Heart to
be won before he gained hers, which was that of his Father. Palamede seemed
much disturbed at the Overture, and lamented to her, That his Father was one of
those too provident Parents, who only place their Thoughts upon bringing Riches
into their Families by Marriages, and are wholly insensible of all other
Considerations. But the Strictness of Caelia's Rules of Life made her insist
upon this Demand; and the Son, at a proper Hour, communicated to his Father the
Circumstances of his Love, and the Merit of the Object. The next Day the Father
made her a Visit. The Beauty of her Person, the Fame of her Virtue, and a
certain irresistible Charm in her whole Behavior on so tender and delicate an
Occasion, wrought so much upon him, in Spite of all Prepossessions, that he
hastened the Marriage with an Impatience equal to that of his Son. Their
Nuptials were celebrated with a Privacy suitable to the Character and Modesty
of Caelia, and from that Day, till a fatal one of last Week, they lived
together with all the Joy and Happiness which attend Minds entirely united.

It should have been intimated, That Palamede is a Student of the Temple, and
usually retired thither early in a Morning, Caelia still sleeping.

It happened a few Days since, that she followed him thither to communicate to
him something she had omitted in her redundant Fondness to speak of the Evening
before. When she came to his Apartment, the Servant there told her, she was
coming with a Letter to her. While Caelia in an Inner Room was reading an
Apology from her Husband, That he had been suddenly taken by some of his
Acquaintance to dine at Brentford, but that he should return in the Evening, a
Country Girl, decently clad, asked, If those were not the Chambers of Mr.
Palamede? She was answered, They were, but that he was not in Town. The
Stranger asked, When he was expected at Home? The Servant replied, She would go
in and ask his Wife. The young Woman repeated the Word Wife, and fainted. This
Accident raised no less Curiosity when Amazement in Caelia, who caused her to
be removed into the Inner Room. Upon proper Applications to revive her, the
unhappy young Creature returned to her self, and said to Caelia, with an
earnest and beseeching Tone, Are you really Mr. Palamede's Wife? Caelia
replies, I hope I do not look as if I were any other in the Condition you see
me. The Stranger answers, No, Madam, he is my Husband. At the same Instant she
threw a Bundle of Letters into Caelia's Lap, which confirmed the Truth of what
she asserted. Their mutual Innocence and Sorrow made them look at each other as
Partners in Distress, rather than Rivals in Love. The Superiority of Caelia's
Understanding and Genius gave her an Authority to examine into this Adventure
as if she had been offended against, and the other the Delinquent. The Stranger
spoke in the following Manner:

Madam, If it shall please you, Mr. Palamede having an Uncle of a good Estate
near Winchester, was bred at the School there, to gain the more his good Will
by being in his Sight. His Uncle died, and left him the Estate, which my
Husband now has. When he was a mere Youth he set his Affections on me; but when
he could not gain his Ends he married me, making me and my Mother, who is a
Farmer's Widow, swear we would never tell it upon any Account whatsoever; for
that it would not look well for him to marry such a one as me; besides, that
his Father would cut him off of the Estate. I was glad to have him in an honest
Way, and he now and then came and stayed a Night and away at our House. But
very lately he came down to see us, with a fine young Gentleman his Friend, who
stayed behind there with us, pretending to like the Place for the Summer; but
ever since Master Palamede went, he has attempted to abuse me; and I ran hither
to acquaint him with it, and avoid the wicked Intentions of his false Friend.

Caelia had no more Room for Doubt, but left her Rival in the same Agonies she
felt her self. Palamede returns in the Evening, and finding his Wife at his
Chambers, learned all that had passed, and hastened to Caelia's Lodgings.

It is much easier to imagine than express the Sentiments of either the
Criminal or the Injured at this Encounter.

As Soon as Palamede had found Way for Speech, he confessed his Marriage, and
his placing his Companion on Purpose to vitiate his Wife, that he might break
through a Marriage made in his Nonage, and devote his riper and knowing Years
to Caelia. She made him no Answer; but retired to her Closet. He returned to
the Temple, where he soon after received from her the following Letter:

SIR,
YOU, who this Morning were the best, are now the worst of Men who beath vital
Air. I am at once overwhelmed with Love, Hatred, Rage, and Disdain. Can Infamy
and Innocence live together? I feel the Weight of the one too strong for the
Comfort of the other. How bitter, Heaven, how bitter is my Portion? How much
have I to say; but the Infant which I bear about me stirs with my Agitation. I
am, Palamede, to live in Shame, and this Creature be Heir to it. Farewell for
ever.


The TATLER. [No 199.
From Saturd. July 15. to Tuesd. July 18. 1710.
WHEN we revolve in our Thoughts such Catastrophes as that in the History of
the unhappy Caelia, there seems to be something so hazardous in the changing a
single State of Life into that of Marriage, that (it may happen) all the
Precautions imaginable are not sufficient to defend a Virgin from Ruin by her
Choice. It seems a wonderful Inconsistence in the Distribution of public
Justice, that a Man who robs a Woman of an Ear-ring or a Jewel, should be
punished with Death; but one who by false Arts and Insinuations should take
from her her very self, is only to suffer Disgrace. This excellent young Woman
has nothing to consolate her self with, but the Reflection that her Sufferings
are not the Effect of any Guilt or Misconduct, and has for her Protection the
Influence of a Power which, amidst the unjust Reproach of all Mankind, can give
not only Patience, but Pleasure to Innocence in Distress.

As the Person who is the Criminal against Caelia cannot be sufficiently
punished according to our present Law, so are there numberless unhappy Persons
without Remedy according to present Custom. That great Ill which has prevailed
among us in these latter Ages, is the making even Beauty and Virtue the
Purchase of Money. The Generality of Parents, and some of those of Quality,
instead of looking out for introducing Health of Constitution, Frankness of
Spirit, or Dignity of Countenance, into their Families, lay out all their
Thoughts upon finding out Marches for their Estates, and not their Children.
You shall have one form a Plot for the Good of his Family, that there shall not
be Six Men in England capable of pretending to his Daughter. A Second shall
have a Son obliged, out of mere Discretion, for fear of doing any Thing below
himself, follow all the Drabs in Town. These sage Parents meet; and as there is
no Pass, no Courtship, between the young Ones, it is no unpleasant Observation
to behold how they proceed to Treaty. There is ever in the Behavior of each
something that denotes his Circumstance; and honest Coupler the Conveniencer
says, he can distinguish upon Sight of the Parties, before they have opened any
Point of their Business, which of the Two has the Daughter to sell. Coupler is
of our Club, and I have frequently heard him declaim upon this Subject, and
assert, that the Marriage-Settlements which are now used have grown fashionable
even within his Memory.

When the Theater in some late Reigns owed its chief Support to those Scenes
which were written to put Matrimony out of Countenance, and render that State
terrible, then was it that Pin-Money first prevailed, and all the other
Articles inserted which create a Diffidence; and intimate to the young People,
that they are very soon to be in a State of War with each other: Though this had
seldom happened, except the Fear of it had been expressed. Coupler will tell
you also, that Jointures were never frequent till the Age before his own; but
the Women were contented with the Third Part of the Estate the Law allotted
them, and scorned to engage with Men whom they thought capable of abusing their
Children. He has also informed me, that those who were the oldest Benchers when
he came to the Temple told him, the first Marriage-Settlement of considerable
Length was the Invention of an old Sergeant, who took the Opportunity of Two
Testy Fathers, who were ever squabbling to bring about an Alliance between
their Children. These Fellows knew each other to be Knaves, and the Sergeant
took hold of their mutual Diffidence, for the Benefit of the Law, to extend the
Settlement to Three Skins of Parchment.

To this great Benefactor to the Profession is owing the present Price Current
of Lines and Words. Thus is Tenderness thrown out of the Question; and the
great Care is, What the young Couple shall do when they come to hate each
other? I do not question but from this one Humor of Settlements, might very
fairly be deduced not only our present Defection in Point of Morals, but also
our Want of People. This has given Way to such unreasonable Gallantries, that a
Man is hardly reproachable that deceives an innocent Woman, though she has never
so much Merit, if she is below him in Fortune. The Man has no Dishonor
following his Treachery; and her own Sex are so debased by Force of Custom, as
to say in the Case of the Woman, How could she expect he would marry her?

By this Means the good Offices, the Pleasures and Graces of Life, are not put
into the Balance: The Bridegroom has given his Estate out of himself and he
has no more left but to follow the blind Decree of his Fate, whether he shall
be succeeded by a Sot, or a Man of Merit, in his Fortune. On the other Side, a
fine Woman, who has also a Fortune, is set up by Way of Auction; her first
Lover has Ten to One against him. The very Hour after he has opened his Heart
and his Rent-Roll, he is made no other Use of, but to raise her Price. She and
her Friends lose no Opportunity of publishing it to call in new Bidders. While
the poor Lover very innocently waits till the Plenipotentiaries at the Inns of
Court have debated about the Alliance, all the Partisans of the Lady throw
Difficulties in the Way, till other Offers come in; and the Man who came first
is not put in Possession, till she has been refused by half the Town. If an
Abhorrence to such mercenary Proceedings were well settled in the Minds of my
Fair Readers, those of Merit would have a Way opened to their Advancement: nay,
those who abound in Wealth only, would in Reality find their Account in it. It
would not be in the Power of their Prude Acquaintance, their Waiters, their
Nurses, Cousins and Whisperers, to persuade them, that there are not above
Twenty Men in a Kingdom, (and those such as perhaps they may never set Eyes on)
whom they can think of with Discretion. As the Case stands now, let any one
consider, how the great Heiresses, and those to whom they were offered, for no
other Reason but that they could make them suitable Settlements, live together.
What can be more insipid, if not loathsome, than for Two Persons to be at the
Head of a Crowd, who have as little Regard for them as they for each other, and
behold one another in an affected Sense of Prosperity, without the least Relish
of that exquisite Gladness at meeting, that sweet Inquietude at parting,
together with the Charms of Voice, Look, Gesture, and that general Benevolence
between well chosen Lovers, which makes all Things please, and leaves not the
least Trifle indifferent.

But I am diverted from these Sketches for future Essays, in Behalf of my
numerous Clients of the Fair Sex, by a Notice sent to my Office in Sheer-Lane,
That a blooming Widow, in the Third Year of her Widowhood, and Twenty six of
her Age, designs to take a Colonel of Twenty eight. The Parties request I would
draw up their Terms of coming together, as having a Regard to my Opinion
against long and diffident Settlements; and I have sens them the following
Indenture:

We John -- and Mary -- having Estates for Life, resolve to take each other. I
John will venture my Life to enrich thee Mary; and I Mary will consult my
Health to nurse thee John. To which we have interchangeably set our Hands,
Hearts, and Seals, this 17th of July, 1710. The TATLER. [No 200.
From Tuesday July 18. to Thursday July 20. 1710.
From my own Apartment, July 19.
HAving devoted the greater Part of my Time to the Service of the Fair Sex, I
must ask Pardon of my Men Correspondents if I postpone their Commands, when I
have any from the Ladies which lie unanswered. That which follows is of
Importance.

SIR,
YOU cannot think it strange if I, who know little of the World, apply to you
for Advice in the weighty Affair of Matrimony, since you your self have often
declared it to be of that Consequence as to require the utmost Deliberation.
Without farther Preface therefore, give me Leave to tell you, that my Father at
his Death left me a Fortune sufficient to make me a March for any Gentleman. My
Mother (for she is still alive (is very pressing with me to marry; and I am apt
to think, to gratify her, I shall venture upon One of Two Gentlemen who at this
Time make their Addresses to me. My Request is, that you would direct me in my
Choice; which that you may the better do, I shall give you their Characters;
and to avoid Confusion, desire you to call them by the Names of Philander and
Silvius. Philander is young, and has a good Estate; Silvius is as young, and
has a better. The former has had a liberal Education, has seen the Town, is
retired from thence to his Estate in the Country, is a Man of few Words, and
much given to Books. The latter was brought up under his Father's Eye, who gave
him just Learning enough to enable him to keep his Accounts; but made him
withal very expert in Country Business, such as Ploughing, Sowing, Buying,
Selling, and the like. They are both very sober Men, neither of their Persons
is disagreeaable, nor did I know which to prefer till I had heard them
discourse; when the Conversation of Philander so much prevailed, as to give him
the Advantage, with me, in all other Respects. My Mother pleads strongly for
Silvius, and uses these Arguments, That he not only has the larger Estate at
present, but by his good Husbandry and Management increases it daily; That his
little Knowledge in other Affairs will make him easy and tractable; whereas
(according to her) Men of Letters know too much to make good Husbands. To Part
of this I imagine I answer effectually, by saying, Philander's Estate is large
enough; That they who think 2000 l. a Year sufficient, make no Difference
between that and Three. I easily believe him less conversant in those Affairs,
the Knowledge of which she so much commends in Silvius; but I think them
neither so necessary or becoming in a Gentleman as the Accomplishments of
Philander. It is no great Character of a Man to say, He rides in his Coach and
Six, and understands as much as he who follows his Plough. Add to this, That
the Conversation of these Sort of Men seems so disagreeable to me, that though
they may make good Bailiffs, I can hardly be persuaded they can be good
Companions. It Is possible I may seem to have odd Notions, when I say I am not
fond of a Man only for being of (what is called) a Thriving Temper. To
conclude, I own I am at a Loss to conceive how good Sense should make a Man an
ill Husband, or conversing with Books less complaisant.

CAELIA.


The Resolution which this Lady is going to take, she may very well say is
founded on Reason: For after the Necessities of Life are served, there is no
manner of Competition between a Man of Liberal Education and an Illiterate. Men
are not altered by their Circumstances, but as they give them Opportunities of
exerting what they are in themselves; and a powerful Clown is a Tyrant in the
most ugly Form he can possibly appear. There lies a seeming Objection in the
thoughtful Manner of Philander: But let her consider which she shall oftener
have Occasion to wish, that Philander would speak, or Silvius hold his Tongue.

The Train of my Discourse is prevented by the urgent Have of another
Correspondent.

July 14. Mr. Bickerstaff,
THis comes to you from one of those Virgins of Twenty five Years old and
upwards, that you, like a Patron of the Distressed, promised to provide for;
who makes it her humble Request, that no Occasional Stories or Subjects may (as
they have for Three or Four of your last Days) prevent your publishing the
Scheme you have communicated to Amanda, for every Day and Hour is of the
greatest Consequence to Damsels of so advanced an Age. Be quick then, if you
intend to do any Service for

Your Admirer, Diana Forecast.


In this important Affair, I have not neglected the Proposals of others. Among
them is the following Sketch of a Lottery for Persons. The Author of it has
proposed very ample Encouragement, not only to my self, but also to Charles
Lilly and John Morphew. If the Matter bears, I shall not be unjust to his
Merit: I only desire to enlarge his Plan; for which Purpose I lay it before the
Town, as well for the Improvement as Encouragement of it.

The Amicable Contribution for raising the Fortunes of Ten young Ladies.
Imprimis, It is proposed to raise 100000 Crowns by Way of Lots, which will
advance for each Lady 2500 l. which Sum, together with one of the Ladies, the
Gentleman that shall be so happy as to draw a Prize, (provided they both like)
will be entitled to, under such Restrictions hereafter mentioned. And in case
they do not like, then either Party that refuses shall be entitled to 1000 l.
only, and the Remainder to him or her that shall be willing to marry, the Man
being first to declare his Mind. But it is provided, That if both Parties shall
consent to have one another, the Gentleman shall, before he receives the Money
thus raised, settle 1000 l. of the same in substantial Hands, (who shall be as
Trustees for the said Ladies) and shall have the whole and sole Disposal of it
for her Use only.

Note, Each Party shall have Three Months Time to consider, after an Interview
had, which shall be within Ten Days after the Lots are drawn.

Note also, The Name and Place of Abode of the Prize shall be placed on a
proper Ticket.

Item, They shall be Ladies that have had a liberal Education, between Fifteen
and Twenty three, all genteel, witty, and of unblameable Characters.

The Money to be raised shall be kept in an Iron Box, and when there shall be
2000 Subscriptions, which amounts to 500 l. it shall be taken out and put into
a Goldsmith's Hands, and the Note made payable to the proper Lady, or her
Assigns, (with a Clause therein to hinder her from receiving it, till the
fortunate Person that draws her shall first sign the Note) and so on till the
whole Sum is subscribed for: And as soon as 100000 Subscriptions are
completed, and 200 Crowns more to pay the Charges, the Lottery shall be drawn
at a proper Place, to be appointed a Fortnight before the Drawing.

Note, Mr. Bickerstaff objects to the marriageable Years here mentioned; and is
of Opinion, they should not commence till after Twenty three. But he appeals to
the Learned, both of Warwick Lane and Bishopsgate-Street, on this Subject.

The TATLER. [No 201.
From Thursd. July 20. to Saturd. July 22. 1710.
White's Chocolate-house, July 21.
IT has been often asserted in these Papers, That the great Source of our wrong
Pursuits is the impertinent Manner with which we treat Women, both in the
common and important Circumstances of Life. In vain do we say, the whole Sex
would run into England, while the Privileges which are allowed them, do no way
balance the Inconveniences arising from those very Immunities. Our Women have
very much indulged to them in the Participation of our Fortunes and our
Liberty; but the Errors they commit in the Use of either, are by no means so
impartially considered, as the false Steps which are made by Men. In the
Commerce of Lovers, the Man makes the Address, assails, and betrays, and yet
stands in the same Degree of Acceptance as he was in before he committed that
Treachery: The Woman, for no other Crime but believing one whom she thought
loved her, is treated with Shiness and Indifference at the best, and commonly
with Reproach and Scorn. He that is past the Power of Beauty, may talk of this
Matter with the same Unconcern as of any other Subject: Therefore I shall take
upon me to consider the Sex, as they live within Rules, and as they transgress
them. The ordinary Class of the Good or the Ill have very little Influence upon
the Actions of others; but the Eminent in either Kind are those who lead the
World below them. The Ill are employed in communicating Scandal, Infamy, and
Disease, like Furies; the Good distribute Benevolence, Friendship, and Health,
like Angels. The Ill are damped with Pain and Anguish at the Sight of all that
is laudable, lovely, or happy. The Virtuous are touched with Commiseration
toward the Guilty, the Disagreeable, and the Wretched. There are those who
betray the Innocent of their own Sex, and solicit the Lewd of ours. There are
those who have abandoned the very Memory, not only of Innocence, but Shame.
There are those who never forgave, nor could ever bear being forgiven. There
are also who visit the Beds of the Sick, lull the Cares of the Sorrowful, and
double the Joys of the Joyful. Such is the destroying Fiend, such the Guardian
Angel, Woman.

The Way to have a greater Number of the amiable Part of Womankind, and lessen
the Crowd of the other Sort, is to contribute what we can to the Success of
well-grounded Passions; and therefore I comply with the Request of an enamoured
Man in inserting the following Billet:

MADAM,
MR. Bickerstaff you always read, though me you will never hear. I am obliged
therefore to his Compassion for the Opportunity of imploring yours -- I sigh
for the most Accomplished of her Sex. That is so just a Distinction of her to
whom I write, that the owning I think so is no Distinction of me who write.
Your good Qualities are peculiar to you, my Admiration in common with
Thousands. I shall be present when you read this, but fear every Woman will
take it for her Character, sooner than she who deserves it.


If the next Letter which presents it self should come from the Mistress of
this modest Lover, and I make them break through the Oppression of their
Passions, I shall expect Gloves at their Nuptials.

Mr. Bickerstaff,
YOU that are a Philosopher know very well the Make of the Mind of Woman, and
can best iustruct me in the Conduct of an Affair which highly concerns me. I
never can admit my Lover to speak to me of Love, yet think him impertinent when
he offers to talk of any Thing else. What shall I do with a Man that always
believes me? It Is a strange Thing, this Distance in Men of Sense; Why do not
they always urge their Fate? If we are sincere in our Severity, you lose
nothing by attempting. If we are Hypocrites, you certainly succeed.


From my own Apartment, July 21.
Before I withdraw from Business for the Night, it is my Custom to receive all
Addresses to me, that others may go to Rest as well as my self, at least as far
as I can contribute to it. When I called to know if any would speak with me, I
was informed that Mr. Mills, the Player, desired to be admitted. He was so, and
with much Modesty acquainted me, as he did other People of Note, that Hamlet
was to be acted on Wednesday next for his Benefit. I had long wanted to speak
with this Person, because I thought I could admonish him of many Things which
would tend to his Improvement. In the General I observed to him, That though
Action was his Business, the Way to that Action was not to study Gesture, for
the Behavior would follow the Sentiments of the Mind.

Action to the Player, is what Speech is to an Orator. If the Matter be well
conceived, Words will flow with Ease: And if the Actor is well possessed of the
Nature of his Part, a proper Action will necessarily follow. He informed me,
That Wilks was to act Hamlet, I desired him, to request of him in my Name, That
he would wholly forget Mr. Betterton; for that he failed in no Part of Othello,
but where he had him in View. An Actor's forming himself by the Carriage of
another, is like the Trick among the Widows, who lament their Husbands as their
Neighbors did theirs, and not according to their own Sentiments of the
Deceased.

There is a Fault also in the Audience which interrupts their Satisfaction very
much, that is, the figuring to themselves the Actor in some Part wherein they
formerly particularly liked him, and not attending to the Part he is at that
Time performing. Thus, whatever Wilks, (who is the strictest Follower of
Nature) is acting, the vulgar Spectators turn their Thoughts upon Sir Harry
Wildair. When I had indulged the Loquacity of an old Man for some Time in such
loose Hints, I took my Leave of Mr. Mills, and was told, Mr. Elliot of St.
James's Coffee-house would speak with me. His Business was to desire I would,
as I am an Astrologer, let him know beforehand who were to have the
Benefit-Tickets in the ensuing Lottery; which Knowledge he was of Opinion he
could turn to great Account, as he was concerned in News.

I granted his Request, upon an Oath of Secrecy, That he would only make his
own Use of it, and not let it be publicly known till after they were drawn. I
had not done speaking, when he produced to me a Plan which he had formed of
keeping Books, with the Names of all such Adventurers, and the Numbers of their
Tickets, as should come to him, in order to give an Hourly Account of what
Tickets shall come up during the whole Time of the Lottery, the Drawing of
which is to begin on Wednesday next. I liked his Method of disguising the
Secret I had told him, and pronounced him a thriving Man who could so well
watch the Motion of Things, and profit by a prevailing Humor and Impatience so
aptly, as to make his honest Industry agreeable to his Customers, as it is to
be the Messenger of their good Fortune.

ADVERTISEMENT.
From the Trumpet in Sheer-Lane, July 20.
Ordered, That for the Improvement of the Pleasures of Society, a Member of
this House, one of the most wakeful of the Soporifick Assembly beyond
Smithfield-Bars, and one of the Order of Story-Tellers in Holborn, may meet and
exchange Stale Matter, and report the same to their Principals.

N. B. No Man is to tell above one Story in the same Evening; but has Liberty
to tell the same the Night following.

Mr. Bickerstaff desires his Love Correspondents to vary the Names they shall
assume in their future Letters, for that he is overstock'd with Philanders.

The TATLER. [No 202.
-- Est hic,
Est ulubris Animus si te non deficit aequus.
Hor.
From Saturd, July 22. to Tuesd. July 25. 1710.
From my own Apartment, July 24.
THIS Afternoon I went to visit a Gentleman of my Acquaintance at Mile-End, and
passing through Stepney Churchyard, I could not forbear entertaining my self
with the Inscriptions on the Tombs and Graves. Among others, I observed one
with this notable Memorial:

Here lies the Body of T. B. This fantastical Desire of being remembered only
by the Two first Letters of a Name, led me into the Contemplation of the Vanity
and imperfect Seize of Ambition in general. When I run back in my
Imagination all the Men whom I have ever known and conversed with in my whole
Life, there are but very few who have not used their Faculties in the Pursuit
of what it is impossible to acquire, or left the Possession of what they might
have been (at their setting out) Masters, to search for it where it was out of
their Reach. In this Thought it was not possible to forget the Instance of
Pyrrhus, who proposing to himself in Discourse with a Philosopher, one, and
another, and another Conquest, was asked, What he would do after all that?
Then, says the King, we will make merry. He was well answered, What hinders
your doing that in the Condition you are already? The restless Desire of
exerting themselves above the common Level of Mankind is not to be resisted in
some Tempers; and Minds of this Make may be observed in every Condition of
Life. Where such Men do not make to themselves or meet with Employment, the
Soil of their Constitution runs into Tares and Weeds. An old Friend of mine,
who lost a Major's Post Forty Years ago, and quitted, has ever since studied
Maps, Encampments, Retreats, and Countermarches, with no other Design but to
feed his Spleen and Ill-Humour, and furnish himself with Matter for arguing
against all the successful Actions of others. He that at his first setting out
in the World was the gayest Man in our Regiment, ventured his Life with
Alacrity, and enjoyed it with Satisfaction, encouraged Men below him, and was
courted by Men above him, has been ever since the most froward Creature
breathing. His warm Complexion spends it self now only in a general Spirit of
Contradiction; for which he watches all Occasions, and is in his Conversation
still upon Sentry, treats all Men like Enemies, with every other Impertinence
of a speculative Warrior.

He that observes in himself this natural Inquietude, should take all
imaginable Care to put his Mind in some Method of Gratification, or he will
soon find himself grow into the Condition of this disappointed Major. Instead
of courting proper Occasions to rise above others, he will be ever studious of
pulling others down to him: It being the common Refuge of disappointed
Ambition, to ease themselves by Detraction. It would be no great Argument
against Ambition, that there are such mortal Things in the Disappointment of
it; but it certainly is a forcible Exception, that there can be no solid
Happiness in the Success of it. If we value popular Praise, it is in the Power
of the meanest of the People to disturb us by Calumny. If the Fame of being
happy, we cannot look into a Village but we see Crowds in actual Possession of
what we seek only the Appearance. To this may be added, that there is I know
not what Malignity in the Minds of ordinary Men to oppose you in what they see
you fond of; and it is a certain Exception against a Man's receiving Applause,
that he visibly courts it. However this is not only the Passion of great and
undertaking Spirts, but you see it in the Lives of such as one would believe
were far enough removed from the Ways of Ambition. The Rural Squires of this
Nation even eat and drink out of Vanity. A vainglorious Fox-hunter shall
entertain half a County for the Ostentation of his Beef and Beer, without the
least Affection for any of the Crowd about him. He feeds them, because he
thinks it a Superiority over them that he does so; and they devour him, because
they know he treats them out of Insolence. This indeed is Ambition in
Grotesque, but may figure to us the Condition of politer Men, whose only
Pursuit is Glory. When the Superior acts out of a Principle of Vanity, the
Dependant will be sure to allow it him; because he knows it destructive of the
very Applause which is courted by the Man who favors him, and consequently
makes him nearer himself.

But as every Man living has more or less of this Incentive, which makes Men
impatient of an unactive Condition, and urges Men to attempt what may tend to
their Reputation, it is absolutely necessary they should form to themselves an
Ambition which is in every Man's Power to gratify. This Ambition would be
independent, and would consist only in acting what to a Man's own Mind appears
most great and laudable. It is a Pursuit in the Power of every Man, and is only
a regular Prosecution of what he himself approves. It is what can be
interrupted by no outward Accidents, for no Man can be robbed of his good
Intention. One of our Society of the Trumpet therefore started last Night a
Notion which I thought had Reason in it. It is, methinks, said he, an
unreasonable Thing, that Heroic Virtue should (as it seems to be at present)
be confined to a certain Order of Men, and be attainable by none but those whom
Fortune has elevated to the most conspicuous Stations. I would have every Thing
to be esteemed as Heroic which is great and uncommon in the Circumstances in
the Man who performs it. Thus there would be no Virtue in humane Life which
every one of the Species would not have a Pretense to arrive at, and an Ardency
to exert. Since Fortune is not in our Power, let us be as little as possible in
hers. Why should it be necessary that a Man should be rich, to be generous? If
we measured by the Quality, and not the Quantity, of Things, the Particulars
which accompany an Action, is what should denominate it mean or great. The
highest Station of humane Life is to be attained by each Man that pretends to
it: For every Man can be as valiant, as generous, as wise, and as merciful, as
the Faculties and Opportunities which he has from Heaven and Fortune will
permit. He that can say to himself, I do as much good, and am as virtuous, as
my most earnest Endeavors will allow me, whatever is his Station in the World,
is to himself possessed of the highest Honor. If Ambition is not thus turned,
it is no other than a continual Succession of Anxiety and Vexation. But when it
has this Cast, it invigorates the Mind, and the Consciousness of its own Worth
is a Reward which it is not in the Power of Envy, Reproach, or Detraction, to
take from it. Thus the Seat of solid Honor is in a Man's own Bosom, and no one
can want Support who is in Possession of an honest Conscience, but he who would
suffer the Reproaches of it for other Greatness.

P. S. I was going on in my Philosophy, when Notice was brought me, that there
was a great Crowd in my Antichamber, who expected Audience. When they were
admitted, I found they all met at my Lodgings (each coming upon the same
Errand) to know whether they were of the Fortunate in the Lottery which is now
ready to be drawn. I was much at a Loss how to extricate my self from their
Importunity; but observing the Assembly made up of both Sexes, I signified to
them, that in this Case it would appear Fortune is not blind, for all the Lots
would fall upon the Wisest and the Fairest. This gave so general a
Satisfaction, that the Room was soon emptied, and the Company retired with the
best Air, and the most pleasing Grace, I had any where observed. Mr. Elliot of
St. James's Coffee-house now stood alone before me, and signified to me, he had
now not only prepared his Books, but had received a very great Subscription
already. His Design was, to advertise his Subscribers at their respective
Places of Abode, within an Hour after their Number is drawn, whether it was a
Blank or Benefit, if the Adventurer lives within the Bills of Mortality, if he
dwells in the Country, by the next Post. I encouraged the Man in his Industry,
and told him, The ready Path to good Fortune, was to believe there was no such
Thing.

The TATLER. [No 203.
Ut tu Fortunam, sic nos te, Celse, feremus.
Hor.
From Tuesday July 25. to Thursday July 27. 1710.
From my own Apartment, July 26.
IT is natural for the Imaginations of Men, who lead their Lives in too
solitary a Manner, to prey upon themselves, and form from their own Conceptions
Beings and Things which have no Place in Nature. This often makes an Adept as
much at a Loss when he comes into the World as a mere Savage. To avoid
therefore that Ineptitude for Society, which is frequently the Fault of us
Scholars, and has to Men of Understanding and Breeding something much more
shocking and untractable than Rusticity it self, I take Care to visit all
public Solemnities, and go into Assemblies as often as my Studies will permit.
This being therefore the first Day of the Drawing of the Lottery, I did not
neglect spending a considerable Time in the Crowd: But as much a Philosopher as
I pretend to be, I could not but look with a Sort of Veneration upon the Two
Boys which received the Tickets from the Wheels, as the impartial and equal
Dispensers of the Fortunes which were to be distributed among the Crowd, who
all stood expecting the same Chance. It seems at first Thought very wonderful,
that one Passion should so universally have the Preeminence of another in the
Possession of Men's Minds as that in this Case; all in general have a secret
Hope of the great Ticket: And yet Fear in another Instance, as in going into a
Battle shall have so little Influence, as that though each Man believes there
will be many Thousands slain, each is consident he himself shall escape. This
Certainty proceeds from our Vanity; for every Man sees abundance in himself
that deserves Reward, and nothing which should meet with Mortification. But of
all the Adventurers that filled the Hall, there was one who stood by me, who I
could not but fancy expected the Thousand Pounds per Annum, as a mere Justice
to his Parts and Industry. He had his Pencil and Table Book, and was at the
drawing of each Lot, counting how much a Man with Seven Tickets was now nearer
the great Prize, by the striking out another, and another Competitor. This Man
was of the most particular Constitution I had ever observed; his Passions were
so active, that he worked in the utmost Stretch of Hope and Fear. When one
Rival fell before him, you might see a short Gleam of Triumph in his
Countenance, which immediately vanished at the Approach of another. What added
to the Particularity of this Man, was, that he every Moment cast a Look, either
upon the Commissioners, the Wheels, or the Boys. I gently whispered him, and
asked, When he thought the Thousand Pounds would come up? Pugh! says he, Who
knows that? And then looks upon a little List of his own Tickets, which were
pretty high in their Numbers, and said it would not come this Ten Days. This
Fellow will have a good Chance, though not that which he has put his Heart on.
The Man is mechanically turned, and made for getting. The Simplicity and
Eagerness which he is in, argues an Attention to his Point; though what he is
laboring at does not in the least contribute to it. Were it not for such
honest Fellows as these, the Men who govern the rest of their Species would
have no Tools to work with: For the outward Show of the World is carried on by
such as cannot find out that they are doing nothing. I left my Man with great
Reluctance, seeing the Care he took to observe the whole Conduct of the Persons
concerned, and compute the Inequality of the Chances with his own Hands and
Eyes. Dear Sir, said I, they must rise early that cheat you. Ay, said he,
there is nothing like a Man's minding his Business himself. It Is very true, said
I, The Master's Eye makes the Horse fat.

As it is much the greater Number who are to go without Prizes, it is but very
Expedient to turn our Lecture to the forming just Sentiments on the Subject of
Fortune. One said this Morning, That the Chief Lot he was consident would fall
upon some Puppy; but this Gentleman is one of those wrong Tempers who approve
only the Unhappy, and have a natural Prejudice to the Fortunate. But as it is
certain that there is a great Meanness in being attacked to a Man purely for
his Fortune, there is no less a Meanness in disliking him for his Happiness. It
is the same Perverseness under different Colors, and both these Resentments
arise from mere Pride.

The true Greatness of Mind consists in valuing Men apart from their
Circumstances, or according to their Behavior in them. Wealth is a Distinction
only in Traffic; but it must not be allowed as a Recommendation in any other
Particular, but only just as it is applied. It was very prettily said, That we
may learn the little Value of Fortune by the Persons on whom Heaven is pleased
to bestow it. However, there is not a harder Part in Humane Life, than becoming
Wealth and Greatness. He must be very well stocked with Merit, who is not
willing to draw some Superiority over his Friends from his Fortune; For it is
not every Man that can entertain with the Air of a Guest, and do good Offices
with the Mien of one that receives them.

I must confess, I cannot conceive how a Man can place himself in a Figure
wherein he can so much enjoy his own Soul, and that greatest of Pleasures, the
just Approbation of his own Actions, than as an Adventurer on this Occasion, to
sit and see the Lots go off without Hope or Fear, perfectly unconcerned as to
himself, but taking Part in the good Fortune of others.

I will believe there are happy Tempers in being, to whom all the Good that
arrives to any of their Fellow Creatures gives a Pleasure. These live in a
Course of substantial and lasting Happiness, and have the Satisfaction to see
all Men endeavor to gratify them. This State of Mind not only lets a Man into
certain Enjoyments, but relieves him from as certain Anxieties. If you will not
rejoice with happy Men, you must repine at them. Dick Reptile alluded to this
when he said, He would hate no Man out of pure Idleness. As for my own Part, I
look at Fortune quite in another View than the rest of the World; and, by my
Knowledge in Futurity, tremble at the approaching Prize, which I see coming to
a young Lady for whom I have much Tenderness; and have therefore writ her the
following Letter, to be sent by Mr. Elliot with the Notice of her Ticket.

MADAM,
YOU receive at the Instant this comes to your Hands, an Account of your having
(what only you wanted) Fortune; and to admonish you, that you may not now want
every Thing else. You had yesterday Wit, Virtue, Beauty; but you never heard of
them till to Day. They say Fortune is blind; but you will find she has opened
the Eyes of all your Beholders. I beseech you, Madam, make use of the
Advantages of having been educated without Flattery. If you can still be Chloe,
Fortune has indeed been kind to you; if you are al^ered, she has it not in her
Power to give you an Equivalent.


Grecian Coffee-house, July 26.
Some Time ago a Virtuoso, my very good Friend, sent me a Plan of a covered
Summerhouse, which a little after was rallied by another of my Correspondents.
I cannot therefore defer giving him an Opportunity of making his Defense to the
Learned in his own Words.

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
July 15. 1710. SIR,
I Have been this Summer upon a Ramble to visit several Friends and Relations;
which is the Reason I have left you, and our ingenious, unknown Friend of
South Wales, so long in your Error concerning the Grass-plots in my
Green-house. I will not give you the Particulars of my Gardiner's Conduct in
the Management of my covered Garden, but content my self with letting you know,
that my little Fields within Doors, though by their Novelty they appear too
extravagant to you to subsist even in a regular Imagination, are in the Effect
Things that require no Conjuration. Your Correspondent may depend upon it, that
under a sashed Roof, which lets in the Sun at all Times, and the Air as often
as is convenient, he may have Grass-plots in the greatest Perfection, if he
will be at the Pains to water, mow, and roll them. Grass and Herbs in general,
the less they are exposed to the Sun and Wind, the livelier is their Verdure.
They require only Warmth and Moisture; and if you were to see my Plots, your
Eye would soon confess, that the Bowling-Green at Marybone wears not half so
bright a Livery.

The Motto with which the Gentleman has been pleased to furnish you, is so very
proper, and pleases me so well, that I design to have it set upon the Front of
my Green-house in Letters of Gold.

I am, Sir, etc.


The TATLER. [No 204.
-- Gaudent prae Nomine molles
Auriculae. --

From Thursd. July 27. to Saturday July 29. 1710.
From my own Apartment, July 28.
MAny are the Inconveniences which happen from the improper Manner of Address
in common Speech, between Persons of the same or of different Quality. Among
these Errors, there is none greater than that of the impertinent Use of Title,
and a paraphrastical Way of saying, You. I had the Curiosity the other Day to
follow a Crowd of People near Billingsgate, who were conducting a passionate
Woman who sold Fish to a Magistrate, in order to explain some Words which were
ill taken by one of her own Quality and Profession in the public Market. When
she came to make her Defense, she was so very full of, His Worship, and of, If
it should please his Honor, that we could for some Time hardly hear any other
Apology she made for her self, than that of attoning for the ill Language she
had been accused of toward her Neighbor by the great Civilities she paid to
her Judge. But this Extravagance in her Sense of doing Honor, was no more to
be wondered at, than that her many Rings on each Finger were worn as Instances
of Finery and Dress. The Vulgar may thus heap and huddle Terms of Respect, and
nothing better be expected from them; but for People of Rank to repeat
Appellatives insignificantly, is a Folly not to be endured, neither with Regard
to our Times or our Understanding. It is below the Dignity of Speech to extend
it with more Words or Phrases than are necessary to explain our selves with
Elegance: And it is, methinks, an Instance of Ignorance, if not of Servitude,
to be redundant in such Expressions.

I waited upon a Man of Quality some Mornings ago: He happened to be dressing;
and his Shoemaker fitting him, told him, That if his Lordship would please to
tread hard, or that if his Lordship would stamp a little, his Lordship would
find his Lordship's Shoe will fit as easy as any Piece of Work his Lordship
should see in England. As soon as my Lord was dressed, a Gentleman approached
him with a very good Air, and told him, he had an Affair which had long
depended in the Lower Courts, which, through the Inadvertency of his Ancestors
on the one Side, and the ill Arts of their Adversaries on the other, could not
possibly be settled according to the Rules of the Lower Courts: That therefore
he designed to bring his Cause before the House of Lords next Session, where he
should be glad if his Lordship should happen to be present; for he doubted not
but his Cause would be approved by all Men of Justice and Honor. In this Place
the Word Lordship was gracefully inserted, because it was applied to him in
that Circumstance wherein his Quality was the Occasion of the Discourse, and
wherein it was most useful to the one, and most honorable to the other.

This Way is so far from being disrespectful to the Honor of Nobles, that it
is an Expedien^ for using them with greater Deference. I would not put Lordship
to a Man's Hat, Gloves, Wig, or Cane; but to desire his Lordship's Favor, his
Lordship's Judgment, or his Lordship's Patronage, is a Manner of speaking,
which expresses an Alliance between his Quality and his Merit. It is this
Knowledge which distinguished the Discourse of the Shoemaker from that of the
Gentleman. The highest Point of good Breeding, if any one can hit it, is to
show a very nice Regard to your own Dignity, and with that in your Heart
express your Value for the Man above you.

But the silly Humor to the contrary has so much prevailed, that the slavish
Addition of Title enervates Discourse, and renders the Application of it almost
ridiculous. We Writers of Diurnals are nearer in our Styles to that of common
Talk than any other Writers, by which Means we use Words of Respect sometimes
very unfortunately. The Post-Man, who is one of the most celebrated of our
Fraternity, fell into this Misfortune Yesterday in his Paragraph from Berlin of
July 26. Count Wartemberg (says he) Great Chamberlain, and Chief Minister of
this Court, who on Monday lest accompanied the King of Prussia to Oranienburg,
was taken so very ill, the (...) Wednesday has Life was despaired of; and we
had a Report, that his Excellency was dead.

I humbly presume, that it slattens the Narration, to say his Excellency in a
Case which is common to all Men; except you would infer what is not to be
inferred, to wit, That the Author designed to say, All wherein he excelled
others was departed from him.

Were Distinctions used according to the Rules of Reason and Sense, those
Additions to Men's Names would be, as they were first intended, significant of
their Worth, and not their Persons; so that in some Cases it might be proper to
say, The Man is dead, but his Excellency will never die. It is, methinks, very
unjust to laugh at a Quaker, because he has taken up a Resolution to treat you
with a Word, the most expressive of Complaisance that can be thought of, and
with an Air of good Nature and Charity calls you Friend. I say, it is very
unjust to rally him for this Term to a Stranger, when you your selves, in all
your Phrases of Distinction, confound Phrases of Honor into no Use at all.

Tom. Courtly, who is the Pink of Courtesy, is an Instance of how little Moment
an undistinguishing Application of Sounds of Honor are to those who understand
themselves. Tom. never fails of paying his Obeisance to every Man he sees, who
has Title or Office to make him conspicuous; but his Deference is wholly given
to outward Considerations. I, who know him, can tell within half an Acre how
much Land one Man has more than another by Tom's Bow to him. Title is all he
knows of Honor, and Civility of Friendship: For this Reason, because he cares
for no Man living, he is religiously strict in performing what he calls his
Respects to you. To this End he is very learned in Pedigree, and will aba^
something in the Ceremony of his Approaches to a Man, if he is in any Doubt
about the bearing of his Coat of Arms. What is the most pleasan^ of all his
Character is, That he acts with a So^ of Integrity in these Impertinencies; and
thoug^ he would not do any Man any solid Kindness, h^ is wonderfully just and
careful not to wrong h^ Quality. But as Integrity is very scarce in the World,
I cannot forbear having Respect for the Impertinent: It is some Virtue to be
bound b^ any Thing. Tom. and I are upon very goo^ Terms for the Respect he has
for the House (...) Bickerstaff. Though one cannot but laugh at his f^rious
Consideration of Things so little essenti^ one must have a Value even for a
frivolous go^ Conscience.

The TATLER. [No 205.
(...)
(...)
Hesiod.
From Saturd. July 29. to Tuesd. Aug. 1. 1710.
From my own Apartment, July 31.
NAture has implanted in us Two very strong Desires, Hunger for the
Preservation of the Individual, and Lust for the Support of the Species; or, to
speak more intelligibly, the former to continue our own Persons, and the latter
to introduce others into the World. According as Men behave themselves with
regard to these Appetites, they are above or below the Beasts of the Field,
which are incited by them without Choice or Reflection. But reasonable
Creatures correct these Incentives, and improve them into elegant Motives of
Friendship and Society. It is chiefly from this homely Foundation, that we are
under the Necessity of seeking for the agreeable Companion, and the honorable
Mistress. By this Cultivation of Art and Reason, our Wants are made Pleasures,
and the Gratification of our Desires, under proper Restrictions, a Work no Way
below our noblest Faculties. The wisest Man may maintain his Character, and yet
consider in what Manner he shall best entertain his Friend, or divert his
Mistress: Nay, it is so far from being a Derogation to him, that he can in ^o
other Instances show so true a Taste of his Life, or his Fortune. What concerns
one of the ^bove-mentioned Appetites, as it is elevated into love, I shall have
abundant Occasion to discourse of before I have provided for the numberless
Crowd of Damsels I have proposed to take Care of. The Subject therefore of the
present Paper shall be that Part of Society which owes its Beginning to the
common Necessity of Hunger. When this is considered as the Support of our
Being, we may take in under the same Head Thirst also; otherwise when we are
pursuing the Glutton, the Drunkard may make his Escape. The true Choice of our
Diet, and our Companions at it, seems to consist in that which contributes most
to Cheerfulness and Refreshment: And these certainly are best consulted by
Simplicity in the Food, and Sincerity in the Company. By this Rule are in the
first Place excluded from Pretense to Happiness all Meals of State and
Ceremony, which are performed in dumb Show, and greedy Sullenness. At the
Boards of the Great, they say, you shall have a Number attending with as good
Habits and Countenances as the Guests, which only Circumstance must destroy the
whole Pleasure of the Repast: For if such Attendants are introduced for the
Dignity of their Appearance, modest Minds are shocked by considering them as
Spectators, or else look upon them as Equals, for whose Servitude they are in a
Kind of Suffering. It may be here added, that the sumptuous Sideboard to an
ingenious Eye has often more the Air of an Altar than a Table. The next absurd
Way of enjoying our selves at Meals, is, where the Bottle is plied without
being called for^ where Humor takes Place of Appetite, and the good Company
are too dull or too merry to know any Enjoyment in their Senses.

Though this Part of Time is absolutely necessar^ to sustain Life, it must be
also considered, Tha^ Life it self is to the endless Being of Man b^ what a
Meal is to this Life, not valuable for (...) self, but for the Purposes of it.
If there be an^ Truth in this, the Expense of many Hours the Way is somewhat
unaccountable; and placing much Thought either in too great Sumptuousness and
Elegance in this Matter, or wallowing in Noise and Riot at it, are both, though
not equally, unaccountable. I have often considered these different People with
very great Attention, and always speak of them with the Distinction of the
Eaters, and the Swallowers. The Eaters sacrifice all their Senses and
Understanding to this Appetite: The Swallowers hurry themselves out of both,
without pleasing this or any other Appetite at all. The latter are improved
Brutes, the former degenerated Men. I have sometimes thought it would not be
improper to add to my Dead and Living Men, Persons in an intermediate State of
Humanity, under the Appellation of Dozers. The Dozers are a Sect, who, instead
of keeping their Appetites in Subjection, live in Subjection to them; nay, they
are so truly Slaves to them, that they keep at too great a Distance ever to
come into their Presence. Within my own Acquaintance, I know those that I dare
say have forgot that they ever were hungry, and are no less utter Strangers to
Thirst and Weariness, who are beholden to Sauces for their Food, and to their
Food for their Weariness.

I have often wondered, confidering the excellent and choice Spirits that we
have among our Divines, that they do not think of putting vicious Habits into a
more contemptible and unlovely Figure than they do at present. So many Men of
Wit and Spirit as there are in Sacred Orders, have it in their Power to make
the Fashion of their Side. The Leaders in humane Society are more effectually
prevailed upon this Way than can easily be imagined. I have more than one in my
Thoughts at this Time capable of doing this against all the Opposition of the
most Witty, as well as the most Voluptuous. There may possibly be more
acceptable Subjects, but sure there are none more useful. It is visible, that
though Men's Fortunes, Circumstances, and Pleasures, give them Prepossessions too
strong to regard any Mention either of Punishments or Rewards, they will listen
to what makes them inconsiderable or mean in the Imaginations of others, and by
Degrees in their own.

It is certain such Topics are to be touched upon in the Light we mean, only
by Men of the most consummate Prudence, as well as excellent Wit: For these
Discourses are to be made, if made to run into Example, before such as have
their Thoughts more intent upon the Propriety than the Reason of the Discourse.
What indeed leads me into this Way of Thinking, is, That the last Thing I read
was a Sermon of the learned Dr. South, upon the Ways of Pleasantness. This
admirable Discourse was made at Court, where the Preacher was too wise a Man
not to believe, the greatest Argument, in that Place, against the Pleasures
then in Vogue, must be, that they lost greater Pleasures by prosecuting the
Course they were in. The Charming Discourse has in it whatever Wit and Wisdom
can put together. This Gentleman has a Talent of making all his Faculties bear
to the great End of his hallowed Profession. Happy Genius! He is the better Man
for being a Wit. The best Way to praise this Author is to quote him; and, I
think, I may defy any Man to say a greater Thing of him, or his Ability, than
that there are no Paragraphs in the whole Discourse I speak of below these
which follow.

After having recommended the Satisfaction of the Mind, and the Pleasure of
Conscience, he proceeds:

An ennobling Property of it is, That it is such a Pleasure as never satiates
or wearies; for it properly affects the Spirit, and a Spirit feels no
Weariness, as being privileged from the Causes of it. But can the Epicure say
so of any of the Pleasures he so much dotes upon? Do they not expire while they
satisfy, and after a few Minutes Refreshment determine in Loathing and
Unquietness? How short is the Interval between a Pleasure and a Burden? How
undiscernable the Transition from one to the other: Pleasure dwells no longer
upon the Appetie than the Necessities of Nature, which are quickly and easily
provided for; and then all that follows is a Load and an Oppression. Every
Morsel to a satisfied Hunger, is only a new Labor to a tired Digestion. Every
Draught to him that has quenched his Thirst, is but a further quenching of
Nature, and a Provision for Rheum and Diseases, a Drowning of the Quickness and
Activity of the Spirits.

He that prolongs his Meals, and sacrifices his Time, as well as his other
Conveniences, to his Luxury, How quickly does he outsit his Pleasure? And
then, How is all the following Time bestowed upon Ceremony and Surfeit? Till at
length, after a long Fatigue of Eating, and Drinking, and Babbling, he
concludes the great Work of dining genteely, and so makes a Shift to rise from
Table, that he may lie down upon his Bed; where, after he has slept himself
into some Use of himself, by much ado he staggers to his Table again, and there
acts over the same brutish Scene: So that he passes his whole Life in a dozed
Condition, between sleeping and waking, with a Kind of Drowsiness and Confusion
upon his Senses, which, what Pleasure it can be, is hard to conceive. All that
is of it dwells upon the Tip of his Tongue, and within the Compass of his
Palate. A worthy Prize for a Man to purchase with the Loss of his Time, his
Reason, and himself!

The TATLER. [No 206
Metiri se quemque suo Module ac Pede verum est
Hor
From Tuesday Aug. 1. to Thursday Aug. 3. 1710
From my own Apartment, August 2.
THE general Purposes of Men in the Conduct of their Lives, (I mean with
relation to this Life only) end in gaining either the Affection or the Esteem
of those with whom the^ converse. Esteem makes a Man powerful in Business, and
Affection desirable in Conversation, which is certainly the Reason that very
agreeabl^ Men fail of their Point in the World; and thos^ who are by no Means
such, arrive at it with much Ease. If it be visible in a Man's Carriage that h^
has a strong Passion to please, no one is much a^ a Loss how to keep Measures
with him, because there is always a Balance in People's Hands (...) make up
with him, by giving him what he (...) wants in Exchange for what you think fit
to de^ him. Such a Person asks with Diffidence, (...) ever leaves Room for
Denial by that Softness (...) his Complexion. At the same Time he himse^ is
capable of denying nothing, even what he (...) not able to perform. The other
Sort of Man w^ courts Esteem, having a quite different View, (...) as different
a Behavior, and acts as much by ^ Dictates of his Reason, as the other does by
^ Impulse of his Inclination. You must pay ^ every Thing you have of him. He
consid^ Mankind as a People in Commerce, and ne^ gives out out of himself what
he is sure will ^ come in with Interest from another. All ^ Words and Actions
tend to the Advancement of his Reputation and of his Fortune, toward which he
makes hourly Progress, because he lavishes no Part of his good Will upon such
as do not make some Advances to merit it. The Man who values Affection,
sometimes becomes popular; he who aims at Esteem, seldom falls of growing rich.

Thus far we have looked at these different Men, as Persons who endeavor to be
valued and beloved from Design, or Ambition; but they appear in quite another
Figure, when you observe the Men who are agreeable and venerable from the Force
of their natural Inclinations. We affect the Company of him who has least
Regard of himself in his Carriage, who throws himself into unguarded Gaiety,
voluntary Mirth, and general good Humor; who has nothing in his Head but the
present Hour, and seems to have all his Interests and Passions gratified, if
every Man else in the Room is as unconcerned as himself. This Man usually has
no Quality or Character among his Companions, let him be born of whom he will,
have what great Qualities he please, let him be capable of assuming for a
Moment what Figures he pleases, he still dwells in the Imagination of all who
know him but as Jack such a One. This makes Jack brighten up the Room wherever
he enters, and change the Severity of the Company into that Gaiety and good
Humor into which his Conversation generally leads them. It is not unpleasant
to observe even this Sort of Creature go out of his Character, to check himself
sometimes for his Familiarities, and pretend so aukwardly at procuring to
himself more esteem than he finds he meets with. I was the other Day walking
with Jack Gainly toward Lincoln's-Inn-Walks. We met a Fellow who is a Lower
Officer where Jack is in the Direction. Jack cries to him, So, How is it Mr --
He answers, Mr. Gainly, I am glad to see yo^ well. This Expression of Equality
gave m^ Friend a Pang, which appeared in a Flush of hi^ Countenance. Prithee
Jack, says I, do not b^ angry at the Man; for do what you will, the Man can
only love you, be contented with the Image the Man has of thee; for if thou
aimes^ at any other, it must be Hatred or Contempt. I went on, and told him,
Look'ee, Jack, I have heard thee sometimes talk like an Oracle for half an
Hour, with the Sentiments of a Roman, the Closeness of a School-man, and the
Integrity of a Divine; but then, Jack, while I admired thee, it was upon
Topics which did not concern thy self, and where the Greatness of the Subject,
(added to thy being personally unconcerned in it) created all that was great in
thy Discourse. I did not mind his being a little out of Humor, but comforted
him, by giving him several Instances of Men of our Acquaintance, who had no one
Quality in any Eminence, that were much more esteemed than he was with very
many: But the Thing is, if your Character is to give Pleasure, Men will
consider you only in that Light, and not in those Acts which turn to Esteem and
Veneration.

When I think of Jack Gainly, I cannot but reflect also upon his Sister Gatty.
She is young, witty, pleasant, innocent. This is her natural Character; but
when she observes any one admired for what they call a Fine Woman, she i^ all
the next Day womanly, prudent, observing, and virtuous. She is every Moment
asked in her prudential Behavior, Whether she is not well? Upon which she as
often answers in a Fret, Do People think one must be always romping, always a
Jackpudding? I never fail to enquire o^ her, If my Lady such a One, that awful
Beauty, was not at the Play last Night? She knows the Connection between that
Question and her Chang^ of Humor, and says, 'It would be very well, if some
People would examine into themselves as much as they do into others.' Or, 'Sure
there is nothing in the World so ridiculous as an amorous old Man.'

As I was saying, there is a Class which every Man is in by his Post in Nature,
from which it is impossible for him to withdraw to another, and become it.
Therefore it is necessary that each should be contented with it, and not
endeavor at any Progress out of that Tract. To follow Nature, is the only
agreeable Course; which is what I would fain inculcate to those jarring
Companions, Flavia and Lucia. They are Mother and Daughter. Flavia, who is the
Mamma, has all the Charms and Desires of Youth still about her, and not much
turned of Thirty: Lucia is blooming and amorous, and but a little above
Fifteen. The Mother looks very much younger than she is, the Girl very much
elder. If it were possible to fix the Girl to her sick Bed, and preserve the
Portion (the Use of which the Mother partakes) the good Widow Flavia would
certainly do it. But for fear of Lucia's Escape, the Mother is forced to be
constantly attended with a Rival, that explains her Age, and draws off the Eyes
of her Admirers. The Jest is, they can never be together in Strangers Company,
but Lucy is eternally reprimanded for something very particular in her
Behavior; for which she has the Malice to say, She hopes she shall always obey
her Parents. She carried her Passion and Jealousy to that Height the other Day,
that coming suddenly into the Room, and surprising Colonel Lofty speaking
Rapture on one Knee to her Mother, she clapped down by him, and asked her
Blessing.

I do not know whether it is so proper to tell Family Occurrences of this
Nature; but we every Day see the same Thing happen in the public Conversation
in the World. Men cannot be contented with what is laudable, but they must have
all that is laudable. This Affectation is what destroys the familiar Man into
Pretenses to take State upon him, and the contrary Character to the Folly of
aiming at being winning and complaisant. But in these Cases, Men may easily lay
aside what they are, but can never arrive at what they are not.

As to the Pursuits after Affection and Esteem, the Fair Sex are happy in this
Particular, that with them the one is much more nearly related to the other
than in Men. The Love of a Woman is inseparable from some Esteem of her; and as
she is naturally the Object of Affection, the Woman who has your Esteem has
also some Degree of your Love. A Man that dotes on a Woman for her Beauty, will
whisper his Friend, That Creature has a great deal of Wit when you are well
acquainted with her. And if you examine the Bottom of your Esteem for a Woman,
you will find you have a greater Opinion of her Beauty than any Body else. As
to us Men, I design to pass most of my Time with the facetious Harry
Bickerstaff; but William Bickerstaff, the most prudent Man of our Family, shall
be my Executor.

The TATLER. [No 207.
From Thursd. Aug. 3. to Saturd. Aug. 5. 1710.
From my own Apartment, August 4.
HAving Yesterday Morning received a Paper of Latin Verses, written with much
Elegance in Honor of these my Papers, and being informed at the same Time that
they were composed by a Youth under Age, I read them with much Delight, as an
Instance of his Improvement. There is not a greater Pleasure to old Age, than
seeing young People entertain themselves in such a Manner as that we can
partake of their Enjoyments. On such Occasions we flatter our selves, that we
are not quite laid aside in the World, but that we are either used with
Gratitude for what we were, or honored for what we are. A well inclined young
Man, and whose good Breeding is founded upon the Principles of Nature and
Virtue, must needs take Delight in being agreeable to his Elders, as we are
truly delighted when we are not the Jest of them. When I say this, I must
confess I cannot but think it a very lamentable Thing that there should be a
Necessity for making that a Rule of Life, which should be, methinks, a mere
Instinct of Nature. If Reflection upon a Man in Poverty, whom we once knew in
Riches, is an Argument of Commiseration with generous Minds; sure old Age,
which is a Decay from that Vigor which the Young possess, and must certainly
(if not prevented against their Will) arrive at, should be more forcibly the
Object of that Reverence which honest Spirits are inclined to from a Sense of
being themselves liable to what they observe has already overtaken others.

My Three Nephews, whom in June last was Twelvemonth I disposed of according to
their several Capacities and Inclinations, the first to the University, the
Second to a Merchant, and the Third to a Woman of Quality as her Page, by my
Invitation dined with me to Day. It is my Custom often, when I have a Mind to
give my self a more than ordinary Cheerfulness, to invite a certain young
Gentlewoman of our Neighborhood to make one of the Company. She did me that
Favor this Day. The Presence of a beautiful Woman of Honor, to Minds which
are not trivially disposed, displays an Alacrity which is not to be
communicated by any other Object. It was not unpleasant to me to look into her
Thoughts of the Company she was in. She smiled at the Party of Pleasure I had
thought of for her, which was composed of an old Man and Three Boys. My
Scholar, my Citizen, and my self, were very soon neglected; and the young
Courtier, by the Bow he made to her at her Entrance, engaged her Observation
without a Rival. I observed the Oxonian not a little discomposed at this
Preference, while the Trader kept his Eye upon his Uncle. My Nephew Will had a
Thousand secret Resolutions to break in upon the Discourse of his younger
Brother, who gave my fair Companion a full Account of the Fashion, and what was
reckoned most becoming to this Complexion, and what Sort of Habit appeared best
upon the other Shape. He proceeded to acquaint her, who of Quality was well or
sick within the Bills of Mortality, and named very familiarly all his Lady's
Acquaintance, not forgetting her very Words when he spoke of their Characters.
Besides all this, he had a Road of Flattery; and upon her enquiring what Sort
of Woman Lady Lovely was in her Person, Really Madam, says the Jackanapes, she
is exactly of your Height and Shape; but as you are fair, she is a brown Woman.
There was no enduring that this Fop should outshine us all at this unmerciful
Rate, therefore I thought fit to talk to my young Scholar concerning his
Studies; and because I would throw his Learning into present Service, I desired
him to repeat to me the Translation he had made of some tender Verses in
Theocritus. He did so, with an Air of Elegance peculiar to the College to which
I sent him. I made some Exceptions to the Turn of the Phrases, which he
defended with much Modesty, as believing in that Place the Matter was rather to
consult the Softness of a Swain's Passion, than the Strength of his
Expressions. It soon appeared, that Will had out-stripped his Brother in the
Opinion of our young Lady. A little Poetry to one who is bred a Scholar, has
the same Effect that a good Carriage of his Person has on one who is to live in
Courts. The Favor of Women is so natural a Passion, that I envied both the
Boys their Success in the Approbation of my Guest; and I thought the only
Person invulnerable was my young Trader. During the whole Meal, I could observe
in the Children a mutual Contempt and Scorn of each other, arising from their
different Way of Life and Education, and took that Occasion to advertise them
of such growing Distasts, which might mislead them in their future Life, and
disappoint their Friends, as well as themselves, of the Advantages which might
be expected from the Diversity of their Professions and Interests.

The Prejudices which are growing up between these Brothers from the different
Ways of Education, are what create the most fatal Misunderstandings in Life.
But all Distinctions of Disparagement merely from our Circumstances, are such
as will not bear the Examination of Reason. The Courtier, the Trader, and the
Scholar, should all have an equal Pretension to the Denomination of a
Gentleman. That Tradesman who deals with me in a Commodity which I do not
understand with Uprightness, has much more Right to that Character, than the
Courtier who gives me false Hopes, or the Scholar who laughs at my Ignorance.

The Appellation of Gentleman is never to be affixed to a Man's Circumstances,
but to his Behavior in them. For this Reason I shall ever, as far as I am
able, give my Nephews such Impressions as shall make them value themselves
rather as they are useful to others, than as they are conscious of Merit in
themselves. There are no Qualities from which we ought to pretend to the Esteem
of others, but such as render us serviceable to them; for Free Men have no
Superiors but Benefactors. I was going on like a true old Fellow to this
Purpose to my Guests, when I received the following Epistle:

SIR,
I Have yours, with Notice of a Benefit-Ticket of 400 l. per Annum, both
enclosed by Mr. Elliot, who had my Numbers for that Purpose. Your Philosophic
Advice came very seasonably to me with that good Fortune; but I must be so
sincere with you as to acknowledge, I owe my present Moderation more to my own
Folly, than your wisdom. You will think this strange till I inform you, that I
had fixed my Thoughts upon the 1000 l. a Year, and had with that Expectation
laid down so many agreeable Plans for my Behavior toward my new Lovers and
old Friends, that I have received this Favor of Fortune with an Air of
Disappointment. This is interpreted by all who know not the Springs of my Heart
as a wonderful Piece of Humility. I hope my present State of Mind will grow
into that; but I confess my Conduct to be now owing to another Cause. However,
I know you will approve my taking hold even of Imperfections to find my Way
toward Virtue, which is so feeble in us at the best, that we are often
beholden to our Faults for the first Appearances of it. I am,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, CHLOE.


The TATLER. [No 208.
Si dixeris aestuo, sudat. --
Juv.
From Saturd. August 5. to Tuesd. August 8. 1710.
From my own Apartment, August 7.
AN old Acquaintanc who met me this Morning seemed overjoyed to see me, and
told me, I looked as well as he had known me do these Forty Years: But,
continued he, not quite the Man you were when we visited together at Lady
Brightly's. Oh! Isaac, those Days are over. Do you think there are any such
fine Creatures now living as we then conversed with? He went on with a Thousand
incoherent Circumstances, which, in his Imagination, must needs please me; but
they had the quite contrary Effect. The Flattery with which he began, in
telling me how well I wore, was not disagreeable; but his indiscreet Mention of
a Set of Acquaintance we had outlived, recalled Ten Thousand Things to my
Memory, which made me reflect upon my present Condition with Regret. Had he
indeed been so kind as, after a long Absence, to felicitate me upon an indolent
and easy old Age, and mentioned how much he and I had to thank for, who at our
Time of Day could walk firmly, eat heartily, and converse cheerfully, he had
kept up my Pleasure in my self. But of all Mankind, there are none so shocking
as these injudicious civil People. They ordinarily begin upon something that
they know must be a Satisfaction; but then, for Fear of the Imputation of
Flattery, they follow it with the last Thing in the World of which you would be
reminded. It is this that perplexes civil Persons. The Reason that there is
such a general Outcry amongst us against Flatterers, is, that there are so very
few good Ones. It is the nicest Art in this Life, and is a Part of Eloquence
which does not want the Preparation that is necessary to all other Parts of it,
That your Audience should be your Well-wishers: For Praise from an Enemy is the
most pleasing of all Commendations.

It is generally to be observed, that the Person most agreeable to a Man for a
Constancy is he that has no shining Qualities, but is a certain Degree above
great Imperfections, whom he can live with as his Inferior, and who will either
overlook or not observe his little Defects. Such an easy Companion as this,
either now and then throws out a little Flattery, or lets a Man silently
flatter himself in his Superiority to him. If you take Notice, there is hardly
a rich Man in the World, who has not such a led Friend of small Consideration,
who is a Darling for his Insignificancy. It is a great Ease to have one in our
own Shape a Species below us, and who, without being listed in our Service, is
by Nature of our Retinue. These Dependants are of excellent Use on a Rainy Day,
or when a Man has not a Mind to dress, or to exclude Solitude, when one has
neither a Mind to that or to Company. There are of this good-natured Order, who
are so kind as to divide themselves, and do these good Offices to many. Five or
Six of them visit a whole Quarter of the Town, and exclude the Spleen without
Fees from the Families they frequent. If they do not prescribe Physic, they
can be Company when you take it. Very great Benefactors to the Rich, or those
whom they call People at their Ease, are your Persons of no Consequence. I have
known some of them, by the Help of a little Cunning, make delicious Flatterers.
They know the Course of the Town, and the general Characters of Persons: By
this Means they will sometimes tell the most agreeable Falsehoods imaginable.
They will acquaint you, that such a One of a quite contrary Party said, that
though you were engaged in different Interests, yet he had the greatest Respect
for your good Sense and Address. When one of these has a little Cunning, he
passes his Time in the utmost Satisfaction to himself and his Friends: For his
Position is never to report or speak a displeasing Thing to his Friend. As for
letting him go on in an Error, he knows Advice against them is the Office of
Persons of greater Talents and less Discretion.

The Latin Word for a Flatterer (Assentator) implies no more than a Person that
barely consents; and indeed such a one, if a Man were able to purchase or
maintain him, cannot be bought too dear. Such a one never contradicts you, but
gains upon you, not by a fulsom Way of commending you in broad Terms, but
liking whatever you propose or utter; at the same Time is ready to beg your
Pardon, and gainsay you, if you chance to speak Ill of your self. An old Lady
is very seldom without such a Companion as this, who can recite the Names of
all her Lovers, and the Matches refused by her in the Days when she minded such
Vanities, (as she is pleased to call them, though she so much approves the
Mention of them.) It is to be noted, that a Woman's Flatterer is generally
older than her self, her Years serving at once to recommend her Patroness's
Age, and to add Weight to her Complaisance in all other Particulars.

We Gentlemen of small Fortunes are extremely necessitous in this Particular. I
have indeed one who smokes with me often; but his Parts are so low, that all
the Incense he does me is to fill his Pipe with me, and to be out at just as
many Whiffs as I take. This is all the Praise or Assent that he is capable of,
yet there are more Hours when I would rather be in his Company than that of the
brightest Man I know. It would be an hard Matter to give an Account of this
Inclination to be flattered; but if we go to the Bottom of it, we shall find
that the Pleasure in it is something like that of receiving Money which lay
out. Every Man thinks he has an Estate of Reputation, and is glad to see one
that will bring any of it Home to him: It is no Matter how dirty a Bag it is
conveyed to him in, or by how clownish a Messenger, so the Money is good. All
that we want to be pleased with Flattery, is to believe that the Man is sincere
who gives it us. It is by this one Accident, that absurd Creatures often outrun
the more Skilful in this Art. Their Want of Ability is here an Advantage, and
their Bluntness, as it is the seeming Effect of Sincerity, is the best Cover to
Artifice.

Terence introduces a Flatterer talking to a Coxcomb whom he cheats out of a
Livelihood, and a third Person on the Stage makes on him this pleasant Remark,
"This Fellow has an Art of making Fools Madmen." The Love of Flattery is indeed
sometimes the Weakness of a great Mind; but you see it also in Persons who
otherwise discover no Manner of Relish of any Thing above mere Sensuality.
These latter it sometimes improves, but always debases the former. A Fool is in
himself the Object of Pity till he is flattered. By the Force of that his
Stupidity is raised into Affectation, and he becomes of Dignity enough to be
ridiculous. I remember a Drole, that upon one's saying, The Times are so
ticklish that there must great Care be taken what one says in Conversation;
answered with an Air of Surliness and Honesty, If People will be free, let them
be so in the Manner that I am, who never abuse a Man but to his Face. He had no
Reputation for saying dangerous Truths; therefore when it was repeated, You
abuse a Man but to his Face? Yes, says he, I flatter him.

It is indeed the greatest of Injuries to flatter any but the Unhappy, or such
as are displeased with themselves for some Infirmity. In this latter Case we
have a Member of our Club, that when Sir Jeffery falls asleep, wakens him with
Snoring. This makes Sir Jeffery hold up for some Moments the longer, to see
there are Men younger than himself among us, who are more Lethargick than he is.

When Flattery is practiced upon any other Consideration, it is the most abject
Thing in Nature; nay, I cannot think of any Character below the Flatterer,
except he that envies him. You meet with Fellows prepared to be as mean as
possible in their Condescentions and Expressions; but they want Persons and
Talents to rise up to such a Baseness. As a Coxcomb is a Fool of Parts, so is a
Flatterer a Knave of Parts.

The best of this Order that I know, is one who disguises it under a Spirit of
Contradiction or Reproof. He told an errant Driveler the other Day, That he did
not care for being in Company with him, because he heard he turned his absent
Friends into Ridicule. And upon Lady Autumn's disputing with him about
something that happened at the Revolution, he replied with a very angry Tone,
Pray, Madam, give me Leave to know more of a Thing in which I was actually
concerned, than you who were then in your Nurse's Arms.

The TATLER. [No 209.
From Tuesd. August 8. to Thursd. August 10. 1710.
From my own Apartment, August 9.
ANoble Painter, who has an Ambition to draw an History-Piece, has desired of
me to give him a Subject on which he may show the utmost Force of his Art and
Genius. For this Purpose I have pitched upon that remarkable Incident between
Alexander the Great and his Physician. This Prince, in the Midst of his
Conquests in Persia, was seized by a violent Fever; and according to the
Account we have of his vast Mind, his Thoughts were more employed about his
Recovery as it regarded the War, than as it concerned his own Life. He
professed, a slow Method was worse than Death to him, because it was what he
more dreaded, an Interruption of his Glory. He desired a dangerous, so it might
be a speedy Remedy. During this Impatience of the King, it is well known that
Darius had offered an immense Sum to any who should take away his Life. But
Philippus, the most esteemed and most knowing of his Physicians, promised, that
within Three Days Time he would prepare a Medicine for him which should restore
him more expeditiously than could be imagined. Immediately after this
Engagement, Alexander receives a Letter from the most considerable of his
Captains, with Intelligence, That Darius had bribed Philippus to poison him.
Every Circumstance imaginable favored this Suspicion; but this Monarch, who
did nothing but in an extraordinary Manner, concealed the Letter; and while the
Medicine was preparing, spent all his Thoughts upon his Behavior in this
important Incident. From his long Soliloquy he came to this Resolution: "
Alexander must not lie here alive to be oppressed by his Enemy. I will not
believe my Physician guilty; or, I will perish rather by his Guilt, than my own
Diffidence.'

At the appointed Hour, Philippus enters with the Potion. One cannot but form
to one's self on Occasion the Encounter of their Eyes, the Resolution in those
of the Patient, and the Benevolence in the Countenance of the Physician. The
Hero raised himself in his Bed, and holding the Letter in one Hand, and the
Potion in the other, drank the Medicine. It will exercise my Friend's Pencil
and Brain to place this Action in its proper Beauty. A Prince observing the
Features of a suspected Traitor after having drank the Poison he offered him,
is a Circumstance so full of Passion, that it will require the highest Strength
of his Imagination to conceive it, much more to express it. But as Painting is
Eloquence and Poetry in Mechanism, I shall raise his Idea's, by reading with
him the finest Draughts of the Passions concerned in this Circumstance from the
most excellent Poets and Orators. The Confidence which Alexander assumes from
the Air of Philippus's Face as he is reading his Accusation, and the generous
Disdain which is to rise in the Features of a falsely accused Man, are
principally to be regarded. In this Particular he must heighten his Thoughts,
by reflecting, that he is not drawing only an innocent Man traduced, but a Man
zealously affected to his Person and Safety, full of Resentment for being
thought false. How shall we contrive to express the highest Admiration mingled
with Disdain? How shall we in Strokes of a Pencil say, what Philippus did to
his Prince on this Occasion? "Sir, my Life never depended on yours more than it
does now. Without knowing this Secret, I prepared the Potion, which you have
taken as what concerned Philippus no less than Alexander; and there is nothing
new in this Adventure, but that it makes me still more admire the Generosity
and Confidence of my Master." Alexander took him by the Hand, and said, "
Philippus, I am confident you had rather I had any other Way to have manifested
the Faith I have in you, than a Case which so nearly concerns me: And in
Gratitude I now assure you, I am anxious for the Effect of your Medicine, more
for your Sake than my own.'

My Painter is employed by a Man of Sense and Wealth to furnish him a Gallery,
and I shall join with my Friend in the Designing Part. It is the great Use of
Pictures to raise in our Minds either agreeable Idea's of our absent Friends,
or high Images of eminent Personages. But the latter Design is, methinks,
carried on in a very improper Way: For to fill a Room full of Battle-Pieces,
pompous Histories of Sieges, and a tall Hero alone in a Crowd of insignificant
Figures about him, is of no Consequence to private Men. But to place before our
Eyes great and illustrious Men in those Parts and Circumstances of Life wherein
their Behavior may have an Effect upon our Minds, as being such as we partake
with them merely as they were Men: Such as these, I say, may be just and useful
Ornaments of an elegant Apartment. In this Collection therefore that we are
making, we will not have the Battles, but the Sentiments of Alexander. The
Affair we were just now talking of, has Circumstances of the highest Nature,
and yet their Grandeur has little to do with his Fortune. If by observing such
a Piece as that of his taking a Bowl of Poison with so much Magnanimity, a Man,
the next Time he has a Fit of the Spleen, is less froward to his Friend or his
Servants; thus far is some Improvement.

I have frequently thought, that if we had many Draughts which were Historical
of certain Passions, and had the true Figure of the great Men we see
transported by them, it would be of the most solid Advantage imaginable. To
consider this mighty Man on one Occasion administer to the Wants of a poor
Soldier, benumbed with Cold, with the greatest Humanity; at another,
barbarously stabbing a faithful Officer: At one Time, so generously chaste and
virtuous as to give his Captive Statira her Liberty; at another, burning a Town
at the Instigation of Thais. This Sort of Changes in the same Person are what
would be more beneficial Lessons of Morality, than the several Revolutions in a
great Man's Fortune. There are but One or Two in an Age to whom the pompous
Incidents of his Life can be exemplary; but I or any Man may be as sick, as
good-natured, as compassionate, and as angry, as Alexander the great. My
Purpose in all this Chat is, that so excellent a Furniture may not for the
future have so Romantic a Turn, but allude to Incidents which come within the
Fortunes of the ordinary Race of Men. I do not know but it is by the Force of
this senseless Custom that People are drawn in Postures they would not for half
they are worth be surprised in. The unparalleled Firceness of some Rural
'Squires drawn in Red, or in Armor, who never dreamed to destroy any Thing
above a Fox, is a common and ordinary Offense of this Kind. But I shall give an
Account of our whole Gallery on another Occasion.

The TATLER. [No 210.
From Thursd. Aug. 10. to Saturd. Aug. 12. 1710.
Sheer-Lane, August 10.
I Did my self the Honor this Day to make a Visit to a Lady of Quality, who is
one of those who are ever railing at the Vices of the Age, but mean only one
Vice, because it is the only Vice they are not guilty of. She went so far as to
fall foul on a young Woman who has had Imputations; but whether they were just
or not, no one knows but her self. However that is, she is in her present
Behavior modest, humble, pious, and discreet. I thought it became me to bring
this censorious Lady to Reason, and let her see she was a much more vicious
Woman than the Person she spoke of.

Madam, said I, you are very severe to this poor young Woman, for a Trespass
which I believe Heaven has forgiven her, and for which you see she is for ever
out of Countenance. Nay, Mr. Bickerstaff, she interrupted, If you at this Time
of Day contradict People of Virtue, and stand up for ill Women -- No, no,
Madam, said I, not so fast, she is reclaimed, and I fear you never will be.
Nay, nay, Madam, do not be in a Passion, but let me tell you what you are. You
are indeed as good as your Neighbors, but that is being very bad. You are a
Woman at the Head of a Family, and lead a perfect Town Lady's Life. You go on
your own Way, and consult nothing but your Glass. What Imperfections indeed you
see there, you immediately mend as fast as you can. You may do the same by the
Faults I tell you of, for they are much more in your Power to correct.

You are to know then, that you Visiting Ladies, that carry your Virtue from
House to House with so much Prattle in each other's Applause, and triumph over
other People's Faults, I grant you have but the Speculation of Vice in your own
Conversations, but, promote the Practice of it in all others you have to do
with.

As for you, Madam, your Time passes away in Dressing, Eating, Sleeping, and
Praying. When you rise in Morning, I grant you an Hour spent very well; but you
come out to dress in so froward a Humor, that the poor Girl who attends you,
curses her very Being in that she is your Servant, for the peevish Things you
say to her. When this poor Creature is put into a Way, that Good or Evil are
regarded but as they relieve her from the Hours she has and must pass with you.
The next you have to do with, is your Coachman and Footmen. They convey your
Ladyship to Church. While you are praying there, they are cursing, swearing,
and drinking in an Alehouse. During the Time also which your Ladyship sets
apart for Heaven, you are to know, that your Cook is sweating and fretting in
Preparation for your Dinner. Soon after your Meal you make Visits, and the
whole World that belongs to you speaks all the Ill of you which you are
repeating of others. You see, Madam, whatever Way you go, all about you are in
a very broad one. The Morality of these People it is your proper Business to
enquire into; and till you reform them, you had best let your Equals alone;
otherwise, if I allow you you are not vicious, you must allow me you are not
virtuous.

I took my Leave, and received at my coming Home the following Letter:

Mr. Bickerstaff,
I Have lived a pure and undefiled Virgin these Twenty seven Years; and I
assure you, it is with great Grief and Sorrow of Heart I tell you, that I become
weary and impatient of the Derision of the Gigglers of our Sex who call me old
Maid, and tell me I shall lead Apes. If you are truly a Patron of the
Distressed, and an Adept in Astrology, you will advise whether I shall or ought
to be prevailed upon by the Impertinencies of my own Sex, to give Way to the
Importunities of yours. I assure you, I am surrounded with both, though at
present a Forlorn.

I am, etc.


I must defer my Answer to this Lady out of a Point of Chronology. She says,
she has been Twenty Seven Years a Maid; but I fear, according to a common
Error, she dates her Virginity from her Birth, which is a very erroneous
Method; for a Woman of Twenty is no more to be thought chaste so many Years,
than a Man of that Age can be said to have been so long Valiant. We must not
allow People the Favor of a Virtue till they have been under the Temptation to
the contrary. A Woman is not a Maid till her Birthday, as we call it, of her
Fifteenth Year. My Plaintiff is therefore desired to inform me, whether she is
at present in her Twenty eighth or Forty third Year, and she shall be
dispatched accordingly.

St. James's Coffee-house, August 11.
A Merchant came hither this Morning, and read a Letter from a Correspondent of
his at Milan. It was dated of the 7th Instant. N. S. The following is an
Abstract of it. On the 25th of the last Month Five Thousand Men were on their
March in the Lampourdan, under the Command of General Wesell, having received
Orders from his Catholic Majesty to join him in his Camp with all possible
Expedition. The Duke of Anjou soon had Intelligence of their Motion, and took a
Resolution to decamp, in order to intercept them, within a Day's March of our
Army. The King of Spain was apprehensive the Enemy might make such a Movement,
and commanded General Stanhope with a Body of Horse, consisting of Fourteen
Squadrons, to observe their Course, and prevent their Passage over the Rivers
Segra and Noguera between Larida and Balaguer. It happened to be the first Day
that Officer had appeared Abroad after a dangerous and violent Fever; but he
received the King's Commands on this Occasion with a Joy which surmounted his
present Weakness, and on the 27th of last Month came up with the Enemy on the
Plains of Balaguer. The Duke of Anjou's Rear-Guard consisting of Twenty six
Squadrons, that General sent Intelligence of their Posture to the King, and
desired his Majesty's Orders to attack them. During the Time which he waited
for his Instructions, he made his Disposition for the Charge, which was to
divide themselves into Three Bodies; One to be commanded by himself in the
Center, a Body on the Right by Count Maurice of Nassau, and the Third on the
Left by the Earl of Rochford. Upon the Receipt of his Majesty's Direction to
attack the Enemy, the General himself charged with the utmost Vigor and
Resolution, while the Earl of Rochford and Count Maurice extended themselves on
his Right and Left, to prevent the Advantage the Enemy might make of the
Superiority of their Numbers. What appears to have misled the Enemy's General
in this Affair was, that it was not supposed practicable that the Confederates
would attack him till they had received a Reinforcement. For this Reason he
pursued his March without facing about, till we were actually coming on to
Engagement. General Stanhope's Disposition made it impracticable to do it at
that Time, Count Maurice and the Earl of Rochford attacking them in the Instant
in which they were forming themselves. The Charge was made with the greatest
Gallantry, and the Enemy very soon put into so great Disorder, that their whole
Cavalry were commanded to support their Rear-Guard. Upon the Advance of this
Reinforcement, all the Horse of the King of Spain were come up to sustain
General Stanhope, insomuch that the Battle improved to a general Engagement of
the Cavalry of both Armies. After a warm Dispute for some Time, it ended in the
utter Defeat of all the Duke of Anjou's Horse. Upon the Dispatch of these
Advices, that Prince was retiring toward Lerida. We have no Account of any
considerable Loss on our Side, except that both those Heroic Youths, the Earl
of Rochford and Count Nassau, fell in this Action. They were, you know, both
Sons of Persons who had a great Place in the Confidence of your late King
William; and I doubt not but their Deaths will endear their Families, which
were ennobled by him, in your Nation. General Stanhope has been reported by the
Enemy dead of his Wounds; but he received only a slight Contusion on the
Shoulder.

P. S. We acknowledge you here a mighty brave People; but you are said to love
quarrelling so well, that you cannot be quiet at Home. The Favorers of the
House of Bourbon among us affirm, That this Stanhope, who could as it were get
out of his sick Bed to fight against their King of Spain, must be of the
Antimonarchical Party.

The TATLER. [No 211.
-- Nequeo monstrare, and sentio tantum.
Juv.
From Saturd. Aug. 12. to Tuesd. Aug. 15. 1710.
Sunday, August 13.
IF there were no other Consequence of it, but barely that Humane Creatures on
this Day assemble themselves before their Creator, without Regard to their
usual Employments, their Minds at Leisure from the Cares of this Life, and
their Bodies adorned with the best Attire they can bestow on them; I say, were
this mere outward Celebration of a Sabbath all that is expected from Men, even
that were a laudable Distinction, and a Purpose worthy the Humane Nature. But
when there is added to it the sublime Pleasure of Devotion, our Being is
exalted above it self; and he who spends a Seventh Day in the Contemplation of
the next Life, will not easily fall into the Corruptions of this in the other
Six. They who never admit Thoughts of this Kind into their Imagination, lose
higher and sweeter Satisfactions than can be raised by any other Entertainment.
The most illiterate Man who is touched with Devotion, and uses frequent
Exercises of it, contracts a certain Greatness of Mind, mingled with a noble
Simplicity, that raises him above those of the same Condition; and there is an
indelible Mark of Goodness in those who sincerely possess it. It is hardly
possible it should be otherwise; for the Fervours of a pious Mind will
naturally contract such an Earnestness and Attention toward a better Being, as
will make the ordinary Passages of Life go off with a becoming Indifference. By
this, a Man in the lowest Condition will not appear mean, or in the most
splendid Fortune, insolent.

As to all the Intricacies and Vicissitudes under which Men are ordinarily
entangled with the utmost Sorrow and Passion, one who is devoted to Heaven when
he falls into such Difficulties is led by a Clue through a Labyrinth. As to
this World, he does not pretend to Skill in the Mazes of it, but fixes his
Thoughts upon one Certainty, that he shall soon be out of it. And we may ask
very boldly, What can be a more sure Consolation than to have an Hope in Death?
When Men are arrived at thinking of their very Dissolution with Pleasure, how
few Things are there that can be terrible to them? Certainly nothing can be
dreadful to such Spirits, but what would make Death terrible to them, Falsehood
toward Man, or Impiety toward Heaven. To such as these, as there are
certainly many such, the Gratifications of innocent Pleasures are doubled, even
with Reflections upon their Imperfection. The Disappointments which naturally
attend the great Promises we make our selves in expected Enjoyments, strike no
Damp upon such Men, but only quicken their Hopes of soon knowing Joys, which
are too pure to admit of Allay or Satiety.

It is thought among the politer Part of Mankind an Imperfection to want a
Relish of any of those Things which refine our Lives. This is the Foundation of
the Acceptance which Eloquence, Music, and Poetry, make in the World; and I
know not why Devotion, considered merely as an Exaltation of our Happiness,
should not at leas^ be so far regarded as to be considered. It is possible the
very Enquiry would lead Men into suc^ Thoughts and Gratifications as they did
not expect to meet with in this Place. Many a goo^ Acquaintance has been lost
from a general Prepossession in his Disfavour, and a severe Aspect has often
hid under it a very agreeable Companion.

There are no distinguishing Qualities among Men to which there are not false
Pretenders; but though none is more pretended to than that of Devotion, there
are, perhaps, fewer successful Impostors in this Kind than any other. There is
something so natively great and good in a Person that is truly devout, that an
awkward Man may as well pretend to be genteel, as an Hypocrite to be pious. The
Constraint in Words and Actions are equally visible in both Cases, and any
Thing set up in their Room does but remove the Endeavourers the further off
their Pretensions. But however the Sense of true Piety is abated, there is no
other Motive of Action that can carry us through all the Vicissitudes of Life
with Alacrity and Resolution. But Piety, like Philosophy, when it is
superficial, does but make Men appear the worse for it; and a Principle that is
but half received, does but distract, instead of guiding our Behavior. When I
reflect upon the unequal Conduct of Lotius, I see many Things that run directly
counter to his Interest; therefore I cannot attribute his Labors for the
public Good to Ambition. When I consider his Disregard to his Fortune, I
cannot esteem him covetous. How then can I reconcile his Neglect of himself,
and his Zeal for others? I have long suspected him to be a little Pious: But no
Man ever hid his Vice with greater Caution than he does his Virtue. It was the
Praise of a great Roman, That he had rather be, than appear good. But such is
the Weakness of Lotius, that I dare say, he had rather be esteemed irreligious,
than devout. By I know not what Impatience of Rail^ery he is wonderfully
fearful of being thought ^oo great a Believer. A Hundred little Devices are
made use of to hide a Time of private Devotion; and he will allow you any
Suspicion of his being ill employed, so you do not tax him with being well. But
alas! How mean is such a Behavior? To boast of Virtue is a most ridiculous Way
of disappointing the Merit of it, but not so pitiful as that of being ashamed
of it. How unhappy is the Wretch who makes the most absolute and independent
Motive of Action the Cause of Perplexity and Inconstancy? How much another
Figure does Caelicola make with all who know him? His great and superior Mind,
frequently exalted by the Raptures of Heavenly Meditation, is to all his
Friends of the same Use as if an Angel were to appear at the Decision of their
Disputes. They very well understand he is as much disinterested and unbiased
as such a Being. He considers all Applications made to him, as those Addresses
will effect his own Application to Heaven. All his Determinations are delivered
with a beautiful Humility; and he pronounces his Decisions with the Air of one
who is more frequently a Supplicant than a Judge.

Thus humble, and thus great, is the Man who is moved by Piety, and exalted by
Devotion. But behold this recommended by the masterly Hand of a great Divine I
have heretofore made bold with.

It is such a Pleasure as can never cloy or overwork the Mind; a Delight that
grows and improves under Thought and Reflection; and while it exercises, does
also endear it self to the Mind. All Pleasure that affect the Body must needs
weary, because they transport; and all Transportation is a Violence; and no
Violence can be lasting, but determines upon the Falling of the Spirits, which
are not able to keep up that Height of Motion that the Pleasure of the Senses
raises them to. And therefore how inevitably does an immoderate Laughter end in
a Sigh, which is only Nature's recovering it self after a Force done to it: But
the religious Pleasure of a well-disposed Mind moves gently, and therefore
constantly. It does not effect by Rapture and Ecstasy, but is like the Pleasure
of Health, greater and stronger than those that call up the Senses with grosser
and more affecting Impressions. No Man's Body is as strong as his Appetites;
but Heaven has corrected the Boundlesness of his voluptuous Desires by stinting
his Strengths, and contracting his Capacities. -- The Pleasure of the religious
Man is an easy and a portable Pleasure, such an one as he carries about in his
Bosom, without alarming either the Eye or Envy of the World. A Man putting all
his Pleasure into this one, is like a Traveller putting all his Goods into one
Jewel; the Value is the same, and the Convenience greater. The TATLER. [No 212.
From Tuesday Aug. 15. to Thursday Aug. 17. 1710.
From my own Apartment, Aug. 16.
I Have had much Importunity to answer the following Letter.

Mr. Bickerstaff,
REading over a Volume of Yours, I find the Words Simplex Munditiis mentioned
as a Description of a very well dressed Woman. I beg of you, for the Sake of
the Sex, to explain these Terms. I cannot comprehend what my Brother means,
when he tells me they signify my own Name, which is,

SIR, Your humble Servant, Plain English.


I think the Lady's Brother has given us a very good Idea of that elegant
Expression, it being the greatest Beauty of Speech to be close and
intelligible. To this End nothing is to be more carefully consulted than
Plainness. In a Lady's Attire this is the single Excellence; for to be what
some call fine, is the same Vice in that Case, as to be florid is in Writing or
Speaking. I have studied and writ on this important Subject till I almost
despair of making a Reformation in the Females of this Island, where we have
more Beauty than in any Spot in the Universe, if we did not disguise it by
false Garniture, and detract from it by impertinent Improvements. I have by me
a Treatise concerning Pinners, which I have some Hopes will contribute to the
Amendment of the present Head-dresses, to which I have solid and unanswerable
Objections. But most of the Errors in that and other Particulars of adorning
the Head, are crept into the World from the Ignorance of modern Tirewomen; for
it is come to that Pass, that an awkward Creature in the first Year of her
Apprenticeship, that can hardly stick a Pin, shall take upon her to dress a
Woman of the First Quality. However it is certain, that there requires in a
good Tirewoman a perfect Skill in Optics; for all the Force of Ornament is to
contribute to the Intention of the Eyes. Thus she who has a Mind to look
killing, must arm her Face accordingly, and not leave her Eyes and Cheeks
undressed. Ther^ is Araminta so sensible of this, that she never will see even
her own Husband without a Hood on. Can any one living bear to see Miss Gruel,
lean as she is, with her Hair tied back after the modern Way? But such is the
Folly of our Ladies, that because one who is a Beauty, out of Ostentation of
her being such, takes Care to wear something that she knows cannot be of any
Consequence to her Complexion; I say, our Women run on so heedlesly in the
Fashion, that though it is the Interest of some to hide as much of their Faces as
possible, yet because a leading Toast appeared with a backward Head-dress, the
rest shall follow the Mode, without observing that the Author of the Fashion
assumed it because it could become no one but her self.

Flavia is ever well dressed, and always the gentilest Woman you meet: But the
Make of her Mind very much contributes to the Ornament of her Body. She has the
greatest Simplicity of Manners of any of her Sex. This makes every Thing look
native about her, and her Clothes are so exactly fitted, that they appear as it
were Part of her Person. Every one that sees her, knows her to be of Quality;
but her Distinction is owing to her Manner, and not to her Habit. Her Beauty is
full of Attraction, but not of Allurement. There is such a Composure in her
Looks, and Propriety in her Dress, that you would think it impossible she
should change the Garb you one Day see her in for any Thing so becoming, till
you next Day see her in another. There is no other Mystery in this, but that
however she is apparelled, she is her self the same: For there is so immediate
a Relation between our Thoughts and Gestures, that a Woman must think well to
look well.

But this weighty Subject I must put off for some other Matters in which my
Correspondents are urgent for Answers, which I shall do where I can, and appeal
to the Judgment of others where I cannot.

August 15. 1710. Mr. Bickerstaff,
TAking the Air the other Day on Horseback in the Green Lane that leads to
Southgate, I discovered coming toward me a Person well mounted in a Mask; and
I accordingly expected, as any one would, to have been robbed. But when we came
up with each other, the Spark, to my greater Surprise, very peaceably gave me
the Way; which made me take Courage enough to ask him, if he masqueraded, or
how? He made me no Answer, but still continued incognito. This was certainly an
Ass in a Lion's Skin; a harmless Bull-Beggar, who delights to fright innocent
People, and set them a gallopping. I bethought my self of putting as good a
Jest upon him, and had turned my Horse, with a Design to pursue him to London,
and get him apprehended, on Suspicion of being a Highway-man: But when I
reflected, that 'twas the proper Office of the Magistrate to punish only
Knaves, and that we had a Censor of Great Britain for People of another
Denomination, I immediately determined to prosecute him in your Court only.
This unjustifiable Frolic I take to be neither Wit nor Humor: Therefore hope
you will do me, and as many others as were that Day frighted, Justice. I am,

SIR, Your Friend and Servant, J. L.


SIR,
THE Gentleman begs your Pardon, and frighted you out of Fear of frighting you;
for he is just come out of the Smallpox.


Mr. Bickerstaff,
YOur Distinction concerning the Time of commencing Virgins is allowed to be
just. I write you my Thanks for it, in the Twenty eighth Year of my Life, and
Twelfth of my Virginity. But I am to ask you another Question, May a Woman be
said to live any more Years a Maid than she continues to be courted?

I am, etc.


Aug. 15. 1710. SIR,
I Observe that the Post-Man of Saturday last, giving an Account of the Action
in Spain, has this elegant Turn of Expression; General Stanhope, who in the
whole Action expressed as much Bravery as Conduct, received a Contusion in his
Right Shoulder. I should be glad to know, Whether this cautious Politician
means to commend or to rally him, by saying, He expressed as much Bravery as
Conduct? If you can explain this dubious Pharase, it will inform the Public,
and oblige,

SIR, Your humble Servant, etc.


The TATLER. [No 213.
From Thursd. Aug. 17. to Saturd. Aug. 19. 1710.
Sheer-Lane, August 16.
THere has of late crept in among the downright English, a mighty Spirit of
Dissimulation. But before we discourse of this Vice, it will be necessary to
observe, that the Learned make a Difference between Simulation and
Dissimulation. Simulation is a Pretense of what is not, and Dissimulation a
Concealment of what is. The latter is our present Affair. When you look round
you in public Places in this Island, you see the Generality of Mankind carry
in their Countenance an Air of Challenge or Defiance: And there is no such Man
to be found among us who naturally strives to do greater Honors and Civilities
than he receives. This innate Sullenness or Stubborness of Complexion is hardly
to be conquered by any of our Islanders. For which Reason, however they may
pretend to choose one another, they make but very awkward Rogues; and their
Dislike to each other is seldom so well dissembled, but it is suspected. When
once it is so, it had as good be professed. A Man who dissembles well, must
have none of what we call Stomach, otherwise he will be cold in his Professions
of Good Will where he hates; an Imperfection of the last ill Consequence in
Business. This Fierceness in our Natures is apparent from the Conduct of our
young Fellows, who are not got into the Schemes and Arts of Life which the
Children of this World walk by. One would think that of Course, when a Man of
any Consequence for his Figure, his Mien, or his Gravity, passes by a Youth, he
should certainly have the first Advances of Salutation; but he is, you may
observe, treated in a quite different Manner, it being the very Characteristick
of an English Temper to defy. As I am an Englishman, I find it a very hard
Matter to bring my self to pull off the Hat first; but it is the only Way to be
upon any good Terms with those we meet with: Therefore the first Advance is of
high Moment. Men judge of others by themselves; and he that will command with
us, must condescend. It moves ones Spleen very agreeably to see Fellows pretend
to be Dissemblers without this Lesson. They are so reservedly complaisant till
they have learned to resign their natural Passions, that all the Steps they
make toward gaining those whom they would be well with, are but so many Marks
of what they really are, and not of what they would appear.

The rough Britains, when they pretend to be artful toward one another, are
ridiculous enough; but when they set up for Vices they have not, and dissemble
their Good with an Affectation of Ill, they are insupportable. I know Two Men
in this Town who make as good Figures as any in it, that manage their Credit so
well as to be thought Atheists, and yet say their Prayers Morning and Evening.
Tom. Springly the other Day pretended to go to an Assignation with a married
Woman at Rosamond's- Pond, and was seen soon after reading the Responses with
great Gravity at Six of Clock Prayers.

Sheer-Lane, August 17.
Though the following Epistle bears a just Accusation of my self, yet in regard
it is a more advantageous Piece of Justice to another, I insert it at large.

Garraway's Coffee-house, August 10. Mr. Bickerstaff,
I Have lately read your Paper, wherein you represent a Conversation between a
young Lady, your Three Nephews, and your self; and am not a little offended at
the Figure you give your young Merchant in the Presence of a Beauty. The Topic
of Love is a Subject on which a Man is more beholden to Nature for his
Eloquence, than to the Instruction of the Schools, or my Lady's Woman. From the
Two latter, your Scholar and Page must have reaped all their Advantage above
him -- I know by this Time you have pronounced me a Trader. I acknowledge it,
but cannot bear the Exclusion from any Pretense of speaking agreeably to a Fine
Woman, or from any Degree of Generosity that Way. You have among us Citizens
many Well-wishers, but it is for the Justice of your Representations, which we,
perhaps, are better Judges of than you (by the Account you give of your Nephew)
seem to allow.

To give you an Opportunity of making us some Reparation, I desire you would
tell your own Way the following Instance of Heroic Love in the City. You are
to remember, that somewhere in your Writings, for enlarging the Territories of
Virtue and Honor, you have multiplied the Opportunities of attaining to
Heroic Virtue, and have hinted, that in whatever State of Life a Man is, if he
does Things above what is ordinarily performed by Men of his Rank, he is in
those Instances an Hero.

Tom Trueman, a young Gentleman of Eighteen Years of Age, fell passionately in
Love with the beauteous Almira, Daughter to his Master. Her Regard for him was
no less tender. Trueman was better acquainted with his Master's Affairs than
his Daughter, and secretly lamented, that each Day brought him by many
Miscarriages nearer Bankrupcy than the former. This unhappy Posture of their
Affairs the Youth suspected was owing to the ill Management of a Factor, in
whom his Master had an entire Confidence. Trueman took a proper Occasion, when
his Master was ruminating on his decaying Fortune, to address him for Leave to
spend the Remainder of his Time with his Foreign Correspondent. During Three
Years Stay in that Employment, he became acquainted with all that concerned his
Master; and by his great Address in the Management of that Knowledge, saved him
Ten thousand Pounds. Soon after this Accident, Trueman's Uncle left him a
considerable Estate. Upon receiving that Advice, he returned to England, and
demanded Almira of her Father. The Father over joy'd at the Match, offered him
the 10000 l. he had saved him, with the further Proposal of resigning to him
all his Business, Trueman refused both, and retired into the Country with his
Bride, contented with his own Fortune, though perfectly skilled in all the
Methods of improving it.

It is to be noted, That Trueman refused Twenty Thousand Pounds with another
young Lady; so that reckoning both his Self-Denials, he is to have in your
Court the Merit of having given 30000 l. for the Woman he loved. This Gentleman
I claim your Justice to; and hope you will be convinced, that some of us have
larger Views than only Cash Debtor, per contra Creditor.

Yours, Richard Traffic.
N. B. Mr. Thomas Trueman of Lime-street is entered among the Heroes of
Domestic Life.

Charles Lilly.




The TATLER. [No 214.
-- Soles and aperta Serena
Prospicere, and certis poteris cognoscere Signis.
Virg.
From Saturd. Aug. 19. to Tuesd. Aug. 22. 1710.
From my own Apartment, August 21.
IN every Party there are Two Sorts of Men, the Rigid and the Supple. The Rigid
are an intractable Race of Mortals, who act upon Principle, and will not,
forsooth, fall into any Measures that are not consistent with their received
Notions of Honor. These are Persons of a stubborn, unpliant Morality, that
sullenly adhere to their Friends when they are disgraced, and to their
Principles, though they are exploded. I shall therefore give up this stiff-necked
Generation to their own Obstinacy, and turn my Thoughts to the Advantage of the
Supple, who pay their Homage to Places, and not Persons; and without enslaving
themselves to any particular Scheme of Opinions, are as ready to change their
Conduct in Point of Sentiment, as of Fashion. The welldisciplined Part of a
Court are generally so perfect at their Exercise, that you may see a whole
Assembly, from Front to Rear, face about at once to a new Man of Power, though at
the same Time they turn their Backs upon him that brought them thither. The
great Hardship these complaisant Members of Society are under, seems to be the
Want of Warning upon any approaching Change or Revolution; so that they are
obliged in a Hurry to tack about with every Wind, and stop short in the Midst
of a full Career, to the great Surprise and Derision of their Beholders.

When a Man foresees a decaying Ministry, he has Leisure to grow a Malecontent,
reflect upon the present Conduct, and by gradual Murmurs fall off from his
Friends into a new Party, by just Steps and Measures. For Want of such Notices,
I have formerly known a very well-bred Person refuse to return a Bow of a Man
whom he thought in Disgrace, that was next Day made Secretary of State; and
another, who after a long Neglect of a Minister, came to his Levee, and made
Professions of Zeal for his Service the very Day before he was turned out.

This produces also unavoidable Confusions and Mistakes in the Descriptions of
great Men's Parts and Merits. That ancient Lyrick, Mr. D'Urfey, some Years ago
writ a Dedication to a certain Lord, in which he celebrated him for the
greatest Poet and Critic of that Age, upon a Misinformation in Dyer's Letter,
that his noble Patron was made Lord Chamberlain. In short, innumerable Votes
Speeches, and Sermons, have been thrown away, and turned to no Account, merely
for Want of due and timely Intelligence. Nay it has been known, that a
Panegyric has been half printed off, when the Poet, upon the Removal of the
Minister, has been forced to alter it into a Satyr.

For the Conduct therefore of such useful Persons as are ready to do their
Country Service upon all Occasions, I have an Engine in my Study, which is a
Sort of a Political Barometer, or, to speak more intelligibly, a State
Weather-Glass, that, by the rising and falling of a certain Magical Liquor,
presages all Changes and Revolutions in Government, as the common Glass does
those of the Weather. This Weather-Glass is said to have been invented by
Cardan, and given by him as a Present to his great Countryman and Contemporary
Machiavel, which (by the Way) may serve to rectify a received Error in
Chronology, that places one of these some Years after the other. How or when it
came into my Hands, I shall desire to be excused, if I keep to my self; but so
it is, that I have walked by it for the better Part of a Century, to my Safety
at least, if not to my Advantage; and have among my Papers, a Register of all
the Changes that have happened in it from the Middle of Queen Elizabeth's Reign.

In the Time of that Princess, it stood long at settled Fair. At the latter End
of King James the First, it fell to Cloudy. It held several Years after at
Stormy; insomuch that at last despairing of seeing any Clear Weather at Home, I
followed the Royal Exile, and some Time after finding my Glass rise, returned
to my native Country with the rest of the Loyalists. I was then in Hopes to
pass the Remainder of my Days in settled Fair: But alas! during the greatest
Part of that Reign, the English Nation lay in a dead Calm, which, as it is
usual, was followed by high Winds and Tempests till of late Years: In which,
with unspeakable Joy and Satisfaction, I have seen our Political Weather
returned to settled Fair. I must only observe, that for all this last Summer my
Glass has pointed at Changeable. Upon the whole, I often apply to Fortune
Aenaeas's Speech to the Sybil:

-- Non ulla Laborum,
O Virgo, nova mi Facies inopinave surgit
Omnia praecepi, atque Animo mecum ante peregi.
The Advantages which have accured to those whom I have advised in their
Affairs, by Virtue of this Sort of Praescience, have been very considerable. A
Nephew of mine, who has never put his Money into the Stocks, or taken it out,
without my Advice, has in a few Years raised Five hundred Pounds to almost so
many Thousands. As for my self, who look upon Riches to consist rather in
Content than Possessions, and measure the Greatness of the Mind rather by its
Tranquillity than its Ambition. I have seldom used my Glass to make my Way in
the World, but often to retire from it. This is a By-Path to Happiness, which
was first discovered to me by a most pleasing Apothegm of Pythagoras: When the
Winds, says he, rise, worship the Echo. That great Philosopher (whether to
make his Doctrines the more venerable, or to guild his Precepts with the Beauty
of Imagination, or to awaken the Curiosity of his Disciples; for I will not
suppose what is usually said, that he did it to conceal his Wisdom from the
Vulgar) has couched several admirable Precepts in remote Allusions and
mysterious Sentences. By the Winds in this Apothegm, are meant State-Hurricanes
and popular Tumults. When these arise, says he, worship the Echo; that is,
withdraw your self from the Multitude into Deserts, Woods, Solitudes, or the
like Retirements, which are the usual Habitations of the Echo.

The TATLER. [No 215.
From Tuesday Aug. 22. to Thursday Aug. 24. 1710.
From my own Apartment, August 23.
LYsander has writ to me out of the Country, and tells me, after many other
Circumstances, that he had passed a great deal of Time with much Pleasure and
Tranquillity, till his Happiness was interrupted by an indiscreet Flatterer, who
came down into those Parts to visit a Relation. With the Circumstances in which
he represents the Matter, he had no small Provocation to be offended, for he
attacked him in so wrong a Season, that he could not have any Relish of
Pleasure in it; though, perhaps, at another Time, it might have passed upon him
without giving him much Uneasiness. Lysander had, after a long Satiety of the
Town, been so happy as to get to a Solitude he extremely liked, and recovered a
Pleasure he had long discontinued, that of Reading. He was got to the Bank of a
Rivulet, covered by a pleasing Shade, and fanned by a soft Breeze, which threw
his Mind into that Sort of Composure and Attention, in which a Man, though with
Indolence, enjoys the utmost Liveliness of his Spirits, and the greatest
Strength of his Mind at the same Time. In this State, Lysander represents that
he was reading Virgil's Georgicks; when on a sudden the Gentleman
abovementioned surprised him, and, without any Manner of Preparation, falls
upon him at once, 'What! I have found you out at last, after searching all over
the Wood. We wanted you at Cards after Dinner, but you are much better
employed. I have heard indeed that you are an excellent Scholar: But at the
same Time, is it not a little unkind to rob the Ladies, who like you so well,
of the Pleasure of your Company? But that is indeed the Misfortune of you great
Scholars, you are seldom so fit for the World, as those who never trouble
themselves with Books. Well, I see you are taken up with your Learning there,
and I Will leave you.' Lysander says, he made him no Answer, but took a
Resolution to complain to me.

It is a substantial Affliction, when Men govern themselves by the Rules of
good Breeding, that by the very Force of them they are subjected to the
Insolence of those who either never will, or never can, understand them. The
superficial Part of Mankind form to themselves little Measures of Behavior
from the Outside of Things. By the Force of these narrow Conceptions, they act
amongst themselves with Applause, and do not apprehend they are contemptible to
those of higher Understanding, who are restrained by Decencies above their
Knowledge from showing a Dislike. Hence it is, that because Complaisance is a
good Quality in Conversation, one Impertinent takes upon him on all Occasions
to commend; and because Mirth is agreeable, another thinks fit eternally to
jest. I have of late received many Packets of Letters complaining of these
spreading Evils. A Lady who is lately arrived at the Bath acquaints me, there
was in the Stage-Coach wherein she went down a common Flatterer, and a common
Jester. These Gentlemen were (she tells me) Rivals in her Favor and adds, If
there ever happened a Case wherein of Two Persons One was not liked more than
another, it was in that Journey. They differed only in Proportion to the Degree
of Dislike between the Nauseous and the Insipid. Both these Characters of Men
are born out of a Barrenness of Imagination. They are never Fools by Nature,
but become such out of an impotent Ambition of being what she never intended
them, Men of Wit and Conversation. I therefore think fit to declare, That
according to the known Laws of this Land, a Man may be a very honest Gentleman,
and enjoy himself and his Friend, without being a Wit; and I absolve all Men
from taking Pains to be such for the future. As the present Case stands, is it
not very unhappy that Lysander must be attacked and applauded in a Wood, and
Corinna jolted and commended in a Stage-Coach; and this for no manner of
Reason, but because other People have a Mind to show their Parts? I grant
indeed, if these People (as they have Understanding enough for it) would
confine their Accomplishments to those of their own Degree of Talents, it were
to be tolerated; but when they are so insolent as to interrupt the Meditations
of the Wise, the Conversations of the Agreeable, and the whole Behavior of the
Modest, it becomes a Grievance naturally in my Jurisdiction. Among themselves,
I cannot only overlook, but approve it. I was present the other Day at a
Conversation, where a Man of this Height of Breeding and Sense told a young
Woman of the same Form, To be sure, Madam, every Thing must please that comes
from a Lady. She answered, I know, Sir, you are so much a Gentleman that you
think so. Why, this is very well on both Sides; and it is impossible that such
a Gentleman and Lady should do other than think well of one another, These are
but loose Hints of the Disturbances in humane Society, of which there is yet no
Remedy: But I shall in a little Time publish Tables of Respect and Civility, by
which Persons may be instructed in the proper Times and Seasons, as well as at
what Degree of Intimacy a Man may be allowed to commend or rally his
Companions; the promiscuous License of which is at present far from being among
the small Errors in Conversation.

P. S. The following Letter was left, with a Request to be immediately
answered, lest the Artifices used against a Lady in Distress may come into
common Practice.

SIR,
MY elder Sister buried her Husband about Six Months ago; and at his Funeral, a
Gentleman of more Art than Honesty, on the Night of his Interrment, while she
was not her self, but in the utmost Agony of her Grief, spoke to her of the
Subject of Love. In that Weakness and Distractio^ which my Sister was in, (as
one ready to fall is ap^ to lean on any Body) he obtained her Promise of
Marriage, which was accordingly consummated Eleve^ Weeks after. There is no
Affliction comes alone, bu^ one brings another. My Sister is now ready to
Lie-i^ She humbly asks of you, as you are a Friend to the Sex, to let her know
who is the lawful Father of thi^ Child, or whether she may not be relieved from
thi^ Second Marriage, considering it was promised under such Circumstances as
one may very well suppose she did not what she did voluntarily, but because s^
was helpless otherwise. She is advised somethin^ about Engagements made in
Gaol, which she thin^ the same as to the Reason of the Thing. But, dea^ Sir,
she relies upon your Advice, and gives you h^ Service; as does

Your humble Servant, Rebecca Midriff


The Case is very hard; and I fear, the Plea she is advised to make, from the
Similitude of a Man who is in Duresse, will not prevail. But though I despair of
Remedy as to the Mother, the Law gives the Child his Choice of his Father where
the Birth is thus legally ambiguous.

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
The humble Petition of the Company of Linendrapers residing within the Liberty
of Westminster;
SHOWS,
THat there has of late prevailed among the Ladies so great an Affectation of
Nakedness, that they have not only left the Bosom wholly bare, but lowered
their Stays some Inches below the former Mode.

That in Particular, Mrs. Arabella Overdo has not the least Appearance of
Linen, and our best Customers show but little above the Small of their Backs.

That by this Means, your Petitioners are in Danger of losing the Advantage of
covering a Ninth Part of every Woman of Quality in Great Britain.

Your Petitioners humbly offer the Premises to your Indulgence's
Consideration, and shall ever, etc.

Before I answer this Petition, I am inclined to examine the Offenders my self.

The TATLER. [No 216.
-- Nugis addere Pondus.

From Thursd. Aug. 24. to Saturd. Aug. 26. 1710.
From my own Apartment, Aug. 25.
NAture is full of Wonders; every Atom is a standing Miracle, and endowed with
such Qualities, as could not be impressed on it by a Power and Wisdom less than
Infinite. For this Reason, I would not discourage any Searches that are made
into the most minute and trivial Parts of the Creation. However, since the
World abounds in the noblest Fields of Speculation, it is, methinks, the Mark
of a little Genius to be wholly conversant among Insects, Reptiles,
Animalcules, and those trifling Rarities that furnish out the Apartment of a
Virtuoso.

There are some Men whose Heads are so odly turned this Way, that though they are
utter Strangers to the common Occurrences of Life, they are able to discover
the Sex of a Cockle, or describe the Generation of a Mite, in all its
Circumstances. They are so little versed in the World, that they scarce know a
Horse from an Ox; but at the same Time will tell you, with a great deal of
Gravity, That a Flea is a Rhinoceros, and a Snail an Hermaphrodite. I have
known one of these whimsical Philosophers who has set a greater Value upon a
Collection of Spiders than he would upon a Collection of Spiders than he would
upon a Flock of Sheep, and has sold his Coat off his Back to purchase a
Tarantula.

I would not have a Scholar wholly unacquainted with these Secrets and
Curiosities of Nature; but certainly the Mind of Man, that is capable of so
much higher Contemplations, should not be altogether fixed upon such mean and
disproportioned Objects. Observations of this Kind are apt to alienate us too
much from the Knowledge of the World, and to make us serious upon Trifles, by
which Means they expose Philosophy to the Ridicule of the Witty, and Contempt
of the Ignorant. In short, Studies of this Nature should be the Diversions,
Relaxations, and Amusements; not the Care, Business, and Concern of Life.

It is indeed wonderful to consider, that there should be a Sort of learned Men
who are wholly employed in gathering together the Refuse of Nature, if I may
call it so, and hoarding up in their Chests and Cabinets such Creatures as
others industriously avoid the Sight of. One does not know how to mention some
of the most precious Parts of their Treasure, without a Kind of an Apology for
it. I have been shown a Beetle valued at Twenty Crowns, and a Toad at an
Hundred; But we must take this for a general Rule, That whatever appears
trivial or obscene in the common Notions of the World, looks grave and
philosophical in the Eye of a Virtuoso.

To show this Humor in its Perfection, I shall present my Reader with the
Legacy of a certain Virtuoso, who laid out a considerable Estate in natural
Rarities and Curiosities, which upon his Deathbed he bequeathed to his
Relations and Friends, in the following Words:

The Will of a Virtuoso. I Nicholas Gimcrack being in sound Health of Mind, but
in great Weakness of Body, do by this my Last Will and Testament bestow my
Worldly Goods and Chattels in Manner following:

Imprimis, To my dear Wife, One Box of Butterflies, One Drawer of Shells, A
Female Skeleton, A dried Cockatrice.


Item, To my Daughter Elizabeth, My Receipt for preserving dead Caterpillars.
As also my Preparations of Winter May-Dew, and Embrio Pickle.


Item, To my little Daughter Fanny, Three Crocodiles Eggs.
And upon the Birth of her First Child, if she marries with her Mother's
Consent, The Nest of an Humming-Bird.


Item, To my eldest Brother, as an Acknowledgment for the Lands he has vested
in my Son Charles, I bequeath My last Year's Collection of Grasshoppers.


Item, To his Daughter Susanna, being his only Child, I bequeath my English
Weeds pasted on Royal Paper. With my large Folio of Indian Cabbage.


Item, To my learned and worthy Friend Dr. Johannes Elscrikius, Professor in
Anatomy, and my Associate in the Studies of Nature, as an eternal Monument of
my Affection and Friendship for him, I bequeath My Rat's Testicles, and Whale's
Pizzle,
To him and his Issue Male; and in Default of such Issue in the said Dr.
Elscrickius, then to return to my Executor and his Heirs for ever.

Having fully provided for my Nephew Isaac, by making over to him some Years
since A Horned Scarabaeus, The Skin of a Rattle-Snake, and The Mummy of an
Egyptian King,


I make no further Provision for him in this my Will.

My eldest Son John having spoken disrespectfully of his little Sister whom I
keep by me in Spirits of Wine, and in many other Instances behaved himself
undutifully toward me, I do disinherit, and wholly cut off from any Part of
this my Personal Estate, by giving him a single Cockle Shell.

To my Second Son Charles, I give and bequeath all my Flowers, Plants,
Minerals, Mosses, Shells, Pebbles, Fossils, Beetles, Butterflies, Caterpillars,
Grasshoppers, and Vermin, not above specified: As also all my Monsters, both wet
and dry, making the said Charles whole and sole Executor of this my Last Will
and Testament; he paying, or causing to be paid, the aforesaid Legacies within
the Space of Six Months after my Decease. And I do hereby revoke all other
Wills whatsoever by me formerly made.

ADVERTISEMENT,
Whereas an ignorant Upstart in Astrology has publicly endeavored to persuade
the World, that he is the late John Partridge, who died the 28th of March,
1708; These are to certify all whom it may concern, That the true John
Partridge was not only dead at that Time, but continues so to this present Day.

Beware of Counterfeits, for such are Abroad.

The TATLER. [No 217.
Atque Does atque Astra vocat crudelia Matter.

From Saturd. Aug. 26. to Tuesd. Aug. 29. 1710.
From my own Apartment, Aug. 28.
AS I was passing by a Neighbor's House this Morning, I overheard the Wife of
the Family speak Things to her Husband which gave me much Disturbance, and put
me in Mind of a Character which I wonder I have so long omitted, and that is,
an outrageous Species of the Fair Sex which is distinguished by the Term
Scolds. The Generality of Women are by Nature loquacious: Therefore mere
Volubility of Speech is not to be imputed to them, but should be considered
with Pleasure when it is used to express such Passions as tend to sweeten or
adorn Conversation: But when, through Rage, Females are vehement in their
Eloquence, nothing in the World has so ill an Effect upon the Features; for by
the Force of it, I have seen the most Amiable become the most Deformed; and she
that appeared one of the Graces, immediately turned into one of the Furies. I
humbly conceive, the great Cause of this Evil may proceed from a false Notion
the Ladies have of what we call a Modest Woman. They have too narrow a
Conception of this lovely Character, and believe they have not at all forfeited
their Pretensions to it, provided they have no Imputations on their Chastity.
But alas! the young Fellows know they pick out better Women in the Side-Boxes,
than many of those who pass upon the World and themselves for Modest.

Modesty never rages, never murmurs, never pouts: When it is ill treated, it
pines, it beseeches, it languishes. The Neighbor I mention is one of your
common modest Women, that is to say, those as are ordinarily reckoned such. Her
Husband knows every Pain in Life with her but Jealousy. Now because she is
clear in this Particular, the Man cannot say his Soul's his own, but she cries,
No modest Woman is respected now adays. What adds to the Comedy in this Case
is, that it is very ordinary with this Sort of Women to talk in the Language of
Distress: They will complain of the forlorn Wretchedness of their Condition,
and then the poor helpless Creatures shall throw the next Thing they can lay
their Hands on at the Person who offends them. Our Neighbor was only saying to
his Wife, she went a little too fine, when she immediately pulled his Periwig
off, and stamping it under her Feet, wrung her Hands, and said, Never modest
Woman was so used: These Ladies of irresistible Modesty are those who make
Virtue unamiable; not that they can be said to be virtuous, but as they live
without Scandal; and being under the common Denomination of being such, Men
fear to meet their Faults in those who are as agreeable as they are innocent.

I take the Bully among Men, and the Scold among Women, to draw the Foundation
of their Actions from the same Defect in the Mind A Bully thinks Honor
consists wholly in being brave, and therefore has Regard to no one Rule of
Life, if he preserves himself from the Accusation of Cowardice. The froward
Woman knows Chastity to be the first Merit in a Woman; and therefore, since no
one can call her one ugly Name, she calls all Mankind all the rest.

These Ladies, where their Companions are so imprudent as to take their
Speeches for any other than Exercises of their own Lungs, and their Husbands
Patience, gain by the Force of being resisted, and flame with open Fury, which
is no Way to be opposed but by being neglected: Though at the same Time Humane
Frailty makes it very hard to relish the Philosophy of contemning even
frivolous Reproach. There is a very pretty Instance of this Infirmity in the
Man of the best Sense that ever was, no less a Person than Adam himself.
According to Milton's Description of the First Couple, as soon as they had
fallen, and the turbulent Passions of Anger, Hatred, and Jealousy, first
entered their Breasts, Adam grew moody, and talked to his Wife, as you may find
it in the 359th Page, and 9th Book, of Paradise Lest, in the Octave Edition,
which out of Heroicks, and put into Domestic Style, would run thus:

'Madam, If my Advice had been of any Authority with you when that strange
Desire of Gadding possessed you this Morning, we had still been happy: But your
cursed Vanity and Opinion of your own Conduct, which is certainly very wavering
when it seeks Occasions of being proved, has ruined both your self, and me who
trusted you.'

Eve had no Fan in her Hand to ruffle, or Tucker to pull down, but with a
reproachful Air she answered:

Sir, Do you impute that to my Desire of Gadding, which might have happened to
your self with all your Wisdom and Gravity?' The Serpent spoke so excellently,
and with so good a Grace, that -- Besides, 'What Harm had I ever done him, that
he should design me any? Was I to have been always at your Side, I might as
well have continued there, and been but your Rib still: But if I was so weak a
Creature as you thought me, Why did you not interpose your sage Authority more
absolutely? You denied me going as faintly, as you say I resisted the Serpent.
Had not you been too easy, neither you or I had now transgressed.'

Adam replied, 'Why, Eve. have thou the Impudence to upbraid me as the Cause of
thy Transgression for my Indulgence to thee? Thus it will ever be with him who
trusts too much to Woman: At the same Time that she refuses to be governed, if
she suffers by her Ostinacy, she will accuse the Man that shall leave her to
her self.'

Thus they in mutual Accusation spent
The fruitless Hours, but neither self condemning:
And of their vain Contest appeared no End.
This to the Modern will appear but a very faint Piece of Conjugal Enmity; but
you are to consider, that they were but just begun to be angry, and they wanted
new Words for expressing their new Passions. But her accusing him of letting
her go, and telling him how good a Speaker, and how fine a Gentleman the Devil
was, we must reckon, allowing for the Improvements of Time, that she gave him
the same Provocation as if she had called him Cuckold. The passionate and
familiar Terms with which the same Case, repeated daily for so many Thousand
Years, has furnished the present Generation, were not then in Use; but the
Foundation of Debate has ever been the same, a Contention about their Merit and
Wisdom. Our general Mother was a Beauty, and hearing there was another now in
the World, could not forbear (as Adam tells her) showing her self, though to
the Devil, by whom the same Vanity made her liable to be betrayed.

I cannot, with all the Help of Science and, Astrology, find any other Remedy
for this Evil but what was the Medicine in this first Quarrel; which was, as
appeared in the next Book, that they were convinced of their being both weak,
but one weaker than the other.

If it were possible that the Beauteous could but rage a little before a Glass,
and see their pretty Countenances grow wild, it is not to be doubted but it
would have a very good Effect; but that would require Temper: For Lady
Firebrand, upon observing her Features swell when her Maid vexed her the other
Day, stamped her Dressing-Glass under her Feet. In this Case, when one of this
Temper is moved, she is like a Witch in an Operation, and makes all Things turn
round with her. The very Fabric is in a Vertigo when she begins to charm. In
an Instant, whatever was the Occasion that moved her Blood, she has such
intolerable Servants, Betty is so awkward, Tom cannot carry a Message, and her
Husband has so little Respect for her, that she, poor Woman, is weary of this
Life, and was born to be unhappy.

Desunt Multa.
ADVERTISEMENT.
The Season now coming on in which the Town will begin to fill, Mr. Bickerstaff
gives Notice, That from the first of October next, he will be much wittier than
he has hitherto been.

The TATLER. [No 218.
Scriptorum Chorus omnis amat Nemus and fugit Urbe^
Hor.
From Tuesday Aug. 29. to Thursday Aug. 31. 1710.
From my own Apartment, Aug. 30.
I Chanced to rise very early one particular Morning this Summer, and took a
Walk into the Country to divert my self among the Fields and Meadows, while the
Green was new, and the Flowers in their Bloom. As at this Season of the Year
every Lane is a beautiful Walk, and every Hedge full of Nosegays, I lost my
self with a great deal of Pleasure among several Thickets and Bushes that were
filled with a great Variety of Birds, and an agreeable Confusion of Notes,
which formed the pleasantest Scene in the World to one who had passed a whole
Winter in Noise and Smoke. The Freshness of the Dews that lay upon every Thing
about me, with the cool Breath of the Morning, which inspired the Birds with so
many delightful Instincts, created in me the same Kind of animal Pleasure, and
made my Heart overflow with such secret Emotions of Joy and Satisfaction as are
not to be described or accounted for. On this Occasion I could not but reflect
upon a beautiful Simile in Milton: As one who long in populous City pent,
Where Houses thick, and Sewers, annoy the Air,
Forth issuing on a Summer's Morn, to breath
Among the pleasant Villages, and Farms
Adjoin'd, from each Thing met conceives Delight:
The Smell of Grain, or tedded Grass, or Kine,
Or Dairy, each rural Sight, each rural Sound.
Those who are conversant in the Writings of polite Authors, receive an
additional Entertainment from the Country, as it revives in their Memories
those charming Descriptions with which such Authors do frequently abound.

I was thinking of the foregoing beautiful Simile in Milton, and applying it to
my self, when I observed to the Windward of me a black Cloud falling to the
Earth in long Trails of Rain, which made me betake my self for Shelter to a
House which I saw at a little Distance from the Place where I was walking. As I
sat in the Porch, I heard the Voices of Two or Three Persons, who seemed very
earnest in Discourse. My Curiosity was raised when I heard the Names of
Alexander the Great and Artaxerxes; and as their Talk seemed to run on ancient
Heroes, I concluded there could not be any Secret in it; for which Reason I
thought I might very fairly listen to what they said.

After several Parallels between great Men, which appeared to me altogether
groundless and chimerical, I was surprised to hear one say, That he valued the
Black Prince more than the Duke of Vendosme. How the Duke of Vendosme should
become a Rival of the Black Prince's, I could not conceive: And was more
startled when I heard a Second affirm with great Vehemence, That if the Emperor
of Germany was not going off, he should like him better than either of them. He
added, That though the Season was so changeable, the Duke of Marlborough was in
blooming Beauty. I was wondering to my self from whence they had received this
odd Intelligence, especially when I heard them mention the Names of several
other great Generals, as the Prince of Hesse, and the King of Sweden, who, they
said, were both running away. To which they added, what I entirely agreed with
them in, That the Crown of France was very weak, but that the Marshall Villars
still kept his Colors. At last one of them told the Company, If they would go
along with him, he would show them a Chimney-Sweeper and a Painted Lady in the
same Bed, which he was sure would very much please them. The Shower which had
driven them, as well as my self, into the House, was now over: And as they were
passing by me into the Garden, I asked them to let me be one of their Company.

The Gentleman of the House told me, if I delighted in Flowers, it would be
worth my while, for that he believed he could show me such a Blow of Tulips as
was not to be matched in the whole Country.

I accepted the Offer, and immediately found that they had been talking in
Terms of Gardening, and that the Kings and Generals they had mentioned were
only so many Tulips, to which the Gardiners, according to their usual Custom,
had given such high Titles and Appellations of Honor.

I was very much pleased and astonished at the glorious Show of these gay
Vegetables, that arose in great Profusion on all the Banks about us. Sometimes
I considered them with the Eye of an ordinary Spectator as so many beautiful
Objects, varnished over with a natural Gloss, and stained with such a Variety
of Colors, as are not to be equalled in any artificial Dies or Tinctures.
Sometimes I considered every Leaf as an elaborate Piece of Tissue, in which the
Threads and Fibers were woven together into different Configurations, which
gave a different Coloring to the Light as it glanced on the several Parts of
the Surface. Sometimes I considered the whole Bed of Tulips, according to the
Notion of the greatest Mathematician and Philosopher that ever lived, as a
Multitude of Optic Instruments, designed for the separating Light into all
those various Colors of which it is composed.

I was awakened out of these my Philosophical Speculations, by observing the
Company often seemed to laugh at me. I accidentally praised a Tulip as one of
the finest that I ever saw; upon which they told me, 'twas a common
Fool's-Coat. Upon that I praised a Second, which it seems was but another Kind
of Fool's-Coat. I had the same Fate with Two or Three more; for which Reason I
desired the Owner of the Garden to let me know which were the finest of the
Flowers, for that I was so unskilful in the Art, that I thought the most
beautiful were the most valuable, and that those which had the gayest Colors
were the most beautiful. The Gentleman smiled at my Ignorance: He seemed a very
plain honest Man, and a Person of good Sense, had not his Head been touched
with that Distemper which Hippocrates calls the (...), Tulippomania; insomuch
that he would talk very rationally on any Subject in the World but a Tulip.

He told me, That he valued the Bed of Flowers which lay before us, and was not
above Twenty Yards in Length, and Two in Breadth, more than he would the best
Hundred Acres of Land in England; and added, That it would have been worth
twice the Money it is, if a foolish Cook-Maid of his had not almost ruined him
the last Winter, by mistaking an Handful of Tulip-Roots for an Heap of Onions,
and by that Means (says he) made me a Dish of Porridge, that cost me above 1000
l. Sterling. He then showed me what he thought the finest of his Tulips, which
I found received all their Value from their Rarity and Oddness, and put me in
Mind of your great Fortunes, which are not always the greatest Beauties.

I have often looked upon it as a Piece of Happiness, that I have never fallen
into any of these fantastical Tastes, nor esteemed any Thing the more for its
being uncommon and hard to be met with. For this Reason, I look upon the whole
Country in Springtime as a spacious Garden, and make as many Visits to a Spot
of Daizies, or a Bank of Violets, as a Florist does to his Borders and
Parterres. There is not a Bush in Blossom within a Mile of me which I am not
acquainted with, nor scarce a Daffodil or Cowslip that withers away in my
Neighborhood without my missing it. I walked Home in this Temper of Mind
through several Fields and Meadows with an unspeakable Pleasure, not without
reflecting on the Bounty of Providence, which has made the most pleasing and
most beautiful Objects the most ordinary and most common.

The TATLER. [No 219.
-- Solutos
Qui captat Risus Hominum, Famamque Dicacis.
Affectat, niger est, hunc, tu Roman, caveto.

From Thursd. Aug. 31. to Saturd. Sept. 2. 1710.
From my own Apartment, Sept. 1.
NEver were Men so perplexed as a select Company of us were this Evening with a
Couple of professed Wits, who through our ill Fortune, and their own
Confidence, had thought fit to pin themselves upon a Gentleman who had owned to
them that he was going to meet such and such Persons, and named us one by one.
These pert Puppies immediately resolved to come with him, and from the
Beginning to the End of the Night entertained each other with Impertinencies,
to which we were perfect Strangers. I am come Home very much tired; for the
Affliction was so irksome to me, that it surpasses all other I ever knew,
insomuch that I cannot reflect upon this Sorrow with Pleasure, though it is
past.

An easy Manner of Conversation is the most desirable Quality a Man can have;
and for that Reason Coxcombs will take upon them to be familiar with People
whom they never saw before. What adds to the Vexation of it is, that they will
act upon the Foot of knowing you by Fame, and rally with you, as they call it,
by repeating what your Enemies say of you; and court you, as they think, by
uttering to your Face at a wrong Time all the kind Things your Friends speak of
you in your Absence.

These People are the more dreadful, the more they have of what is usually
called Wit: For a lively Imagination, when it is not governed by a good
Understanding, makes such miserable Havoc both in Conversation and Business,
that it lays you defenseless, and fearful to throw the least Word in its Way,
that may give it new Matter for its further Errors.

Tom. Mercett has as quick a Fancy as any one living; but there is no
reasonable Man can bear him half an Hour. His Purpose is to entertain, and it
is of no Consequence to him what is said, so it be what is called well said; as
if a Man must bear a Wound with Patience, because he that pushed at you came up
with a good Air and Mien. That Part of Life which we spend in Company, is the
most pleasing of all our Moments; and therefore I think our Behavior in it
should have its Laws as well as the Part of our Being, which is generally
esteemed the more important. From hence it is, that from long Experience I have
made it a Maxim. that however we may pretend to take Satisfaction in sprightly
Mirth and high Jollity, there is no great Pleasure in any Company where the
Basis of the Society is not mutual Good Will. When this is in the Room, every
trifling Circumstance, the most minute Accident, the Absurdity of a Servant,
the Repetition of an old Story, the Look of a Man when he is telling it, the
most indifferent and the most ordinary Occurrences, are Matters which produce
Mirth and good Humor. I went to spend an Hour after this Manner with some
Friends who enjoy it in Perfection whenever they meet, when those Destroyers
abovementioned came in upon us. There is not a Man among them has any Notion
of Distinction of Superiority to one another, either in their Fortunes or their
Talents, when they are in Company. Or if any Reflection to the contrary occurs
in their Thoughts, it only strikes a Delight upon their Minds, that so much
Wisdom and Power is in Possession of one whom they love and esteem.

In these my Lucubrations, I have frequently dwelt upon this one Topic. It
would make short Work for us Reformers, for it is only Want of making this a
Position that renders some Characters bad, which would otherwise be good. Tom
Mercett means no Man Ill, but does Ill to every Body. His Ambition is to be
witty; and to carry on that Design, he breaks through all Things that other
People hold Sacred. If he thought Wit was no Way to be used but to the
Advantage of Society, that Sprightliness would have a new Turn, and we should
expect what he is going to say with Satisfaction instead of Fear. It is no
Excuse for being mischievous, that a Man is mischievous without Malice; nor
will it be thought an Atonement that the Ill was done not to injure the Party
concerned, but to divert the Indifferent.

It is, methinks, a very great Error, that we should not profess Honesty in
Conversation as much as in Commerce. If we consider, that there is no greater
Misfortune than to be ill received where we love the turning a Man to Ridicule
among his Friends, we rob him of greater Enjoyments than he could have
purchased by his Wealth; yet he that laughs at him, would perhaps be the last
Man who would hurt him in this Case of less Consequence. It has been said, the
History of Don Quixote utterly destroyed the Spirit of Gallantry in the Spanish
Nation; and I believe we may say much more truly, that the Humor of Ridicule
has done as much Injury to the true Relish of Company in England.

Such Satisfactions as arise from the secret Comparison of our selves to
others, with relation to their inferior Fortunes or Merit, are mean and
unworthy. The true and high State of Conversation is when Men communicate their
Thoughts to each other upon such Subjects, and in such a Manner, as would be
pleasant if there were no such Thing as Folly in the World; for it is but a low
Condition of Wit in one Man which depends upon Folly in another.

P. S. I was here interrupted by the Receipt of my Letters, among which is one
from a Lady, who is not a little offended at my Translation of the Discourse
between Adam and Eve. She pretends to tell me my own, as she calls it, and
quotes several Passages in my Works which tend to the utter Disunion of Man and
Wife. Her Epistle will best express her. I have made an Extract of it, and
shall insert the most material Passages.

I suppose you know we Women are not too apt to forgive: For which Reason,
before you concern your self any further with our Sex, I would advise you to
answer what is said against you by those of your own. I enclose to you Business
enough till you are ready for your Promise of being witty. You must not expect
to say what you please, without admitting others to take the same Liberty.
Marry come up! You a Censor? Pray read over all these Pamphlets, and these
Notes upon your Lucubrations, by that Time you shall hear further. It is, I
suppose, from such as you that People learn to be Sensorious, for which I and
all our Sex have an utter Aversion, when once People come to take the Liberty
to wound Reputations --


This is the main Body of the Letter; but she bids me turn over, and there I
find --

Mr. Bickerstaff,
If you will draw Mrs. Sisly Trippit according to the enclosed Description, I
will forgive you all.

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
The humble Petition of Joshua Fairlove of Stepney;
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioner is a general Lover, who for some Months last past has
made it his whole Business to frequent the Bypath and Roads near his
Dwelling, for no other Purpose but to hand such of the Fair Sex as are obliged
to pass through them.

That he has been at great Expense for clean Gloves to offer his Hand with.

That toward the Evening he approaches near London, and employs himself as a
Convey toward Home.

Your Petitioner therefore most humbly prays, That for such his humble
Services, he may be allowed the Title of an Esquire.


Mr. Morphew has Orders to carry the proper Instruments, and the Petitioner is
to be hereafter writ to upon gilt Paper, by the Title of Joshua Fairlove Esquire

The TATLER. [No 220.
Insani sanus Nomen ferat, aequus iniqui,
Ultra quam satis est, Virtutem si petat ipsam.
Hor.
From Saturd. Sept. 2. to Tuesd. Sept. 5. 1710.
From my own Apartment, Sept. 4.
HAving received many Letters filled with Compliments and Acknowledgments for
my late useful Discovery of the Political Barometer, I shall here communicate
to the Public an Account of my Ecclesiastical Thermometer, the latter giving
as manifest Prognostications of the Changes and Revolutions in Church, as the
former does of those in State, and both of them being absolutely necessary for
every prudent Subject who is resolved to keep what he has, and get what he can.

The Church Thermometer, which I am now to treat of, is supposed to have been
invented in the Reign of Henry the Eighth, about the Time when that Religious
Prince put some to Death for owning the Pope's Supremacy, and others for
denying Transubstantiation. I do not find, however, any great Use made of this
Instrument till it fell into the Hands of a learned and vigilant Priest or
Minister, (for he frequently wrote himself both one and the other) who was some
Time Vicar of Bray. This Gentleman lived in his Vicaridge to a good old Age;
and after having seen several Successions of his neighboring Clergy either
burnt or banished, departed this Life with the Satisfaction of having never
deserted his Flock, and died Vicar of Bray. As this Glass was first designed to
calculate the different Degrees of Heat in Religion, as it raged in Popery, or
as it cooled and grew temperate in the Reformation, it was marked at several
Distances, after the Manner our ordinary Thermometer is to this Day, viz.
Extreme Hot sultry Hot, very Hot, Hot, Warm, Temperate, Cold, just Freezing,
Frost, hard Frost, great Frost, extreme Cold.

It is well known, that Toricellius, the Inventor of the common Weather-Glass,
made the Experiment in a long Tube which held Thirty two Foot of Water; and
that a more modern Virtuoso finding such a Machine altogether unweildy and
useless, and considering that Thirty two Inches of Quicksilver weighed as much
as so many Foot of Water in a Tube of the same Circumference, invented that
fizeable Instrument which is now in Use. After this Manner, that I might adapt
the Thermometer I am now speaking of to the present Constitution of our Church,
as divided into High and Low, I have made some necessary Variations both in the
Tube and the Fluid it contains. In the first Place, I ordered a Tube to be cast
in a Planetary Hour, and took Care to seal it Hermetically, when the Sun was in
Conjunction with Saturn. I then took the proper Precautions about the Fluid,
which is a Compound of Two very different Liquors; one of them a Spirit drawn
out of a strong heady Wine; the other a particular Sort of Rock Water, colder
than Ice, and clearer than Crystal. The Spirit is of a red fiery Color, and
so very apt to ferment, that unless it be mingled with a Proportion of the
Water, or pent up very close, it will burst the Vessel that holds it, and fly
up in Fume and Smoke. The Water on the contrary is of such a subtle piercing
Cold, that unless it be mingled with a Proportion of the Spirits, it will sink
through almost every Thing that it is put into, and seems to be of the same
Nature as the Water mentioned by Quintus Curtius, which, says the Historian,
could be contained in nothing but in the Hoof or (as the Oxford Manuscript has
it) in the Skull of an Ass. The Thermometer is marked according to the
following Figure, which I set down at length, not only to give my Reader a
clear Idea of it, but also to fill up my Paper. Ignorance. Persecution. Wrath.
Zeal. CHURCH. Moderation. Lukewarmness. Infidelity. Ignorance.


The Reader will observe, that the Church is placed in the Middle Point of the
Glass, between Zeal and Moderation, the Situation in which she always
flourishes, and in which every good Englishman wishes her who is a Friend to
the Constitution of his Country. However, when it mounts to Zeal, it is not
amiss; and when it sinks to Moderation, is still in a most admirable Temper.
The worst of it is, that when once it begins to rise, it has still an
Inclination to ascend, insomuch that it is apt to climb from Zeal to Wrath, and
from Wrath to Persecution, which always ends in Ignorance, and very often
proceeds from it. In the same Manner it frequently takes its Progress through
the lower Half of the Glass; and when it has a Tendency to fall, will gradually
descend from Moderation to Lukewarmness, and from Lukewarmness to Infidelity,
which very often terminates in Ignorance, and always proceeds from it.

It is a common Observation, that the ordinary Thermometer will be affected by
the breathing of People who are in the Room where it stands; and indeed, it is
almost incredible to conceive how the Glass I am now describing will fall by
the Breath of a Multitude crying Popery; or on the contrary, how it will rise
when the same Multitude (as it sometimes happens) cry out in the same Breath,
The Church is in Danger.

As soon as I had finished this my Glass, and adjusted it to the
abovementioned Scale of Religion, that I might make proper Experiments with
it, I carried it under my Cloak to several Coffee-houses, and other Places of
Resort about this great City. At St. James's Coffee-house, the Liquor stood at
Moderation; but at Will's, to my extreme Surprise, it subsided to the very
lowest Mark on the Glass. At the Grecian, it mounted but just one Point higher;
at the Rainbow, it still ascended Two Decrees: Child's fetched it up to Zeal,
and other adjacent Coffee-houses to Wrath.

It fell into the lower Half of the Glass as I went further into the City, till
at length it settled at Moderation, where it continued all the Time I stayed
about the Change, as also whilst I passed by the Bank. And here I cannot but
take Notice, that through the whole Course of my Remarks, I never observed my
Glass to rise at the same Time that the Stocks did.

To complete the Experiment, I prevailed upon a Friend of mine, who works under
me in the Occult Sciences, to make a Progress with my Glass through the whole
Island of Great Britain; and after his Return, to present me with a Register of
his Observations. I guessed beforehand at the Temper of several Places he
passed through, by the Characters they have had Time out of Mind. Thus that
facetious Divine, Dr. Fuller, speaking of the Town of Banbury near a Hundred
Years ago, tells us, it was a Place famous for Cakes and Zeal, which I find by
my Glass is true to this Day as to the latter Part of this Description; though
I must confess, it is not in the same Reputation for Cakes that it was in the
Time of that learned Author; and thus of other Places. In short, I have now by
me, digested in an Alphabetical Order, all the Counties, Corporations and
Boroughs, in Great Britain, with their respective Tempers, as they stand
related to my Thermometer: But this I shall keep to my self, because I would by
no Means do any Thing that may seem to influence any ensuing Elections.

The Point of Doctrine which I would propagate by this my Invention, is the
same which was long ago advanced by that able Teacher Horace, out of whom I
have taken my Text for this Discourse: We should be careful not to overshoot
our selves in the Pursuits even of Virtue. Whether Zeal or Moderation be the
Point we aim at, let us keep Fire out of the one, and Frost out of the other.
But alas! the World is too Wise to want such a Precaution. The Terms
High-Church and Low-Church, as commonly used, do not so much denote a
Principle, as they distinguish a Party. They are like Words of Battle, that
have nothing to do with their original Signification, but are only given out to
keep a Body of Men together, and to let them know Friends from Enemies.

I must confess, I have considered with some little Attention the Influence
which the Opinions of these great National Sects have upon their Practice; and
do look upon it as one of the unaccountable Things of our Times, that
Multitudes of honest Gentlemen, who entirely agree in their Lives, should take
it in their Heads to differ in their Religion.

The TATLER. [No 221.
-- Sicut meus est Mos,
Nescio quid meditans Nugarum, and totus in illis.
Hor.
From Tuesday Sept. 5. to Thursday Sept. 7. 1710.
From my own Apartment, Sept. 6.
AS I was this Morning going out of my House, a little Boy in a black Coat
delivered to me the following Letter. Upon asking who he was, he told me, that
he belonged to my Lady Gimcrack. I did not at first recollect the Name; but
upon Enquiry, found it to be the Widow of Sir Nicholas, whose Legacy I lately
gave some Account of to the World. The Letter ran thus:

Mr. Bickerstaff,
I Hope you will not be surprised to receive a Letter from the Widow Gimcrack.
You know, Sir, that I have lately lost a very whimsical Husband, who I find, by
one of your last Weeks Papers, was not altogether a Stranger to you. When I
married this Gentleman, he had a very handsome Estate; but upon buying a Set of
Microscopes, he was chosen a Fellow of the Royal Society; from which Time I do
not remember ever to have heard him speak as other People did, or talk in a
Manner that any of his Family could understand him. He used, however, to pass
away his Time very innocently in Conversation with several Member; of that
learned Body; for which Reason I never advised him against their Company for
several Years, till at last I found his Brain was quite turned with their
Discourses. The first Symptom which he discovered of his being a Virtuoso, as
you call him, poor Man! was about Fifteen Years ago, when he gave me positive
Orders to turn off an old Weeding-Woman that had been employed in the Family
for several Years. He told me at the same Time, that there was no such Thing in
Nature as a Weed, and that it was his Design to let his Garden produce what it
pleased; so that you may be sure it makes a very pleasant Show as it now lies.
About the same Time he took a Humor to ramble up and down the Country, and
would often bring Home with him his Pockets full of Moss and Pebbles. This you
may be sure gave me a heavy Heart; though at the same Time I must needs say, he
had the Character of a very honest Man, notwithstanding he was reckoned a
little weak, till he begun to sell his Estate, and buy those strange Baubles
that you have taken Notice of. Upon Midsummer-Day last, as he was walking with
me in the Fields, he saw a very odd colored Butterfly just before us. I
observed, that he immediately changed Color, like a Man that is surprised with
a Piece of good Luck, and telling me that it was what he had looked for above
these Twelve Years, he threw off his Coat, and followed it. I lost Sight of
them both in less than a quarter of an Hour; but my Husband continued the Chase
over Hedge and Ditch till about Sunset; at which Time, as I was afterward
told, he caught the Butterfly, as she rested her self upon a Cabbage, near Five
Miles from the Place where he first put her up. He was here lifted from the
Ground by some Passengers in a very fainting Condition, and brought Home to me
about Midnight. His violent Exercise threw him into a Fever, which grew upon
him by Degrees, and at last carried him off. In one of the Intervals of his
Distemper, he called to me, and after having excused himself for running out of
his Estate, he told me, That he had always been more industrious to improve his
Mind than his Fortune; and that his Family must rather value themselves upon
his Memory as he was a wise Man, than a rich one. He then told me, That it was
a Custom among the Romans, for a Man to give his Slaves their Liberty when he
lay upon his Deathbed. I could not imagine what this meant, till after having
a little composed himself, he ordered me to bring him a Flea which he had kept
for several Months in a Chain, with a Design, as he said, to give it its
Manumission. This was done accordingly. He then made the Will, which I have
since seen printed in your Works Word for Word. Only I must take Notice, that
you have omitted the Codicil, in which he left a large Concha Veneris, as it is
there called, to a Member of the Royal Society, who was often with him in his
Sickness, and assisted him in his Will. And now, Sir, I come to the chief
Business of my Letter, which is, to desire your Friendship and Assistance in
the Disposal of those many Rarities and Curiosities which lie upon my Hands. If
you know any one that has an Occasion for a Parcel of dried Spiders, I will
sell them a Pennyworth. I could likewise let any one have a Bargain of
Cockle-Shells. I would also desire your Advice, whether I had best sell my
Beetles in a Lump, or by Retail. The Gentleman abovementioned, who was my
Husband's Friend, would have me make an Auction of all his Goods, and is now
drawing up a Catalogue of every Particular for that Purpose, with the Two
following Words in great Letters over the Head of them, Auctio Gimcrackiana.
But upon talking with him, I begin to suspect he is as mad as poor Sir Nicholas
was. Your Advice in all these Particulars, will be a great Piece of Charity to,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, Elizabeth Gimcrack.


I shall answer the foregoing Letter, and give the Widow my best Advice, as
soon as I can find out Chapmen for the Wares which she has to put off. In the
mean Time, I shall give my Reader the Sight of a Letter which I have received
from another Female Correspondent by the same Post.

Good Mr. Bickerstaff,
I Am convinced by a late Paper of yours, that a passionate Woman (which among
the common People goes under the Name of a Scold) is one of the most
unsupportable Creatures in the World. But alas! Sir, What can we do? I have
made a Thousand Vows and Resolutions every Morning to guard my self against
this Frailty, but have generally broken them before Dinner, and could never in
my Life hold out till the Second Course was set upon the Table. What most
troubles me is, that my Husband is as patient and good-natured as you^ own
Worship, or any Man living can be. Pra^ give me some Directions, for I would
observe the strictest and severest Rules you can think of to cu^ my self of
this Distemper, which is apt to fall into my Tongue every Moment. I am,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, etc.


In Answer to this most unfortunate Lady, I must acquaint her, That there is
now in Town an ingenious Physician of my Acquaintance, who undertakes to cure
all the Vices and Defects of the Mind by inward Medicines, or outward
Applications. I shall give the World an Account of his Patients and his Cures
in other Papers, when I shall be more at Leisure to treat upon this Subject. I
shall only here inform my Correspondent, That for the Benefit of such Ladies
that are troubled with virulent Tongues, he has prepared a Cold Bath, over
which there is fastened, at the End of a long Pole, a very convenient Chair,
curiously gilt and carved. When the Patient is seated in this Chair, the Doctor
lifts up the Pole, and gives her Two or Three total Emersions in the Cold Bath,
till such Time as she has quite lost the Use of Speech. This Operation so
effectually chills the Tongue, and refrigerates the Blood, that a Woman, who at
her Entrance into the Chair is extremely passionate and sonorous, will come out
as silent and gentle as a Lamb. The Doctor told me, he would not practice this
Experiment upon Women of Fashion, had not he seen it made upon those of meaner
Condition with very good Effect.

The TATLER. [No 222.
-- Chrysidis Udas
Ebrius ante Fores extinct a cum Face cantat.
Persius.
From Thursday Sept. 7. to Saturday Sept. 9. 1710.
From my own Apartment, September 8.
WHereas by Letters from Nottingham we have Advice, That the young Ladies of
that Place complain for Want of Sleep, by reason of certain riotous Lovers, who
for this last Summer have very much infested the Streets of that eminent City
with Violins and Bass-Viols, between the Hours of Twelve and Four in the
Morning, to the great Disturbance of many of Her Majesty's peaceable Subjects.
And whereas I have been importuned to publish some Edict against these Midnight
Alarms, which, under the Name of Serenades, do greatly annoy many well-disposed
Persons, not only in the Place abovementioned, but also in most of the Polite
Towns of this Island.

I have taken that Matter into my serious Consideration, and do find, that this
Custom is by no means to be indulged in this Country and Climate.

It is indeed very unaccountable, that most of our British Youth should take
such great Delight in these Nocturnal Expeditions. Your robust true-born
Briton, that has not yet felt the Force of Flames and Darts, has a natural
Inclination to break Windows; while th^se whose natural Ruggedness has been
soothed and softened by gentle Passion, have as strong a Propensity to languish
under them, especially if they have a Fiddler behind them to utter their
Complaints: For as the Custom prevails at present, there is scarce a young Man
of any Fashion in a Corporation who does not make Love with the Town-Musick.
The Waits often help him through his Courtship; and my Friend Mr. Banister has
told me, he was proffered Five hundred Pounds by a young Fellow to play, but
for one Winter under the Window of a Lady that was a great Fortune, but more
cruel than ordinary. One would think they hoped to conquer their Mistresses
Hearts as People tame Hawks and Eagles, by keeping them awake, or breaking
their Sleep when they are fallen into it.

I have endeavored to search into the Original of this impertinent Way of
making Love, which, according to some Authors, is of great Antiquity. If we may
believe Monsieur Dacier and other Critics, Horace's Tenth Ode of the Third
Book was originally a Serenade. And if I was disposed to show my Learning, I
could produce a Line of him in another Place, which seems to have been the
Burden of an old Heathen Serenade.

" -- Audis minus and minus jam
Me tuo tongas pereunte Noctes,
Lydia, Dormis?
But notwithstanding the Opinions of many learned Men upon this Subject, I
rather agree with them who look upon this Custom, as now practiced, to have
been introduced by castrated Musicians, who found out this Way of applying
themselves to their Mistresses at these Hours, when Men of hoarser Voices
express their Passions in a more vulgar Method. It must be confessed, That your
Italian Eunuchs do practice this Manner of Courtship to this Day.

But whoever were the Persons that first thought of the Serenade, the Authors
of all Countries are unanimous in ascribing the invention to Italy.

There are Two Circumstances which qualified that Country above all other for
this Midnight Music.

The first I shall mention, was the Softness of their Climate.

This gave the Lover Opportunities of being Abroad in the Air, or of lying upon
the Earth whole Hours together, without Fear of Damps or Dews; but as for our
Tramontain Lovers, when they begin their Midnight Complaint with, My Lodging it
is on the cold Ground,
We are not to understand them in the Rigor of the Letter, since it would be
impossible for a British Swain to condole himself long in that Situation
without really dying for his Mistress. A Man might as well serenade in
Greenland as in our Region. Milton seems to have had in his Thoughts the
Absurdity of these Northern Serenades in the Censure which he passes upon them:

-- Or Midnight Ball,
Or Serenede, which the Starved Lover sings
To his proud Fair, best quitted with Disdain.
The Truth of it is, I have often pitied, in a Winter Night, a Vocal Musician,
and have attributed many of his Trills and Quavers to the Coldness of the
Weather.

The second Circumstance which inclined the Lalians to this Custom, was that
Musical Genius which is so universal among them. Nothing is more frequent in
that Country, than to hear a Cobbler working to an Opera Tune. You can scarce
see a Porter that has not one Nail much longer than the rest, which you will
find, upon Enquiry, is cherished for some Instrument. In short, there is not a
Labourer, or Handicraft Man, that in the Cool of the Evening does not relieve
himself with Solo's and Sonnata's.

The Italian fooths his Mistress with a plaintivee Voice, and bewails himself
in such melting Music, that the whole Neighborhood sympathizes with him in
his Sorrow.

Qualis Populea maerens, Philomela, sub Umbra
Flet Noctem, Rameque sedens miserabile Carmen
Integrat, and late moestis Loca Quaestibus implet.
On the contrary, our honest Countrymen have so little an Inclination to
Music, that they seldom begin to sing till they are drunk, which also is
usually the Time when they are most disposed to serenade.

The TATLER. [No 223.
For when upon their ungot Heirs,
The Entail themselves and all that is theirs,
What blinder Bargain ever was driven,
Or Wager laid at Six and Seven,
To pass themselves away, and turn
Their Children's Tenants e're they are born?
Hud.
From Saturd. Sept. 9. to Tuesd. Sept. 12. 1710.
From my own Apartment, September 11.
I HAVE been very much solicited by Clarinda, Flavia, and Lysetta, to reassume
my Discourse concerning the Methods of disposing honorably the unmarried Part
of the World, and taking off those Bars to it, Jointures and Settlements, which
are not only the greatest Impediments toward entering into that State, but also
the frequent Causes of Disturst and Animosity in it after it is consummated. I
have with very much Attention considered the Case; and among all the
Observations that I have made through a long Course of Years, I have thought the
Coldness of Wives to their Husbands, as well as Disrespect from Children to
Parents, to arise from this one Source. This Trade for Minds and Bodies in the
Lump, without Regard to either, but as they are accompanied with such Sums of
Money, and such Parceis of Land, cannot but produce a Commerce between the
Parties concerned suitable to the mean Motives upon which they at first came
together. I have heretofore given an Account, that this Method of making
Settlements, was first invented by a griping Lawyer, who made Use of the
covetous Tempers of the Parents of each Side to force Two young People into
these vile Measures of Diffidence, for no other End but to increase the Skins
of Parchment, by which they were put into each other's Possession out of each
other's Power. The Law of our Country has given an ample and generous Provision
for the Wife, even the Third of the Husband's Estate, and left to her good
Humor and his Gratitude the Expectation of further Provision; but the
fantastical Method of going further, with relation to their Heirs, has a
Foundation in nothing but Pride and Folly: For as all Men wish their Children
as like themselves, and as much better as they can possibly, it seems
monstrous, that we should give out of our selves the Opportunities of rewarding
and discouraging them according to their Deserts. This wise Institution has no
more Sense in it, than if a Man should begin a Deed with, "Whereas no Man
living knows how long he shall continue to be a reasonable Creature, or an
honest Man: And whereas I B. am going to enter in the State of Matrimony with
Mrs. D. therefore I shall from henceforth make it indifferent to me, whether
from this Time forward I shall be a Fool or a Knave: And therefore in full and
perfect Health of Body, and as sound Mind, not knowing which of my Children
will prove better or worse, I give to my Firstborn, be he perverse,
ungrateful, impious, or cruel, the Lump and Bulk of my Estate, and leave one
Year's Purchase only to each of my younger Children, whether they shall be
brave or beautiful, modest or honorable, from the Time of the Date hereof
wherein I resign my Senses, and hereby promise to employ my Judgment no further
in the Distribution of my Worldly Goods from the Day of the Date hereof, hereby
further confessing and covenanting, that I am from henceforth married, and dead
in Law.'

There is no Man that is conversant in modern Settlements, but knows this is an
exact Translation of what is inserted in these Instruments. Men's Passions
could only make them submit to such Terms; and therefore all unreasonable
Bargains in Marriage ought to be set aside, as well as Deeds extorted from Men
under Force or in Prison, who are altogether as much Masters of their Actions
as he that is possessed with a violent Passion.

How strangely Men are sometimes partial to themselves, appears by the Rapine
of him that has a Daughter's Beauty under his Direction. He will make no
Scruple of using it to force from her Lover as much of his Estate as is worth
10000 l. and at the same Time, as a Justice on the Bench, will spare no Pains
to get a Man hanged that has taken but a Horse from him.

It is to be hoped, the Legislature will in due Time take this Kind of Robbery
into Consideration, and not suffer Men to prey upon each other, when they are
about making the most solemn League, and entering into the strictest Bonds. The
only sure Remedy is to fix a certain Rate on every Woman's Fortune; one Price
for that of a Maid, and another for a Widow: For it is of infinite Advantage,
that there should be no Frauds or Uncertainties in the Sale of our Women.

If any Man should exceed the settled Rate, he ought to be at Liberty after
Seven Years are over, by which Time his Love may be supposed to abate a little,
if it is not founded upon Reason, to renounce the Bargain, and be freed from
the Settlement upon restoring the Portion; as a Youth married under Fourteen
Years old may be off if he pleases when he comes to that Age, and as a Man is
discharged from all Bargains but that of Marriage made when he is under Twenty
one.

It grives me when I consider, that these Restraints upon Matrimony take away
the Advantage we should otherwise have over other Countries, which are sunk
much by those great Checks upon Propagation, the Convents. It is thought
chiefly owing to these that Italy and Spain want above half their Complement of
People. Were the Price of Wives always fixed and settled, it would contribute
to filling the Nation more than all the Encouragements that can possibly be
given to Foreigners to transplant themselves hither.

I therefore, as Censor of Britain, till a Law is made, will lay down Rules
which shall be observed with Penalty of degrading all that break them into
Pretty Fellows, Smarts, Squibs, Hunting Horns, Drums, and Bagpipes.

The Females that are guilty of breaking my Orders, I shall respectively
pronounce to be Kits, Hornpipes, Dulcimers, and Kettle-Drums. Such Widows as
wear the Spoils of one Husband I will bury, if they attempt to rob another.

I ordain, That no Woman ever demand one Shilling to be paid after her
Husband's Death, more than the very Sum she brings him, or an Equivalent for it
in Land.

That no Settlement be made, in which the Man settles on his Children more than
the Reversion of the Jointure, or the Value of it in Money; so that at his
Death he may in the Whole be bound to pay his Family but double to what he has
received. I would have the eldest, as well as the rest, have his Provision out
of this.

When Men are not able to come up to those Settlements I have proposed, I would
have them receive so much of the Portion only as they can come up to, and the
rest to go to the Woman by Way of Pin-Money, or Separate Maintenance. In this,
I think, I determined equally between the Two Sexes.

If any Lawyer varies from these Rules, or is above Two Days in drawing a
Marriage Settlement, or uses more Words in it than one Skin of Parchment will
contain, or takes above Five Pounds for drawing it, I would have him thrown
over the Bar.

Were these Rules observed, a Woman with a small Fortune, and a great deal of
Worth, would be sure to marry according to her Deserts, if the Man's Estate
were to be less incumbered in Proportion as her Fortune is less than he might
have with others.

A Man of a great deal of Merit, and not much Estate, might be chosen for his
Worth; because it would not be difficult for him to make a Settlement.

The Man that loves a Woman best, would not lose her for not being able to bid
so much as another, or for not complying with an extravagant Demand.

A fine Woman would no more be set up to Auction as she is now. When a Man puts
in for her, her Friends or her self take Care to publish it; and the Man that
was the first Bidder is made no other Use of but to raise the Price. He that
loves her, will continue in Waiting as long as she pleases, (if her Fortune be
thought equal to his) and under Pretense of some Failure in the Rent-Roll, or
Difficulties in drawing the Settlement, he is put off till a better Bargain is
made with another.

All the rest of the Sex that are not rich or beautiful to the highest Degree
are plainly Gainers, and would be married so fast, that the least charming of
them would soon grow Beauties to the Batchelors.

Widows might be easily married, if they would not, as they do now, set up for
discreet, only by being mercenary.

The making Matimony cheap and easy, would be the greatest Discouragement to
Vice: The limiting the Expense of Children would not make Men ill inclined, or
afraid of having them in a regular Way; and the Men of Merit would not live
unmarried, as they often do now, because the Goodness of a Wife cannot be
ensured to them; out the Loss of an Estate is certain, and a Man would never
have the Affliction of a worthless Heir added to that of a bad Wife.

I am the more serious, large, and particular on this Subject, because my
Lucubrations designed for the Encouragement of Virtue, cannot have the desired
Success as long as this Encumbrance of Settlements continues upon Matrimony.

The TATLER. [No 224.
Materiam superabat Opus. --
Ovid.
From Tuesday Sept. 12. to Thursday Sept. 14. 1710.
From my own Apartment, September 13.
IT is my Custom, in a Dearth of News, to entertain my self with those
Collections of Advertisements that appear at the End of all our public Prints.
These I consider as Accounts of News from the little World, in the same Manner
that the foregoing Parts of the Paper are from the great. If in one we hear
that a Sovereign Prince is fled from his Capital City, in the other we hear of
a Tradesman who has shut up his Shop, and run away. If in one we find the
Victory of a General, in the other we see the Desertion of a private Soldier. I
must confess, I have a certain Weakness in my Temper, that is often very much
affected by these little Domestic Occurrences, and have frequently been caught
with Tears in my Eyes over a melancholy Advertisement.

But to consider this Subject in its most ridiculous Lights, Advertisements are
of great Use to the Vulgar: First of all, as they are Instruments of Ambition.
A Man that is by no Means big enough for the Gazette, may easily creep into the
Advertisements; by which Means we often see an Apothecary in the same Paper of
News with a Plenipotentiary, or a Running-Footman with an Ambassador. An
Advertisement from Pickadilly goes down to Posterity, with an Article from
Madrid; and John Bartlett of Goodman's-Fields is celebrated in the same Paper
with the Emperor of Germany. Thus the Fable tells us, That the Wren mounted as
high as the Eagle, by getting upon his Back.

A Second Use which this Sort of Writings have been turned to of late Years,
has been the Management of Controversy, insomuch that above half the
Advertisements one meets with Nowadays are purely Polemical. The Inventors of
Strops for Razors have written against one another this Way for several Years,
and that with great Bitterness; as the whole Argument pro and con in the Case
of the Morning-Gowns is still carried on after the same Manner. I need not
mention the several Proprietors of Dr. Anderson's Pills; nor take Notice of the
many Satirical Works of this Nature so frequently published by Dr. Clark, who
has had the Confidence to advertise upon that learned Knight, my very worthy
Friend, Sir William Read: But I shall not interpose in their Quarrel; Sir
William can give him his own in Advertisements, that, in the Judgment of the
Impartial, are as well penned as the Doctor's.

The Third and last Use of these Writings is, to inform the World where they
may be furnished with almost every Thing that is necessary for Life. If a Man
has Pains in his Head, Cholicks in his Bowels, or Spots in his Clothes, he may
here meet with proper Cures and Remedies. If a Man would recover a Wife or a
Horse that is stolen or strayed; if he wants new Sermons, Electuaries, Asses
Milk, or any Thing else, either for his Body or his Mind, this is the Place to
look for them in.

The great Art in writing Advertisements, is the finding out a proper Method to
catch the Reader's Eye; without which, a good Thing may pass over unobserved,
or be lost among Commissions of Bankrupt. Asterisks and Hands were formerly of
great Use for this Purpose. Of late Years, the N. B. has been much in Fashion;
as also little Cuts and Figures, the Invention of which we must ascribe to the
Author of Spring-Trusses. I must not here omit the blind Italian Character,
which being scarce legible, always fixes and detains the Eye, and gives the
curious Reader something like the Satisfaction of prying into a Secret.

But the great Skill in an Advertiser is chiefly seen in the Style which he
makes use of. He is to mention the universal Esteem, or general Reputation, of
Things that were never heard of. If he is a Physician or Astrologer, he must
change his Lodgings frequently, and (though he never saw any Body in them besides
his own Family) give public Notice of it, For the Information of the Nobility
and Gentry. Since I am thus usefully employed in writing Criticisms on the
Works of these diminutive Authors, I must not pass over in Silence an
Advertisement which has lately made its Appearance, and is written altogether
in a Ciceronian Manner. It was sent to me, with Five Shillings, to be inserted
among my Advertisements; but as it is a Pattern of good Writing in this Way, I
shall give it a Place in the Body of my Paper.

THE highest compounded Spirit of Lavender, the most glorious (if the
Expression may be used) enlivening Scent and Flavor that can possibly be,
which so raptures the Spirits, delights the Gust, and gives such Airs to the
Countenance, as are not to be imagined but by those that have tried it. The
meanest Sort of the Thing is admired by most Gentlemen and Ladies; but this far
more, as by far it exceeds it, to the gaining among all a more than common
Esteem. It is sold (in neat Flint Bottles fit for the Pocket) only at the
Golden-Key in Warton's-Court near Holborn-Bars, for 3 s. 6 d. with Directions.
At the same Time that I recommend the several Flowers in which this Spirit of
Lavender is wrapped up, (if the Expression may be used) I cannot excuse my
Fellow Laborers for admitting into their Papers several uncleanly
Advertisements, not at all proper to appear in the Works of polite Writers.
Among these I must reckon the Carminitive Wind expelling Pills. If the Doctor
had called them only his Carminitive Pills, he had been as cleanly as one could
have wished; but the Second Word entirely destroys the Decency of the First.
There are other Absurdities of this Nature so very gross, that I dare not
mention them; and shall therefore dismiss this Subject with a public
Admonition to Michael Parrot, That he do not presume any more to mention a
certain Worm he knows of, which, by the Way, has grown Seven Foot in my Memory;
for, if I am not much mistaken, it is the same that was but Nine Foot long
about Six Months ago.

By the Remarks I have here made, it plainly appears, that a Collection of
Advertisements is a kind of Miscellany; the Writers of which, contrary to all
Authors, except Men of Quality, give Money to the Booksellers who publish their
Copies. The Genius of the Bookseller is chiefly shown in his Method of ranging
and digesting these little Tracts. The last Paper I took up in my Hands, places
them in the following Order: The True Spanish Blacking for Shoes, etc. The
Beautifying Cream for the Face, etc. Pease and Plasters, etc. Nectar and
Ambrosia, etc. Four Freehold Tenements of 15 l. per Annum, etc. * The Present
State of England, etc. Annotations upon the Tatler, etc. A Commission of
Bankrupt being awarded against B. L. Bookseller, etc.


The TATLER. [No 225.
-- Si quid novisti rectius istis
Candidus imperti, si non, his utere mecum.
Hor.
From Thursday Sept. 14. to Saturday Sept. 16. 1710.
From my own Apartment, September 15.
THE Hours which we spend in Conversation are the most pleasing of any which we
enjoy; yet, methinks, there is very little Care taken to improve our selves for
the frequent Repetition of them. The common Fault in this Case, is that of
growing too intimate, and falling into displeasing Familiarities: For it is a
very ordinary Thing for Men to make no other Use of a close Acquaintance with
each other's Affairs, but to teaze one another with unacceptable Allusions. One
would pass over patiently such as converse like Animals, and salute each other
with Bangs on the Shoulder, sly Raps with Canes, or other robust Pleasantries
practiced by the rural Gentry of this Nation: But even among those who should
have more polite Idea's of Things, you see a Set of People who invert the
Design of Conversation, and make frequent Mention of ungrateful Subjects; nay,
mention them because they are ungrateful; as if the Perfection of Society were
in knowing how to offend on the one Part, and how to bear an Offense on the
other. In all Parts of this populous Town you find the merry World made up of
an active and a passive Companion; one who has goodnature enough to suffer all
his Friend shall think fit to say, and one who is resolved to make the most of
his Good Humor to show his Parts. In the Trading Part of Mankind, I have ever
observed the Jest went by the Weight of Purses, and the Ridicule is made up by
the Gains which arise from it. Thus the Packer allows the Clothier to say what
he pleases, and the Broker has his Countenance ready to laugh with the
Merchant, though the Abuse is to fall on himself, because he knows that, as a
Go-between, he shall find his Account in being in the good Graces of a Man of
Wealth. Among these just and punctual People, the richest Man is ever the
better Jester; and they know no such Thing as a Person who shall pretend to a
superior Laugh at a Man, who does not make him Amends by Opportunities of
Advantage in another Kind: But among People of a different Way, where the
pretended Distinction in Company is only what is raised from Sense and
Understanding, it is very absurd to carry on a rough Raillery so far, as that
the whole Discourse should turn upon each others Infirmities, Follies, or
Misfortunes.

I was this Evening with a Set of Wags of this Class. They appear generally by
Two and Two; and what is most extraordinary, is, that those very Persons who
are most together, appear least of a Mind when joined by other Company. This
Evil proceeds from an indiscreet Familiarity, whereby a Man is allowed to say
the most grating Thing imaginable to another, and it shall be accounted
Weakness to show an Impatience for the Unkindness. But this and all other
Deviations from the Design of pleasing each other when we meet, are derived
from Interlopers in Society, who want Capacity to put in a Stock among regular
Companions, and therefore supply their Wants by stale Histories, sly
Observations, and rude Hints, which relate to the Conduct of others. All
Cohabitants in general run into this unhappy Fault; Men and their Wives break
into Reflections, which are like so much Arabic to the rest of the Company;
Sisters and Brothers often make the like Figure from the same unjust Sense of
the Art of being intimate and familiar. It is often said, such an one cannot
stand the Mention of such a Circumstance: If he cannot, I am sure it is for
Want of Discourse, or a worse Reason, that any Companion of his touches upon it.

Familiarity, among the truly Well-bred, never give Authority to trespass upon
one another in the most minute Circumstance, but it allows to be kinder than we
ought otherwise presume to be. Eusebius has Wit, Humor, and Spirit; but there
never was a Man in his Company who wished he had less, for he understands
Familiarity so well, that he knows how to make Use of it in a Way that neither
makes himself or his Friend contemptible; but if any one is lessened by his
Freedom, it is he himself, who always likes the Place, the Diet, and the
Reception, when he is in the Company of his Friends. Equality is the Life of
Conversation; and he is as much out who assumes to himself any Part above
another, as he who considers himself below the rest of the Society. Familiarity
in Inferiors is Sauciness; in Superiors, Condescension; neither of which are to
have Being among Companions, the very Word implying that they are to be equal.
When therefore we have abstracted the Company from all Considerations of their
Quality or Fortune, it will immediately appear, that to make it happy and
polite, there must nothing be started which shall discover that our Thoughts
run upon any such Distinctions. Hence it will arise, that Benevolence must
become the Rule of Society, and he that is most obliging, must be most
diverting.

This Way of Talking I am fallen into from the Reflection that I am wherever I
go entertained with some Absurdity, Mistake, Weakness, or ill Luck of some Man
or other, whom not only I, but the Person who makes me those Relations has a
Value for. It would therefore be a great Benefit to the World, if it could be
brought to pass that no Story should be a taking one, but what was to the
Advantage of the Person of whom it is related. By this Means, he that is now a
Wit in Conversation, would be considered as a Spreader of false News is in
Business.

But above all, to make a Familiar fit for a Bosom Friend, it is absolutely
necessary that we should always be inclined rather to hide than rally each
others Infirmities. To suffer for a Fault, is a Sort of Atonement; and no Body
is concerned for the Offense for which he has made Reparation.

P. S. I have received the following Letter, which rallies me for being witty
sooner than I designed; but I have now altered my Resolution, and intend to be
facetious till the Day in October heretofore mentioned, instead of beginning
for that Day.

Sept. 6. 1710. Mr. Bickerstaff,
BY your own Reckoning, you came Yesterday about a Month before the Time you
looked your self, much to the Satisfaction of

Your most Obliged Humble Servant, Plain English.


St. James's Coffee-house, September 15.
Advices from Madrid of the 8th say, the Duke of Anjou, with his Court, and all
the Councils, were preparing to leave that Place in a Day or Two, in order to
remove to Valladolid. They add, That the Palace was already unfurnished, and a
Declaration had been published, importing, That it was absolutely necessary, in
the present Conjuncture of Affairs, that the Court were absent for some Time
from Madrid, but would return thither in Six Weeks. This sudden Departure is
attributed to the Advice, That the Portuguese Army was in Motion to enter Spain
by Braganza, and that his Catholic Majesty was on the March with a strong
Detachment toward Castille. Two Thousand Horse were arrived at Agreda, and
it is reported they were to join the rest of the Body, with the King, and
advance to Callaiatud, on their Way to Madrid, whilst General Staremberg
observed the Enemy on the Frontier of Navarre. They write from Bayonne, That
the Duke of Vendosme set forwards to Spain on the 14th.

The TATLER. [No 226.
-- Juvenis quondam, nunc Faemina Caeneus,
Et Fato in veterem rursus revoluta Figuram.
Virg.
From Saturd. Sept. 16. to Tuesday Sept. 19. 1710.
From my own Apartment, September 18.
IT is one of the Designs of this Paper to transmit to Posterity an Account of
every Thing that is monstrous in my own Times. For this Reason I shall here
publish to the World the Life of a Person who was neither Man nor Woman, as
written by one of my ingenious Correspondents, who seems to have imitated
Plutach in that multifarious Erudition, and those occasional Differtation,
which he has wrought into the Body of his History. The Life I am putting out,
is that of Margery, alias John Young, commonly known by the Name of Dr. Young,
who (as the Town very well knows) was a Woman that practiced Physic in Man's
Clothes, and after having had Two Wives and several Children, died about a
Month since.

SIR,
I Here make bold to trouble you with a short Account of the famous Dr. Young's
Life, which you may call (if you please) a Second Part of the Farce of the Sham
Doctor. This perhaps will not seem so strange to you, who (if I am not
mistaken) have somewhere mentioned with Honor your Sister Kirleus as a
Practitioner both in Physic and Astrology: But in the common Opinion of
Mankind, a She-Quack is altogether as strange and astonishing a Creature as the
Centaur that practiced Physic in the Days of Achilles, or as King Phys in the
Rehearsal. Aesculapius, the great Founder of your Art, was particularly famous
for his Beard, as we may conclude from the Behavior of a Tyrant, who is
branded by Heathen Historians as guilty both of Sacrilege and Blasphemy, having
robbed the Statue of Aesculapius of a thick bushy Golden Beard, and then
alleged for his Excuse, That it was a Shame the Son should have a Beard when
his Father Apollo had none. This latter Instance indeed seems something to
favor a Female Professor, since (as I have been told) the ancient Statues of
Apollo are generally made with the Head and Face of a Woman: Nay, I have been
credibly informed by those who have seen them both, that the famous Apollo in
the Belvidera did very much resemble Dr. Young. Let that be as it will, the
Doctor was a Kind of Amazon in Physic, that made as great Devastations and
Slaughters as any of our chief Heroes in the Art, and was as fatal to the
English in these our Days, as the famous Jean d' Arc was in those of our
Forefathers.

I do not find any Thing remarkable in the Life I am about to write till the
Year 1695, at which Time the Doctor, being about Twenty three Years old, was
brought to Bed of a Bastard Child. The Scandal of such a Misfortune gave so
great Uneasiness to pretty Mrs. Peggy, (for that was the Name by which the
Doctor was then called) that she left her Family, and followed her Lover to
London, with a fixed Resolution some Way or other to recover her lost
Reputation: But instead of changing her Life, which one would have expected
from so good a Disposition of Mind, she took it in her Head to change her Sex.
This was soon done by the Help of a Sword and a Pair of Breeches. I have Reason
to believe, that her first Design was to turn Man-Midwife, having her self had
some Experience in those Affairs: But thinking this too narrow a Foundation for
her future Fortune, she at length bought her a Gold Button Coat, and set up for
a Physician. Thus we see the same fatal Miscarriage in her Youth made Mrs.
Young a Doctor, that formerly made one of the same Sex a Pope.

The Doctor succeeded very well in his Business at first, but very often met
with Accidents that disquieted him. As he wanted that deep magisterial Voice
which gives Authority to a Prescription, and is absolutely necessary for the
right Pronouncing of those Words, Take these Pills, he unfortunately got the
Nickname of the Squeaking Doctor. If this Circumstance alarmed the Doctor,
there was another that gave him no small Disquiet, and very much diminished his
Gains. In short, he found himself run down as a superficial prating Quack, in
all Families that had at the Head of them a cautious Father, or a jealous
Husband. These would often complain among one another, that they did not like
such a Smock-faced Physician; though in Truth had they known how justly he
deserved that Name, they would rather have favored his Practice, than have
apprehended any Thing from it.

Such were the Motives that determined Mrs. Young to change her Condition, and
take in Marriage a virtuous young Woman, who lived with her in good Reputation,
and made her the Father of a very pretty Girl. But this Part of her Happiness
was soon after destroyed by a Distemper which was too hard for our Physician,
and carried off his first Wife. The Doctor had not been a Widow long, before he
married his Second Lady, with whom also he lived in very good Understanding. It
so happened, that the Doctor was with Child at the same Time that his Lady was;
but the little ones coming both together, they passed for Twins. The Doctor
having entirely established the Reputation of his Manhood, especially by the
Birth of the Boy of whom he had been lately delivered, and who very much
resembles him, grew into good Business, and was particularly famous for the
Cure of Venereal Distempers; but would have had much more Practice among his
own Sex, had not some of them been so unreasonable as to demand certain Proofs
of their Cure, which the Doctor was not able to give them. The florid blooming
Look, which gave the Doctor some Uneasiness at first, instead of betraying his
Person, only recommended his Physic. Upon this Occasion I cannot forbear
mentioning what I thought a very agreeable Surprise in one of Moliere's Plays,
where a young Woman applies her self to a sick Person in the Habit of a Quack,
and speaks to her Patient, who was something scandalized at the Youth of his
Physician, to the following Purpose -- I begun to practice in the Reign of
Francis I. and am now in the Hundred and fiftieth Year of my Age; but, by the
Virtue of my Medicaments, have maintained my self in the same Beauty and
Freshness I had at Fifteen. For this Reason Hippocrates lays it down as a Rule,
That a Student in Physic should have a sound Constitution, and a healthy Look;
which indeed seem as necessary Qualifications for a Physician, as a good Life,
and virtuous Behavior, for a Divine. But to return to our Subject. About Two
Years ago the Doctor was very much afflicted with the Vapors, which grew upon
him to such a Degree, that about six Weeks since they made an End of him. His
Death discovered the Disguise he had acted under, and brought him back again to
his former Sex. It Is said, that at his Burial the Pall was held up by Six Women
of some Fashion. The Doctor left behind him a Widow, and Two Fatherless
Children, if they may be called so, besides the little Boy beforementioned. In
relation to whom we may say of the Doctor, as the good old Ballad about The
Children in the Wood says of the Unnatural Uncle, that he was Father and Mother
both in one. These are all the Circumstances that I could learn of Doctor
Young's Life, which might have given Occasion to many obscene Fictions: But as
I know those would never have gained a Place in your Paper, I have not troubled
you with any Impertinence of that Nature; having stuck to the Truth very
scrupulously, as I always do when I subscribe my self,

SIR, Your, etc.


I shall add, as a Postcript to this Letter, that I am informed, the famous
Saltero, who sells Coffee in his Musaeum at Chelsea, has by him a Curiosity
which helped the Doctor to carry on his Imposture, and will give great
Satisfaction to the curious Inquirer.

The TATLER. [No 227
Omnibus invideas, Zoile, nemo tibi.
Martial.
From Tuesd. Sept. 19. to Thursd. Sept. 21. 1710.
From my own Apartment, September 20.
IT is the Business of Reason and Philosophy to sooth and allay the Passions of
the Mind, or turn them to a vigorous Prosecution of what is dictated by the
Understanding. In order to this good End, I would keep a watchful Eye upon the
growing Inclinations of Youth, and be particularly careful to prevent their
indulging themselves in such Sentiments as may imbitter their more advanced
Age. I have now under Cure a young Gentleman, who lately communicated to me,
that he was of all Men living the most miserably envious. I desired the
Circumstances of his Distemper; upon which, with a Sigh that would have moved
the most inhumane Breast, 'Mr. Bickerstaff, said he, I am Nephew to a Gentleman
of a very great Estate, to whose Favor I have a Cousin that has equal
Pretensions with my self. This Kinsman of mine is a young Man of the highest
Merit imaginable, and has a Mind so tender, and so generous, that I can observe
he returns my Envy with Pity. He makes me upon all Occasions the most obliging
Condescensions: And I cannot but take Notice of the Concern he is in to see my
Life blasted with this racking Passion, though it is against himself. In the
Presence of my Uncle, when I am in the Room, he never speaks so well as he is
capable of, but always lowers his Talents and Accomplishments out of Regard to
me. What I beg of you, dear Sir, is to instruct me how to love him, as I know
he does me: And I beseech you, if possible, to set my Heart right, that it may
no longer be tormented where it should be pleased, or hate a Man whom I cannot
but approve.

The Patient gave me this Account with such Candor and Openness, that I
conceived imme^iate Hopes of his Cure; because in Diseases of ^he Mind, the
Person affected is half recovered ^hen he is sensible of his Distemper. Sir,
said I, ^he Acknowledgment of your Kinsman's Merit is ^ very hopeful Symptom;
for it is the Nature of ^ersons afflicted with this Evil, when they are
in^urable, to pretend a Contempt of the Person ^nvied, if they are taxed with
that Weakness. A ^an who is really envious, will not allow he is ^o; but upon
such an Accusation is tormented ^ith the Reflection, that to envy a Man is to
al^ow him your Superior. But in your Case, when ^ou examine the Bottom of your
Heart, I am apt ^o think it is Avarice, which you mistake for En^y. Were it not
that you have both Expectations from the same Man, you would look upon your
^ousin's Accomplishments with Pleasure. You that now consider him as an
Obstacle to your ^nterest, would then behold him as an Ornament ^o your Family.
I observed my Patient upon this ^ccasion recover himself in some Measure; and
^e owned to me, that he hoped it was as I ima^ined; for that in all Places but
where he was his ^ival, he had Pleasure in his Company. This ^as the first
Discourse we had upon this Malady; and I do not doubt but, after Two or Three
^ore, I shall by just Degrees soften his Envy into ^mulation.

Such an Envy as I have here described, may ^ossibly creep into an ingenuous
Mind; but the ^nvy which makes a Man uneasy to himself and ^hers, is a certain
Distortion and Perverseness of Temper, that renders him unwilling to be pleased
with any Thing without him that has either Beauty or Perfection in it. I look
upon it as a Distemper in the Mind, (which I know no Moralist that has
described in this Light) when a Man cannot discern any Thing which another is
Master of that is agreeable. For which Reason, I look upon the good-natured Man
to be endowed with a certain discerning Faculty which the Envious are
altogether deprived of. Shallow Wits, superficial Critics, and conceited Fops,
are with me so many blind Men in respect of Excellencies. They can behold
nothing but Faults and Blemishes, and indeed see nothing that is worth seeing.
Show them a Poem, it is Stuff; a Picture, it is Daubing. They find nothing in
Architecture that is not irregular, or in Music that is not out of Tune. These
Men should consider, that it is their Envy which deforms every Thing, and that
the Ugliness is not in the Object, but in the Eye. And as for nobler Minds,
whose Merits are either not discovered, or are misrepresented by the envious
Part of Mankind, they should rather consider their Defamers with Pity than
Indignation. A Man cannot have an Idea of Perfection in another, which he was
never sensible of in himself. Mr. Lock tells us, That upon asking a blind Man,
What he thought Scarlet was? He answered, That he believed it was like the
Sound of a Trumpet. He was forced to form his Conceptions of Idea's which he
had not, by those which he had. In the same Manner, ask an envious Man, What he
thinks of Virtue? He will call it Design: What of Goodnature? And he will term
it Dullness. The Difference is, That as the Person beforementioned was born
blind, your envious Men have contracted the Distemper themselves, and are
troubled with a Sort of an acquired Blindness. Thus the Devil in Milton, though
made an Angel of Light, could see nothing to please him even in Paradise, and
hated our First Parents, though in their State of Innocence.

The TATLER. [No 228.
-- Veniet Manus, Auxilio quae
Sit mihi --
Hor.
From Thursday Sept. 21. to Saturday Sept. 23. 1710.
From my own Apartment, Sept. 22.
A Man of Business who makes a public Entertainment, may sometimes leave his
Guests, and beg them to divert themselves as well as they can till his Return.
I shall here make use of the same Privilege, (being engaged in Matters of some
Importance relating to the Family of the Bickerstaffs) and must desire my
Readers to entertain one another till I can have Leisure to attend them. I have
therefore furnished out this Paper, as I have done some few others, with
Letters of my ingenious Correspondents, which I have Reason to believe will
please the Public, as much as my own more elaborate Lucubrations.

Lincoln, Sept. 9. SIR,
I Have long been of the Number of your Admirers, and take this Opportunity of
telling you so. I know not why a Man so famed for Astrological Observations may
not be also a good Casuist, upon which Presumption, it is I ask your Advice in
an Affair that at present puzzles quite that slender Stock of Divinity I am
Master of. I have now been some Time in Holy Orders, and Fellow of a certain
College in one of the Universities; but weary of that unactive Life, I resolve
to be doing Good in my Generation. A worthy Gentleman has lately offered me a
fat Rectory, but means, I perceive, his Kinswoman should have the Benefit of
the Clergy. I am a Novice in the World, and confess, it startles me how the
Body of Mrs. Abigail can be annexed to Cure of Souls. Sir, would you give us in
one of your Tatlers the Original and Progress of Smock-Simony, and show us,
that where the Laws are silent, Men's Consciences ought to be so too; you could
not more oblige our Fraternity of young Divines, and among the rest,

Your humble Servant, High-Church


I am very proud of having a Gentleman of this Name for my Admirer, and may
some Time or other write such a Treatise as he mentions. In the mean Time I do
not see why our Clergy, who are very frequently Men of good Families, should be
reproached, if any of them chance to espouse a Handmaid with a Rectory in
Commendam, since the best of our Peers have often joined themselves to the
Daughters of very ordinary Tradesmen upon the same valuable Considerations.

Globe in Moorfields, Sept. 16. Honored Son,
I Have now finished my Almanac for the next Year, in all the Parts of it
except that which concerns the Weather; and you having shown your self, by some
of your late Works, more Weatherwise than any of our modern Astrologers, I most
humbly presume to trouble you upon this Head. You know very well, that in our
ordinary Almanacks the Wind and Rain, Snow and Hail, Clouds and Sunshine, have
their proper Seasons, and come up as regularly in their several Months as the
Fruits and Plants of the Earth. As for my own Part, I freely own to you, that I
generally steal my Weather out of some antiquated Almanac, that foretold it
several Years ago. Now, Sir, what I humbly beg of you is, that you would lend
me your State Weather-Glass, in order to fill up this vacant Column in my
Works. This, I know, would sell my Almanac beyond any other, and make me a
richer Man than Poor Robin. If you will not grant me this Favor, I must have
Recourse to my old Method, and will copy after an Almanac which I have by me,
and which I think was made for the Year when the great Storm was. I am,

SIR, The most humble of Your Admirers, T. Philomath.


This Gentleman does not consider, what a strange Appearance his Almanac would
make to the Ignorant, should he transpose his Weather, as he must do, did he
follow the Dictates of my Glass. What would the World say to see Summers filled
with Clouds and Storms, and Winters with Calms and Sunshine, according to the
Variations of the Weather, as they might accidentally appear in a State
Barometer? But let that be as it will, I shall apply my own Invention to my own
Use; and if I do not make my Fortune by it, it will be my own Fault.

The next Letter comes to me from another Self-interessed Solicitor.

Mr. Bickerstaff,
I Am going to set up for a Scrivener, and have thought of a Project which may
turn both to your Account and mine. It came into my Head upon reading that
learned and useful Paper of yours concerning Advertisements. You must
understand, I have made my self Master in the whole Art of Advertising, both as
to the Style and the Letter. Now if you and I could so manage it, that no Body
should write Advertisements besides my self, or print them any where but in
your Paper, we might both of us get Estates in a little Time. For this End I
would likewise propose, that you should enlarge the Design of Advertisements,
and have sent you Two or Three Samples of my Work in this Kind, which I have
made for particular Friends, and intend to open Shop with. The First is for a
Gentleman, who would willingly marry, if he could find a Wife to his Liking;
the Second is for a poor Whig, who is lately turned out of his Post; and the
Third for a Person of a contrary Party, who is willing to get into one.


WHereas A. B. next Door to the Pestle and Mortar, being about 30 Years old, of
a spare Make, with dark-colored Hair, bright Eye, and a long Nose, has
Occasion for a good-humored, tall, fair, young Woman, of about 3000 l.
Fortune: These are to give Notice, That if any such young Woman has a Mind to
dispose of her self in Marriage to such a Person as the abovementioned, she may
be provided with a Husband, a Coach and Horses, and a proportionable Settlement.

C. D. designing to quit his Place, has great Quantities of Paper, Parchment,
Ink, Wax, and Wafers to dispose of, which will be sold at very reasonable Rates.

E. F. a Person of good Behavior, Six Foot high, of a black Complexion and
sound Principles, wants an Employ. He is an excellent Penman and Accomptant,
and speaks French.

The TATLER. [No 229.
Quesitam Meritis sum Superbiam.
Hor.
From Saturday Sept. 23. to Tuesday Sept. 26. 1710.
From my own Apartment, Sept. 25.
THE whole Creation preys upon it self: Every living Creature is inhabited. A
Flea has a Thousand invisible Insects that teaze him as he jumps from Place to
Place, and revenge our Quarrels upon him. A very ordinary Microscope shows us,
that a Louse is it self a very lousy Creature. A Whale, besides those Seas and
Oceans in the several Vessels of his Body, which are filled with innumerable
Shoals of little Animals, carries about it a whole World of Inhabitants;
insomuch that, if we believe the Calculations some have made, there are more
living Creatures which are too small for the naked Eye to behold about the
Leviathan, than there are of visible Creatures upon the Face of the whole
Earth. Thus every nobler Creature is as it were the Basis and Support of
Multitudes that are his Inferiors.

This Consideration very much comforts me, when I think on those numberless
Vermin that feed upon this Paper, and find their Sustenance out of it: I mean,
the small Wits and Scribble^ that every Day turn a Penny by nibbling at (...)
Lucubrations. This has been so advantageou^ (...) this little Species of
Writers, that, if they (...) me Justice, I may expect to have my Statue (...)
in Grub-street, as being a common Benefactor to that Quarter.

They say, when a Fox is very much troubled with Fleas, he goes into the next
Pool with a little Lock of Wool in his Mouth, and keeps his Body under Water
till the Vermin get into it, after which he quits the Wool, and diving, leaves
his Tormentors to shift for themselves, and get their Livelihood where they
can. I would have these Gentlemen take Care that I do not serve them after the
same Manner; for though I have hitherto kept my Temper pretty well, it is not
impossible but I may some Time or other disappear; and what will then become of
them? Should I lay down my Paper, What a Famine would there be among the
Hawkers, Printers, Booksellers, and Authors? It would be like Dr. B -- s's
dropping his Cloak, with the whole Congregation hanging upon the Skirts of it.
To enumerate some of these my doughty Antagonists, I was threatened to be
answered Weekly Tit for Tat: I was undermined by the Whisperer, haunted by Tom.
Brown's Ghost, scolded at by a Female Tatler, and slandered by another of the
same Character, under the Title of Atalantis. I have been annotated, retattled,
examined, and condoled: But it being my standing Maxim never to speak ill of
the Dead, I shall let these Authors rest in Peace, and take great Pleasure in
thinking that I have sometimes been the Means of their getting a Belly full.
When I see my self thus surrounded by such formidable Enemies, I often think of
the Knight of the Red Cross in Spencer's (...) of Error, who after he has cut
off the Dra^'s Head, and left it wallowing in a Flood of (...) sees a Thousand
monstrous Reptiles making (...) Attempts upon him, one with many Heads, (...)
with none, and all of them without (...)

The same so sore annoyed has the Knight,
That well nigh choked with the deadly Stink,
His Forces fail, ne can no longer fight;
Whose Courage when the Fiend perceived to shrink,
She poured forth out of her Hellish Sink
Her fruitful cursed Spawn of Serpents small,
Deformed Monsters, foul, and black as Ink;
Which swarming all about his Legs did crawl,
And him encombred sore, but could not hurt at all.
As gentle Shepherd in sweet Even-tide,
When ruddy Phoebus gins to welk in West,
High on an Hill, his Flock to viewen wide,
Marks which do bite their hasty Supper best;
A Cloud of combrous Gnats do him molest,
All striving to infix their feeble Stings
That from their Noyance he no where can rest;
But with his clownish Hands their tender Wings
He brusheth often, and often does mar their Murmurings.
If ever I should want such a Fry of little Authors to attend me, I shall think
my Paper in a very decaying Condition. They are like Ivy about an Oak, which
adorns the Tree at the same Time that it eats into it; or like a great Man's
Equipage, that do Honor to the Person on whom they feed. For my Part, when I
see my self thus attacked, I do not consider my Antagonists as malicious, but
hungry, and therefore am resolved never to take any Notice of them.

As for those who detract from my Labors without being prompted to it by an
empty Stomach, in Return to their Censures I shall take Pains to excel, and
never fail to persuade my self, that their Enmity is nothing but their E^ or
Ignorance.

Give me Leave to conclude, like an old (...) and a Moralist, with a Fable:

The Owls, Bats, and several other B^ (...) Night, were one Day got together in
(...) Shade, where they abused their Neighbors in a very sociable Manner.
Their Satyr at last fell upon the Sun, whom they all agreed to be very
troublesome, impertinent, and inquisitive. Upon which the Sun, who overheard
them, spoke to them after this Manner: Gentlemen, I wonder how you dare abuse
one that you know could in an Instant scorch you up, and burn every Mother's
Son of you: But the only Answer I shall give you, or the Revenge I shall take
of you, is, to shine on.

The TATLER. [No 230.
From Tuesd. Sept. 26. to Thursd. Sept. 28. 1710.
From my own Apartment, Sept. 27.
THE following Letter has laid before me many great and manifest Evils in the
World of Letters which I had overlooked; but they open to me a very busy Scene,
and it will require no small Care and Application to amend Errors which are
become so universal. The Affectation of Politeness is exposed in this Epistle
with a great deal of Wit and Discernment; so that whatever Discourses I may
fall into hereafter upon the Subjects the Writer treats of, I shall at present
lay the Matter before the World without the least Alteration from the Words of
my Correspondent.

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
^IR,
^ere are some Abuses among us of great Con^quence, the Reformation of which is
pro^ ^our Province; though as far as I have been ^ant in your Papers, you have
not yet considered them. These are the deplorable Ignorance that for some Years
has reigned among our English Writers, the great Depravity of our Taste, and
the continual Corruption of our Style. I say nothing here of those who handle
particular Sciences, Divinity, Law, Physic, and the like; I mean the Traders
in History and Politics, and the Belles Lettres; together with those by whom
Books are not Translated, but (as the common Expressions are) Done out of
French, Latin, or other Language, and Made English. I cannot but observe to
you, that till of late Years, a Grubstreet Book was always bound in Sheep-skin,
with suitable Print and Paper, the Price never above a Shilling, and taken off
wholly by common Tradesmen or Country Pedlars; but now they appear in all Sizes
and Shapes, and in all Places: They are handed about from Lap-fulls in every
Coffee-house to Persons of Quality; are shown in Westminster Hall and the Court
of Requests. You may see them gilt and in Royal Paper of Five or Six Hundred
Pages, and rated accordingly. I would engage to furnish you with a Catalogue of
English Books published within the Compass of Seven Years past, which at the
first Hand would cost you a Hundred Pounds, wherein you shall not be able to
find Ten Lines together of common Grammar or common Sense.

These Two Evils, Ignorance and Want of Taste, have produced a Third; I mean the
continual Corruption of our English Tongue, which, without some timely Remedy,
will suffer more by the false Refinements of Twenty Years past, tha^ (...) has
been improved in the foregoing Hu^ And this is what I design chiefly to (...)
upon, leaving the former Evils to your A^version.

But instead of giving you a List of (...) Refinements crept into our Language
(...) send you the Copy of a Letter I recei^ (...) Time ago from a most
accomplished Person in this Way of Writing; upon which I shall make some
Remarks. It is in these Terms: SIR,
I Could n't get the Things you sent for all about Town -- I thot to have come
down my self, and then I Would h' bot 'um; but I have not don't, and I believe I
cannot d't, that is Pozz -- Tom begins to gi'mself Airs, because he is going with
the Plenipo's -- It Is said, the French King will bamboozl' us again, which
causes many Speculations. The Jacks and others of that Kidney are very uppish,
and alert upon it, as you may see by their Phizz's -- Will Hazard has got the
Hipps, having lost to the Tune of Five Hundr'd Pound, tho he understands Play
very well, no body better. He has promis't me upon Rep, to leave off Play; but
you know it is a Weakness he is too apt to give into, tho he has as much Wit as
any Man, no body more. He has lain incog ever since -- The Mob's very quiet
with us now -- I believe you thot I banter'd you in my last like a Country Put
-- I sha'n't leave Town this Month, etc.




This Letter is in every Point an admirable Pattern of the present polite Way
of Writing, nor is it of less Authority for being an Epistle: You may gather
every Flower in it, with a Thousand more of equal Sweetness, from the Books,
Pam^lets, and single Papers, offered us every Day in (...) Coffee-houses: And
these are the Beauties in^ced to supply the Want of Wit, Sense, Hu^ and
Learning, which formerly were look^ ^n as Qualifications for a Writer. If a
(...) Wit, who died Forty Years ago, were (...) ^om the Grave on Purpose. How
would (...) ^le to read this Letter? And after he had (...) ^ugh that
Difficulty, how would he be able to understand it? The first Thing that strikes
your Eye, is the Breaks at the End of almost every Sentence, of which I know
not the Use, only that it is a Refinement, and very frequently practiced. Then
you will observe the Abbreviations and Elisions, by which Consonants of most
obdurate Sound are joined together, without one softening Vowel to intervene;
and all this only to make one Syllable of Two, directly contrary to the Example
of the Greeks and Romans, altogether of the Gothic Strain, and a natural
Tendency toward relapsing into Barbarity, which delights in Monosyllables, and
uniting of Mute Consonants, as it is observable in all the Northern Languages.
And this is still more visible in the next Refinement, which consists in
pronouncing the first Syllable in a Word that has many, and dismissing the
rest; such as Phizz, Hipps, Mobb, Pozz, Rep, and many more, when we are already
overloaded with Monosyllables, which are the Disgrace of our Language. Thus we
cram one Syllable, and cut off the rest, as the Owl fattened her Mice after she
had bit off their Legs, to prevent them from running away; and if ours be the
same Reason for maiming our Words, it will certainly answer the End, for I am
sure no other Nation will desire to borrow them. Some Words are hitherto but
fairly split, and therefore only in their Way to Perfection; as Incog, and
Plenipo: But in a short Time, it is to be hoped, they will be further dock'd to
Inc. and Plen. This Reflection has made me of late Years very impatient for a
Peace, which I believe would save the Lives of many brave Words, as well as
Men. The War has introduced abundance of Polysyllables, which will never be
able to live many more Campaigns. Speculations, Operations, Preliminaries,
Ambassadors, Pallisadoes, Communication, Circumvallation, Battalions, as
numerous as they are, if they attack us too frequently in our Coffee-houses, we
shall certainly put them to Flight, and cut off the Rear.

The Third Refinement observable in the Letter I send you, consists in the
Choice of certain Words invented by some pretty Fellows, such as Banter,
Bamboozle, Country Put, and Kidney, as it is there applied, some of which are
now struggling for the Vogue, and others are in Possession of it. I have done
my utmost for some Years past to stop the Progress of Mobb and Banter, but have
been plainly born down by Numbers, and betrayed by those who promised to assist
me.

In the last Place, you are to take Notice of certain choice Phrases scattered
through the Letter, some of them tolerable enough, till they were worn to Rags
by servile Imitators. You might easily find them, though they were not in a
different Print, and therefore I need not disturb them.

These are the false Refinements in our Style which you ought to correct:
First, by Argument and fair Means; but if those fail, I think you are to make
Use of your Authority as Censor, and by an Annual Index Expurgatorius expunge
all Words and Phrases that are offensive to good Sense, and condemn those
barbarous Mutilations of Vowels and Syllables. In this last Point, the usual
Pretense is, That they spell as they speak: A noble Standard for Language! To
depend upon the Caprice of every Coxcomb, who because Words are the Clothing
of our Thoughts, cuts them out and shapes them as he pleases, and changes them
oftener than his Dress. I believe all reasonable People would be content that
such Refiners were more sparing in their Words, and liberal in their Syllables:
And upon this Head, I should be glad you would bestow some Advice upon several
young Readers in our Churches, who coming up from the University full freight
with Admiration of our Town Politeness, will needs correct the Style of their
Prayer-Books. In reading the Absolution, they are very careful to say Pardons
and Absolves; and in the Prayer for the Royal Family, it must be endue'um,
enrich'um, prosper'um, and bring'um. Then in their Sermons they use all the
modern Terms of Art, Sham, Banter, Mob, Bubble, Bully, Cutting, Shuffling, and
Palming; all which, and many more of the like Stamp, as I have heard them often
in the Pulpit from such young Sophisters, so I have read them in some of those
Sermons that have made most Noise of late. The Design, it seems, is to avoid
the dreadful Imputation of Pedantry; to show us, that they know the Town,
understand Men and Manners, and have not been poring upon old unfashionable
Books in the University.

I should be glad to see you the Instrument of introducing into our Style that
Simplicity which is the best and truest Ornament of most Things in Life, which
the politer Ages always aimed at in their Building and Dress, (Simplex
Munditiis) as well as their Productions of Wit. It Is manifest, that all new
affected Modes of Speech, whether borrowed from the Court, the Town, or the
Theater, are the first perishing Parts in any Language; and, as I could prove
by many Hundred Instances, have been so in ours. The Writings of Hooker, who
was a Country Clergyman, and of Parsons the Jesuit, both in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, are in a Style that, with very few Allowances, would not offend any
present Reader; much more clear and intelligible than those of Sir H. Wootton,
Sir Rob. Naunton, Osborn, Daniel the Historian, and several others who writ
later; but being Men of the Court, and affecting the Phrases then in Fashion,
they are often either not to be understood, or appear perfectly ridiculous.

What Remedies are to be applied to these Evils, I have not Room to consider,
having, I fear, already taken up most of your Paper. Besides, I think it is our
Office only to represent Abuses, and yours to redress them. I am with great
Respect,

SIR, Your, etc.


The TATLER. [No 231.
Principiis obsta --

From Thursd. Sept 28. to Saturd. Sept. 30. 1710.
From my own Apartment, Sept. 29.
THere are very many ill Habits that might with much Ease have been prevented,
which, after we have indulged our selves in them, become incorrigible. We have
a sort of Proverbial Expression, of taking a Woman down in her Wedding Shoes,
if you would bring her to Reason. An early Behavior of this Sort, had a very
remarkable good Effect in a Family wherein I was several Years an intimate
Acquaintance.

A Gentleman in Lincolushire had Four Daughters, Three of which were early
married very happily; but the Fourth, though no Way inferior to any of her
Sisters, either in Person or Accomplishments, had from her Infancy discovered
so imperious a Temper, (usually called a High Spirit) that it continually made
great Uneasiness in the Family, became her known Character in the
Neighborhood, and deterred all her Lovers from declaring themselves. However,
in Process of Time, a Gentleman of a plentiful Fortune and long Acquaintance,
having observed that Quickness of Spirit to be her only Fault, made his
Addresses, and obtained her Consent in due Form. The Lawyers finished the
Writings, (in which, by the Way, there was no Pin-Money) and they were married.
After a decent Time spent in the Father's House, the Bridegroom went to prepare
his Seat for her Reception. During the whole Course of his Courtship, though a
Man of the most equal Temper, he had artificially lamented to her, that he was
the most passionate Creature breathing. By this one Intimation, he at once made
her understand Warmth of Temper to be what he ought to pardon in her, as well
as that he alarmed her against that Constitution in himself. She at the same
Time thought her self highly obliged by the composed Behavior which he
maintained in her Presence. Thus far he with great Success soothed her from
being guilty of Violences, and still resolved to give her such a terrible
Apprehension of his fiery Spirit, that she should never dream of giving Way to
her own. He returned on the Day appointed for carrying her Home; but instead of
a Coach and Six Horses, together with the gay Equipage suitable to the
Occasion, he appeared without a Servant, mounted on the Skeleton of a Horse
which his Huntsman had the Day before brought in to feast his Dogs on the
Arrival of their new Mistress, with a Pillion fixed behind, and a Case of
Pistols before him, attended only by a Favorite Hound. Thus equipped, he in a
very obliging (but somewhat positive) Manner desired his Lady to seat her self
on the Cushion; which done, away they crawled. The Road being obstructed by a
Gate, the Dog was commanded to open it: The poor Cur looked up and wagged his
Tail; but the Master, to show the Impatience of his Temper, drew a Pistol and
shot him dead. He had no sooner done it, but he fell into a Thousand Apologies
for his unhappy Rashness, and begged as many Pardons for his Excesses before
one for whom he had so profound a Respect. Soon after their Steed stumbled, but
with some Difficulty recovered: However, the Bridegroom took Occasion to swear,
if he frighted his Wife so again, he would run him through: And alas! the poor
Animal being now almost tired, made a second Trip; immediately on which the
careful Husband alights, and with great Ceremony first takes off his Lady, then
the Accoutrements, draws his Sword, and saves the Huntsman the Trouble of
killing him: Then says to his Wife, Child, prithee take up the Saddle; which
she readily did, and tugged it Home, where they found all Things in the
greatest Order, suitable to their Fortune and the present Occasion. Some Time
after the Father of the Lady gave an Entertainment to all his Daughters and
their Husbands, where, when the Wives were retired, and the Gentleman passing a
Toast about, our last married Man took Occasion to observe to the rest of his
Brethren, how much, to his great Satisfaction, he found the World mistaken as
to the Temper of his Lady, for that she was the most meek and humble Woman
breathing. The Applause was received with a loud Laugh: But as a Trial which of
them would appear the most Master at Home, he proposed they should all by Turns
send for their Wives down to them. A Servant was dispatched, and Answer was
made by one, Tell him I will come by and by; another, That she would come when
the Cards were out of her Hand; and so on. But no sooner was her Husband's
Desire whispered in the Ear of our last married Lady, but the Cards were
clapped on the Table, and down she comes with, My Dear, would you speak with
me? He receives her in his Arms, and after repeated Caresses tells her the
Experiment, confesses his good Nature, and assures her That since she could now
command her, Temper, he would no longer disguise his own.

I received the following Letter, with a Dozen of Wine, and cannot but do
Justice to the Liquor, and give my Testimony; That I have tried it upon several
of my Acquaintance, who were given to impertinent Abbreviations, with great
Success.

Mr. Bickerstaff,
I Send you by this Bearer, and not per Bearer, a Dozen of that Claret which is
to be sold at Garraway's Coffee-house on Thursday the Fifth of October next. I
can assure you, I have found by Experience the Efficacy of ic, in amending a
Fault you complain of in your last. The very first Draught of it has some
Effect upon the Speech of the Drinker, and restores all the Letters taken away
by the Elisions so justly complained of. Will Hazard was cured of his
Hypochondria by Three Glasses; and the Gentleman who gave you an Account of his
late Indisposition, has in public Company, after the First Quart, spoke every
Syllable of the Word Plenipotentiary.

Your, etc.


The TATLER. [No 232.
From Saturd. Sept. 30. to Tuesd. October. 3. 1710.
From my own Apartment, October. 2.
I Have received the following Letter from my unfortunate old Acquaintance the
Upholsterer, who, I observed, had long absented himself from the Bench at the
upper End of the Mall^ Having not seen him for some Time, I was in Fear I
should soon hear of his Death, especially since he never appeared, though the
Noons have been of late pretty warm, and the Councils at that Place very full
from the Hour of Twelve to Three, which the Sages of that Board employ in
Conference, while the unthinking Part of Mankind are eating and drinking for
the Support of their own private Persons, without any Regard to the Public.

SIR,
I Should have waited on you very frequently to have discoursed you upon some
Matters of Moment, but that I love to be well informed in the Subject upon
which I consult my Friends before I enter into Debate with them. I have
therefore with the utmost Care and Pains applied my self to the reading all the
Writings and Pamphlets which have come out since the Trial, and have studied
Night and Day in order to be Master of the whole Controversy: But the Authors
are so numerous, and the State of Affairs alters so very fast, that I am now a
Fortnight behindhand in my Reading, and know only how Things stood Twelve Days
ago. I wish you would enter into those useful Subjects; for, if I may be
allowed to say so, these are not Times to jest in. As for my own Part, you know
very well, that I am of a public Spirit, and never regarded my own Interest,
but looked further; and let me tell you, that while some People are minding
only themselves and Families, and others are thinking only of their own
Country, Thing go on strangely in the North. I foresee very great Evils arising
from the Neglect of Transactions at a Distance; for which Reason I am now
writing a Letter to a Friend in the Country, which I design as an Answer to the
Czar of Muscovy's Letter to the Grand Signior concerning his Majesty of Sweden.
I have endeavored to prove, that it is not reasonable to expect that his
Swedish Majesty should leave Bender without Forty Thousand Men; and I have
added to this, an Apology for the Cossacks. But the Matter multiplies upon me,
and I grow dim with much Writing; therefore desire, if you have an old green
Pair of Spectacles, such as you used about your Fiftieth Year, that you send
them to me; as also, that you would please to desire Mr. Morphew to send me in
a Bushel of Coals on the Credit of my Answer to his Czarian Majesty; for I
design it shall be printed for Morphew, and the Weather grows sharp. I shall
take it kindly if you would order him also to send me the Papers as they come
out. If there are no fresh Pamphlets published, I compute that I shall know
before the End of next Month what has been done in Town to this Day. If it were
not for an ill Custom lately introduced by a certain Author, of talking Latin
at the Beginning of Papers, Matters would be in a much clearer Light than they
are: But to our Comfort, there are solid Writers who are not guilty of this
Pedantry. The Post-Man writes like an Angel: The Moderator is fine Reading! It
would do you no Harm to read the Post-Boy with Attention; he is very deep of
late. He is Instructive; but I confess a little Satirical: A sharp Pen! He
cares not what he says. The Examiner is admirable, and is become a grave and
substantial Author. But above all, I am at a Loss how to govern my self in my
Judgment of those whose whole Writings consist in Interrogatories: And then the
Way of answering, by proposing Questions as hard to them, is quite as
extraordinary. As for my Part, I tremble at these Novelties; we expose, in my
Opinion, our Affairs too much by it. You may be sure the French King will spare
no Cost to come at the reading of them. I dread to think if the Fable of the
Black Birds should fall into his Hands. But I shall not venture to say more
till I see you. In the mean Time,

I am, etc.
P. S. I take the Bender Letter in the Examiner to be spurious.




This unhappy Correspondent, whose fantastical Loyalty to the King of Sweden
has reduced him to this low Condition of Reason and Fortune, would appear much
more monstrous in his Madness, did we not see Crowds very little above his
Circumstances from the same Cause, a Passion to Politics.

It is no unpleasant Entertainment to consider the Commerce even of the Sexes
interrupted by Difference in State Affairs. A Wench and her Gallant parted last
Week upon the Words Unlimited and Passive: And there is such a Jargon of Terms
got into the Mouths of the very silliest of the Women, that you cannot come
into a Room even among them, but you find them divided into Whig and Tory. What
heightens the Humor is, that all the hard Words they know, they certainly
suppose to be Terms useful in the Disputes of the Parties. I came in this Day
where Two were in very hot Debate, and one of them proposed to me to explain to
them what was the Difference between Circumcision and Predestination. You may
be sure I was at a Loss; but they were too angry at each other to wait for my
Explanation, but proceeded to lay open the whole State of Affairs, instead of
the usual Topics of Dress, Gallantry and Scandal.

I have often wondered how it should be possible that this Turn to Politics
should so universally prevail, to the Exclusion of every other Subject out of
Conversation; and upon mature Consideration, find it is for Want of Discourse.
Look round you among all the young Fellows you meet, and you see those who have
least Relish for Books, Company, or Pleasure, though they have no Manner of
Qualities to make them succeed in those Pursuits, shall make very passable
Politicians. Thus the most barren Invention shall find enough to say to make
one appear an able Man in the Top-Coffee-houses. It is but adding a certain
Vehemence in uttering your self, let the Thing you say be never so flat, and
you shall be thought a very sensible Man, if you were not too hot. As Love and
Honor are the noblest Motives of Life; so the Pretenders to them, without
being animated by them, are the most contemptible of all Sorts of Pretenders.
The unjust Affectation of any Thing that is laudable, is ignominious in
Proportion to the Worth of the Thing we affect: Thus, as Love of one's Country
is the most glorious of all Passions, to see the most ordinary Tools in a
Nation give themselves Airs that Way, without any one good Quality in their own
Life, has something in it Romantic, yet not so ridiculous as odious.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Mr. Bickerstaff has received Silvia's Letter from the Bath, and his Sister is
set out thither. Tom. Frontley, who is one of the Guides for the Town, is
desired to bring her into Company, and oblige her with a Mention in his next
Lampoon.

The TATLER. [No 233.
-- Sunt certa Piacula, quae te
Ter pure Lecto poterunt recreare Libello.
Hor.
From Tuesd. October. 3. to Thursd. October. 5. 1710.
From my own Apartment, October. 4.
WHEN the Mind has been perplexed with anxious Cares and Passions, the best
Method of bringing it to its usual State of Tranquillity, is, as much as we
possibly can, to turn our Thoughts to the Adversities of Persons of higher
Consideration in Virtue and Merit than our selves. By this Means all the little
Incidents of our own Lives, if they are unfortunate, seem to be the Effect of
Justice upon our Faults and Indiscretions. When those whom we know to be
excellent and deserving of a better Fate are wretched, we cannot but resign our
selves, whom most of us know to merit a much worse State than that we are
placed in. For such and many other Occasions, there is one admirable Relation
which one might recommend for certain Periods of one's Life, to touch, comfort,
and improve the Heart of Man. Tully says, somewhere, The Pleasures of an
Husbandman are next to those of a Philosopher. In like Manner one may say, (for
methinks they bear the same Proportion one to another) the Pleasures of
Humanity are next to those of Devotion. In both these latter Satisfactions,
there is a certain Humiliation which exalts the Soul above its ordinary State.
At the same Time that it lessens our Value of our selves, it enlarges our
Estimation of others. The History I am going to speak of, is that of Joseph in
Holy Writ, which is related with such Majestic Simplicity, that all the Parts
of it strike us with strong Touches of Nature and Compassion, and he must be a
Stranger to both who can read it with Attention, and not be overwhelmed with
the Vicissitudes of Joy and Sorrow. I hope it will not be a Profanation to
tell it ones own Way here, that they who may be unthinking enough to be more
frequently Readers of such Papers as this than of Sacred Writ, may be
advertised, that the greatest Pleasures the Imagination can be entertained with
are to be found there, and that even the Style of the Scriptures is more than
Humane.

Joseph, a beloved Child of Israel, became invidious to his elder Brethren, for
no other Reason but his superior Beauty and Excellence of Body and Mind,
insomuch that they could not bear his growing Virtue, and let him live. They
therefore conspire his Death; but Nature pleaded so strongly for him in the
Heart of one of them, that by his Persuasion they determined rather to bury him
in a Pit, than be his immediate Executioners with their own Hands. When thus
much was obtained for him, their Minds still softened toward him, and they
took the Opportunity of some Passengers to sell him into Egypt. Israel was
persuaded by the Artifice of his Sons, that the Youth was torn to Pieces by
Wild Beasts: But Joseph was sold to Slavery, and still exposed to new
Misfortunes, from the same Cause as before, his Beauty and his Virtue. By a
false Accusation he was committed to Prison, but in Process of Time delivered
from it, in Consideration of his Wisdom and Knowledge, and made the Governor of
Pharaoh's House. In this Elevation of his Fortune, his Brothers were sent into
Egypt to buy Necessaries of Life in a Famine. As soon as they are brought into
his Presence, he beholds, but he beholds with Compassion, the Men who had sold
him to Slavery approaching him with Awe and Reverence. While he was looking
over his Brethren, he takes a Resolution to indulge himself in the Pleasure of
stirring their and his own Affections, by keeping himself concealed, and
examining into the Circumstances of their Family. For this End, with an Air of
Severity, as a watchful Minister to Pharaoh, he accuses them as Spies, who are
come into Egypt with Designs against the State. This led them into the Account
which he wanted of them, the Condition of their ancient Father and little
Brother, whom they had left behind them. When he had learned that his Brother
was living, he demands the bringing him to Egypt, as a Proof of their Veracity.

But it would be a vain and empty Endeavor to attempt laying this excellent
Representation of the Passions of Man in the same Colors as they appear in the
Sacred Writ in any other Manner, or almost any other Words, than those made use
of in the Page it self. I am obliged therefore to turn my designed Narration
rather into a Comment upon the several Parts of that beautiful and passionate
Scene. When Joseph expects to see Benjamin, How natural, and how forcible is
the Reflection, This Affliction is come upon us in that we saw the Anguish of
our Brother's Soul without Pity? How moving must it be to Joseph to hear Reuben
accuse the rest, that they would not hear what he pleaded in Behalf of his
Innocence and Distress? He turns from them and weeps, but commands his Passion
so far as to give Orders for binding one of them in the Presence of the rest,
while he at Leisure observed their different Sentiments and Concern in their
Gesture and Countenance. When Benjamin is demanded in Bondage for stealing the
Cup, With what Force, and what Resignation does Judah address his Brother?

In what Words shall I speak to my Lord; with what Confidence can I say any
Thing? Our Guilt is but too apparent, we submit to our Fate. We are my Lord's
Servants, both we and he also with whom the Cup is found. When that is not
accepted, How pathetically does he recapitulate the whole Story? And
approaching nearer to Joseph, delivers himself as follows; which, if we fix our
Thoughts upon the Relation between the Pleader and the Judge, it is impossible
to read without Tears.

SIR,
Let me intrude so far upon you even in the high Condition in which you are,
and the miserable One in which you see me and my Brethren, to inform you of the
Circumstances of us unhappy Men that prostrate our selves before you. When we
were first examined by you, you enquired, (for what Reason my Lord enquired we
know not;) but you enquired whether we had not a Father or a Brother? We then
acquainted you, that we had a Father, an old Man, who had a Child of his old
Age, and had buried another Son whom he had by the same Woman. You were pleased
to command us to bring the Child he had remaining down to you: We did so, and
he has forfeited his Liberty. But my Father said to us, You know that my Wife
bare me Two Sons, one of them was torn in Pieces: If Mischief befall this also,
it will bring my Gray Hairs with Sorrow to the Grave. Accept, therefore, Oh my
Lord! me for your Bondman, and let the Lad return with his Brethren, that I
may not see the Evil that shall come on my Father. Here Joseph's Passion grew
too great for further Disguise, and he reveals himself with Exclamations of
Transport and Tenderness.

After their Recovery from their first Astonishment, his Brethren were seized
with Fear for the Injuries they had done him; but how generously does he keep
them in Countenance, and make an Apology for them: Be not angry with your
selves for selling me hither; call it not so, but think Providence sent me
before you to preserve Life.

It would be endless to go through all the Beauties of this sacred Narrative;
but any who shall read it, at an Hour when he is disengaged from all other
Regard or Interests than what arise from it, will feel the alternate Passion of
a Father, a Brother, and a Son, so warm in him, that they will incline him to
exert himself (in such of those Characters as happen to be his) much above the
ordinary Course of his Life.


The TATLER. [No 234.
From Thursd. October. 5. to Saturd. October. 7. 1710.
From my own Apartment, October 6.
I HAVE Reason to believe, that certain of my Contemporaries have made Use of
an Art (I some time ago professed) of being often designedly dull; and for that
Reason shall not exert my self when I see them lazy. He that has so much to
struggle with as the Man who pretends to censure others, must keep up his Fire
for an Onset, and may be allowed to carry his Arms a little carelessly upon an
ordinary March. This Paper therefore shall be taken up by my Correspondents,
Two of which have sent me the Two following plain, but sensible and honest
Letters, upon Subjects no less important than those of Education and Devotion.

SIR,
I Am an old Man, retired from all Acquaintance with the Town, but what I have
from your Papers (not the worst Entertainment of my Solitude;) yet being still
a Well-wisher to my Country and the Commonwealth of Learning (a qua, confitcor,
nullam Aetatis meae Partem abhorruisse;) and hoping the plain Phrase in Writing
that was current in my younger Days would have lasted for my Time, I was
startled at the Picture of modern Politeness (transmitted by your ingenious
Correspondent), and grieved to see our Sterling English Language fallen into
the Hands of Clippers and Coyners. That mutilated Epistle, consisting of Hippo,
Rep's, and suchlike enormous Curtailings, was a mortifying Spectacle, but with
the Reserve of Comfort to find this, and other Abuses of our Mother Tongue, so
pathetically complained of, and to the proper Person for redressing them, the
Censor of Great Britain.

He had before represented, the deplorable Ignorance that for several Years
past has reigned amongst our English Writers, the great Depravity of our Taste,
and continual Corruption of our Style: But, Sir, before you give your self the
Trouble of prescribing Remedies for these Distempers, (which you own will
require the greatest Care and Application) give me Leave (having long had my
Eye upon these Mischiefs, and Thoughts exercised about them) to mention what I
humbly conceive to be the Cause of them, and in your Friend Horace's Words, Quo
Font derivata Clades in Patriam Populumque fluxit.

I take our corrupt Ways of Writing to proceed from the Mistakes and wrong
Measures in our common Methods of Education, which I always looked upon as one
of our National Grievances, and a Singularity that renders us no less than our
Situation, -- Penitus toto divisos Orb Britannos.
This puts me upon consulting the most celebrated Critics on that Subject, to
compare our Practice with their Precepts, and find where it was that we came
short or went wide.

But after all, I found our Case required something more than these Doctors had
directed, and the principal Defect of our English Discipline to lie in the
Initiatory Part, which, although it needs the greatest Care and Skill, is usually
left to the Conduct of those blind Guides, viz. Chance and Ignorance.

I shall trouble you with but a single Instance, pursuant to what your
sagacious Friend has said, That he could furnish you with a Catalogue of
English Books, that would cost you a Hundred Pounds at first Hand, wherein you
could not find Ten Lines together of common Grammar; which is a necessary
Consequence of our Mismanagement in that Province.

For can any Thing be more absurd than our Way of Proceeding in this Part of
Literature? To push tender Wits into the intricate Mazes of Grammar, and a
Latin Grammar? To learn an unknown Art by an unknown Tongue? To carry them a
dark Round-about Way to let them in at a Backdoor? Whereas by teaching them
first the Grammar of their Mother Tongue, (so easy to be learned) their Advance
to the Grammars of Latin and Greek would be gradual and easy; but our
precipitate Way of hurrying them over such a Gulf, before we have built them a
Bridge to it, is a Shock to their weak Understandings, which they seldom, or
very late, recover. In the mean Time we wrong Nature, and slander Infants, who
want neither Capacity nor Will to learn, till we put them upon Service beyond
their Strength, and then indeed we baulk them.

The Liberal Arts and Sciences are all beautiful as the Graces; nor has Grammar
(the severe Mother of all) so frightful a Face of her Own; it is the Vizard put
upon it that scares Children. She is made to speak hard Words, that to them
sound like Conjuring. Let her talk intelligibly, and they will listen to her.

In this, I think, as on other Accounts, we show our selves true Britains,
always overlooking our natural Advantages. It has been the Practice of wisest
Nations to learn their own Language by stated Rules, to avoid the Confusion
that would follow from leaving it to vulgar Use. Our English Tongue (says a
learned Man) is the most determinate in its Construction, and reducible to the
fewest Rules Whatever Language has less Grammar in it, is not intelligible; and
whatever has more, all that it has more is superfluous; for which Reasons he
would have it made the Foundation of learning Latin, and all other Languages.

To speak and write without Absurdity the Language of one's Country, is
commendable in Persons of all Stations, and to some indispensibly necessary;
and to this Purpose, I would recommend above all Things the having a Grammar of
our Mother Tongue first taught in our Schools, which would facilitate our
Youths learning their Latin and Greek Grammars, with spare Time for
Arithmetic, Astronomy, Cosmography, History, etc. that would make them pass
the Spring of their Life with Profit and Pleasure, that is now miserably spent
in Grammatical Perplexities.

But here, methinks, I see the Reader smile, and ready to ask me, (as the
Lawyer did Sexton Diego on his bequeathing rich Legacies to the Poor of the
Parish. Where are these mighty Sums to be raised?) Where is there such a
Grammar to be had? I will not answer, as he did, Even where your Worship
pleases. No, it is our good Fortune to have such a Grammar, with Notes, now in
the Press, and to be published next Term.

I hear it is a chargeable Work, and wish the Publisher to have Customers of
all that have Need of such a Book; yet fancy that he cannot be much a Sufferer,
if it is only bought by all that have more Need for it than they think they
have.

A certain Author brought a Poem to Mr. Cowley, for his Perusal and Judgment of
the Performance, which he demanded at the next Visit with a Poetaster's
Assurance; and Mr. Cowley, with his usual Modesty, desired that he would be
pleased to look a little to the Grammar of it. To the Grammar of it! What do
you mean, Sir? Would you send me to School again? Why Mr. H --, Would it do you
any Harm?

This put me on considering how this Voyage of Literature may be made with more
Safety and Profit, Expedition and Delight; and at last, for completing so good
a Service, to request your Directions in so deplorable a Case; hoping that, as
you have had Compassion on our overgrown Coxcombs in Concerns of less
Consequence, you will exert your Charity toward Innocents, and vouchsafe to be
Guardian to the Children and Youth of Great Britain in this important Affair of
Education, wherein Mistakes and wrong Measures have so often occasioned their
Aversion to Books, that had otherwise proved the chief Ornament and Pleasure of
their Life. I am with sincerest Respect,

SIR, Your, etc.


St. Cl -- nts, Oct. 5. Mr. Bickerstaff,
I Observe, as the Season begins to grow cold, so does People's Devotion;
insomuch that instead of filling the Churches, that united Zeal might keep one
warm there, one is left to freeze in almost bare Walls, by those who in hot
Weather are troublesome the contrary Way. This, Sir, needs a Regulation that
none but you can give to it, by causing those who absent themselves on Account
of Weather only this Wintertime, to pay the Apothecaries Bills occasioned by
Coughs, Catarrhs, and other Distempers contracted by sitting in empty Seats.
Therefore to you I apply my self for Redress, having gotten such a Cold on
Sunday was Sevenight, that has brought me almost to your Worship's Age from
Sixty within less than a Fortnight. I am

Your Worship's in all Obedience, W. E.


The TATLER. [No 235.
Scit Genius natale Comes qui temperat Astrum.
Hor.
From Saturd. October. 7. to Tuesday October. 10. 1710.
From my own Apartment, October 9.
AMong those Inclinations which are common to all Men, there is none more
unaccountable than that unequal Love by which Parents distinguish their
Children from each other. Sometimes Vanity and Self-love appear to have a Share
toward this Effect; and in other Instances I have been apt to attribute it to
mere Instinct: But however that is, we frequently see the Child that has been
beholden to neither of these Impulses in their Parents, in spite of being
neglected, snubbed, and thwarted at Home, acquire a Behavior which makes it as
agreeable to all the rest of the World, as that of every one else of their
Family is to each other. I fell into this Way of Thinking from an Intimacy
which I have with a very good House in our Neighborhood, where there are Three
Daughters of a very different Character and Genius. The eldest has a great deal
of Wit and Cunning; the Second has good Sense, but no Artifice; the Third has
much Vivacity, but little Understanding. The First is a fine, but scornful
Woman; the Second is not charming, but very winning; the Third no Way
commendable, but very desirable. The Father of these young Creatures was ever a
great Pretender to Wit, the Mother a Woman of as much Coquettry. This Turn in
the Parents has biassed their Affections toward their Children. The old Man
supposes the eldest of his own Genius, and the Mother looks upon the youngest
as her self renewed. By this Means, all the Lovers that approach the House are
discarded by the Father for not observing Mrs. Mary's Wit and Beauty, and by
the Mother for being blind to the Mien and Air of Mrs. Biddy. Come never so
many Pretenders, they are not suspected to have the least Thoughts of Mrs.
Betty, the middle Daughter. Betty therefore is mortified into a Woman of a
great deal of Merit, and knows she must depend on that only for her
Advancement. The middlemost is thus the Favorite of all her Acquaintance as
well as mine, while the other Two carry a certain Insolence about them in all
Conversations, and expect the Partiality which they meet with at Home to attend
them wherever they appear. So little do Parents understand that they are of all
People the least Judges of their Children's Merit, that what they reckon such
is seldom any Thing else but a Repetition of their own Faults and Infirmities.

There is, methinks, some Excuse for being particular, when one of the
Offspring has any Defect in Nature. In this Case, the Child, if we may so
speak, is so much the longer the Child of its Parents, and calls for the
Continuance of their Care and Indulgence from the Slowness of its Capacity, or
the Weakness of its Body. But there is no enduring to see Men enamoured only at
the Sight of their own Impertinencies repeated, and to observe, as we may
sometimes, that they have a secret Dislike of their Children for a Degeneracy
from their very Crimes. Commend me to Lady Goodly; she is equal to all her own
Children, but prefers them to those of all the World beside. My Lady is a
perfect Hen in the Care of her Brood; she fights and squabbles with all that
appear where they come, but is wholly unbiassed in dispensing her Favors among
them. It is no small Pains she is at to defame all the young Women in her
Neighborhood by Visits, Whispers, Intimations, and Hearsays; all which she
ends with thanking Heaven, that no one living is so blessed with such obedient
and well inclined Children as her self. Perhaps, says she, Betty cannot dance
like Mrs. Frontinett, and it is no great Matter whether she does or not; but
she comes into a Room with a good Grace; though she says it that should not,
she looks like a Gentlewoman. Then if Mrs. Rebecca is not so talkative as the
mighty Wit Mrs. Clapper, yet she is discreet, she knows better what she says
when she does speak. If her Wit be slow, her Tongue never runs before it. This
kind Parent lifts up her Eyes and Hands in Congratulation of her own good
Fortune, and is maliciously thankful that none of her Girls are like any of her
Neighbors: But this Preference of her own to all others, is grounded upon an
Impulse of Nature; while those who like one before another of their own, are so
unpardonably unjust, that it could hardly be equalled in the Children, though
they preferred all the rest of the World to such Parents. It is no unpleasant
Entertainment to see a Ball at a Dancing-School, and observe the Joy of
Relations when the young Ones, for whom they are concerned, are in Motion. You
need not be told whom the Dancers belong to. At their first Appearance the
Passion of their Parents are in their Faces, and there is always a Nod of
Approbation stolen at a good Step, or a graceful Turn.

I remember among all my Acquaintance but one Man whom I have thought to live
with his Children with Equanimity and a good Grace. He had Three Sons and One
Daughter, whom he bred with all the Care imaginable in a liberal and ingenuous
Way. I have often heard him say, He had the Weakness to love one much better
than the other, but that he took as much Pains to correct that as any other
Criminal Passion that could arise in his Mind. His Method was, to make it the
only Pretension in his Children to his Favor to be kind to each other; and he
would tell them, That he who was the best Brother, he would reckon the best
Son. This turned their Thoughts into an Emulation for the Superiority in kind
and tender Affection toward each other. The Boys behaved themselves very early
with a Manly Friendship; and their Sister, instead of the gross Familiarities
and impertinent Freedoms in Behavior, usual in other Houses, was always
treated by them with as much Complaisance as any other young Lady of their
Acquaintance. It was an unspeakable Pleasure to visit or sit at Meal in that
Family. I have often seen the old Man's Heart flow at his Eyes with Joy upon
Occasions which would appear indifferent to such as were Strangers to the Turn
of his Mind; but a very slight Accident, wherein he saw his Children's
Good Will to one another, created in him the God-like Pleasure of loving them,
because they loved each other. This great Command of himself, in hiding his
first Impulse to Partiality, at last improved to a steady Justice toward them;
and that which at first was but an Expedient to correct his Weakness, was
afterward the Measure of his Virtue.

The Truth of it is, those Parents who are interested in the Care of one Child
more than that of another, no longer deserve the Name of Parents, but are in
Effect as childish as their Children, in having such unreasonable and
ungoverned Inclinations. A Father of this Sort has degraded himself into one of
his own Offspring; for none but a Child would take Part in the Passions of
Children.

The TATLER. [No 236.
Nescio qua natale Solum Dulcedine Mentem
Tangit, and immemorem non sinit esse sui.
Ovid.
From Tuesday October. 10. to Thursday October. 12. 1710.
From my own Apartment, October 11.
I Find in the Registers of my Family, that the Branch of the Bickerstaffs,
from which I am descended, came originally out of Ireland. This has given me a
Kind of natural Affection for that Country. It is therefore with Pleasure that
I see not only some of the greatest Warriors, but also of the greatest Wits, to
be Natives of that Kingdom. The Gentleman who writes the following Letter is
one of these last. The Matter of Fact contained in it is literally true, though
the diverting Manner in which it is told may give it the Color of a Fable.

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire at his House in Great Britain.
Dublin. SIR,
FInding by several Passages of your Tatlers, that you are a Person curious in
Natural Knowledge, I thought it would not be unacceptable to you to give you
the following History of the Migration of Frogs into this Country. There is an
ancient Tradition among the wild Philosophers of the Kingdom, That this whole
Island was once as much infested by Frogs, as that wherein Whittington made his
Fortune was by Mice. Insomuch that it is said, Mackdonald the First could no
more sleep by reason of these Dutch Nightingales, (as they are called at Paris)
than Pharaoh could when they croaked in his Bedchamber. It was in the Reign of
this great Monarch that St. Patrick arrived in Ireland, being as famous for
destroying Vermin as any Rat-catcher of our Times. If we may believe the
Tradition, he killed more in one Day than a Flock of Storks could have done in
a Twelvemonth. From that Time for about Five hundred Years, there was not a
Frog to be heard in Ireland, notwithstanding the Bogs still remained, which in
former Ages had been so plentifully stocked with those Inhabitants.

When the Arts began to flourish in the Reign of King Charles the Second, and
that great Monarch had placed himself at the Head of the Royal Society, to lead
them forward into the Discoveries of Nature, it is said, That several Proposals
were laid before his Majesty for the importing of Frogs into Ireland. In order
to it, a Virtuoso of known Abilities was unanimously elected by the Society,
and entrusted with the whole Management of that Affair. For this End he took
along with him a sound Able-bodied Frog, of a strong hale Constitution, that
had given Proofs of his Vigor by several Leaps which he made before that
Learned Body. They took Ship, and sailed together till they came within Sight
of the Hill of Hoath, before the Frog discovered any Symptoms of being
indisposed by his Voyage: But as the Wind chopped about, and began to blow from
the Irish Coast, he grew Sea-sick, or rather Land-sick; for his learned
Companion ascribed it to the Particles of the Soil with which the Wind was
impregnated. He was confirmed in his Conjecture, when, upon the Wind's turning
about, his Fellow Traveller sensibly recovered, and continued in good Health
till his Arrival upon the Shore, where he suddenly relapsed, and expired upon a
Ring's- End Car in his Way to Dublin. The same Experiment was repeated several
Times in that Reign, but to no Purpose. A Frog was never known to take Three
Leaps upon Irish Turf, before he stretched himself out and died.

Whether it were that the Philos;ophers on this Side the Water despaired of
^ocking the Island with this useful Animal, or whether in the following Reign
it was not thought proper to undo the Miracle of a Popish Saint, I do not hear
of any further Progress made in this Affair till about Two Years after the
Battle of the Boyne.

It was then that an ingenious Physician, to the Honor as well as Improvement
of his Native Country, performed what the English had been so long attempting
in vain. This learned Man, with the Hazard of his Life, made a Voyage to
Leverpool, where he filled several Barrels with the choicest Spawn of Frogs
that could be found in those Parts. This Cargo he brought over very carefully,
and afterward disposed of it in several warm Beds that he thought most capable
of bringing it to Life. The Doctor was a very ingenious Physician, and a very
good Protestant; for which Reason, to show his Zeal against Popery, he placed
some of the most promising Spawn in the very Fountain that is dedicated to the
Saint, and known by the Name of St. Patrick's Well, where these Animals had the
Impudence to make their first Appearance. They have since that Time very much
increased and multiplied in all the Neighborhood of this City. We have here
some curious Enquirers into Natural History who observe their Motions, with a
Design to compute in how many Years they will be able to hop from Dublin to
Wexford; though, as I am informed, not one of them has yet passed the Mountains
of Wicklow.

I am further informed, that several Grasiers of the County of Cork have
entered into a Project of planting a Colony in those Parts, at the Instance of
the French Protestants: And I know not but the same Design may be on Foot in
other Parts of the Kingdom, if the Wisdom of the British Nation do not think
fit to prohibit the further Importation of English Frogs. I am,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, T. B.


There is no Study more becoming a rational Creature, than that of Natural
Philosophy; but as several of our modern Virtuoso's manage it, their
Speculations do not so much tend to open and enlarge the Mind, as to contract
and fix it upon Trifles.

This in England is in a great Measure owing to the worthy Elections that are
so frequently made in our Royal Society. They seem to be in a Confederacy
against Men of polite Genius, noble Thought, and diffusive Learning; and choose
into their Assemblies such as have no Pretense to Wisdom, but Want of Wit; or
to natural Knowledge, but Ignorance of every Thing else. I have made
Observations in this Matter so long, that when I meet with a young Fellow that
is an humble Admirer of the Sciences, but more dull than the rest of the
Company, I conclude him to be a Fellow of the Royal Society.

The TATLER. [No 237.
In nova fert Animus mutatas dicere Formas
Corpora. --
Ovid.
From Thursd. October. 12. to Saturd. October. 14. 1710.
From my own Apartment, October 13.
COming Home last Night before my usual Hour, I took a Book into my Hand, in
order to divert my self with it till Bedtime. Milton chanced to be my Author,
whose admirable Poem of Paradise Lost serves, at once, to fill the Mind with
pleasing Idea's, and with good Thoughts, and was therefore the most proper Book
for my Purpose. I was amusing my self with that beautiful Passage in which the
Poet represents Eve sleeping by Adam's Side, with the Devil sitting at her Ear,
and inspiring evil Thoughts under the Shape of a Toad. Ithuriel, one of the
Guardian Angels of the Place, walking his Nightly Rounds, saw the great Enemy
of Mankind hid in this loathsome Animal, which he touched with his Spear. This
Spear being of a Celestial Temper, had such a secret Virtue in it, that
whatever it was applied to, immediately flung off all Disguise, and appeared in
its natural Figure. I am afraid the Reader will not pardon me if I content my
self with explaining the Passage in Prose, without giving it in the Author's
own inimitable Words:

-- On he led his radiant Files,
Dazzling the Morn: These to the Bower direct,
In Search of whom they sought. Him there they found,
Squat like a Toad, close at the Ear of Eve;
Essaying by his devilish Art to reach
The Organs of her Fancy, and with them forge
Illusions as he list, Phantasms and Dreams;
Or if, inspiring Venom, he might taint
The Animal Spirits (that from pure Blood arise
Like gentle Breaths from Rivers pure) thence raise
At least distempered, discontented Thoughts,
Vain Hopes, vain Aims, inordinate Destres,
Blown up with high Conceits, ingendring Pride.
Him thus intent, Ithuriel with his Spear
Touched lightly; for no Falsehood can endure
Touch of Celestial Temper, but returns
Of Force to his own Likeness. Up he starts,
Discovered and surpised. As when a Spark
Lights on a Heap of nitrous Powder, laid
Fit for the Tun, some Magazine to store
Against a rumored War, the smutty Grain,
With sudden Blaze diffused, inflames the Air;
So started up in his own Shape the Fiend.
I could not forbear thinking how happy a Man would be in the Possession of
this Spear; or what an Advantage it would be to a Minister of State, were he
Master of such a White Staff. It would let him discover his Friends from his
Enemies, Men of Abilities from Pretenders: It would hinder him from being
imposed upon by Appearances and Professions, and might be made use of as a Kind
of State Test, which no Artifice could elude.

These Thoughts made very lively Impressions on my Imagination, which were
improved, instead of being defaced by Sleep, and produced in me the following
Dream: I was no sooner fallen asleep, but, methoughts, the Angel Ithuriel
appeared to me, and with a Smile that still added to his Celestial Beauty, made
me a Present of the Spear which he held in his Hand, and disappeared. To make
Trial of it, I went into a Place of public Resort.

The first Person that passed by me, was a Lady that had a particular Shyness
in the Cast of her Eye, and a more than ordinary Reservedness in all the Parts
of her Behavior. She seemed to look upon Man as an obscene Creature, with a
certain Scorn and Fear of him. In the Height of her Airs I touched her gently
with my Wand, when, to my unspeakable Surprise, she fell upon her Back, and
kicked up her Heels in such a Manner, as made me blush in my Sleep. As I was
hasting away from this undisguised Prude, I saw a Lady in earnest Discourse
with another, and overheard her say with some Vehemence, Never tell me of him,
for I am resolved to die a Virgin! I had a Curiosity to try her; but as soon as
I laid my Wand upon her Head, she immediately fell in Labor. My Eyes were
diverted from her by a Man and his Wife, who walked near me Hand in Hand after
a very loving Manner. I gave each of them a gentle Tap, and the next Instant
saw the Woman in Breeches, and the Man with a Fan in his Hand. It would be
tedious to describe the long Series of Metamorphoses that I entertained my self
with in my Night's Adventure, of Whigs disguised in Tories, and Tories in
Whigs; Men in Red Coats that denounced Terror in their Countenances, trembling
at the Touch of my Spear; others in Black with Peace in their Mouths, but
Swords in their Hands. I could tell Stories of Noblemen changed into Usurers,
and Magistrates into Beadles; of Free-Thinkers into Penitents, and Reformers
into Whoremasters. I must not however omit the Mention of a grave Citizen that
passed by me with an huge Clasped Bible under his Arm, and a Band of a most
immoderate Breadth; but upon a Touch on the Shoulder, he let drop his Book, and
fell a picking my Pocket.

In the general I observed, that those who appeared good, often disappointed my
Expectation; but that on the contrary, those who appeared very bad, still grew
worse upon the Experiment; as the Toad in Milton, which one would have thought
the most deformed Part of the Creation, at Ithuriel's Stroke, became more
deformed, and started up into a Devil.

Among all the Persons that I touched, there was but one who stood the Test of
my Wand; and after many Repetitions of the Stroke, stuck to his Form, and
remained steady and fixed in his first Appearance. This was a young Man who
boasted of foul Distempers, wild Debauches, Insults upon holy Men, and Affronts
to Religion.

My Heart was extremely troubled at this Vision: The Contemplation of the whole
Species, so entirely sunk in Corruption, filled my Mind with a Melancholy that
is inexpressible, and my Discoveries still added to my Affliction.

In the Midst of these Sorrows which I had in my Heart, methoughts there passed
by me a Couple of Coaches with Purple Liveries. There sat in each of them a
Person with a very venerable Aspect. At the Appearance of them, the People who
were gathered round me in great Multitudes divided into Parties, as they were
disposed to favor either of those reverend Persons: The Enemies of one of them
begged me to touch him with my Wand, and assured me, I should see his Lawn
converted into a Cloak. The opposite Party told me with as much Assurance, That
if I laid my Wand upon the other, I should see his Garments embroidered with
Flower-de-Luces, and his Head covered with a Cardinal's Cap. I made the
Experiment, and to my great Joy, saw them both, without any Change,
distributing their Blessings to the People, and praying for those who had
reviled them. Is it possible, thought I, that good Men, who are so few in
Number, should be divided among themselves, and give better Quarter to the
Vicious that are in their Party, than the most strictly Virtuous who are out of
it? Are the Ties of Faction above those of Religion? -- I was going on in my
Soliloquies, but some sudden Accident awakened me, when I found my Hand
grasped, but my Spear gone. The Reflection on so very odd a Dream made me
figure to my self, What a strange Face the World would bear, should all Mankind
appear in their proper Shapes and Characters, without Hypocrisy and Disguise? I
am afraid, the Earth we live upon would appear to other intellectual Beings no
better than a Planet peopled with Monsters. This should, methinks, inspire us
with an honest Ambition of recommending our selves to those invisible Spies,
and of being what we would appear. There was one Circumstance in my foregoing
Dream which I at first intended to conceal; but upon second Thoughts, I cannot
look upon my self as a candid and impartial Historian, if I do not acquaint my
Reader, that upon taking Ithuriel's Spear into my Hand, though I was before an
old decrepid Fellow, I appeared a very handsome, jolly, black Man. But I know
my Enemies will say, this is praising my own Beauty, for which Reason I will
speak no more of it.

The TATLER. [No 238.
-- Poetica surgit
Tempestas --
Juv.
From Saturd. October. 14. to Tuesd. October. 17. 1710.
From my own Apartment, October 16.
STorms at Sea are so frequently described by the ancient Poets, and copied by
the Moderns, that whenever I find the Winds begin to rise in a new Heroic
Poem, I generally skip a Leaf or Two till I come into Fair Weather. Virgil's
Tempest is a Masterpiece in this Kind, and is indeed so naturally drawn, that
one who has made a Voyage can scarce read it without being Seasick.

Land Showers are no less frequent among the Poets than the former, but I
remember none of them which have not fallen in the Country; for which Reason
they are generally filled with the Lowings of Oxen, and the Bleatings of Sheep,
and very often embellished with a Rainbow.

Virgil's Land Shower is likewise the best in its Kind: It is indeed a Shower
of Consequence, and contributes to the main Design of the Poem, by cutting off
a tedious Ceremonial, and bringing Matters to a speedy Conclusion between Two
Potentates of different Sexes. My ingenious Kinsman Mr. Humphry Wagstaff, who
treats of every Subject after a Manner that no other Author has done, and
better than any other can do, has sent me the Description of a City Shower. I
do not question but the Reader remembers my Cousin's Description of the Morning
as it breaks in Town, which is printed in the 9th Tatler, and is another
exquisite Piece of this Local Poetry:

Careful Observers may foretell the Hour
(By sure Prognostics) when to dread a Shower:
While Rain depends, the pensive Cat gives over
Her Frolicks, and pursues her Tail no more.
Returning Home at Night, you will find the Sink
Strike your offended Sense with double Stink.
If you be wise, then go not far to dine,
You Will spend in Coach-hire more than save in Wine.
A coming Shower your shooting Corns presage,
Old Aches throb, your hollow Tooth will rage.
Sauntring in Coffee-house is Dulman seen;
He damns the Climate, and complains of Spleen.
Mean while the South rising with dabbled Wings,
A Sable Cloud athwart the Welkin flings,
That swill'd more Liquor than it could contain,
And like a Drunkard gives it up again.
Brisk Susan whips her Linen from the Rope,
While the first drizzling Shower is born aslope.
Such is that Sprinkling which some careless Queen
Flirts on you from her Mop, but not so clean.
You fly, invoke the Gods; then turning, stop
To rail; she singing, still whirls on her Mop.
Not yet, the Dust had shunned the unequal Strife,
But aided by the Wind, fought still for Life;
And wafted with its Foe by violent Gust,
'Twas doubtful which was Rain, and which was Dust.
Ah! where must needy Poet seek for Aid,
When Dust and Rain at once his Coat invade;
His only Coat, where Dust confused with Rain
Roughen the Nap, and leave a mingled Stain.
Now in contiguous Drops the Flood comes down,
Threatening with Deluge this devoted Town.
To Shops in Crowds the daggled Females fly,
pretend to cheapen Goods, but nothing buy.
^he Templer spruce, while every Spout's a-broach,
^tays till it is fair, yet seems to call a Coach.
The tuck'd-up Sempstress walks with hasty Strides,
While Streams run down her oil'd Umbrella's Sides.
Here various Kinds by various Fortunes led,
Commence Acquaintance underneath a Shed.
Triumphant Tories, and desponding Whigs,
Forget their Fewds, and join to save their Wigs.
Box'd in a Chair the Beau impatient sits,
While Spouts run clatt'ring over the Roof by Fits;
And ever and anon with frightful Din
The Leather sounds, he trembles from within.
So when Troy Chair-men bore the Wooden Steed,
Pregnant with Greeks, impatient to be freed.
(Those Bully Greeks, who, as the Moderns do,
Instead of paying Chair-men, run them through.)
Laoco'n siruck the Outside with his Spear,
And each imprisoned Hero quaked for Fear.
Now from all Parts the swelling Kennels flow,
And bear their Trophies with them as they go:
Filth of all Hues and Odours seem to tell
What Street they sailed from, by their Sight and Smell.
They, as each Torrent drives, with rapid Force,
From Smithfield or St. Pulchre's shape their Course,
And in huge Constuent joined at Snow-Hill Ridge,
Fall from the Conduit, prove to Holborn-Bridge.
Sweepings from Butchers Stalls, Dung, Guts, and Blood,
Drowned Puppies, stinking Sprats, all drenched in Mud,
Dead Cats and Turnip-Tops come tumbling down the Flood.
The TATLER. [No 239.
-- Mecum certasse feretur.
Ovid.
From Tuesd. October. 17. to Thursd. October. 19. 1710.
From my own Apartment, October. 18.
IT is ridiculous for any Man to criticize on the Works of another, who has not
distinguished himself by his own Performances. A Judge would make but an
indifferent Figure who had never been known at the Bar. Cicero was reputed the
greatest Orator of his Age and Country before he wrote a Book De Oratore; and
Horace the greatest Poet before he published his Art of Poetry. This
Observation arises naturally in any one who casts his Eye upon this last
mentioned Author, where he will find the Criticisms placed in the latter End of
his Book, that is, after the finest Odes and Satyrs in the Latin Tongue.

A Modern, whose Name I shall not mention, because I would not make a silly
Paper sell, was born a Critic and an Examiner, and, like one of the Race of
the Serpent's Teeth, came into the World with a Sword in his Hand. His Works
put me in mind of the Story that is told of a German Monk, who was taking a
Catalogue of a Friend's Library, and meeting with a Hebrew Book in it, entered
it under the Title of, A Book that has the Beginning where the End should be.
This Author, in the last of his Crudities, has amassed together a Heap of
Quotations, to prove that Horace and Virgil were both of them modester Men than
my self, and if his Works were to live as long as mine, they might possibly
give Posterity a Notion, that Isaac Bickerstaff was a very conceited old
Fellow, and as vain a Man as either Tully or Sir Francis Bacon. Had this
serious Writer fallen upon me only, I could have overlooked it; but to see
Cicero abused, is, I must confess, what I cannot bear. The Censure he passes
upon this great Man runs thus; The Itch of being very Abusive, is almost
inseparable from Vainglory. Tully has these Two Faults in so high a Degree,
that nothing but his being the best Writer in the World can make Amends for
them. The scurrilous Wretch goes on to say I am as bad as Tully. His Words are
these; And yet the Tatler, in his Paper of September 26, has outdone him in
both. He speaks of himself with more Arrogance, and with more Insolence of
others. I am afraid by his Discourse, this Gentleman has no more read Plutarch
than he has Tully. If he had, he would have observed a Passage in that
Historian, wherein he has with great Delicacy distinguished between Two
Passions which are usually complicated in Humane Nature, and which an ordinary
Writer would not have thought of separating. Not having my Greek Spectacles by
me, I shall quote the Passage Word for Word as I find it translated to my Hand.
Nevertheless, though he was intemperately fond of his own Praise, yet he was very
free from envying others, and most liberally profuse in commending both the
Ancients and his Contemporaries, as is to be understood by his Writings; and
many of those Sayings are still recorded, as that concerning Aristotle, That he
was a River of flowing Gold: Of Plato 's Dialogue, That if Jupiter were to
speak, he would discourse as he did. Theophrastus he was wont to call his
peculiar Delight; and being asked, Which of Demosthenes his Orations he liked
best? He answered, The longest.

And as for the Eminent Men of his own Time, either for Eloquence or
Philosophy, there was not one of them which he did not, by writing or speaking
favorably of, render more illustrious.

Thus the Critic tells us, That Cicero was excessively vainglorious and
abusive; Plutarch, that he was vain, but not abusive. Let the Reader believe
which of them he pleases.

After this he complains to the World, that I call him Names; and that in my
Passion I said, He was a Flea, a Louse, an Owl, a Bat, a small Wit, a
Scribbler, and a Nibbler. When he has thus bespoken his Reader's Pity, he falls
into that admirable Vein of Mirth, which I shall set down at length, it being
an exquisite Piece of Raillery, and written in great Gaiety of Heart. After
this List of Names, ( viz. Flea, Louse, Owl, Bat, etc.) I was surprised to hear
him say, that he has hitherto kept his Temper pretty well; I wonder how he will
write when he has lost his Temper? I suppose, as he now is very angry and
unmannerly, he will then be exceeding courteous and good-humoured. If I can
outlive this Raillery, I shall be able to bear any Thing.

There is a Method of Criticism made Use of by this Author, (for I shall take
Care how I call him a Scribbler again) which may turn into Ridicule any Work
that was ever written, wherein there is a Variety of Thoughts: This the Reader
will observe in the following Words; He (meaning me) is so intent upon being
something extraordinary, that he scarce knows what he would be; and is as
fruitful in his Similes, as a Brother of his whom I lately took Notice of. In
the Compass of a few Lines he compares himself to a Fox, to Daniel Burgess, to
the Knight of the Red Cross, to an Oak with Ivy about it, and to a great Man
with an Equipage. I think my self as much honored by being joined in this Part
of his Paper with the Gentleman whom he here calls my Brother, as I am in the
Beginning of it, by being mentioned with Horace and Virgil.

It is very hard that a Man cannot publish Ten Papers without stealing from
himself; but to show you that this is only a Knack of Writing, and that the
Author is got into a certain Road of Criticism, I shall set down his Remarks on
the Works of the Gentleman whom he here glances upon, as they stand in his 6th
Paper, and desire the Reader to compare them with the foregoing Passage upon
mine.

In Thirty Lines his Patron is a River, the Primum Mobile, a Pilot, a Victim,
the Sun, any Thing, and Nothing. He bestows Increase, conceals his Source,
makes the Machine move, teaches to steer, expiates our Offenses, raises
Vapors, and looks larger as he sets.

What Poem can be safe from this Sort of Criticism? I think I was never in my
Life so much offended as at a Wag whom I once met with in a Coffee-house: He
had in his Hand one of the Miscellanies, and was reading the following short
Copy of Verses, which, without Flattery to the Author, is (I think) as
beautiful in its Kind as any one in the English Tongue.

Flavia the least and flight est Toy
Can with resistless Art employ.
This Fan in meaner Hands would prove
An Engine of small Force in Love;
But she with such an Air and Mien,
Not to be told, or safely seen,
Directs its wanton Motions so,
That it wounds more than Cupid's Bow;
Gives Coolness to the matchless Dame,
To every other Breast a Flame.
When this Coxcomb had done reading them, Heyday! says he, What Instrument is
this that Flavia employs in such a Manner as is not to be told, nor safely
seen? In Ten Lines it is a Toy, a Cupid's Bow, a Fan, and an Engine in Love. It
has wanton Motions, it wounds, it cools, and inflames.

Such Criticisms make a Man of Sense sick, and a Fool merry.

The next Paragraph of the Paper we are talking of, falls upon some Body whom I
am at a Loss to guess at: But I find the whole Invective turns upon a Man who
(it seems) has been imprisoned for Debt. Whoever he was, I must heartily pity
him; but at the same Time must put the Examiner in Mind, that notwithstanding
he is a Critic, he still ought to remember he is a Christian. Poverty was
never thought a proper Subject for Ridicule; and I do not remember that I ever
met with a Satyr upon a Beggar.

As for those little Retortings of my own Expressions, of being dull by Design,
witty in October, shining, excelling, and so forth; they are the common Cavils
of every Witlin, who has no other Method of showing his Parts, but by little
Variations and Repetitions of the Man's Words whom he attacks.

But the Truth of it is, the Paper before me, not only in this Particular, but
in its very Essence, is like Ovid's Echo:

-- Quae nec reticere loquenti,
Nec prior ipsa loqui didicit. --
I should not have deserved the Character of a Censor, had I not animadverted
upon the abovementioned Author by a gentle Chastisement: But I know my Reader
will not pardon me, unless I declare, that nothing of this Nature for the
future (unless it be written with some Wit) shall divert me from my Care of the
Public.

The TATLER. [No 240.
Ad Populum Phaleras. --
Pers.
From Thursd. October. 19. to Saturd. October. 21. 1710.
From my own Apartment, October. 20.
I DO not remember that in any of my Lucubrations I have touched upon that
useful Science of Physic, notwithstanding I have declared my self more than
once a Professor of it. I have indeed joined the Study of Astrology with it,
because I never knew a Physician recommend himself to the Public who had not a
Sister Art to embellish his Knowledge in Medicine. It has been commonly
observed in Compliment to the Ingenious of our Profession, that Apollo was God
of Verse as well as Physic; and in all Ages the most celebrated Practitioners
of our Country were the particular Favorites of the Muses. Poetry to Physic
is indeed like the Gilding to a Pill; it makes the Art shine, and covers the
Severity of the Doctor with the Agreeableness of the Companion.

The very Foundation of Poety is good Sense, if we may allow Harace to be a
Judge of the Art. Scribendi recte sapere est, and Principium, and Fons.
And if so, we have Reason to believe, that the same Man who writes well can
prescribe well, if he has applied himself to the Study of both. Besides, when
we see a Man making Profession of Two different Sciences, it is natural for us
to believe he is no Pretender in that which we are not Judges of when we find
him skilful in that which we understand.

Ordinary Quacks and Charlatans are thoroughly sensible how necessary it is to
support themselves by these collateral Assistances, and therefore always lay
their Claim to some supernumerary Accomplishments which are wholly foreign to
their Profession.

About 20 Years ago, it was impossible to walk the Streets without having an
Advertisement thrust into your Hand of a Doctor who was arrived at the
Knowledge of the Green and Red Dragon, and had discovered the Female Fern Seed.
No Body ever knew what this meant; but the Green and Red Dragon so amused the
People, that the Doctor lived very comfortably upon them. About the same Time
there was pasted a very hard Word upon every Corner of the Streets. This, to
the best of my Remembrance, was TETRACHYMAGOGON. Which drew great Shoals of
Spectators about it, who read the Bill that it introduced with unspeakable
Curiosity; and when they were sick, would have no Body but this learned Man for
their Physician.

I once received an Advertisement of one who had studied Thirty Years by
Candlelight for the Good of his Countrymen. He might have studied Twice as
long by Daylight, and never have been taken Notice of: But Lucubrations cannot
be over-valued. There are some who have gained themselves great Reputation for
Physic by their Birth, as the Seventh Son of a Seventh Son; and others by not
being born at all, as the Unborn Doctor, who, I hear, is lately gone the Way of
his Patients, having died worth Five Hundred Pounds per Annum, though he was
not born to a Halfpenny.

My ingenious Friend Doctor Saffold, succeeded my old Contemporary Doctor Lilly
in the Studies both of Physic and Astrology, to which he added that of Poetry,
as was to be seen both upon the Sign where he lived, and in the Bills which he
distributed. He was succeeded by Doctor Case, who erased the Verses of his
Predecessor out of the Sign-Post, and substituted in their Stead Two of his
own, which were as follow:

Within this Place
Lives Doctor Case.
He is said to have got more by this Distich, than Mr. Dryden did by all his
Works. There would be no End of enumerating the several imaginary Perfections
and unaccountable Artifices by which this Tribe of Men ensnare the Minds of the
Vulgar, and gain Crowds of Admirers. I have seen the whole Front of a
Mountebank's Stage from one End to the other faced with Patents, Certificates,
Medals, and Great Seals, by which the several Princes of Europe have testified
their particular Respect and Esteem for the Doctor. Every great Man with a
sounding Title has been his Patient. I believe I have seen Twenty Mountebanks
that have given Physic to the Czar of Moscovy. The Great Duke of Tuscany
escapes no better. The Elector of Brandenburg was likewise a very good Patient.

This great Condescension of the Doctor draws upon him much Good Will from his
Audience; and it is Ten to One, but if any of them be troubled with an aching
Tooth, his Ambition will prompt him to get it drawn by a Person who has had so
many Princes, Kings, and Emperors, under his Hands.

I must not leave this Subject without observing, that as Physicians are apt to
deal in Poetry, Apothecaries endeavor to recommend themselves by Oratory, and
are therefore without Controversy the most eloquent Persons in the whole
British Nation. I would not willingly discourage any of the Arts, especially
that of which I am an humble Professor; but I must confess, for the Good of my
native Country, I could wish there might be a Suspension of Physic for some
Years, that our Kingdom, which has been so much exhausted by the Wars, might
have Leave to recruit it self.

As for my self, the only Physic which has brought me safe to almost the Age
of Man, and which I prescribe to all my Friends, is Abstinence. This is
certainly the best Physic for Prevention, and very often the most effectual
against a present Distemper. In short, my Recipe is, Take nothing.

Were the Body Politic to be physick'd like particular Persons, I should
venture to prescribe to it after the same Manner. I remember when our
wholeIsland was shaken with an Earthquake some Years ago, there was an impudent
Mountebank who sold Pills which (as he told the Country People) were very good
against an Earthquake. It may perhaps be thought as absurd to prescribe a Diet
for the allaying Popular Commotions, and National Ferments. But I am verily
persuaded, that if in such a Case a whole People were to enter into a Course of
Abstinence, and eat nothing but Water Gruel for a Fortnight, it would abate the
Rage and Animosity of Parties, and not a little contribute to the Cure of a
distracted Nation. Such a Fast would have a natural Tendency to the procuring
of those Ends for which a Fast is usually proclaimed. If any Man has a Mind to
enter on such a voluntary Abstinence, it might not be improper to give him the
Caution of Pythagoras in particular:

Abstine a Fabis. ' Abstain from Beans. That is, say the Interpreters, Meddle
not with Elections, Beans having been made Use of by the Voters among the
Athenians in the Choice of Magistrates.

The TATLER. [No 241.
From Saturd. October 21. to Tuesd. October. 24. 1710.
From my own Apartment, October. 23.
A Method of spending one's Time agreeably is a Thing so little studied, that
the common Amusement of our young Gentlemen (especially of such as are at a
Distance from those of the first Breeding) is Drinking. This Way of
Entertainment has Custom of its Side; but as much as it has prevailed, I
believe there have been very few Companies that have been guilty of Excess this
Way, where there have not happened more Accidents which make against, than for
the Continuance of it. It is very common that Events arise from a Debauch which
are fatal, and always such as are disagreeable. With all a Man's Reason and
good Sense about him, his Tongue is apt to utter Things out of mere Gaiety of
Heart which may displease his best Friends. Who then would trust himself to the
Power of Wine, without saying more against it, than that it raises the
Imagination, and depresses the Judgment. Were there only this single
Consideration, That we are less Masters of our selves when we drink in the
least Proportion above the Exigencies of Thirst; I say, were this all that
could be objected, it were sufficient to make us abhor this Vice. But we may go
on to say, that as he who drinks but a little is not Master of himself, so he
who drinks much is a Slave to himself. As for my Part, I ever esteemed a
Drunkard of all vicious Persons the most vicious: For if our Actions are to be
weighed and considered according to the Intention of them, what can we think of
him who puts himself into a Circumstance wherein he can have no Intention at
all, but incapacitates himself for the Duties and Offices of Life, by a
Suspension of all his Faculties. If a Man considered, that he cannot under the
Oppression of Drink be a Friend, a Gentleman, a Master, or a Subject; that he
has so long banished himself from all that is dear, and given up all that is
sacred to him, he would even then think of a Debauch with Horror: But when he
looks still further, and acknowledges, that he is not only expelled out of all
the Relations of Life, but also liable to offend against them all, What Words
can express the Terror and Detestation he would have of such a Condition? And
yet he owns all this of himself who says he was drunk last Night.

As I have all along persisted in it, that all the Vicious in general are in a
State of Death, so I think I may add to the Nonexistence of Drunkards, that
they died by their own Hands. He is certainly as guilty of Suicide who perishes
by a slow, as he that is dispatched by an immediate, Poison. In my last
Lucubration I proposed the general Use of Water Gruel, and hinted, that it
might not be amiss at this very Season: But as there are some, whose Cases, in
regard to their Families, will not admit of Delay, I have used my Interest in
several Wards of the City, that the wholesome Restorative abovementioned may
be given in Tavern Kitchens to all the Mornings Draught Men within the Walls
when they call for Wine before Noon. For a further Restraint and Mark upon such
Persons, I have given Orders, that in all the Offices where Policies are drawn
upon Lives, it shall be added to the Article which prohibits that the Nominee
should cross the Sea, the Words, Provided also, That the abovementioned A. B.
shall not drink before Dinner during the Term mentioned in this Indenture.

I am not without Hopes but by this Method I shall bring some unsizeable
Friends of mine into Shape and Breath, as well as others who are languid and
consumptive into Health and Vigor. Most of the Self-Murderers whom I yet
hinted at, are such as preserve a certain Regularity in taking their Poison,
and make it mix pretty well with their Food: But the most conspicuous of those
who destroy themselves, are such as in their Youth fall into this Sort of
Debauchery, and contract a certain Uneasiness of Spirit, which is not to be
diverted but by Tippling as often as they can fall into Company in the Day, and
conclude with downright Drunkenness at Night. These Gentlemen never know the
Satisfaction of Youth, but skip the Years of Manhood, and are decrepid soon
after they are of Age. I was Godfather to one of these old Fellows. He is now
Three and Thirty, which is the Grand Climacterick of a young Drunkard. I went
to visit the crazy Wretch this Morning, with no other Purpose but to rally him
under the Pain and Uneasiness of being sober.

But as out Faults are double when they affect others besides our selves, so
this Vice is still more odious in a married than a single Man. He that is the
Husband of a Woman of Honor, and comes Home overloaded with Wine, is still
more contemptible in Proportion to the Regard we have to the unhappy Consort of
his Bestiality. The Imagination cannot shape to its self any Thing more
monstrous and unnatural than the Familiarities between Drunkenness and
Chastity. The wretched Astraea, who is the Perfection of Beauty and Innocence,
has long been thus condemned for Life. The Romantic Tales of Virgins devoted
to the Jaws of the Monsters, have nothing in them so terrible as the Gift of
Astraea to that Bacchanal.

The Reflection of such a Match as spotless Innocence with abandoned Lewdness,
is what puts this Vice in the worst Figure it can bear with Regard to others;
but when it is looked upon with Respect only to the Drunkard himself, it has
Deformities enough to make it disagreeable, which may be summed up in a Word,
by allowing, that he who resigns his Reason, is actually guilty of all that he
is liable to from the Want of Reason.

P. S. Among many other Enormities, there are Two in the following Letters
which I think should be suddenly amended; but since they are Sins of Omission
only, I shall not make Remarks upon them till I find the Delinquents persist in
their Errors; and the inserting the Letters themselves shall be all their
present Admonition.

October 16. Mr. Bickerstaff,
SEveral that frequent Divine Service at S. Paul's, as well as my self, having
with great Satisfaction observed the good Effect which your Animadversion had
on an Excess in Performance there; it is requested, that you will take Notice
of a contrary Fault, which is the unconcerned Silence, and the motionless
Postures of others who come thither. If this Custom prevails, the Congregation
will resemble an Audience at a Playhouse, or rather a dumb Meeting of Quakers.
Your censuring such Church-mutes in the Manner you think fit, may make these
Dissenters join with us, out of Fear lest you should further animadvert upon
their Non Conformity. According as this succeeds, you shall hear from,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, B. B.


Mr. Bickerstaff,
I Was the other Day in Company with a Gentleman, who, in reciting his own
Qualifications, concluded every Period with these Words, The best of any Man in
England. Thus for Example: He kept the best House of any Man in England; he
understood this, and that, and the other, the best of any Man in England. How
harsh and ungrateful soever this Expression might sound to one of my Nation,
yet the Gentleman was one whom it no Ways became me to interrupt; but perhaps a
new Term put into his By-Words (as they call a Sentence a Man particularly
affects) may cure him. I therefore took a Resolution to apply to you, who, I
dare say, can easily persuade this Gentleman (whom I cannot believe an Enemy to
the Union) to mend his Phrase, and be hereafter the wisest of any Man in Great
Britain. I am,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, Scoto Britannus.


ADVERTISEMENT.
Whereas Mr. Humphrey Trelooby wearing his own Hair, a Pair of Buck-Skin
Breeches, a Hunting-Whip, with a new Pair of spurs, has complained to the
Censor, That on Thursday last he was defrauded of Half a Crown, under Pretense
of a Duty to the Sexton for seeing the Cathedral of St. Paul, London: It is
hereby ordered, That none hereafter require above Sixpence of any Country
Gentleman under the Age of Twenty five for that Liberty; and that all which
shall be received above the said Sum of any Person for beholding the Inside of
that Sacred Edifice, be forthwith paid to Mr. John Morphew for the Use of Mr.
Bickerstaff, under Pain of further Censure on ike abovementioned Extortion.

The TATLER. [No 242.
-- Quis iniquae
Tam patiens Urbis, tam ferreus ut teneat se?
Juv.
From Tuesday Oct. 24. to Tursday Oct. 26. 1710.
From my own Apartment, October 25.
IT was with very great Displeasure I heard this Day a Man say of a Companion
of his with an Air of Approbation, You know Tom never fails of saying a
spightful Thing. He has a great deal of Wit, but Satyr is his particular
Talent. Did you mind how he put the young Fellow out of Countenance that
pretended to talk to him? Such impertinent Applauses, which one meets with
every Day, put me upon considering what true Raillery and Satyr were in
themselves; and this, methought, occurred to me from Reflection upon the great
and excellent Persons that were admired for Talents this Way. When I had ran
over several such in my Thoughts, I concluded, (however unaccountable the
Assertion might appear at first Sight) that Goodnature was an essential
Quality in a Satyrist, and that all the Sentiments which are beautiful in this
Way of Writing must proceed from that Quality in the Author. Goodnature
produces a Disdain of all Baseness, Vice, and Folly, which prompts them to
express themselves with Smartness against the Errors of Men, without Bitterness
toward their Persons. This Quality keeps the Mind in Equanimity, and never
lets an Offense unseasonably throw a Man out of his Character. When Virgil
said, He that did not hate Bavius might love Maevius, he was in perfect good
Humor, and was not so much moved at their Absurdities, as passionately to call
them Sots or Blockheads in a direct Invective, but laughed at them with a
Delicacy of Scorn, without any Mixture of Anger.

The best good Man, with the worst-natured Muse, was the Character among us of
a Gentleman as famous for his Humanity as his Wit.

The ordinary Subjects for Satyr are such as incite the greatest Indignation in
the best Tempers, and consequently Men of such a Make are the best qualified
for speaking of the Offenses in Humane Life. These Men can behold Vice and
Folly when they injure Persons to whom they are wholly unacquainted, with the
same Severity as others resent the Ills they do themselves. A good-natured Man
cannot see an over-bearing Fellow put a bashful Man of Merit out of
Countenance, or outstrip him in the Pursuit of any Advantage; but he is on Fire
to succor the Oppressed, to produce the Merit of the one, and confront the
Impudence of the other.

The Men of the greatest Character in this Kind were Horace and Juvenal. There
is not, that I remember, one ill-natured Expression in all their Writings, not
one Sentence of Severity which does not apparently proceed from the contrary
Disposition. Whoever reads them, will, I believe, be of this Mind; and if they
were read with this View, it may possibly persuade our young Fellows, that they
may be very witty Men without speaking ill of any but those who deserve it: But
in the Perusal of these Writers it may not be unnecessary to consider, that
they lived in very different Times. Horace was intimate with a Prince of the
greatest Goodness and Humanity imaginable, and his Court was formed after his
Example: Therefore the Faults that Poet falls upon were little Inconsistencies
in Behavior, false Pretenses to Politeness, or impertinent Affectations of
what Men were not fit for. Vices of a coarser Sort could not come under his
Consideration, or enter the Palace of Augustus. Juvenal on the other Hand lived
under Domitian, in whose Reign every Thing that was great and noble was
banished the Habitations of the Men in Power. Therefore he attacks Vice as it
passes by in Triumph, not as it breaks into Conversation. The Fall of Empire,
Contempt of Glory, and a general Degeneracy of Manners, are before his Eyes in
all his Writings. In the Days of Augustus, to have talked like Juvenal had been
Madness, or in those of Domitian like Horace. Morality and Virtue are every
where recommended in Horace, as became a Man in a polite Court, from the
Beauty, the Propriety, the Convenience, of pursuing them. Vice and Corruption
are attacked by Juvenal in a Style which denotes, he fears he shall not be
heard without he calls to them in their own Language, with a barefaced Mention
of the Villainies and Obscenities of his Contemporaries.

This accidental Talk of these Two great Men runs me from my Design, which was
to tell some Coxcombs that run about this Town with the Name of Smart Satirical
Fellows, that they are by no Means qualified for the Characters they pretend
to, of being severe upon other Men, for they want Goodnature. There is no
Foundation in them for arriving at what they aim at; and they may as well
pretend to flatter, as rail agreeably without being Good-Natured.

There is a certain Impartiality necessary to make what a Man says bear any
Weight with those he speaks to. This Quality, with Respect to Men's Errors and
Vices, is never seen but in Good-natured Men. They have ever such a Frankness
of Mind, and Benevolence to all Men, that they cannot receive Impressions of
Unkindness without mature Deliberation; and writing or speaking ill of a Man
upon Personal Consideratious, is so irreparable and mean an Injury, that no o^
^ssessed of this Quality is capable of doing it. But in all Ages there have
been Interpreters to A^rs when living, of the same Genius with the
Commentators, into whose Hands they fall when dead. I dare say, it is
impossible for any Man of ^e Wit than one of these to take any of the F^ and
twenty Letters, and form out of them a Name to describe the Character of a
Vicious Man with greater Life, but one of these would immediately cry, Mr. such
a one is meant in that Place. But the Truth of it is, Satyrists describe the
Age, and Backbiters assign their Descriptions to private Men.

In all Terms of Reproof, when the Sentence appears to arise from Personal
Hatred or Passion, it is not then made the Cause of Mankind, but a
Misunderstanding between Two Persons. For this Reason, the Representations of a
Good-natured Man bear a Pleasantry in them, which shows there is no Malignity
at heart, and by Consequence are attended to by his Hearers or Readers because
they are unprejudiced. This Deference is only what is due to him; for no Man
thoroughly nettled can say a Thing general enough to pass off with the Air of
an Opinion declared, and not a Passion gratified. I remember a humorous Fellow
at Oxford, when he heard any one had spoken ill of him, used to say, I will not
take my Revenge on him till I have forgiven him. What he meant by this, was,
that he would not enter upon this Subject till it was grown as indifferent to
him as any other; and I have, by this Rule, seen him more than once triumph
over his Adversary with an inimitable Spirit and Humor; for he came to the
Assault against a Man full of sore Places, and he himself invulnerable.

There is no Possibility of succeeding in a Satirical Way of Writing or
Speaking, except a Man throws himself quite out of the Question. It is great
Vanity to think any one will attend a Thing because it is your Quarrel. You
must make your Satyr the Concern of Society in general, if you would have it
regarded. When it is so, the Goodnature of a Man of Wit will prompt him to
many brisk and disdainful Sentiments and Replies, to which all the Malice in
the World will not be able to repartee.

The TATLER. [No 243.
Insert se Septus Nebula, mirabile dictu
Permedios, miscotqua Viris, neque cernitur ulli.
Virg.
From Thursd. October. 26. to Saturd. October. 28. 1710.
From my own Apartment, October. 27.
I Have somewhere made Mention of Gyges's Ring, and intimated to my Reader,
that it was at present in my Possession, though I have not since made any Use
of it. The Tradition concerning this Ring is very Romantic, and taken Notice
of both by Plato and Tully, who each of them make an admirable Use of it for
the Advancement of Morality. This Gyges was the Master Shepherd to King
Candaules. As he was wandering over the Plains of Lydia, he saw a great Chasm
in the Earth, and had the Curiosity to enter it. After having descended pretty
far into it, he found the Statue of an Horse in Brass, with Doors in the Sides
of it. Upon opening of them, he found the Body of a dead Man bigger than
ordinary, with a Ring upon his Finger, which he took off, and put it upon his
own. The Virtues of it were much greater than he at first imagined; for upon
his going into the Assembly of Shepherds, he observed, that he was invisible
when he turned the Stone of the Ring within the Palm of his Hand, and visible
when he turned it toward his Company. Had Plato and Cicers been as well versed
in the Occult Sciences as I am, they would have found a great deal of Mystic
Learning in this Tradition; but it is impossible for an Adept to be understood
by one who is not an Adept.

As for my self, I have with much Study and Application arrived at this great
Secret of making my self invisible, and by that Means conveying my self where I
pleased; or to speak in Rosycrucian Lore, I have entered into the Clefts of the
Earth, discovered the Brazen Horse, and robbed the dead Giant of his Ring. The
Tradition says further of Gyges, that by the Means of this Ring he gained
Admission into the most retired Parts of the Court, and made such Use of those
Opportunities, that he at length became King of Lydia. For my own Part, I, who
have always rather endeavored to improve my Mind than my Fortune, have turned
this Ring to no other Advantage than to get a thorough Insight into the Ways of
Men, and to make such Observations upon the Errors of others as may be useful
to the Public, whatever Effect they may have upon my self.

About a Week ago, not being able to sleep, I got up and put on my magical
Ring, and with a Thought transported my self into a Chamber where I saw a
Light. I found it inhabited by a celebrated Beauty, though she is of that
Species of Women whith we call a Slattern. Her Headdress and one of her Shoes
lay upon a Chair, her Petticoat in one Corner of the Room, and her Girdle that
had a Copy of Verses made upon it but the Day before, with her Thread
Stockings, in the middle of the Floor. I was so foolishly officious, that I
could not forbear gathering up her Clothes together to lay them upon the Chair
that stood by her Bedside, when, to my great Surprise, after a little
Muttering, she cried out, What do you do? Let my Petticoat alone. I was
startled at first, but soon found that she was in a Dream; being one of those
who, to use Shakespeare's Expression, are so loose of Thought, that they utter
in their Sleep every Thing that passes in their Imagination. I left the
Apartment of this Female Rake, and went into her Neighbors, where there lay a
Male-Coquet. He had a Bottle of Salts hanging over his Head, and upon the
Table, by his Bedside, Suckling's Poems, with a little Heap of Black Patches
on it. His Snuff Box was within Reach on a Chair: But while I was admiring the
Disposition which he made of the several Parts of his Dress, his Slumber seemed
interrupted by a Pang, that was accompanied by a sudden Oath, as he turned
himself over hastily in his Bed. I did not care for seeing him in his nocturnal
Pains, and left the Room.

I was no sooner got into another Bedchamber, but I heard very harsh Words
uttered in a smooth uniform Tone. I was amazed to hear so great a Volubility in
Reproach, and thought it too coherent to be spoken by one asleep; but upon
looking nearer, I saw the Head dress of the Person who spoke, which showed her
to be a Female with a Man lying by her Side broad awake, and as quiet as a
Lamb. I could not but admire his exemplary Patience, and discovered by his
whole Behavior, that he was then lying under the Discipline of a
Curtain-Lecture.

I was entertained in many other Places with this Kind of Nocturnal Eloquence,
but observed, that most of those whom I found awake, were kept so either by
Envy or by Love. Some of these were sighing, and others cursing, in Soliloquy;
some hugged their Pillows, and others gnashed their Teeth.

The Covetous I likewise found to be a very wakeful People. I happened to come
into a Room where one of them lay sick. His Physician and his Wife were in
close Whisper near his Bedside. I overheard the Doctor say to the poor
Gentlewoman, he cannot possibly live till Five in the Morning. She received it
like the Mistress of a Family prepared for all Events. At the same Instant came
in a Servant Maid, who said, Madam, The Undertaker is below according to your
Order. The Words were scarce out of her Mouth, when the sick Man cried out with
a feeble Voice, Pray, Doctor, how went Bank-Stock to Day at 'Change? This
melancholy Object made me too serious for diverting my self further this Way:
But as I was going Home, I saw a Light in a Garret, and entering into it, heard
a Voice crying, And, Hand, Stand, Band, Fanned, Tanned. I concluded him by this
and the Furniture of his Room to be a Lunatic; but upon listening a little
longer, perceived it was a Poet, writing an Heroic upon the ensuing Peace.

It was now toward Morning, an Hour when Spirits, Witches, and Conjurers are
obliged to retire to their own Apartments, and feeling the Influence of it, I
was hastening Home, when I saw a Man had got half Way into a Neighbor's House.
I immediately called to him, and turning my Ring, appeared in my proper Person.
There is something Magisterial in the Aspect of the Bickerstaffs, which made
him run away in Confusion.

As I took a Turn or Two in my own Lodging, I was thinking, that, old as I was,
I need not go to Bed alone, but that it was in my Power to marry the finest
Lady in this Kingdom, if I would wed her with this Ring. For what a Figure
would she that should have it make a Visit, with so perfect a Knowledge as this
would give her of all the Scandal in the Town? But instead of endeavoring to
dispose of my self and it in Matrimony, I resolved to lend it to my loving
Friend the Author of the Atalantis, to furnish a new Secret History of Secret
Memoirs.

The TATLER. [No 244.
Quid voveat dulci Nutricula majus Alumno,
Quam sapere and fari ut possit que sentiat? --
Hor.
From Saturd. October. 28. to Tuesd. October. 31. 1710.
Will's Coffee-house, October. 30.
IT is no easy Matter when People are advancing in any Thing, to prevent their
going too fast for want of Patience. This happens in nothing more frequently
than in the Prosecution of Studies. Hence it is, that we meet Crowds who
attempt to be eloquent before they can speak. They affect the Flowers of
Rhetoric before they understand the Parts of Speech. In the ordinary
Conversation of this Town, there are so many who can, as they call it, talk
well, that there is not One in Twenty that talks to be understood. This
proceeds from an Ambition to excel, or, as the Term is, to shine, in Company.
The Matter is not to make themselves understood, but admired. They come
together with a certain Emulation, rather than Benevolence. When you fall among
such Companions, the safe Way is to give your self up, and let the Orators
declaim for your Esteem, and trouble your self no further. It is said, that a
Poet must be born so; but I think it may be much better said of an Orator,
especially when we talk of our Town-Poets and Orators; but the Town-Poets are
full of Rules and Laws, the Town-Orators go through thick and thin, and are,
forsooth. Persons of such eminent natural Parts and Knowledge of the World,
that they despise all Men as unexperienced Scholasticks who wait for an
Occasion before they speak, or who speak no more than is necessary. They had
half persuaded me to go to the Tavern the other Night, but that a Gentleman
whispered me, Prithee, Isaac, go with us; there is Tom Varnish will be there,
and he is a Fellow that talks as well as any Man in England.

I must confess, when a Man expresses himself well upon any Occasion, and his
falling into an Account of any Subject arises from a Desire to oblige the
Company, or from Fullness of the Circumstance it self, so that his speaking of
it at large is occasioned only by the Openness of a Companion; I say, in such a
Case as this, it is not only pardonable, but agreeable when a Man takes the
Discourse to himself; but when you see a Fellow watch for Opportunities for
being Copious, it is excessively troublesome. A Man that stammers, if he has
Understanding, is to be attended with Patience and good Nature; but he that
speaks more than he need, has no Right to such an Indulgence. The Man who has a
Defect in his Speech takes Pains to come to you, while a Man of a weak Capacity
with Fluency of Speech triumphs in out-running you. The Stammerer strives to be
fit for your Company; the loquacious Man endeavors to show you, you are not
fit for his.

With Thoughts of this Kind do I always enter into that Man's Company who is
recommended as a Person that talks well; but if I were to choose the People with
whom I would spend my Hours of Conversation, they should be certainly such as
labored no farther than to make themselves readily and clearly apprehended,
and would have Patience and Curiosity to understand me. To have good Sense, and
Ability to express it, are the most essential and necessary Qualities in
Companions. When Thoughts rise in us fit to utter, among familiar Friends there
needs but very little Care in clothing them.

Urbanus is, I take it, a Man one might live with whole Years, and enjoy all
the Freedom and Improvement imaginable, and yet be insensible of a
Contradiction to you in all the Mistakes you can be guilty of. His great good
Will to his Friends has produced in him such a general Deference in his
Discourse, that if he differs from you in his Sense of any Thing, he introduces
his own Thoughts by some agreeable Circumlocution, or he has often observed
such and such a Circumstance that made him of another Opinion. Again, where
another would be apt to say, This I am confident of, I may pretend to judge of
this Matter as well as any Body; Urbanus says, I am verily persuaded, I believe
one may conclude. In a Word, there is no Man more clear in his Thoughts and
Expressions than he is, or speaks with greater Diffidence. You shall hardly
find one Man of any Consideration, but you shall observe one of less
Consequence form himself after him. This happens to Urbanus; but the Man who
steals from him almost every Sentiment he utters in a whole Week, disguises the
Theft, by carrying it with quite a different Air. Umbratilis knows Urbanus's
doubtful Way of Speaking proceeds from Goodnature and Good-Breeding, and not
from Uncertainty in his Opinions. Umbratilis therefore has no more to do but
repeat the Thoughts of Urbanus in a positive Manner, and appear to the
Undiscerning a wiser Man than the Person from whom he borrows: But those who
know him, can see the Servant in his Master's Habit; and the more he struts,
the less do his Clothes appear his own.

In Conversation, the Medium is neither to affect Silence or Eloquence; not to
value our Approbation, and to endeavor to excel us who are of your Company,
are equal Inquiries. The great Enemies therefore to good Company, and those who
transgress most against the Laws of Equality, (which is the Life of it) are,
the Clown, the Wit, and the Pedant. A Clown, when he has Sense, is conscious of
his Want of Education, and with an awkward Bluntness hopes to keep himself in
Countenance, by overthrowing the Use of all polite Behavior. He takes
Advantage of the Restraint good Breeding lays upon others not to offend him to
trespass against them, and is under the Man's own Shelter while he intrudes
upon him. The Fellows of this Class are very frequent in the Repetition of the
Words, Rough and Manly. When these People happen to be by their Fortunes of the
Rank of Gentlemen, they defend their other Absurdities by an impertinent
Courage; and to help out the Defect of their Behavior, add their being
dangerous to their being disagreeable. This Gentleman (though he displeases,
professes to do so, and knowing that, dares still go on to do so) is not so
painful a Companion as he who will please you against your Will, and resolves
to be a Wit.

This Man upon all Occasions, and whoever he falls in Company with, talks in
the same Circle, and in the same Round of Chat which he has learned at one of
the Tables of this Coffee-house. As Poetry is in it self an Elevation above
ordinary and common Sentiments, so there is no Fop is so very near a Madman in
indifferent Company as a Poetical one. He is not apprehensive that the
Generality of the World are intent upon the Business of their own Fortune and
Profession, and have as little Capacity as Curiosity to enter into Matters of
Ornament or Speculation. I remember at a full Table in the City, one of these
ubiquitary Wits was entertaining the Company with a Soliloquy (for so I call it
when a Man talks to those who do not understand him) concerning Wit and Humor.
An honest Gentleman who sat next to me, and was worth Half a Plumb, stared at
him, and observing there was some Sense as he thought, mixed with his
Impertinence, whispered me, Take my Word for it, this Fellow is more Knave than
Fool. This was all my good Friend's Applause of the wittiest Man of Talk that I
was ever present at, which wanted nothing to make it excellent but that there
was no Occasion for it.

The Pedant is so obvious to Ridicule, that it would be to be one to offer to
explain him. He is a Gentleman so well known, that there is none but those of
his own Class who do not laugh at and avoid him. Pedantry proceeds from much
Reading and little Understanding. A Pedant among Men of Learning and Sense, is
like an ignorant Servant giving an Account of a polite Conversation. You may
find he has brought with him more than could have entered into his Head without
being there, but still that he is not a Bit wiser than if he had not been there
at all.

The TATLER. [No. 245.
From Tuesd. October. 31. to Thursd. Nov. 2. 1710.
From my own Apartment, November 1.
THE Lady hereafter mentioned having come to me in very great Have, and paid me
much above the usual Fee as a Cunning-Man to find her stolen Goods, and also
having approved my late Discourse of Advertisements, obliged me to draw up
this, and insert it in the Body of my Paper.

ADVERTISEMENT.
WHereas Bridget Howd'ee, late Servant to the Lady Fardingale, a short, thick,
lively, hard-favoured Wench, of about Twenty nine Years of Age, her Eyes small
and bleared, her Nose very broad at Bottom, and turning up at the End, her
Mouth wide, and Lips of an unusual Thickness, Two Teeth out before, the rest
black and uneven, the Tip of her Left Ear being of a Mouse-Colour, her Voice
loud and shrill, quick of Speech, and something of a Welsh Accent; withdrew her
self on Wednesday last from her Ladyship's Dwelling House, and, with the Help
of her Consorts, carried off the following Goods of her said Lady, viz. A thick
wadded Callico Wrapper, a Musk-coloured Velvet Mantle lined with
Squirrel-Skins, Eight Night-Shifts, Four Pair of Silk-Stockings curiously
derned, Six Pair of Laced Shoes, new and old, with the Heels of half Two Inches
higher than their Fellows; a Quilted Petticoat of the largest Size, and one of
Canvas with Whalebone Hoops; Three Pair of Stays, boulstered below the Left
Shoulder; Two Pair of Hips of the newest Fashion, Six round-about Aprons with
Pockets, and Four striped Muslin Night-Rails very little frayed; a Silver Pot
for Coffee or Chocolate, the Lid much bruised; a broad-brim'd flat Silver Plate
for Sugar with Rhenish Wine, a Silver Ladle for Plumb-Porridge; a Silver
Cheefe-Toaster with Three Tongues, an Ebony Handle, and Silvering at the End; a
Silver Posnet to butter Eggs; One Cawdle and Two Cordial-Water Cups, Two Coco
Cups, and an Ostridge's Egg, with Rims and Feet of Silver; a Marrow Spoon, with
a Scoop at the other End; a Silver Orange Strainer, Eight Sweetmeat Spoons made
with Forks at the End, an Aggat-Handle Knife and Fork in a Sheath, a Silver
Tongue-Scraper, a Silver Tobacco-Box, with a Tulip graved on the Top; and a
Bible bound in Shagreen, with gilt Leaves and Clasps, never opened but once.
Also a small Cabinet, with Six Drawers inlaid with red Tortoise-shell, and
Brass gilt Ornaments at the Four Corners, in which were Two Leather
Forehead-Cloths, Three Pair of oiled Dogskin Gloves, Seven Cakes of Superfine
Spanish Wool, half a Dozen of Portugal Dishes, and a Quire of Paper from
thence; Two Pair of brandnew Plumpers, Four Black-lead Combs. Three Pair of
fashionable Eyebrows, Two Sets of Ivory Teeth, little the worse for wearing,
and One Pair of Box for common Use; Adam and Eve in Bugle-Work, without
Fig Leaves, upon Canvas, curiously wrought with her Ladyship's own Hand;
several Filagrain Curiosities; a Crochet of 122 Diamonds, set strong and deep
in Silver, with a Rump Jewel after the same Fashion; Bracelets of braided Hair,
Pomander, and Seed-Pearl; a large old Purple Velvet Purse embroidered, and
shutting with a Spring, containing Two Pictures in Miniature, the Features
visible; a broad thick Gold Ring with a Hand in Hand graved upon it, and within
this Posie, While Life does last, I Will hold thee fast; another set round with
small Rubies and Sparks, Six wanting; another of Turkey Stone cracked through
the Middle; an Elizabeth and Four Jacobus's, one Guinea the first of the Coin,
an Angel with a Hole bored through, a broken Half of a Spanish Piece of Gold, a
Crown-Piece with the Breeches, an old Ninepence bent both Ways by Lilly the
Almanack-maker for Luck at Langteraloo, and Twelve of the Shells called
Black-moor's Teeth; one small Amber Box with Apoplectick Balsam, and one Silver
gilt of a larger Size for Cashu and Carraway-Comfits, to be taken at long
Sermons, the Lid enamelled, representing a Cupid fishing for Hearts, with a
Piece of Gold on his Hook; over his Head this Rhyme, Only with Gold you me
shall hold. In the lower Drawer was a large new Gold Repeating Watch, made by a
Frenchman; a Gold Chain, and all the proper Appurtenances hung upon Steel
Swivels, to wit, Lockets with the Hair of dead and living Lovers, Seals with
Arms, Emblems and Devices cut in Cornelian, Aggat, and Onyx, with Cupids,
Hearts, Darts, Altars, Flames, Rocks, Pickaxes, Roses, Thorns, and Sun-Flowers;
as also Variety of ingenious French Motto's; together with Gold Etuys for
Quills, Scissars, Needles, Thimbles, and a Sponge dipped in Hungary Water, left
but the Night before by a young Lady going upon a Frolic Incog. There was also
a Bundle of Letters, dated between the Years 1670 and 1682, most of them figned
Philander, the rest Strephon, Amyntas, Corydon, and Adonis; together with a
Collection of Receipts to make Pastes for the Hands, Pomatums, Lip-Salves,
White Pots, Beautifying Creams, Water of Talk, and Frog Spawn Water; Decoctions
for clearing the Complexion, and an approved Medicine to procure Abortion.

Whoever can discover the aforesaid Goods, so that they may be had again, shall
have Fifty Guinea's for the Whole, or proportionable for any Part. N. B. Her
Ladyship is pleased to promise Ten Pounds for the Packet of Letters over and
above, or Five for Philander's only, being her First Love. My Lady bestows
those of Strephon to the Finder, being so written, that they may serve to any
Woman who reads them.

POSTSCRIPT.
As I am Patron of Persons who have no other Friend to apply to, I cannot
suppress the following Complaint.

SIR,
I Am a Black-moor Boy, and have, by my Lady's Order, been christened by the
Chaplain. The good Man has gone further with me, and told me a great deal of
good News; as, that I am as good as my Lady herself as I am a Christian, and
many other Things; But for all this, the Parrat who came over with me from our
Country is as much esteemed by her as I am. Besides this, the Shock-Dog has a
Collar that cost almost as much as mine. I desire also to know, whether now I
am a Christian, I am obliged to dress like a Turk, and wear a Turbant. I am,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, POMPEY.


The TATLER. [No 246.
-- Vitiis nemo sine nascitur, optimus ille
Qui minimis urgetur. --
Hor.
From Thursday Nov. 2. to Saturday Nov. 4. 1710.
From my own Apartment, November 3.
WHen one considers the Turn which Conversation takes in almost every Set of
Acquaintance, Club or Assembly, in this Town or Kingdom, one cannot but
observe, that in spite of what I am every Day saying, and all the Moral
Writers since the Beginning of the World have said, the Subject of Discourse is
generally upon one another's Faults. This in a great Measure proceeds from
Self-Conceit, which were to be endured in one or other individual Person; but
the Folly has spread it self almost over all the Species; and one cannot only
say, Tom, Jack, or Will, but in general, That Man is a Coxcomb. From this
Source it is, that any Excellence is faintly received, any Imperfection
unmercifully exposed. But if Things were put in a true Light, and we would take
Time to consider that Man in his very Nature is an imperfect Being, our Sense
of this Matter would be immediately altered, and the Word Imperfection would
not carry an unhinder Idea than the Word Humanity. It is a pleasant Story, that
we, forsooth, who are the only imperfect Creatures in the Universe, are the
only Beings that will not allow of Imperfection. Some Body has taken Notice,
that we stand in the Middle of Existencies, and are by this one Circumstance
the most unhappy of all others. The Brutes are guided by Instinct, and know no
Sorrow; the Angels have Knowledge, and they are happy; but Men are governed by
Opinion, which is I know not what Mixture of Instinct and Knowledge, and are
neither indolent nor happy. It is very observable, that Critics are a People
between the Learned and the Ignorant, and by that Situation enjoy the
Tranquillity of neither. As Critics stand among Men, so do Men in general
between Brutes and Angels. Thus every Man as he is a Critic and a Coxcomb,
till improved by Reason and Speculation, is ever forgetting himself, and laying
open the Faults of others.

At the same Time that I am talking of the Cruelty of urging People's Faults
with Severity, I cannot but bewail some which Men are guilty of for want of
Admonition. These are such as they can easily mend, and no Body tells them of;
for which Reason I shall make Use of the Penny-Post, (as I have with Success to
several young Ladies about turning their Eyes, and holding up their Heads) to
certain Gentlemen whom I remark habitually guilty of what they may reform in a
Moment. There is a fat Fellow whom I have long remarked wearing his Breast open
in the Midst of Winter, out of an Affectation of Youth. I have therefore sent
him just now the following Letter in my Physical Capacity.

SIR,
FRom the Twentieth Instant to the First of May next, both Days inclusive, I
beg of you to button your Wastcoat from your Collar to your Wastband. I am

Your most humble-Servant, Isaac Bickerstaff, Philomath.


There is a very handsome well-shaped Youth that frequents the Coffee-houses
about Charing Cross, and ties a very pretty Riband with a Cross of Jewels at
his Breast. This being something new, and a Thing in which the Gentleman may
offend the Heralds-Office, I have addressed my self to him as I am Censor:

Dear Countryman,
WAS that Ensign of Honor, which you wear, given you by a Prince or a Lady
that you have served? If you bear it as an absent Lover, please to hang it on a
black Riband; if as a rewarded Soldier, you may have my License to continue the
red.

Your Faithful Servant, Bickerstaff, Censor.


These little Intimations do great Service, and are very useful, not only to
the Persons themselves, but to inform others how to conduct themselves toward
them.

Instead of this honest private Method, or a Friendly one Face to Face, of
acquainting People with Things in their Power to explain or amend, the usual
Way among People is to take no Notice of Things you can help, and nevertheless
exposs you for those you cannot.

Plumbeus and Levis are constantly in each others Company: They would, if they
took proper Methods, be very agreeable Companions; but they so extravagantly
aim at what they are unfit for, and each of them rallies the other so much in
the wrong Place, that instead of doing each other the Offices of Friends, they
do but instruct the rest of the World to laugh at them with more Knowledge and
Skill. Plumbeus is o^ a saturnine and sullen Complexion; Levis, of a mercurial
and airy Disposition. Both these Gentlemen have but very slow Parts, but would
mak^ a very good Figure, did they pursue what they ought. If Plumbeus would
take to Business, h^ would in a fews Years know the Forms of Orders so well, as
to direct and dictate with so much Ease, as to be thought a solid, able, and at
the same Time, a sure Man of Dispatch. Levis, with a little Reading and coming
more into Company, would soon be able to write a Song, or lead up a
Country-Dance. Instead of these proper Pursuits, in Obedience to their
respective Genius's, Plumbeus endeavors to be the Man of Pleasure, and Levis
the Man of Business. This appears in their Speech, and in their Dress: Plumbeus
is ever egregiously fine, and talking something like Wit; Levis is ever
extremely grave, and with a silly Face repeating Maxims. These Two pardon each
other for affecting what each is incapable of, the one to be wise, and the
other gay; but are extremely critical in their Judgments of each other in their
Way toward what they pretend to, Plumbeus acknowledges Levis a Man of a great
Reach, because it is what Plumbeus never cared for being thought himself, and
Levis allows Plumbeus to be an agreeable Rake for the same Reason. Now were
these dear Friends to be free with each other as they ought to be, they would
change Characters, and be both as commendable, instead of being as ridiculous,
as their Capacities will admit of.

Were it not too grave, all that I would urge on this Subject is, that Men are
bewildered when they consider themselves in any other View than that of
Strangers, who are in a Place where it is no great Matter whether they can, or
unreasonable to expect they should, have every Thing about them as well as at
their own Home. This Way of Thinking is, perhaps, the only one that can put
this Being into a proper Posture for the Ease of Society. It is certain, this
would reduce all Faults into those which proceed from Malice or Dishonesty: It
would quite change our Manner of beholding one another, and nothing that was
not below a Man's Nature would be below his Character. The Arts of this Life
would be proper Advances toward the next; and a very good Man would be a very
fine Gentleman. As it now is, Humane Life is inverted, and we have not learned
half the Knowledge of this World before we are dropping into another. Thus,
instead of the Raptures and Contemplations which naturally attend a well-spent
Life from the Approach of Eternity, even we old Fellows are afraid of the
Ridicule of those who are born since us, and ashamed not to understand, as well
as peevish to resign, the Mode, the Fashion, the Ladies, the Fiddles, the
Balls, and what not. Dick Reptile, who does not want Humor, is very pleasant
at our Club when he sees an old Fellow touchy at being laughed at for any Thing
that is not in the Mode, and bawls in his Ear, Prithee don't mind him; tell him
thou art mortal.

The TATLER. [No 247.
By Jenny Distaff, Half-Sister to Mr. Bickerstaff.
Aedepol, uae nos aeque sumus omnes invisae
Viris Propter paucas, quae omnes faciunt dignae ut videamur male.
Ter.
From Saturd. Nov. 4. to Tuesd. Nov. 7. 1710.
From my own Apartment, November 6.
MY Brother having written the above Piece of Latin, desired me to take Care of
the rest of the ensuing Paper. Toward this he bid me answer the following
Letter, and said, Nothing I could write properly on the Subject of it would be
disagreeable to the Motto. It is the Cause of my Sex, and I therefore enter
upon it with great Alacrity. The Epistle is literally thus:

Edenbourgh, Oct. 23. Mr. Bickerstaff,
I Presume to lay before you an Affair of mine, and begs you will be very sinceir
in giving me your Judgment and Advice in this Matter, which is as follows:

A very agreeable young Gentleman, who is endowed with all the good Quallities
that can make a Man complete, has this long Time maid Love to me in the most
passionat Manner that was posable. He has left nothing unsaid to make me belive
his Affections real; and in his Letters expressed himself so hansomly, and so
tenderly, that I had all the Reason imaginable to belive him sinceir. In short,
he positively has promised me he would marry me: But I find all he said
nothing; for when the Question was put to him, he wouldn't; but still would
continue my Humble Servant, and would go on at the old Rate, repeating the
Assurences of his Fidelity (and at the same Time has none in him). He now writs
to me in the same endearing Style he ust to do, would have me spoke to no Man
but himself. His Estate is in his oune Hand, his Father being dead. My Fortune
at my oune Disposal, (mine being also dead) and to the full answers his Estate.
Pray, Sir, be ingeinous, and tell me cordially, if you don't think I shall do
my self an Injurey if I keep Company or a Corospondance any longer with this
Gentleman. I hope you will faver an honest North Briton (as I am) with your
Advice in this Amoure; for I am resolved just to follow your Directions. Sir,
you will do me a sensable Pleasure, and very great Honor, if you will pleas to
insirt this poor Scrole, with your Answer to it, in your Tatler. Pray fail not
to give me your Answer; for on it depends the Happiness of

Disconsolat Almeira.


MADAM,
I Have frequently read over your Letter, and am of Opinion, that as lamentable
as it is, it is the most common of any Evil that attends our Sex. I am very
much troubled for the Tenderness you express toward your Lover, but rejoice at
the same Time that you can so far surmount your Inclination for him as to
resolve to dismiss him when you have my Brother's Opinion for it. His Sense of
the Matter, he desired me to communicate to you. Oh Almeira! The common Failing
of our Sex is to value the Merit of our Lovers rather from the Grace of their
Address, than the Sincerity of their Hearts. He has expressed himself so
handsomely! Can you say, that after you have Reason to doubt his Truth? It is a
very melancholy Thing, that in this Circumstance of Love (which is the most
important of all others in Female Life) we Women, who are, they say, always
weak, are still weakest. The true Way of valuing a Man, is to consider his
Reputation among the Men: For Want of this necessary Rule toward her Conduct,
when it is too late, we find our selves married to the Outcasts of that Sex;
and it is generally from being disagreeable among Men, that Fellows endeavor
to make themselves pleasing to us. The little Accomplishments of coming into a
Room with a good Air, and telling while they are with us what we cannot hear
among our selves, usually make up the whole of a Woman's Man's Merit. But if
we, when we began to reflect upon our Lover, in the first Place considered what
Figures they make in the Camp, at the Bar, on the 'Change, in their Country, or
at Court, we should behold them in quite another View than at present.

Were we to behave our selves according to this Rule, we should not have the
just Imputation of favoring the silliest of Mortals, to the great Scandal of
the wisest, who value our Favor as it advances their Pleasure, not their
Reputation. In a Word, Madam, if you would judge aright in Love, you must look
upon it as in a Case of Friendship. Were this Gentleman treating with you for
any Thing but your self, when you had consented to his Offer, if he fell off,
you would call him a Cheat and an Impostor. There is therefore nothing left for
you to do, but to despise him and your self for doing with Regret.

I am, MADAM, etc.


I have heard it often argued in Conversation, that this Evil Practice is owing
to the perverted Taste of the Wits in the last Generation. A Libertine on the
Throne could very easily make the Language and the Fashion turn his own Way.
Hence it is, that Woman is treated as a Mistress, and not a Wife. It is from
the Writings of those Times, and the traditional Accounts of the Debauches of
their Men of Pleasure, that the Coxcombs nowadays take upon them, forsooth,
to be false Swains and perjured Lovers. Methinks I feel all the Woman rise in
me, when I reflect upon the nauseous Rogues that pretend to deceive us.
Wretches, that can never have it in their Power to overreach any Thing living
but their Mistresses! In the Name of Goodness, if we are designed by Nature as
suitable Companions to the other Sex, Why are we not treated accordingly? If we
have Merit, as some allow, Why is it not as base in Men to injure us as one
another? If we are the Insignificants that others call us, Where is the Triumph
in deceiving us? But when I look at the Bottom of this Disaster, and recollect
the many of my Acquaintance whom I have known in the same Condition with the
Northern Lass that occasions this Discourse, I must own I have ever found the
Perfidiousness of Men has been generally owing to ourselves, and we have
contributed to our own Deceit. The Truth is, we do not conduct our selves as we
are courted, but as we are inclined. When we let our Imaginations take this
unbridled Swing, it is not he that acts best is most lovely, but he that is
most lovely acts best. When our humble Servants make their Addresses, we do not
keep our selves enough disingaged to be Judges of their Merit; and we seldom
give our Judgment of our Lover, till we have lost our Judgment of him.

While Clarinda was passionately attended and addressed to by Strephon, who is
a Man of Sense and Knowledge in the World; and Cassio, who has a plentiful
Fortune and an excellent Understanding, she fell in Love with Damon at a Ball:
From that Moment she that was before the most reasonable Creature of all my
Acquaintance, cannot hear Strephon speak, but it is something so out of the Way
of Ladies Conversation: And Cassio has never since opened his Mouth before us,
but she whispers me, How seldom do Riches and Sense go together? The Issue of
all this is, that for the Love of Damon, who has neither Experience,
Understanding, or Wealth, she despises those Advantages in the other Two which
she finds wanting in her Lover; or else thinks he has them for no Reason but
because he is her Lover. This and many other Instances may be given in this
Town; but I hope thus much may suffice to prevent the Growth of such Evils at
Edinburgh.

The TATLER. [No 248.
By Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
-- Media sese tulit obvia Silva
Virginis Os Habitumque gerens. --
Virg.
From Tuesday Nov. 7. to Thursday Nov. 9. 1710.
From my own Apartment, November 8.
IT may perhaps appear ridiculous; but I must confess, this last Summer as I
was riding in Enfield Chase, I met a young Lady whom I could hardly get out of
my Head, and for ought I know my Heart, ever since. She was mounted on a Pad,
with a very well-fancied Furniture. She sat her Horse with a very graceful
Air; and when I saluted her with my Hat, she bowed to me so obligingly, that
whether it was her Civility or Beauty that touched me so much, I know not, but
I am sure I shall never forget her. She dwells in my Imagination in a Figure so
much to her Advantage, that if I were to draw a Picture of Youth, Health,
Beauty, or Modesty, I should represent any or all of them in the Person of that
young Woman.

I do not find that there are any Descriptions in the ancient Poets so
beautiful as those they draw of Nymphs in their Pastoral Dresses and Exercises.
Virgil gives Venus the Habit of a Spartan Huntress when she is to put Aeneas in
his Way, and relieve his Cares with the most agreeable Object imaginable. Diana
and her Train are always described as Inhabitants of the Woods, and Followers
of the Chase. To be well diverted, is the safest Guard to Innocence; and,
methinks, it should be one of the first Things to be regarded among People of
Condition to find out proper Amusements for young Ladies. I cannot but think
this of Riding might easily be revived among them, when they consider how much
it must contribute to their Beauty. This would lay up the best Portion they
could bring into a Family, a good Stock of Health, to transmit to their
Posterity. Such a charming Bloom as this gives the Countenance, is very much
preferable to the real or affected Feebleness or Softness, which appear in the
Faces of our modern Beauties.

The Comedy, called, The Ladies Cure, represents the Affectation of wan Looks
and languid Glances to a very entertaining Extravagance. There is, as the Lady
in the Play complains, something so robust in perfect Health, that it is with
her a Point of Breeding and Delicacy to appear in public with a sickly Air.
But the natural Gaiety and Spirit which shine in the Complexion of such as form
to themselves a Sort of diverting Industry by choosing Recreations that are
Exercises, surpass all the false Ornaments and Graces that can be put on by
applying the whole Dispensary of a Toilet. An healthy Body and a cheerful Mind
give Charms as irresistible as inimitable. The Beauteous Dictynna, who came to
Town last Week, has from the constant Prospect in a delicious Country, and the
moderate Exercise and Journeys in the Visits she made round it, contracted a
certain Life in her Countenance which will in vain employ both the Painters and
Poets to represent. The becoming Negligence in her Dress, the severe Sweetness
of her Looks, and a certain innocent Boldness in all her Behavior, are the
Effect of the active Recreations I am talking of.

But instead of such or any other as innocent and pleasing Method of passing
away their Time with Alacrity, we have many in Town who spend their Hours in an
indolent State of Body and Mind, without either Recreations or Reflections. I
am apt to believe, there are some Parents imagine their Daughters will be
accomplished enough, if nothing interrupts their Growth or their Shape.
According to this Method of Education, I could name you Twenty Families, where
all the Girls hear of in this Life is, That it is Time to rise and to come to
Dinner; as if they were so insignificant as to be wholly provided for when they
are fed and clothed.

It is with great Indignation that I see such Crowds of the Female World lost
to humane Society, and condemned to a Laziness, which makes Life pass away with
less Relish than in the hardest Labor. Palestris in her Drawing Room, is
supported by Spirits to keep off the Returns of Spleen and Melancholy, before
she can get over half the Day for want of something to do, while the Wench in
the Kitchen sings and scowrs from Morning to Night.

The next disagreeable Thing to a lazy Lady, is a very busy one. A Man of
Business in good Company, who gives an Account of his Abilities and Dispatches,
is hardly more insupportable than her they call a Notable Woman, and a Manager.
Lady Goodday, where I visited the other Day at a very polite Circle,
entertained a great Lady with a Recipe for a Poultice, and gave us to
understand, that she had done extraordinary Cures since she was last in Town.
It seems a Countryman had wounded himself with his Sith as he was Mowing; and
we were obliged to hear of her Charity, her Medicine, and her Humility, in the
harshest Tone, and coursest Language imaginable.

What I would request in all this Prattle is, that our Females would either let
us have their Persons or their Minds in such Perfection as Nature designed them.

The Way to this is, that those who are in the Quality of Gentlewomen should
propose to themselves some suitable Method of passing away their Time. This
would furnish them with Reflections and Sentiments proper for the Companions of
reasonable Men, and prevent the unnatural Marriages which happen every Day
between the most accomplished Women, and the veriest Oafs; the worthiest Men,
and the most insignificant Females. Were the general Turn of Women's Education
of another Kind than it is at present, we should want one another for more
Reasons than we do as the World now goes. The common Design of Parents is to
get their Girls off as well as they can, and make no Conscience of putting into
our Hands a Bargain for our whole Life, which will make our Hearts ache every
Day of it.

I shall therefore take this Matter into serious Consideration, and will
propose, for the better Improvement of the Fair Sex, a Female Library. This
Collection of Books shall consist of such Authors as do not corrupt while they
divert, but shall tend more immediately to improve them, as they are Women.
They shall be such as shall not hurt a Feature by the Austerity of their
Reflections, nor cause one impertinent Glance by the Wantonness of them. They
shall all tend to advance the Value of their Innocence as Virgins, improve
their Understanding as Wives, and regulate their Tenderness as Parents. It has
been very often said in these Lucubrations, that the Ideas which most
frequently pass through our Imaginations, leave Traces of themselves in our
Countenances. There shall be a strict Regard had to this in my Female Library,
which shall be furnished with nothing that shall give Supplies to Ostentation
or Impertinence, but the whole shall be so digested for the Use of my Students,
that they shall not go out of Character in their Enquiries, but their Knowledge
appear only a cultivated Innocence.

The TATLER. [No 249.
Per varios Casus, per tot Discrimina Rerum,
Tendimus. --
Virg.
From Thursday Nov. 9. to Saturday Nov. 11. 1710.
From my own Apartment, November 10.
I Was last Night visited by a Friend of mine who has an inexhaustible Fund of
Discourse, and never fails to entertain his Company with a Variety of Thoughts
and Hints that are altogether new and uncommon. Whether it were in Complaisance
to my Way of Living, or his real Opinion, he advanced the following Paradox,
That it required much greater Talents to fill up and become a retired Life,
than a Life of Business. Upon this Occasion he rallied very agreeably the busy
Men of the Age, who only valued themselves of being in Motion, and passing
through a Series of trifling and insignificant Actions. In the Heat of his
Discourse, seeing a Piece of Money lying on my Table, I defy (says he) any of
these active Persons to produce half the Adventures that this Twelvepenny-Piece
has been engaged in, were it possible for him to give us an Account of his Life.

My Friend's Talk made so odd an Impression upon my Mind, that soon after I was
a-Bed I fell insensibly into a most unaccountable Resverie, that had neither
Moral nor Design in it, and cannot be so properly called a Dream as a Delirium.

Methoughts the Shilling that lay upon the Table reared it self upon its Edge,
and turning the Face toward me, opened its Mouth, and in a soft Silver Sound
gave me the following Account of his Life and Adventures:

I was born, says he, on the Side of a Mountain, near a little Village of Peru,
and made a Voyage to England in an Ingot, under the Convoy of Sir Francis
Drake. I was, soon after my Arrival, taken out of my Indian Habit, refined,
naturalized, and put into the British Mode, with the Face of Queen Elizabeth on
one Side, and the Arms of the Country on the other. Being thus equipped, I
found in me a wonderful Inclination to ramble, and visit all the Parts of the
new World into which I was brought. The People very much favored my natural
Disposition, and shifted me so fast from Hand to Hand, that before I was Five
Years old, I had traveled into almost every Corner of the Nation. But in the
Beginning of my Sixth Year, to my unspeakable Grief, I fell into the Hands of a
miserable old Fellow, who clapped me into an Iron Chest, where I found Five
Hundred more of my own Quality who lay under the same Confinement. The only
Relief we had, was to be taken out and counted over in the fresh Air every
Morning and Evening. After an Imprisonment of several Years, we heard some Body
knocking at our Chest, and breaking it open with an Hammer. This we found was
the old Man's Heir, who, as his Father lay a dying, was so good as to come to
our Release: He separated us that very Day. What was the Fate of my Companions,
I know not: As for my self, I was sent to the Apothecary's Shop for a Pint of
Sack. The Apothecary gave me to an Herb-Woman, the Herb-Woman to a Butcher, the
Butcher to a Brewer, and the Brewer to his Wife, who made a Present of me to a
Nonconformist Preacher. After this Manner I made my Way merrily through the
World; for, as I told you before, we Shillings love nothing so much as
traveling. I sometimes fetched in a Shoulder of Mutton sometimes a Play-Book,
and often had the Satisfaction to treat a Templer at a Twelvepenny Ordinary, or
carry him with Three Friends to Westminster Hall.

In the Midst of this pleasant Progress which I made from Place to Place, I was
arrested by a superstitious old Woman, who shut me up in a greazy Purse, in
Pursuance of a foolish Saying, That while she kept a Queen Elizabeth's Shilling
about her, she should never be without Money. I continued here a close Prisoner
for many Months, till at last I was exchanged for Eight and Forty Farthings.

I thus rambled from Pocket to Pocket till the Beginning of the Civil Wars,
when (to my Shame be it spoken) I was employed in raising Soldiers against the
King: For being of a very tempting Breadth, a Sergeant made Use of me to
inveigle Country Fellows, and list them in the Service of the Parliament.

As soon as he had made one Man sure, his Way was to oblige him to take a
Shilling of a more homely Figure, and then practice the same Trick upon
another. Thus I continued doing great Mischief to the Crown, till my Officer
chancing one Morning to walk Abroad earlier than ordinary, sacrificed me to his
Pleasures, and made Use of me to seduce a Milk-Maid. This Wench bent me, and
gave me to her Sweetheart, applying more properly than she intended the usual
Form of, To my Love and from my Love. This ungenerous Gallant marrying her
within few Days after, pawned me for a Dram of Brandy, and drinking me out next
Day, I was beaten flat with an Hammer, and again set a running.

After many Adventures, which it would be tedious to relate, I was sent to a
young Spendthrift, in Company with the Will of his deceased Father. The young
Fellow, who I found was very extravagant, gave great Demonstrations of Joy at
the Receiving the Will; but opening it, he found himself disinherited and cut
off from the Possession of a fair Estate, by Virtue of my being made a Present
to him. This put him into such a Passion, that after having taken me in his
Hand, and cursed me, he squirred me away from him as far as he could fling me.
I chanced to light in an unfrequented Place under a dead Wall, where I lay
undiscovered and useless, during the Usurpation of Oliver Cromwell.

About a Year after the King's Return, a poor Cavalier that was walking there
about Dinnertime fortunately cast his Eye upon me, and, to the great Joy of us
both, carried me to a Cook's-Shop, where he dined upon me, and drank the King's
Health. When I came again into the World, I found that I had been happier in my
Retirement than I thought, having probably by that Means escaped wearing a
monstrous Pair of Breeches.

Being now of great Credit and Antiquity, I was rather looked upon as a Medal
than an ordinary Coin; for which Reason a Gamester laid hold of me, and
converted me into a Counter, having got together some Dozens of us for that
Use. We led a melancholy Life in his Possession, being busy at those Hours
wherein Current Coin is at rest, and partaking the Fate of our Master, being in
a few Moments valued at a Crown, a Pound, or a Sixpence, according to the
Situation in which the Fortune of the Cards placed us. I had at length the good
Luck to see my Master break, by which Means I was again sent Abroad under my
primitive Denomination of a Shilling.

I shall pass over many other Accidents of less Moment, and hasten to that
fatal Catastrophe when I fell into the Hands of an Artist who conveyed me under
Ground, and with an unmerciful Pair of Sheers cut off my Titles, clipped my
Brims, retrenched my Shape, rubbed me to my inmost Ring, and, in short, so
spoiled and pillaged me, that he did not leave me worth a Groat. You may think
what a Confusion I was in to see my self thus curtailed and disfigured. I
should have been ashamed to have shown my Head, had not all my old Acquaintance
been reduced to the same shameful Figure, excepting some few that were punched
through the Belly. In the midst of this general Calamity, when every Body
thought our Misfortune irretrievable, and our Case desperate, we were thrown
into the Furnace together, and (as it often happens with Cities rising out of a
Fire) appeared with greater Beauty and Luster than we could ever boast of
before. What has happened to me since this Change of Sex which you now see, I
shall take some other Opportunity to relate. In the mean Time I shall only
repeat Two Adventures, as being very extraordinary, and neither of them having
ever happened to me above once in my Life. The First was, my being in a Poet's
Pocket, who was so taken with the Brightness and Novelty of my Appearance, that
it gave Occasion to the finest Burlesque Poem in the British Language, entitued
from me, The Splendid Shilling. The Second Adventure, which I must not omit,
happened to me in the Year 1703, when I was given away in Charity to a blind
Man; but indeed this was by ^ Mistake, the Person who gave me having heed^esly
thrown me into the Hat among a Penny^orth of Farthings.

The TATLER. [No 250.
Scis etenim Justum gemina suspendere Lance
Ancipitis Librae. --
Pers.
From Saturd. Nov. 11. to Tuesd. Nov. 14. 1710.
From my own Apartment, Nov. 13.
I Last Winter erected a Court of Justice for the correcting of several
Enormities in Dress and Behavior, which are not cognizable in any other Courts
of this Realm. The Vintner's Case which I there tried is still fresh in every
Man's Memory. That of the Petticoat gave also a general Satisfaction, not to
mention the more important Points of the Cane and Perspective; in which, if I
did not give Judgments and Decrees according to the strictest Rules of Equity
and Justice, I can safely say, I acted according to the best of my
Understanding. But as for the Proceedings of that Court, I shall refer my
Reader to an Account of them, written by my Secretary, which is now in the
Press, and will shortly be published under the Title of Lillie's Reports.

As I last Year presided over a Court of Justice, it is my intention this Year
to set my self at the Head of a Court of Honor. There is no Court o^ this
Nature any where at present, except in France, where, according to the best of
my intelligence, it consists of such only as are Marshals of that Kingdom. I am
likewise informed, that there is not one of that honorable Board at present
who has not been driven out of the Field by the Duke of Marlborough: But
whether this be only an accidental or a necessary Qualification, I must confess
I am not able to determine.

As for the Court of Honor of which I am here speaking, I intend to sit my
self in it as President, with several Men of Honor on my Right Hand, and Women
of Virtue on my Left, as my Assistants. The First Place of the Bench I have
given to an old Tangereen Captain with a Wooden Leg. The Second is a Gentleman
of a long twisted Periwig without a Curl in it, a Muff with very little Hair
upon it, and a Threadbare Coat with new Buttons, being a Person of great
Worth, and Second Brother to a Man of Quality. The Third is a Gentleman Usher,
extremely well read in Romances, and Grandson to one of the greatest Wits in
Germany, who was some Time Master of the Ceremonies to the Duke of Wolfembuttel.

As for those who sit further on my Right Hand, as it is usual in public
Courts, they are such as will fill up the Number of Faces upon the Bench, and
serve rather for Ornament than Use.

The chief upon my Left Hand are, an old Maiden Lady, that preserves some of
the best Blood of England in her Veins.

A Welsh Woman of a little Stature, but high Spirit.

An old Prude that has censured every Marriage for these Thirty Years, and is
lately wedded to a young Rake.

Having thus furnished my Bench, I shall establish Correspondencies with the
Horse-Guards, and the Veterans of Chelsea College; the former to furnish me
with Twelve Men of Honor as often as I shall have Occasion for a Grand Jury,
and the latter with as many good Men and true for a Petty Jury.

As for the Women of Virtue, it will not be difficult for me to find them about
Midnight at Crimp and Basset.

Having given this public Notice of my Court, I must further add, that I
intend to open it on this Day Sevennight, being Monday the Twentieth Instant;
and do hereby invite all such as have suffered Injuries and Astronts, that are
not to be redressed by the common Laws of this Land, whether they be short
Bows, cold Salutations, supercilious Looks, unreturned Smiles, distant
Behavior, or forced Familiarity; as also all such as have been aggrieved by
any ambiguous Expression, accidental Justle, or unkind Repartee; likewise all
such as have been defrauded of their Right to the Wall, tricked out of the
upper End of the Table, or have been suffered to place themselves in their own
Wrong on the Back-Seat of the Coach: These, and all of these, I do, as I above
said, invite to bring in their several Cases and Complaints, in which they
shall be relieved with all imaginable Expedition.

I am very sensible, that the Office I have now taken upon me will engage me in
the Disquisition of many weighty Points that daily perplex the Youth of the
British Nation, and therefore I have already discussed several of them for my
future Use; as, How far a Man may brandish his Cane in the telling a Story,
without insulting his Hearer? What Degree of Contradiction amounts to the Lie?
How a Man should resent another's staring and cocking a Hat in his Face? If
asking Pardon is an Atonement for treading upon ones Toes? Whether a Man may
put up a Box on the Ear received from a Stranger in the Dark? Or, Whether a Man
of Honor may take a Blow of his Wife? With several other Subtilties of the
like Nature.

For my Direction in the Duties of my Office, I have furnished my self with a
certain Astrological Pair of Scales which I have contrived for this Purpose. In
one of them I lay the Injuries, in the other the Reparations. The first are
represented by little Weights made of a Metal resembling Iron, and the other in
Gold. These are not only lighter than the Weights made use of in Averdupois,
but also than such as are used in Troy-Weight. The heaviest of those that
represent the Injuries amount but to a Scruple; and decrease by so many
Sub-divisions, that there are several imperceptible Weights which cannot be
seen without the Help of a very fine Microscope. I might acquaint my Reader,
that these Scales were made under the Influence of the Sun when he was in
Libra, and describe many Signatures on the Weights both of Injury and
Reparation: But as this would look rather to proceed from an Ostentation of my
own Art than any Care for the Public, I shall pass it over in Silence.

The Letter of the 7th Instant, enquired for by another of the 11th, came to
Hand.

The TATLER. [No 251.
Quisnam igitur Liber? Sapiens. sibi qui Imperiosus,
Quem neque Pauperies, neque Mors, neque Vincula, terrent:
Responsare Cupidinibus, contemnere Honores,
Fortis, and in seipso totus teres atque rotundus,
Externi nequid valeat per laeve morari;
In quem manca ruit semper Fortuna. --
Hor.
From Tuesd. Nov. 14. to Thursd. Nov. 16. 1710.
From my own Apartment, Nov. 15.
IT is necessary to an easy and happy Life, to possess our Minds in such a
Manner as to be always well satisfied with our own Reflections. The Way to this
State, is to measure our Actions by our own Opinion, and not by that of the
rest of the World. The Sense of other Men ought to prevail over us in Things of
less Consideration, but not in Concerns where Truth and Honor are engaged.
When we look into the Bottom of Things, what at first appears a Paradox, is a
plain Truth; and those Professions which, for Want of being duly weighed, seem
to proceed from a Sort of Romantic Philosophy, and Ignorance of the World,
after a little Reflection are so reasonable, that it is direct Madness to walk
by any other Rules. Thus to contradict our Desires, and to conquer the Impulses
of our Ambition, if they do not fall in with what we in our inward Sentiments
approve, is so much our Interest, and so absolutely necessary to our real
Happiness, that to contemn all the Wealth and Power in the World, where they
stand in Competition with a Man's Honor, is rather good Sense than Greatness
of Mind.

Did we consider that the Mind of a Man is the Man himself, we should think it
the most unnatural Sort of Self-murder to sacrifice the Sentiment of the Soul
to gratify the Appetites of the Body. Bless us! Is it possible, that when the
Necessities of Life are supplied, a Man would flatter to be rich, or circumvent
to be powerful? When we meet a poor Wretch urged with Hunger and Cold asking an
Alms, we are apt to think this a State we could rather starve than submit to:
But yet how much more despicable is his Condition who is above Necessity, and
yet shall resign his Reason and his Integrity to purchase Superfluities? These
are both abject and common Beggars; but sure it is less despicable to beg a
Supply to a Man's Hunger than his Vanity. But Custom and general Prepossessions
have so far prevailed over an unthinking World, that those necessitous
Creatures who cannot relish Life without Applause, Attendance, and Equipage,
are so far from making a contemptible Figure, that distressed Virtue is less
esteemed than successful Vice. But if a Man's Appeal in Cases that regarded his
Honor were made to his own Soul, there would be a Bafis and standing Rule for
our Conduct, and we should always endeavor rather to be than appear
honorable. Mr. Collier, in his Essay on Fortitude, has treated this Subject
with great Wit and Magnanimity. What (says he) can be more honorable than to
have Courage enough to execute the Commands of Reason and Conscience; to
maintain the Dignity of our Nature, and the Station assigned us? To be Proof
against Poverty, Pain, and Death it self? I mean so far as not to do any Thing
that is scandalous or sinful to avoid them? To stand Adversity under all Shapes
with Decency and Resolution? To do this, is to be great above Title and
Fortune. This argues the Soul of an Heavenly Extraction, and is worthy the
Offspring of the Deity.

What a generous Ambition has this Man pointed to us? When Men have settled in
themselves a Conviction by such noble Precepts, that there is nothing
honorable that is not accompanied with Innocence; nothing mean but what has
Guilt in it; I say, when they have attained thus much, though Poverty, Pain,
and Death, may still retain their Terrors, yet Riches, Pleasures, and Honors,
will easily lose their Charms, if they stand between us and our Integrity.

What is here said with Allusion to Fortune and Fame, may as justly be applied
to Wit and Beauty; for these latter are as adventitious as the other, and as
little concern the Essence of the Soul. They are all laudable in the Man who
possesses them only for the just Application of them. A bright Imagination,
while it is subservient to an honest and noble Soul, is a Faculty which makes a
Man justly admired by Mankind, and furnishes him with Reflections upon his own
Actions, which add Delicates to the Feast of a good Conscience: But when Wit
descends to wait upon sensual Pleasures, or promote the base Purposes of
Ambition, it is then to be contemned in Proportion to its Excellence. If a Man
will not resolve to place the Foundation of his Happiness in his own Mind, Life
is a bewildered and unhappy State, incapable of Rest or Tranquillity: For to
such a one the general Applause of Valor, Wit, nay of Honesty it self, can
give him but a very feeble Comfort, since it is capable of being interrupted by
any one who wants either Understanding or Goodnature to see or acknowledge
such Excellencies. This Rule is so necessary, that one may very safely say, it
is impossible to know any true Relish of our Being without it. Look about you
in common Life among the ordinary Race of Mankind, and you will find Merit in
every Kind is allowed only to those who are in particular Districts or Sets of
Company: But since Men can have little Pleasure in these Faculties which
denominate them Persons of Distinction, let them give up such an empty Pursuit,
and think nothing essential to Happiness but what is in their own Power, the
Capacity of reflecting with Pleasure on their own Actions, however they are
interpreted.

It is so evident a Truth, that it is only in our own Bosoms we are to search
for any Thing to make us happy, that it is, methinks, a Disgrace to our Nature
to talk of the taking our Measures from thence only as a Matter of Fortitude.
When all is well there, the Vicissitudes and Distinctions of Life are the mere
Scenes of a Drama, and he will never act his Part well who has his Thoughts
more fixed upon the Applause of the Audience than the Design of his Part.

The Life of a Man who acts with a steady Integrity, without valuing the
Interpretation of his Actions, has but one uniform regular Path to move in,
where he cannot meet Opposition, or fear Ambuscade. On the other Side, the
least Deviation from the Rules of Honor introduces a Train of numberless
Evils, and involves him in inexplicable Mazes. He that has entered into Guilt
has bid Adieu to Rest, and every Criminal has his Share of the Misery expressed
so emphatically in the Tragedian;

Mackbeth shall sleep no more!
It was with Detestation of any other Grandeur but the calm Command of his own
Passion, that the excellent Mr. Cowley cries out with so much Justice;

If e're Ambition did my Fancy cheat,
With any Thought so mean as to be great,
Continue, Heaven, still from me to remove
The humble Blessings of that Life I love.
The TATLER. [No 252.
Narratur and prisci Catonis
Saepe Mero caluisse Virtus.
Hor.
From Thursd. Nov. 16. to Saturd. Nov. 18. 1710.
From my own Apartment, Nov. 17.
THE following Letter, and several others to the same Purpose, accuse me of a
Rigor of which I am far from being guilty, to wit, the disallowing the
cheerful Use of Wine.

From my Country House, Oct. 25. Mr. Bickerstaff,
YOur Discourse against Drinking, in Tuesday's Tatler, I like well enough in
the main; but in my humble Opinion, you are become too rigid where you say to
this Effect: [Were there only this single Consideration, that we are the less
Masters of our selves if we drink the least Proportion beyond the Exigence of
Thirst.] I hope no one drinks Wine to allay this Appetite. This seems to be
designed for a loftier Indulgence of Nature; for it were hard to suppose, that
the Author of Nature, who imposed upon her her Necessities and Pains, does not
allow her her Pleasures, and we may reckon among the latter the moderate Use of
the Grape: And though I am as much against Excess, or whatever approaches it,
as your self, yet I conceive one may safely go farther than the Bounds you
there prescribe, not only without forfeiting the Title of being one's own
Master, but also to possess it in a much greater Degree. If a Man's expressing
himself upon any Subject with more Life and Vivacity, more Variety of Idea's,
more copiously, more fluently, and more to the Purpose, argues it he thinks
clearer, speaks more ready, and with greater Choice of comprehensive and
significant Terms. I have the good Fortune now to be intimate with a Gentleman
remarkable for this Temper, who has an inexhaustible Source of Wit to entertain
the Curious, the Grave, the Humorous, and the Frolic. He can transform himself
into different Shapes, and adapt himself to every Company; yet in a
Coffee-house, or in the ordinary Course of Affairs, appears rather dull than
sprightly. You can seldom get him to the Tavern, but when once he is is arrived
to his Pint, and begins to look about and like his Company, you admire a
Thousand Things in him, which before lay buried. Then you discover the
Brightness of his Mind, and the Strength of his Judgment, accompanied with the
most graceful Mirth. In a Word, by this enlivening Aid, he is whatever is
polite, instructive, and diverting. What makes him still more agreeable is,
that he tells a Story, serious or comical, with as much Delicacy of Humor as
Cervantes himself. And for all this, at other Times, even after a long
Knowledge of him, you shall scarce discern in this incomparable Person a whit
more than what might be expected from one of a common Capacity. Doubtless,
there are Men of great Parts that are guilty of downright Bashfulness, that by
a strange Hesitation and Reluctance to speak, murder the finest and most
elegant Thoughts, and render the most lively Conceptions flat and heavy.

In this Case, a certain Quantity of my White or Red Cordial, which you will,
is an easy, but an infallible Remedy. It awakens the Judgment, quickens
Memory, ripens Understanding, disperses Melancholy, chears the Heart; in a
Word, restores the whole Man to himself and his Friends without the least Pain
or Indisposition to the Patient. To be taken only in the Evening in a
reasonable Quantity before going to Bed. Note, My Bottles are sealed with Three
Flower-de-Luces and a Bunch of Grapes. Beware of Counterfeits. I am

Your most Humble Servant, etc.


Whatever has been said against the Use of Wine, upon the Supposition that it
enfeebles the Mind, and renders it unfit for the Duties of Life, bears forcibly
to the Advantage of that delicious Juice, in Cases where it only heightens
Conversation, and brings to Light agreeable Talents, which otherwise would have
lain concealed under the Oppression of an unjust Modesty. I must acknowledge I
have seen many of the Temper mentioned by this Correspondent, and own, Wine may
very allowably be used in a Degree above the Supply of mere Necessity by such
as labor under Melancholy, or are Tongue-ty'd by Modesty. It is certainly a
very agreeable Change, when we see a Glass raise a lifeless Conversation into
all the Pleasures of Wit and good Humor. But when Caska adds to his natural
Impudence the Fluster of a Bottle, that which Fools called Fire when he was
sober, all Men abhor as Outrage when he is drunk. Thus he that in the Morning
was only saucy, is in the Evening tumultuous. It makes one sick to hear one of
these Fellows say, They love a Friend and a Bottle. Noisy Mirth has something
too rustic in it to be considered without Terror by Men of Politeness: But
while the Discourse improves in a well chosen Company, from the Addition of
Spirits which flow from moderate Cups, it must be acknowledged, that Leisure
Time cannot be more agreeably, or perhaps more usefully employed than at such
Meetings: But there is a certain Prudence in this and all other Circumstances
which makes Right or Wrong in the Conduct of ordinary Life. Sir Jeoffrey
Wildacre has nothing so much at Heart as that his Son should know the World
betimes: For this End he introduces him among the Sots of his own Age, where
the Boy learns to laugh at his Father from the Familiarity with which he sees
him treated by his Equals. This the old Fellow calls Living well with his Heir,
and teaching him to be too much his Friend to be impatient for his Estate. But
for the more exact Regulation of Society in this and other Matters, I shall
publish Tables of the Characters and Relations among Men, and by them instruct
the Town in making Sets and Companies for a Bottle. This Humor of Sir Jeoffrey
shall be taken Notice of in the first Place; for there is, methinks, a Sort of
Incest in Drunkenness, and Sons are not to behold Fathers stripped of all
Reverence.

It is shocking in Nature for the Young, to see those whom they should have an
Awe for in Circumstances of Contempt. I shall therefore utterly forbid, that
those in whom Nature should admonish to avoid too gross Familiarities, shall be
received in Parties of Pleasure where there is the least Danger of Excess. I
should run through the whole Doctrine of Drinking, but that my Thoughts are at
present too much employed in the Modelling my Court of Honor; and altering the
Seats, Benches, Bar, and Canopy from that of the Court wherein I last Winter
sat upon Causes of less Moment. By the Way I shall take an Opportunity to
examine, what Method is to be taken to make Joiners and other Artificers get
out of a House they have once entered, not forgetting to tie them under proper
Regulations. It is for Want of such Rules, that I have a Day or two longer than
I expected been tormented and deafened with Hammers, insomuch that I neither
can pursue this Discourse, or answer the following and many other Letters of
the highest Importance.

Mr. Bickerstaff,
WE are Man and Wife, and have a Boy and a Girl: The Lad Seventeen, the Maiden
Sixteen. We are quarrelling about some Parts of their Education. I Ralph cannot
bear that I must pay for the Girl's Learning on the Spinnet, when I know she
has no Ear. I Bridget have not Patience to have my Son whipped because he
cannot make Verses, when I know he is a Blockhead. Pray, Sir, inform us, Is it
absolutely necessary that all who wear Breeches must be taught to Rhyme, all in
Petticoats to touch an Instrument? Please to interpose in this and the like
Cases, to end much solid Distress which arises from trifling Causes, as it is
common in Wedlock, and you will very much oblige us and ours.

Ralph Bridget
Yokefellow.


The TATLER. [No 253.
Pietate gravem ac Meritis si forte Virum quem
Conspexere, silent, arrectisque Auribus astant.
Virg.
From Saturd. Nov. 18. to Tuesd. Nov. 21. 1710.
From my own Apartment, Nov. 20.
Extract of the Journal of the Court of Honor, 1710.
Die Lunae vicesimo Novembris, Hora nona Antemeridiana.
THE Court being sat, an Oath prepared by the Censor was administered to the
Assistants on his Right Hand, who were all sworn upon their Honor. The Women
on his Left Hand took the same Oath upon their Reputation. Twelve Gentlemen of
the Horse-Guards were impannelled, having unanimously chosen Mr. Alexander
Truncheon, who is their Right Hand Man in the Troop, for their Foreman in the
Jury. Mr. Truncheon immediately drew his Sword, and holding it with the Point
toward his own Body, presented it to the Censor. Mr. Bickerstaff received it,
and after having surveyed the Breadth of the Blade, and Sharpness of the Point,
with more than ordinary Attention, returned it to the Foreman in a very
graceful Manner. The rest of the Jury, upon the Delivery of the Sword to their
Foreman, drew all of them together as one Man, and saluted the Bench with such
an Air, as signified the most resigned Submission to those who commanded them,
and the greatest Magnanimity to execute what they should command.

Mr. Bickerstaff, after having received the Compliments on his Right Hand, cast
his Eye upon the Left, where the whole Female Jury paid their Respects by a low
Courtesy, and by laying their Hands upon their Mouths. Their Forewoman was a
professed Platonist, that had spent much of her Time in exhorting the Sex to
set a just Value upon their Persons, and to make the Men know themselves.

There followed a profound Silence, when at length, after some Recollection,
the Censor, who continued hitherto uncovered, put on his Hat with great
Dignity; and after having composed the Brims of it in a Manner suitable to the
Gravity of his Character, he gave the following Charge, which was received with
Silence and Attention, that being the only Applause which he admits of, or is
ever given in his Presence.

The Nature of my Office, and the Solemnity of this Occasion, requiring that I
should open my First Session with a Speech, I shall cast what I have to say
under Two principal Heads.

Under the First, I shall endeavor to show the Necessity and Usefulness of
this new-erected Court; and under the Second, I shall give a Word of Advice and
Instruction to every constituent Part of it.

As for the First, it is well observed by Phaedrus an Heathen Poet, Nisi utile
est quod facimus, frustra est Gloria.
Which is the same, Ladies, as if I should say, It would be of no Reputation
for me to be President of a Court which is of no Benefit to the Public. Now
the Advantages that may arise to the Weal-Publick from this Institution will
more plainly appear, if we consider what it suffers for the Want of it. Are not
our Streets daily filled with wild Pieces of Justice and random Penalties? Are
not Crimes undetermined, and Reparations disproportioned? How often have we
seen the Lie punished by Death, and the Liar himself deciding his own Cause?
nay, not only acting the Judge, but the Excutioner? Have we not known a Box on
the Ear more severely accounted for than Manslaughter? In these Extrajudicial
Proceedings of Mankind, an unmannerly Jest is frequently as Capital as a
premeditated Murder.

But the most pernicious Circumstance in this Case is, that the Man who suffers
the Injury must put himself upon the same Foot of Danger with him that gave it,
before he can have his just Revenge; so that the Punishment is altogether
accidental, and may fall as well upon the Innocent as the Guilty.

I shall only mention a Case which happens frequently among the more polite
Nations of the World, and which I the rather mention, because both Sexes are
concerned in it, and which therefore you Gentlemen and you Ladies of the Jury
will the rather take Notice of; I mean that great and known Case of Cuckoldom.
Supposing the Person who has suffered Insults in his dearer and better-Half;
supposing, I say, this Person should resent the Injuries done to his tender
Wife, What is the Reparation he may expect? Why, to be used worse than his poor
Lady, run through the Body, and left Breathless upon the Bed of Honor. What
then will you on my Right Hand say must the Man do that is affronted? Must our
Sides be elbowed, our Shins broken? Must the Wall, or perhaps our Mistress, be
taken from us? May a Man knit his Forhead into a Frown, toss up his Arm, on
pish at what we say, and must the Villain live after it? Is there no Redress
for injured Honor? Yes, Gentlemen, that is the Design of the Judicature we
have here established.

A Court of Conscience, we very well know, was first instituted for the
determining of several Points of Property that were too little and trivial for
the Cognizance of higher Courts of Justice. In the same Manner, our Court of
Honor is appointed for the Examination of several Niceties and Punctilio's
that do not pass for Wrongs in the Eye of our common Laws. But notwithstanding
no Legislators of any Nation have taken into Consideration these little
Circumstances, they are such as often lead to Crimes big enough for their
Inspection, though they come before them too late for their Redress.

Besides, I appeal to you, Ladies, [Here Mr. Bickerstaff turned to his Left
Hand] if these are not the little Stings and Thorns in Life that make it more
uneasy than its most substantial Evils? Confess ingenuously, Did you never lose
a Mornning's Devotions because you could not offer them up from the highest
Place of the Pew? Have you not been in Pain, even at a Ball, because another
has been taken out to dance before you? Do you love any of your Friends so much
as those that are below you? Or have you any Favorites that walk on your Right
Hand? You have answered me in your Looks, I ask no more.

I come now to the Second Part of my Discourse, which obliges me to address my
self in particular to the respective Members of the Court, in which I shall be
very brief.

As for you, Gentlemen and Ladies my Assistants and Grand Juries, I have made
Choice of you on my Right Hand, because I know you very jealous of your Honor;
and you on my Left, because I know you very much concerned for the Reputation
of others; for which Reason I expect great Exactness and Impartiality in your
Verdicts and Judgments.

I must in the next Place address my self to you, Gentlemen of the Council: You
all know, that I have not chosen you for your Knowledge in the litigious Parts
of the Law, but because you have all of you formerly fought Duels, of which I
have Reason to think you have repented, as being now settled in the peaceable
State of Benchers. My Advice to you is, only that in your Pleadings you are
short and expressive: To which End you are to banish out of your Discourses all
synonymous Terms, and unnecessary Multiplications of Verbs and Nouns. I do
moreover forbid you the Use of the Words also and likewise; and must further
declare, That if I catch any one among you, upon any Pretense whatsoever, using
the Particle or, I shall incessantly order him to be stripped of his Gown, and
thrown over the Bar.

This is a true Copy: Charles Lilly.

N. B. The Sequel of the Proceedings of this Day will be published on Tuesday
next.

The TATLER. [No 254.
Splendide Mendax --
Hor.
From Tuesday Nov. 21. to Thursday Nov. 23. 1710.
From my own Apartment, Nov. 22.
THere are no Books which I more delight in than in Travels, especially those
that describe remote Countries, and give the Writer an Opportunity of showing
his Parts without incurring any Danger of being examined or contradicted. Among
all the Authors of this Kind, our renowned Countryman Sir John Mandeville has
distinguished himself, by the Copiousness of his Invention, and Greatness of
his Genius. The Second to Sir John I take to have been Ferdinand Mendez Pinto,
a Person of infinite Adventure, and unbounded Imagination. One reads the
Voyages of these Two great Wits with as much Astonishment as the Travels of
Ulysses in Homer, or of the Red Cross Knight in Spencer. All is Enchanted
Ground, and Fairy Land.

I have got into my Hands by great Chance several Manuscripts of these Two
eminent Authors, which are filled with greater Wonders than any of those they
have communicated to the Public; and indeed, were they not so well attested,
would appear altogether improbable. I am apt to think, the ingenious Authors
did not publish them with the rest of their Works, lest they should pass for
Fictions and Fables: A Caution not unnecessary, when the Reputation of their
Veracity was not yet established in the World. But as this Reason has now no
further Weight. I shall make the Public a Present of these curious Pieces at
such Times as I shall find my self unprovided with other Subjects.

The present Paper I intend to fill with an Extract of Sir John's Journal, in
which that learned and worthy Knight gives an Account of the Freezing and
Thawing of several short Speeches which he made in the Territories of Nova
Zembla. I need not inform my Reader, that the Author of Hudibras alludes to
this strange Quality in that cold Climate, when, speaking of abstracted Notions
clothed in a visible Shape, he adds that apt Simile,

Like Words congealed in Northern Air.
Not to keep my Reader any longer in Suspense, the Relation put into modern
Language is as follows:

We were separated by a Storm in the Latitude of 73, insomuch that only the
Ship which I was in, with a Dutch and a French Vessel, got safe into a Creek of
Nova Zembla. We landed, in order to resit our Vessels, and store our selves
with Provisions. The Crew of each Vessel made themselves a Cabin of Turf and
Wood, at some Distance from each other, to fence themselves against the
Inclemencies of the Weather, which was severe beyond Imagination. We soon
observed, that in talking to one another we lost several of our Words, and
could not hear one another at above Two Yards Distance, and that too when we
sat very near the Fire. After much Perplexity, I found that our Words froze in
the Air before they could reach the Ears of the Person to whom they were
spoken. I was soon confirmed in this Conjecture, when, upon the Increase of the
Cold, the whole Company grew dumb, or rather deaf; for every Man was sensible,
as we afterward found, that he spoke as well as ever; but the Sounds no sooner
took Air, than they were condensed and lost. It was now a miserable Spectacle
to see us nodding and gaping at one another, every Man talking, and no Man
heard. One might observe a Seaman, that could hail a Ship at a League distance,
beckoning with his Hands, straining his Lungs, and tearing his Throat, but all
in vain.

-- Nec vox, nec Verba, sequuntur.
We continued here Three Weeks in this dismal Plight. At length, upon a Turn of
Wind, the Air about us began to thaw. Our Cabin was immediately filled with a
dry clattering Sound, which I afterward found to be the Crackling of
Consonants that broke above our Heads, and were often mixed with a gentle
Hissing, which I imputed to the Letter S, that occurs so frequently in the
English Tongue. I soon after felt a Breeze of Whispers rushing by my Ear; for
those being of a soft and gentle Substance, immediately liquefied in the warm
Wind that blew across our Cabin. These were soon followed by Syllables and
short Words, and at length by entire Sentences, that melted sooner or later, as
they were more or less congealed; so that we now heard every Thing that had
been spoken during the whole Three Weeks that we had been silent, if I may use
that Expression. It was now very early in the Morning, and yet, to my Surprise,
I heard some Body say, Sir John, it is Midnight, and Time for the Ship's Crew
to go to Bed. This I knew to be the Pilot's Voice, and upon recollecting my
self, I concluded that he had spoken these Words to me some Days before, though
I could not hear them before the present Thaw. My Reader will easily imagine
how the whole Crew was amazed, to hear every Man talking, and see no Man
opening his Mouth. In the Midst of this great Surprise we were all in, we heard
a Volley of Oaths and Curses, lasting for a long while, and uttered in a very
hoarse Voice, which I knew belonged to the Boatswain, who was a very choleric
Fellow, and had taken his Opportunity of Cursing and Swearing at me when he
thought I could not hear him; for I had several Times given him the Strappado
on that Account, as I did not fail to repeat it for these his pious Soliloquies
when I got him on Shipboard.

I must not omit the Names of several Beauties in Wapping, which were heard
every now and then, in the Midst of a long Sigh that accompanied them; as, Dear
Kate! Pretty Mrs. Peggy! When shall I see my Sue again? This betrayed several
Amors which had been concealed till that Time, and furnished us with a great
deal of Mirth in our Return to England.

When this Confusion of Voices was pretty well over, though I was afraid to
offer at Speaking, as fearing I should not be heard, I proposed a Visit to the
Dutch Cabin, which lay about a Mile further up into the Country. My Crew were
extremely rejoiced to find they had again recovered their Hearing, though every
Man uttered his Voice with the same Apprehensions that I had done!

-- Et timide Verba intermissa retentat.
At about half a Mile's Distance from our Cabin, we heard the Groanings of a
Bear, which at first startled us; but upon Enquiry we were informed by some of
our Company, that he was dead, and now lay in Salt, having been killed upon
that very Spot about a Fortnight before, in the Time of the Frost. Not far from
the same Place we were likewise entertained with some posthumous Snarls and
Barkings of a Fox.

We at length arrived at the little Dutch Settlement, and upon entering the
Room, found it filled with Sighs that smelt of Brandy, and several other
unsavourly Sounds that were altogether inarticulate. My Valet, who was an
Irishman, fell into so great a Rage at what he heard, that he drew his Sword;
but not knowing where to lay the Blame, he put it up again. We were stunned
with these confused Noises, but did not hear a single Word till about half an
Hour after; which I ascribed to the harsh and obdurate Sounds of that Language,
which wanted more Time than ours to melt and become audible.

After having here met with a very hearty Welcome, we went to the French
Cabin, who, to make Amends for their Three Weeks Silence, were Talking and
Disputing with greater Rapidity and Confusion than ever I heard in an Assembly
even of that Nation. Their Language as I found, upon the first Giving of the
Weather, sell asunder and dissolved. I was here convinced of an Error into
which I had before fallen; for I fancied, that for the Freezing of the Sound,
it was necessary for it to be wrapped up, and, as it were, preserved in Breath;
but I found my Mistake, when I heard the Sound of a Kit playing a Minuet over
our Heads. I asked the Occasion of it; upon which one of the Company told me,
that it would play there above a Week longer if the Thaw continued; for, says
he, finding our selves bereft of Speech, we prevailed upon one of the Company,
who had this Musical Instrument about him, to play to us from Morning to Night;
all which Time we employed in Dancing, in order to dissipate our Chagrin, and
tuer le Temps.

Here Sir John gives very good Philosophical Reasons why the Kit could be heard
during the Frost; but as they are something Prolix, I pass them over in
Silence, and shall only observe, that the honorable Author seems, by his
Quotations, to have been well versed in the ancient Poets, which perhaps raised
his Fancy above the ordinary Pitch of Historians, and very much contributed to
the Embellishment of his Wriings.

The TATLER. [No 255.
-- Nec te tua plurima, Pantheu,
Labentem Pietas nec Apollinis Insula texit.
Virg.
From Thursd. Nov. 23. to Saturd. Nov. 25. 1710.
From my own Apartment, Nov. 24.
To the Censor of Great Britain.
SIR,
I AM at present under very great Difficulties, which it is not in the Power of
any one, besides your self, to redress. Whether or no you shall think it a
proper Case to come before your Court of Honor, I cannot tell; but thus it is:
I am Chaplain to an honorable Family, very regular at the Hours of Devotion,
and I hope of an unblameable Life; but for not offering to rise at Second
Course, I found my Patron and his Lady very sullen and out of Humor, though at
first I did not know the Reason of it. At length, when I happened to help my
self to a Jelly, the Lady of the House, otherwise a devout Woman, told me, That
it did not become a Man of my Cloth to delight in such frivolous Food: But as I
still continued to sit out the last Course, I was Yesterday informed by the
Butler, that his Lordship had no further Occasion for my Service. All which is
humbly submitted to your Consideration, by,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, etc.


The Case of this Gentleman deserves Pity, especially if he loves Sweetmeats,
to which, if I may guess by his Letter, he is no Enemy. In the mean Time, I
have often wondered at the Indecency of discarding the holiest Man from the
Table as soon as the most delicious Parts of the Entertainment are served up,
and could never conceive a Reason for so absurd a Custom. Is it because a
liquorish Palate, or a sweet Tooth (as they call it) is not consistent with the
Sanctity of his Character? This is but a trifling Pretense. No Man of the most
rigid Virtue gives Offense by any Excesses in Plumb-Pudding or Plumb-Porridge,
and that, because they are the first Parts of the Dinner. Is there any Thing
that tends to Incitation in Sweetmeats more than in ordinary Dishes? Certainly
not. Sugar-Plumbs are a very innocent Diet, and Conserves of a much colder
Nature than your common Pickles. I have sometimes thought, that the Ceremony of
the Chaplain's flying away from the Dessert was Typical and Figurative, to mark
out to the Company how they ought to retire from all the luscious Baits of
Temptation, and deny their Appetites the Gratifications that are most pleasing
to them; or at least to signify, that we ought to stint our selves in our most
lawful Satisfactions, and not make our Pleasure, but our Support, the End of
Eating: But most certainly, if such a Lesson of Temperance had been necessary
at a Table, our Clergy would have recommended it to all the Lay-Masters of
Families, and not have disturbed other Men's Tables with such unseasonable
Examples of Abstinence. The Original therefore of this barbarous Custom, I take
(...) have been merely accidental. The Chaplain ^tired out of pure Complaisance
to make Roo^ for the Removal of the Dishes, or possibly f^ the Ranging of the
Dessert. This by Degre^ grew into a Duty, till at length, as the Fashion
improved, the good Man found himself cut (...) from the third Part of the
Entertainment; an^ if the Arrogance of the Patron goes on, it is n^ impossible
but, in the next Generation, he m^ see himself reduced to the Tithe, or Tenth
Di^ of the Table; a sufficient Caution not to pa^ with any Privilege we are
once possessed of. (...) was usual for the Priest in old Times to feast ^on the
Sacrifice, nay the Honey-Cake, while the hungry Laity looked upon him with
great Devotion, or as the late Lord Rochester describes it i^ a very lively
Manner:

And whiie the Priest did eat, the People stared.
At present the Custom is inverted; the Lai^ feast, while the Priest stands by
as an humbl^ Spectator. This necessarily puts the good Man upon making great
Ravages on all the Dishe^ that stand near him, and distinguishing himself by
Voraciousness of Appetite, as knowing tha^ his Time is short. I would fain ask
these stif^ neck'd Patrons, Whether they would not take (...) ill of a Chaplain
that, in his Grace after Meat, should return Thanks for the whole
Entertainment, with an Exception to the Dessert? And ye^ I cannot but think,
that in such a Proceeding (...) would but deal with them as they deserved^ What
would a Roman Catholic Priest think^ who is always helped first, and placed
next the Ladies, should he see a Clergyman giving hi^ Company the Slip at the
first Appearance of the Tarts or Sweetmeats? Would not he believ^ that he had
the same Antipathy to a Candie^ Orange, or a Piece of Puff-Past, as some have
(...) a Cheshire Cheese, or a Breast of Mutton? Yet to so ridiculous a Height
is this foolish Custom grown, that even the Christmas Pie, which in its very
Nature is a kind of consecrated Cate, and a Badge of Distinction, is often
forbidden to the Druid of the Family. Strange! that a Sirloin of Beef, whether
boiled or roasted, when entire, is exposed to his utmost Depredations and
Incisions; but if minced into small Pieces, and tossed up with Plumbs and
Sugar, changes its Property, and, forsooth, is Meat for his Master.

In this Case I know not which to censure, the Patron or the Chaplain, the
Insolence of Power, or the Abjectness of Dependence. For my own Part, I have
often blushed to see a Gentleman, whom I knew to have much more Wit and
Learning than my self, and who was bred up with me at the University upon the
same Foot of a liberal Education, treated in such an ignominious Manner, and
sunk beneath those of his own Rank, by reason of that Character which ought to
bring him Honor. This deters Men of generous Minds from placing themselves in
such a Station of Life, and by that Means frequently excludes Persons of
Quality from the improving and agreeable Conversation of a learned and
obsequious Friend.

Mr. Oldham lets us know, That he was affrighted from the Thought of such an
Employment, by the scandalous Sort of Treatment which often accompanies it.

Some think themselves exalted to the Sky,
If they light in some Noble Family:
Diet, an Horse, and Thirty Pounds a Year,
Besides the Advantage of his Lordship's Ear.
The Credit of the Business, and the State,
Are Things that in a Youngster's Sense sound great.
Little the unexperienced Wretch does know,
What Slavery he often must undergo:
Who though in Silken Scarf, and Cassock dressed,
Wears but a gayer Livery at best.
When Dinner calls, the Implement must wait,
With holy Words to consecrate the Meat.
But hold it for a Favor seldom known,
If he be deigned the Honor to sit down.
Soon as the Tarts appear, Sir Crape withdr^
Those Dainties are not for a Spiritual Maw.
Observe your Distance, and be sure to stand
Hard by the Cistern with your Cap in Hand:
There for Diversion you may pick your Teeth,
Till the kind Voider comes for your Relief.
Let others who such Meannesses can brook,
Strike Countenance to every great Man's Look;
I rate my Freedom higher.
This Author's Raillery is the Raillery of a Friend, and does not turn the
Sacred Order into Ridicule, but is a just Censure on such Person^ as take
Advantage from the Necessities of a M^ of Merit, to impose on him Hardships
that a^ by no Means suitable to the Dignity of his Profession.

The TATLER. [No 256.
-- Nostrum est tantas componere Lites.
Virg.
from Saturd. Nov. 25. to Tuesday Nov. 28. 1710.
The Proceedings of the Court of Honor, held in Sheer-Lane on Monday the 20th
of November, 1710. before Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire Censor of Great Britain.
PEter Plumb, of London, Merchant, was indicted by the Honorable Mr. Thomas
Gules, of Gule-Hall in the Country of Salop, for that the said Peter Plumb did
in Lombard Street, London, between the Hours of Two and Three in the Afternoon,
meet the said Mr. Thomas Gules, and after a short Salutation, put on his Hat,
Value Five-Pence, while the Honorable Mr. Gules stood bare-headed for the
Space of Two Seconds. It was further urged against the Criminal, That during
his Discourse with the Prosecutor, he feloniously stole the Wall of him, having
clapped his Back against it in such a Manner that it was impossible for Mr.
Gules to recover it again at his taking Leave of him. The Prosecutor alleged,
That he was the Cadet of a very ancient Family; and that according to the
Principles of all the younger Brothers of the said Family, he had never sullied
himself with Business, but had chosen rather to starve like a Man of Honor,
than do any Thing beneath his Quality. He produced several Witnesses, that he
had never employed himself beyond the Twisting of a Whip, or the Making of a
Pair of Nut-Crackers, in which he only worked for his Diversion, in order to
mae a Present now and then to his Friends. The Prisoner being asked what he
could say for himself, cast several Reflections upon the Honorable Mr. Gules;
as, That he was not worth a Groat; That no Body in the City would trust him for
a Halspenny; That he owed him Money, which he had promised to pay him several
Times, but never kept his Word: And in short, That he was an idle, beggarly
Fellow, and of no Use to the Public. This Sort of Language was very severely
reprimanded by the Censor, who told the Criminal, That he spoke in Contempt of
the Court, and that he should be proceeded against for Contumacy, if he did not
change his Style. The Prisoner therefore desired to be heard by his Council,
who urged in his Defense, That he put on his Hat through Ignorance, and took
the Wall by Accident. They likewise produced several Witnesses, That he made
several Motions with his Hat in his Hand, which are generally understood as an
Invitation to the Person we talk with to be covered; and that the Gentleman not
taking the Hint, he was forced to put on his Hat, as being troubled with a
Cold. There was likewise an Irish Man who deposed, That he had heard him cough
Three and twenty times that Morning. And as for the Wall, it was alleged That
he had taken it inadvertently, to save himself from a Shower of Rain which was
then falling. The Censor having consulted the Men of Honor who sat at his
Right Hand on the Bench, found they were all of Opinion, That the Defense made
by the Prisoner's Council did rather aggravate than extenuate his Crime; That
the Motions and Intimations of the Hat were a Token of Superiority in
Conversation, and therefore not to be used by the Criminal to a Man of the
Prosecutor's Quality, who was likewise vested with a double Title to the Wall
at the Time of ^eir Conversation, both as it was the upper ^and, and as it was
a Shelter from the Weather. The Evidence being very full and clear, the ^ry,
without going out of Court, declared their Opinion unanimously by the Mouth of
their Foreman, That the Prosecutor was bound in Honor ^o make the Sun shine
through the Criminal, or, ^s they afterward explained themselves, to whip ^im
through the Lungs.

The Censor knitting his Brows into a Frown, and looking very sternly upon the
Jury, after a ^ittle Pause, gave them to know, That this Court was erected for
the finding out of Penalties suitable to Offenses, and to restrain the Outrages
of private Justice; and that he expected they should moderate their Verdict.
The Jury therefore retired, and being willing to comply with the Advices of the
Censor, after an Hour's Consultation, declared their Opinion as follows:

That in Consideration this was Peter Plumb's first Offense, and that there did
not appear any Malice prepense in it, as also that he lived in good Reputation
among his Neighbors, and that his taking the Wall was only se defendendo, the
Prosecutor should let him escape with Life, and content himself with the
Slitting of his Nose, and the Cutting off both his Ears. Mr. Bickerstaff
smiling upon the Court, told them, That he thought the Punishment, even under
its present Mitigation, too severe; and that such Penalties might be of ill
Consequence in a Trading Nation. He therefore pronounced Sentence against the
Criminal in the following Manner: That his Hat, which was the Instrument of
Offense, should be forfeited to the Court; That the Criminal should go to the
Warehouse from whence he came, and thence, as Occasion should require, proceed
to the Exchange, or Garraway's Coffee-house, in what Manner he pleased; but
that neither he nor any of the Family of the Plumbs should hereafter appear in
the Streets (...) London out of their Coaches, that so the Foo^ Way might be
left open and undisturbed for their Betters.

Dathan, a Peddling Jew, and T. R --, ^ Welshman, were indicted by the Keeper
of (...) Alehouse in Westminster, for breaking the Peac^ and two Earthen Mugs,
in a Dispute about the Antiquity of their Families, to the great Detriment of
the House, and Disturbance of the whole Neighborhood. Dathan said for himself,
that he was provoked to it by the Welshman, who pretended, that the Welsh were
an ancienter People than the Jews; whereas, says he, I can show by this
Genealogy in my Hand, that I am the Son of Mesheck, that was the Son of Naboth,
that was the Son of Shalem, that was the Son of -- The Welshman here
interrupted him, and told him, That he could produce Shennalogy as well as
himself; for that he was John ap Rice, ap Shenkin, ap Shones. He then turned
himself to the Censor, and told him in the same broken Accent, and with much
Warmth, That the Jew would needs uphold, that King Cadwallader was younger than
Issachar. Mr. Bickerstaff seemed very much inclined to give Sentence against
Dathan, as being a Jew; but finding Reasons, by some Expressions which the
Welshman let fall in asserting the Antiquity of his Family, to suspect that the
said Welshman was a Prae-Adamite, he suffered the Jury to go out, without any
previous Admonition. After some Time they returned, and gave their Verdict,
That it appearing the Persons at the Bar did neither of them wear a Sword, and
that consequently they had no Right to quarrel upon a Point of Honor; to
prevent such frivolous Appeals for the future, they should both of them be
tossed in the same Blanket, and there adjust the Superiority as they could
agree it between themselves. The Censor confirmed the Verdict.

Richard Newman was indicted by Major Punto, for having used the Words, Perhaps
it may be so, in a Dispute with the said Major. The Major urged, That the Word,
Perhaps, was questioning his Veracity, and that it was an indirect Manner of
giving him the Lie. Richard Newman had nothing more to say for himself, than
that he intended no such Thing, and threw himself upon the Mercy of the Court.
The Jury brought in their Verdict Special.

Mr. Bickerstaff stood up, and after having cast his Eyes over the whole
Assembly, hemmed thrice. He then acquainted them, That he had laid down a Rule
to himself, which he was resolved never to depart from, and which, as he
conceived, would very much conduce to the shortening the Business of the Court;
I mean, says he, never to allow of the Lie being given by Construction,
Implication, or Induction, but by the sole Use of the Word it self. He then
proceeded to show the great Mischiefs that had arisen to the English Nation
from that pernicious Monosyllable; That it had bred the most fatal Quarrels
between the dearest Friends; That it had frequently thin'd the Guards, and made
great Havoc in the Army; That it had sometimes weakened the City Trained
Bands; and, in a Word, had destroved many of the bravest Men in the Isle of
Great Britain. For the Prevention of which Evils for the future, he instructed
the Jury to present the Word it self as a Nuisance in the English Tongue; and
further promised them, That he would, upon such their Presentment, publish an
Edict of the Court for the entire Banishment and Exclusion of it out of the
Discourses and Conversation of all civil Societies.

This is a true Copy, Charles Lilly.

Monday next is set apart for the Trial of several Female Causes.

N. B. The Case of the Hassock will come on between the Hours of Nine and Ten.

The TATLER. [No 257.
In nova fert Animus mutatas dicere Formas
Corpora: Dii, Captis (nam vos mutastis and illas)
Aspirate meis. --
Ovid. Met.
From Tuesday Nov. 28. to Thursday Nov. 30. 1710.
From my own Apartment, Nov. 29.
EVery Nation is distinguished by Productions that are peculiar to it. Great
Britain is particularly fruitful in Religions, that shoot up and flourish in
this Climate more than in any other. We are so famous Abroad for our great
Variety of Sects and Opinions, that an ingenious Friend of mine, who is lately
returned from his Travels, assures me, there is a Show at this Time carried up
and down in Germany, which represents all the Religions of Great Britain in
Waxwork. Notwithstanding that the Pliancy of the Matter in which the Images are
wrought makes it capable of being molded into all Shapes and Figures, my
Friend tells me, that he did not think it possible for it to be twisted and
tortured into so many skrew'd Faces and wry Features as appeared in several of
the Figures that composed the Show. I was indeed so pleased with the Design of
the German Artist, that I begged my Friend to give me an Account of it in all
its Particulars, which he did after the following Manner.

I have often, says he, been present at a Show of Elephants, Camels,
Dromedaries, and other strange Creatures, but I never saw so great an Assembly
of Spectators as were met together at the Opening of this great Piece of
Wax-work. We were all placed in a large Hall, according to the Price that we
had paid for our Seats: The Curtain that hung before the Show was made by a
Master of Tapestry, who had woven it in the Figure of a monstrous Hydra that
had several Heads, which brandished out their Tongues, and seemed to hiss at
each other. Some of these Heads were large and entire; and where any of them
had been lopped away, there sprouted up several in the Room of them; insomuch
that for one Head cut off, a Man might see Ten, Twenty, or an Hundred, of a
smaller Size, creeping through the Wound. In short, the whole Picture was
nothing but Confusion and Bloodshed. On a sudden, says my Friend, I was
startled with a Flourish of many Musical Instruments that I had never heard
before, which was followed by a short Tune, (if it might be so called) wholly
made up of Jars and Discords. Among the rest, there was an Organ, a Bagpipe, a
Groaning-Board, a Stentorophonick-Trumpet, with several Wind Instruments of a
most disagreeable Sound, which I do not so much as know the Name of. After a
short Flourish, the Curtain was drawn up, and we were presented with the most
extraordinary Assembly of Figures that ever entered into a Man's Imagination.
The Design of the Workman was so well expressed in the dumb Show before us,
that it was not hard for an Englishman to comprehend the Meaning of it.

The principal Figures were placed in a Row, consisting of Seven Persons. The
middle Figure, which immediately attracted the Eyes of the whole Company, and
was much bigger than the rest, was formed like a Matron, dressed in the Habit
of an elderly Woman of Quality in Queen Elizabeth's Days. The most remarkable
Parts of her Dress, was the Beaver with the Steeple Crown, the Scarf that was
darker than Sable, and the Lawn Apron that was whiter than Ermin. Her Gown was
of the richest black Velvet, and just upon her Heart studded with large
Diamonds of an inestimable Value, disposed in the Form of a Cross. She bore an
inexpressible Cheerfulness and Dignity in her Aspect; and though she seemed in
Years, appeared with so much Spirit and Vivacity, as gave her at the same Time
an Air of old Age and Immortality. I found my Heart touched with so much Love
and Reverence at the Sight of her, that the Tears ran down my Face as I looked
upon her; and still the more I looked upon her, the more my Heart was melted
with the Sentiments of Filial Tenderness and Duty. I discovered every Moment
something so charming in this Figure, that I could scarce take my Eyes off it.
On its Right Hand there sat the Figure of a Woman so covered with Ornaments,
that her Face, her Body, and her Hands, were almost entirely hid under them.
The little you could see of her Face was painted; and what I thought very odd,
had something in it like artificial Wrinkles; but I was the less surprised at
it, when I saw upon her Forehead an old-fashioned Tower of gray Hairs. Her
Head-Dress rose very high by Three several Stories or Degrees; her Garments had
a Thousand Colors in them, and were embroidered with Crosses in Gold, Silver
and Silk: She had nothing on, so much as a Glove or a Slipper, which was not
marked with this Figure; nay, so superstitiously fond did she appear of it,
that she sat cross-legged. I was quickly sick of this tawdry Composition of
Ribands, Silks and Jewels, and therefore cast my Eye on a Dame which was just
the Reverse of it. I need not tell my Reader, that the Lady before described
was Popery, or that she I am now going to describe is Presbytery. She sat on
the Left Hand of the venerable Matron, and so much resembled her in the
Features of her Countenance, that she seemed her Sister; but at the same Time
that one observed a Likness in her Beauty, one could not but take Notice, that
there was something in it sickly and splenatick. Her Face had enough to
discover the Relation, but it was drawn up into a peevish Figure, sowred with
Discontent, and overcast with Melancholy. She seemed offended at the Matron for
the Shape of her Hat, as too much resembling the triple Coronet of the Person
who sat by her. One might see likewise, that she dissented from the white Apron
and the Cross; for which Reasons she had made her self a plain, homely Dowdy,
and turned her Face toward the Sectaries that sat on her Left Hand, as being
afraid of looking upon the Matron, lest she should see the Harlot by her.

On the Right Hand of Popery sat Judaism, represented by an old Man embroidered
with Phylacteries, and distinguished by many Typical Figures, which I had not
Skill enough to unriddle. He was placed among the Rubbish of a Temple; but
instead of weeping over it, (which I should have expected from him) he was
counting out a Bag of Money upon the Ruins of it.

On his Right Hand was Deism, or Natural Religion. This was a Figure of an
half-naked awkward Country Wench, who with proper Ornaments and Education would
have made an agreeable and beautiful Appearance; but for Want of those
Advantages, was such a Spectacle, as a Man would blush to look upon.

I have now, continued my Friend, given you an Account of those who were placed
on the Right Hand of the Matron, and who, according to the Order in which they
sat, were Deism, Judaism, and Popery. On the Left Hand, as I told you, appeared
Presbytery. The next to her was a Figure which somewhat puzzled me: It was that
of a Man looking, with Horror in his Eyes, upon a Silver Basin filled with
Water. Observing something in his Countenance that looked like Lunacy, I
fancied at first that he was to express that kind of Distraction which the
Physicians call the Hydro-Phobia; but considering what the Intention of the
Show was, I immediately recollected my self, and concluded it to be Anabaptism.

The next Figure was a Man that sat under a most profound Composure of Mind: He
wore an Hat whose Brims were exactly parallel with the Horizon: His Garment had
neither Sleeve nor Skirt, nor so much as a superfluous Button. What they called
his Cravat, was a little Piece of white Linen quilled with great Exactness, and
hanging below his Chin about two Inches. Seeing a Book in his Hand, I asked our
Artist what it was, who told me it was the Quakers Religion; upon which I
desired a Sight of it. Upon Perusal, I found it to be nothing but a
new-fashioned Grammar, or an Art of abridging ordinary Discourse. The Nouns
were reduced to a very small Number, as the Light, Friend, Babylon. The
principal of his Pronouns was Thou; and as for You, Ye, and Yours, I found they
were not looked upon as Parts of Speech in this Grammar. All the Verbs wanted
the Second Person Plural; the Participles ended all in ing or ed, which were
marked with a particular Accent. There were no Adverbs besides Yea and Nay. The
same Thrift was observed in the Prepositions. The Conjunctions were only Hem!
and Ha! and the Interjections brought under the Three Heads of Sighing,
Sobbing, and Groaning.

There was at the End of the Grammar a little Nomenclature, called, The
Christian Man's Vocabulary, which gave new Appellations, or (if you will)
Christian Names to almost every Thing in Life. I replaced the Book in the Hand
of the Figure, not without admiring the Simplicity of its Garb, Speech, and
Behavior.

Just opposite to this Row of Religions, there was a Statue dressed in a Fool's
Coat, with a Cap of Bells upon his Head, laughing and pointing at the Figures
that stood before him. This Idiot is supposed to say in his Heart what David's
Fool did some Thousands of Years ago, and was therefore designed as a proper
Representative of those among us who are called Atheists and Infidels by
others, and Free-Thinkers by themselves.

There were many other Groupes of Figures which I did not know the Meaning of;
but seeing a Collection of both Sexes turning their Backs upon the Company, and
laying their Heads very close together, I enquired after their Religion, and
found that they called themselves the Philodelphians, or the Family of Love.

In the opposite Corner there sat another little Congregation of strange
Figures, opening their Mouths as wide as they could gape, and distinguished by
the Title of the Sweet Singers of Israel.

I must not omit, that in this Assembly of Wax there were several Pieces that
moved by Clockwork, and gave great Satisfaction to the Spectators. Behind the
Matron there stood one of these Figures, and behind Popery another, which, as
the Artist told us, were each of them the Genius of the Person they attended.
That behind Popery represented Persecution, and the other Moderation. The first
of these moved by secret Springs toward a great Heap of dead Bodies that lay
piled upon one another at a considerable Distance behind the principal Figures.
There were written on the Foreheads of these dead Men several ha^ Words, as
Prae-Adamites, Sabbatarians, Cam^nians, Muggletonians, Brownists, Independants,
M^sonites, Camisars, and the like. At the Approac^ of Persecution, it was so
contrived, that as she held up her Bloody Flag, the whole Assembly of dead Men,
like those in the Rehearsal, started up and drew their Swords. This was
followed by great Clashings and Noise, when, in the Midst of the Tumult, the
Figure of Moderation moved gently toward this new Army, which upon her holding
up a Paper in her Hand, inscribed, Liberty of Conscience, immediately fell into
a Heap of Carcasses, remaining in the same quiet Posture that they lay at first.

The TATLER. [No 258.
Occidit miseros crambe repetita --
Juv.
From Thursday Nov. 30. to Saturd. Dec. 2. 1710.
From my own Apartment, December 1.
WHen a Man keeps a constant Table, he may be allowed sometimes to serve up a
cold Dish of Meat, or toss up the Fragments of a Feast into a Ragoust. I have
sometimes, in a Scarcity of Provisions, been obliged to take the same Kind of
Liberty, and to entertain my Reader with the Leavings of a former Treat. I must
this Day have Recourse to the same Method, and beg my Guests to sit down to a
kind of Saturday's Dinner. To let the Metaphor rest, I intend to fill up this
Paper with a Bundle of Letters relating to Subjects on which I have formerly
treated, and have ordered my Bookseller to rint at the End of each Letter the
Minutes with which I endorsed it, after the first Perusal of it.

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
Nov. 22. 1710. SIR,
DIning Yesterday with Mr. South-British and Mr. William North-Briton, Two
Gentlemen, who, before you ordered it otherwise, were known by the Names of Mr.
English and Mr. William Scott. Among other Things, the Maid of the House (who
in her Time I believe may have been a North-British Warming-pan) brought us up
a Dish of North-British Collops. We liked our Entertainment very well, only we
observed the Table-Cloth, being not so fine as we could have wished, was
North-British Cloth: But the worst of it was, we were disturbed all Dinnertime
by the Noise of the Children, who were playing in the paved Court at
North-British Hoppers; so we paid our North-Briton sooner than we designed, and
took Coach to North-Britain Yard, about which Place most of us live. We had
indeed gone a foot, only we were under some Apprehensions lest a North-British
Mist should wet a South-British Man to the Skin.

We think this Matter properly expressed, according to the Accuracy of the new
Style settled by you in one of your late Papers. You will please to give your
Opinion upon it to,

SIR, Your most humble Servants, J. S. M. P. N. R.



See if this Letter be conformable to the Directions given in the Tatler
abovementioned.

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
Kent, Nov. 22. 1710 SIR,
A Gentleman in my Neighborhood, who happens to be Brother to a Lord, though
neither his Father nor Grandfather were so, it perpetually making Use of this
Phrase, A Person of my Quality. He has it in his Mouth Fifty times a Day, to
his Laborers, his Servants, his Children, his Tenants, and his Neighbors. Wet
or dry, at home or abroad, drunk or sober, angry or pleased, it is the constant
Burden of his Style. Sir, as you are Censor of Great Britain, as you value the
Repose of a loyal County, and the Reputation of my Neighbor, I beg you will
take this cruel Grievance into your Consideration, else, for my own Particular,
I am resolved to give up my Farm, sell my Stock, and remove with my Wife and
Seven Children next Spring to Falmouth or Berwick, if my Strength will permit
me, being brought into a very weak Condition. I am, (with great Respect)

SIR, Your most obedient and languishing Servant, etc.


Let this be referred to the Court of Honor.

Mr. Bickerstaff,
I Am a young Lady of a good Fortune, and at present invested by several Lovers
who lay close Siege to me, and carry on their Attacks with all possible
Diligence. I know which of them has the first Place in my own Heart, but would
freely cross my private Inclinations to make Choice of the Man who loves me
best, which it is impossible for me to know, all of them pretending to an equal
Passion for me. Let me therefore beg of you, dear Mr. Bickerstaff, to lend me
your Itburiel's Spear, in order to touch this Troop of Rivals; after which I
will most faithfully return it to you again, with the greatest Gratitude. I am,

SIR, etc.

Query 1. What Figure this Lady does think her Lover will appear in? Or what
Symptoms he will betray of his Passion upon being touched?

2. Whether a Touch of her Fan may not have the same Efficacy as a Touch of
Ithuriel's Spear?

Great Lincoln's Inn Square, Nov. 29.
Honored Sir, GRatitude obliges me to make this public Acknowledgment of the
eminent Service you have done my self in particular, and the whole Body of
Chaplains (I hope) in general. Coming Home on Sunday about Dinnertime, I found
Things strangely altered for the better; the Porter smiled in my Face when he
let me in, the Footman bowed to me as I passed him, the Steward shook me by the
Hand, and Mrs. Beatrice dropped me a Courtesy as she went along. I was
surprised at all this Civility, and knew not to what I might ascribe it, except
to my bright Beaver and shining Scarf that were new that Day. But I was still
more astonished to find such an agreeable Change at the Table: My Lord helped
me to a fat Slice of Venison with his own Hand, and my Lady did me the Honor
to drink to me. I offered to rise at my usual Time, but was desired to fit
still, with this kind Expression: Come Doctor, a Gelly or a Conserve will do
you no Harm; don't be afraid of the Dessert. I was so confounded with the
Favor, that I returned my Thanks in a most awkward Manner, wondering what was
the Meaning of this total Transformation: But my Lord soon put an End to my
Admirati^ by showing me a Paper that challenged yo^ Sir, for its Author, and
rallied me very agre^ably on the Subject, asking me, which was be^ handled, the
Lord or his Chaplain? I owne^ my self to think the Banter sharpest against ou^
selves, and that these were trifling Matters, no^ fit for a Philosopher to
insist on. His Lordship was in so good a Humor, that he ordered me to return
his Thanks with my own, and my Lady joins in the same, with this one Exception
to your Paper, That the Chaplain in her Family was always allowed Minc'd-Pyes
from Allhallows to Candlemas. I am,

SIR, Your most Obliged, Humble Servant, T. W.


Requires no Answer.

Oxford, Nov. 27. Mr. Censor,
I Have read your Account of Nova Zembla with great Pleasure, and have ordered
it to be transcribed in a little Hand, and inserted in Mr. Touson's late
Edition of Hudibras. I could wish you would furnish us with more Notes upon
that Author, to fill up the Place of those dull Annotations with which several
Editions of that Book have been incumbered. I would particularly desire of you
to give the World the Story of Talicotius, who makes a very eminent Figure in
the first Canto, not having been able to meet with any Account of the said
Talicotius in the Writings of any other Author. I am (with the most profound
Respect)

The most humble of your Admirers, Q. Z.


To be answered next Thursday, if nothing more material intervenes.

Mr. Censor,
IN your Survey of the People, you must have observed Crowds of single Persons
that are qualified to increase the Subjects of this glorious Island, and yet
neglect that Duty to their Country. In order to reclaim such Persons, I lay
before you this Proposal.

Your most obedient Servant, Th. Cl.


This to be considered on Saturday next.

The TATLER. [No 259.
-- Vexat Censura Columbas.
Juv.
From Saturday Dec. 2. to Tuesday Dec. 5. 1710.
A Continuation of the Journal of the Court of Honor, held in Sheer-Lane on
Monday the 27th of November, before Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire Censor of Great
Britain.
ELizabeth Makebate, of the Parish of St. Catherine's, Spinster, was indicted
for surreptitiously taking away the Hassock from under the Lady Grave-Airs,
between the Hours of Four and Five, on Sunday the 26th of November. The
Prosecutor deposed, That as she stood up to make a Courtesy to a Person of
Quality in a neighboring Pew, the Criminal conveyed away the Hassock by
Stealth, insomuch that the Prosecutor was obliged to fit all the while she was
at Church, or to say her Prayers in a Posture that did not become a Woman of
her Quality. The Prisoner pleaded Inadvertency; and the Jury were going to
bring it in Chance-medley, had not several Witnesses been produced against the
said Elizabeth Makebate, that she was an old Offender, and a Woman of a bad
Reputation. It appeared in particular, That on the Sunday before she had
detracted from a new Petticoat of Mrs. Mary Doelittle, having said in the
Hearing of several credible Witnesses, that the said Petticoat was scowred, to
the great Grief and Detriment of the said Mary Doelittle. There were likewise
many Evidences produced against the Criminal, that though she never failed to
come to Church on Sunday, she was a most notorious Sabbath-Breaker, and that
she spent her whole Time, during Divine Service, in disparaging other People's
Clothes, and whispering to those who sat next her. Upon the whole, she was
found guilty of the Indictment, and received Sentence to ask Pardon of the
Prosecutor upon her bare Knees, without either Cushion or Hassock under her, in
the Face of the Court.

N. B. As soon as the Sentence was executed on the Criminal, which was done in
open Court with the utmost Severity, the first Lady of the Bench on Mr.
Bickerstaff's Right Hand stood up, and made a Motion to the Court, That whereas
it was impossible for Women of Fashion to dress themselves before the Church
was half done, and whereas many Confusions and Inconveniences did arise
thereupon, it might be lawful for them to send a Footman, in order to keep
their Places, as was usual in other polite and well regulated Assemblies. The
Motion was ordered to be entered in the Books, and considered at a more
convenient Time.

Charles Cambrick, Linendraper, in the City of Westminster, was indicted for
speaking obscenely to the Lady Penolope Youthwood. It appeared, That the
Prosecutor and her Woman going in a Stage-Coach from London to Brentford, where
they were to be met by the Lady's own Chariot, the Criminal and another of his
Acquaintance traveled with them in the same Coach, at which Time the Prisoner
talked Bawdy for the Space of Three Miles and a half. The Prosecutor alleged,
That over against the Old Fox at Knightsbridge he mentioned the Word Linen;
That at the further End of Kensington he made Use of the Term Smock; and that
before he came to Hammersmith, he talked almost a Quarter of an Hour upon
Wedding-Shifts. The Prosecutor's Woman confirmed what her Lady had said, and
added further, That she had never seen her Lady in so great a Confusion, and in
such a Taking, as she was during the whole Discourse of the Criminal. The
Prisoner had little to say for himself, but that he talked only in his own
Trade, and meant no Hurt by what he said. The Jury however found him guilty,
and represented by their Forewoman, That such Discourses were apt to sully the
Imagination, and that by a Concatenation of Idea's, the Word Linen implied many
Things that were not proper to be stirred up in the Mind of a Woman who was of
the Prosecutor's Quality, and therefore gave it as their Verdict, That the
Linendraper should lose his Tongue. Mr. Bickerstaff said, he thought the
Prosecutor's Ears were as much to blame as the Prisoner's Tongue, and therefore
gave Sentence as follows: That they should both be placed over against one
another in the Midst of the Court, there to remain for the Space of one Quarter
of an Hour, during which Time, the Linendraper was to be gagged, and the Lady
to hold her Hands close upon both her Ears, which was executed accordingly.

Edward Callicoat was indicted as an Accomplice to Charles Cambrick, for that
he the said Edward Callicoat did, by his Silence and his Smiles, seem to
approve and abet the said Charles Cambrick in every Thing he said. It appeared,
That the Prisoner was Foreman of the Shop to the aforesaid Charles Cambrick,
and by his Post obliged to smile at every Thing that the other should be
pleased to say: Upon which he was acquitted.

Josias Shallow was indicted in the Name of Dame Winifred, sole Relict of
Richard Dainty Esquire for having said several Times in Company, and in the Hearing
of several Persons there present, That he was extremely obliged to the Widow
Dainty, and that he should never be able sufficiently to express his Gratitude.
The Prosecutor urged, That this might blaft her Reputation, and that it was in
Effect a boasting of Favors which he had never received. The Prisoner seemed
to be much astonished at the Construction which was put upon his Words, and
said, That he meant nothing by them, but that the Widow had befriended him in a
Lease, and was very kind to his younger Sister. The Jury finding him a little
weak in his Understanding, without going out of the Court, brought in their
Verdict Ignoramus.

Ursula Goodenough was accused by the Lady Betty Wou'dbe, for having said, That
she the Lady Betty Wou'dbe was painted. The Prisoner brought several Persons of
good Credit to witness to her Reputation, and proved by undeniable Evidences,
that she was never at the Place where the Words were said to have been uttered.
The Censor observing the Behavior of the Prosecutor, found Reason to believe
that she had indicted the Prisoner for no other Reason but to make her
Complexion be taken Notice of, which indeed was very fresh and beautiful: He
therefore asked the Offender with a very stern Voice, How she could presume to
spread so groundless a Report? And whether she saw any Colors in the Lady
Wou'dbe's Face that could procure Credit to such a Falsehood? Do you see (says
he) any Lillies or Roses in her Cheeks, any Bloom, any Probability? -- The
Prosecutor, not able to bear such Language any longer, told him, That he talked
like a blind old Fool, and that she was ashamed to have entertained any Opinion
of his Wisdom: But she was soon put to Silence, and sentenced to wear her Mask
for Five Months, and not to presume to show her Face till the Town should be
empty.

Benjamin Buzzard Esquire was indicted for having told the Lady Everbloom at a
public Ball, That she looked very well for a Woman of her Years. The Prisoner
not denying the Fact, and persisting before the Court that he looked upon it as
a Compliment, the Jury brought him in Non Compos Mentis.

The Court then adjourned to Monday the 11 th Instant.

Copia Vera, Charles Lilly.

The TATLER. [No 260.
Non cuicunque datum est habere Nasum.
Mart.
From Tuesday Dec. 5. to Thursday Dec. 7. 1710.
From my own Apartment, December 6.
WE have a very learned and elaborate Dissertation upon Thumbs in Montaigne's
Essays, and another upon Ears in the Tale of a Tub. I am here going to write
one upon Noses, having chosen for my Text the following Verses out of Hudibras:

So learned Talicotius from
The brawny Part of Porter's Bum
Cut Supplemental Noses, which
Lasted as long as Parent Breech:
But when the Date of Nock was out,
Off dropped the Sympathetick Snout.
Notwithstanding that there is nothing obscene in Natural Knowledge, and that I
intend to give as little Offense as may be to Readers of a wellbred
Imagination, I must, for my own Quiet, desire the Critics (who in all Times
have been famous for good Noses) to refrain from the Lecture of this curious
Tract. These Gentlemen were formerly marked out and distinguished by the little
Rhinocerical Nose, which was always looked upon as an Instrument of Derision,
and which they were used to cock, toss, or draw up in a contemptuous Manner,
upon reading the Works of their ingenious Contemporaries. It is not therefore
for this Generation of Men that I write the present Transaction, -- Minus aptus
acutis
Naribus horum Hominum --
But for the Sake of some of my Philosophical Friends in the Royal Society, who
peruse Discourses of this Nature with a becoming Gravity, and a Desire of
improving by them.

Many are the Opinions of learned Men concerning the Rise of that fatal
Distemper which has always taken a particular Pleasure in venting its Spite
upon the Nose. I have seen a little Burlesque Poem in Italian that gives a very
pleasant Account of this Matter. The Fable of it ^ns thus: Mars, the God of
War, having served during the Siege of Naples in the Shape of a French Colonel,
received a Visit one Night from Venus, the Goddess of Love, who had been always
his professed Mistress and Admirer. The Poem says, she came to him in the
Disguise of a Suttling Wench, with a Bottle of Brandy under her Arm. Let that
be as it will, he managed Matters so well, that she went away big-bellied, and
was at length brought to Bed of a little Cupid. This Boy, whether it were by
Reason of any bad Food that his Father had eaten during the Siege, or of any
particular Malignity in the Stars that reigned at his Nativity, came into the
World with a very sickly Look, and crazy Constitution. As soon as he was able
to handle his Bow, he made Discoveries of a most perverse Disposition. He
dipped all his Arrows in Poison, that rotted every Thing they touched; and what
was more particular, aimed all his Shafts at the Nose, quite contrary to the
Practice of his elder Brothers, who had made a humane Heart their Burt in all
Countries and Ages. To break him of this Roguish Trick, his Parents put him to
School to Mercury, who did all he could to hinder him from demolishing the
Noses of Mankind; but in Spite of Education, the Boy continued very unlucky;
and though his Malice was a little softened by good Instructions, he would very
frequently let fly an invenomed Arrow, and wound his Votaries oftener in the
Nose than in the Heart. Thus far the Fable.

I need not tell my learned Reader, that Correggio has drawn a Cupid taking his
Lesson from Mercury, conformable to this Poem; nor that the Poem it self was
designed as a Burlesque upon Fracastorius.

It was a little after this fatal Siege of Naples that Talicotius begun to
practice in a Town of Germany. He was the first Clap-Doctor that I meet with in
History, and a greater Man in his Age than our celebrated Dr. Wall. He saw his
Species extremely mutilated and disfigured by this new Distemper that was crept
into it; and therefore, in Pursuance of a very seasonable Invention, set up a
Manufacture of Noses, havin^ first got a Patent that none should presume t^
make Noses besides himself. His first Patien^ was a great Man of Portugal, who
had done goo^ Services to his Country, but in the Midst of the^ unfortunately
lost his Nose. Talicotius grafted ^ new one on the remaining Part of the
Gristle o^ Cartilaginous Substance, which would sneeze^ smell, take Snuff,
pronounce the Letters M. or N^ and in short, do all the Functions of a Genuine
and Natural Nose. There was however one Misfortune in this Experiment: The
Portuguese's Complexion was a little upon the Subfusk, with very black Eyes and
dark Eyebrows; and the Nose being taken from a Porter that had a white German
Skin, and cut out of those Parts that are not exposed to the Sun, it was very
visible that the Features of his Face were not Fellows. In a Word, the Comde
resembled one of those maimed antique Statues that has often a modern Nose of
fresh Marble glewed to a Face of such a yellow Ivory Complexion as nothing can
give but Age. To remedy this Particular for the future, the Doctor got together
a great Collection of Porters, Men of all Complexions, black, brown, fair,
dark, sallow, pale, and ruddy; so that it was impossible for a Patient of the
most out-of-the-way Color not to find a Nose to match it.

The Doctor's House was now very much enlarged, and become a Kind of College,
or rather Hospital, for the fashionable Cripples of both Sexes that resorted to
him from all Parts of Europe. Over his Door was fastened a large Golden Snout,
not unlike that which is placed over the great Gates at Brazen-Nose College in
Oxford; and as it is usual for the Learned in Foreign Universities to
distinguish their Houses by a Latin Sentence, the Doctor writ underneath this
great Golden Proboscis Two Verses out of Ovid:

Militat omnis Amans, habet and sua Castra Cupido,
Pontice, creed mihi, militat omnis Amans.
It is reported, That Talicotius had at one Time in his House Twelve German
Counts, Nineteen French Marquisses, and a Hundred Spanish Cavaliers, besides
One solitary English Esquire, of whom more hereafter. Though the Doctor had the
Monopoly of Noses in his own Hands, he is said not to have been unreasonable.
Indeed if a Man had Occasion for a high Roman Nose, he must go to the Price of
it. A Carbuncle Nose likewise bore an excessive Rate: But for your ordinary
short turned-up Noses, of which there was the greatest Consumption, they cost
little or nothing; at least the Purchasers thought so, who would have been
content to have paid much dearer for them, rather than to have gone without
them.

The Sympathy betwixt the Nose and its Parent was very extraordinary. Hudibras
has told us, that when the Porter died, the Nose dropped of Course, in which
Case it was always usual to return the Nose, in order to have it interred with
its first Owner. The Nose was likewise affected by the Pain as well as Death of
the Original Proprietor. An eminent Instance of this Nature happened to Three
Spaniards, whose Noses were all made out of the same Piece of Brawn. They found
them one Day shoot and swell extremely; upon which they sent to know how the
Porter did, and heard upon Enquiry, that the Parent of the Noses had been
severely kicked the Day before, and that the Porter kept his Bed on Account of
the Bruises it had received. This was highly resented by the Spaniards, who
found out the Person that had used the Porter so unmercifully, and treated him
in the same Manner as if the Indignity had been done to their own Noses. In
this and several other Cases it might be said, That the Porters led the
Gentlemen by the Nose.

On the other Hand, if any Thing went a^ with the Nose, the Porter felt the
Effects of (...) insomuch that it was generally articled with (...) Patient,
that he should not only abstain from (...) his old Courses, but should on no
Pretense wh^soever smell Pepper, or eat Mustard; on whi^ Occasion, the Part
where the Incision had be^ made was seized with unspeakable Twinges a^
Prickings.

The Englishman I before mentioned was so ve^ irregular, and relapsed so
frequently into the D^stemper which at first brought him to the lear^
Talicotius, that in the Space of Two Years he wo^ out Five Noses, and by that
Means so torment^ the Porters, that if he would have given 500^ for a Nose,
there was not one of them that wo^ accommodate him. This young Gentleman w^
born of honest Parents, and passed his first Yea^ in Fox-hunting; but
accidentally quitting t^ Woods, and coming up to London, he was (...) charmed
with the Beauties of the Play-hou^ that he had not been in Town Two Days befo^
he got the Misfortune which carried off this P^ of his Face. He used to be
called in Germa^ The Englishman of Five Noses, and, The Gentl^man that had
thrice as many Noses as he h^ Ears: Such was the Raillery of those Times.

I shall close this Paper with an Admonition (...) the young Men of this Town,
which I think t^ more necessary, because I see several new fre^ colored Faces,
that have made their first A^pearance in it this Winter. I must therefore
a^sure them, that the Art of making Noses is e^tirely lost; and in the next
Place, beg them not (...) follow the Example of our ordinary Town Rake^ who
live as if there was a Talicotius to be met wit^ at the Corner of every Street.
Whatever youn^ Men may think, the Nose is a very becoming P^ of the Face, and a
Man makes but a very silly Figu^ without it. But it is the Nature of Youth n^
to know the Value of any Thing till they have lost it. The general Precept
therefore I shall leave with them is, to regard every Town-Woman as a
particular Kind of Siren, that has a Design upon their Noses; and that, amidst
her Flatteries and Allutements, they will fancy she speaks to 'em in that
humorous Phrase of old Plautus:

Ego tibi Faciem denasabo mordicus.
' Keep your Face out of my Way, or I Will bite off your Nose. The TATLER. [No
261.
From Thursd. Dec. 7. to Saturd. Dec. 9. 1710.
From my own Apartment, Dec. 8.
IT is the Duty of all who make Philosophy the Entertainment of their Lives, to
turn their Thoughts to practical Schemes for the Good of Society, and not pass
away their Time in fruitless Searches, which tend rather to the Ostentation of
Knowledge than the Service of Life. For this Reason I cannot for bear reading
even the common Bills that are daily put into People's Hands as they pass the
Streets, which give us Notice of the present Residence, the past Travels, and
infallible Medicines of Doctors useful in their Generation, though much below
the Character of the renowned Talicotius: But upon a nice Calculation of the
Successes of such Adepts, I find their Labors tend mostly to the enriching
only one Sort of Men, that is to say, the Society of Upholders. From this
Observation, and many other which occur to me when I am numbering the good
People of Great Britain, I cannot but favor any Proposal which tends to
repairing the Losses we sustain by eminent Cures. The best I have met with i^
this Kind, has been offered to my Consideration and recommended by a Letter,
subscribed Thoma^ Clement. The Title to his printed Articles ru^ thus: By the
Profitable Society at the Wheat-Shea^ over against Tom 's Coffee-house in
Russel Street, Covent Garden, new Proposals for promoting a Contribution
toward raising Two Hundred and Fifty Pounds to be made on the Baptizing of any
Infant born in Wedlock. The Plan is laid with such proper Regulations, as
serves (to such as fall in with it for the Sake of their Posterity) all the
Uses, without any of the Inconveniences of Sentlements. By this Means, such
whose Fortunes depend upon their own Industry, or Personal Qualifications, need
not be deterred by Fear of Poverty from that State which Nature and Reason
prescribe to us as the Fountain of the greatest Happiness in Humane Life. The
Censors of Rome had Power vested in them to lay Taxes on the unmarried; and I
think I cannot show my Impartiality better than in enquiring into the
extravagant Privileges my Brother Batchelors enjoy, and fine them accordingly.
I shall not allow a single Life in one Set to be reproached, and held in Esteem
in the other. It would not, methinks, be amiss, if an old Bachelor, who lives
in Contempt of Matrimony, were obliged to give a Portion to an old Maid who is
willing to enter into it. At the same Time I must allow, that those who can
plead Courtship, and were unjustly rejected, shall not be liable to the Pains
and Penalties of Celibacy. But such as pretend an Aversion to the whole Sex,
because they were ill treated by a particular Female, and cover their Sense of
Disappointment in Women under a Contempt of their Favor, shall be proceeded
against as Batchelors Convict. I am not without Hopes, that from this slight
Warning, all the unmarried Men of Fortune, Taste, and Refinement, will, without
further Delay, become Lovers and humble Servants to such of their Ac^uaintance
as are most agreeable to them, under ^ain of my Censures: And it is to be
hoped, the ^est of the World, who remain single for fear of the ^ncumbrances of
Wedlock, will become Subscri^ers to Mr. Clement's Proposal. By these Means ^e
shall have a much more numerous Account of ^irths in the Year 1711, than any
ever before ^nown in Great Britain, where merely to be born (...) a Distinction
of Providence, greater than being ^orn to a Fortune in another Place.

As I was going on in the Consideration of this good Office which Mr. Clement
proposes to do his Country, I received the following Letter, which seems to be
dictated by a like modest and public Spirit, that makes Use of me also in its
Design of obliging Mankind.

Mr. Bickerstaff,
IN the Royal Lottery for a Million and an half, I had the good Fortune of
obtaining a Prize. From before the Drawing I had devoted a Fifth of whatever
should arise to me to Charitable Uses. Accordingly I lately troubled you with
my Request and Commission for placing half a Dozen Youths with Mr. More,
Writing-Master in Castle-street, to whom, it is said, we owe all the fine
Devices, Flourishes, and the Composure of all the Plates, for the Drawing and
paying the Tickets. Be pleased therefore, good Sir, to find or make Leisure for
complying therewith, for I would not appear concerned in this small Matter. I
am very much

Your humble Servant, etc.


It is no small Pleasure to observe, that in the midst of a very degenerate
Age, still Spirits which retain their natural Dignity, and pursue the Good of
their Fellow Creatures: Some in making themselves useful by professed Servi^
some by secret Generosity. Were I at Liberty (...) discover even all the Good I
know of many M^ living at this Time, there would want nothi^ but a suitable
Historian to make them appear (...) illustrious as any of the noblest of the
old Gree^ or Romans. The Cunning some have used to (...) handsome and worthy
Actions, the Address to (...) Men Services, and escape their Notice, has
produced so many surprising Incidents, (which have been laid before me during
my Censorship) a^ in the Opinion of Posterity, would absolve thi^ Age of all
its Crimes and Follies. I know n^ Way to deal with such delicate Minds as
these, but by assuring them, that when they cease to do Good, I shall tell all
the Good they have done already. Let therefore the Benefactor to the Youths
abovementioned continue such Bounties, upon Pain of being publicly praised.
But there is no Probability of his running into that Hazard; for a strong Habit
of Virtue can make Men suspend the receiving Acknowledgments due to their
Merit, till they are out of a Capacity of receiving them. I am so very much
charmed with Accidents of this Kind, that I have made a Collection of all the
memorable handsome Things done by private Men in my Time. As a Specimen of my
Manner of noting such Actions, take the following Fragment out of much more
which is written in my Year-Book on the remarkable Will of a Gentleman, whom I
shall here call Celamico.

This Day died that plain and excellent Man, my much honored Friend Celamico,
who bequeathed his whole Estate to a Gentleman no Way related to him, and to
whom he had given no such Expectation in his Lifetime. He was a Person of a
very enlarged Soul, and thought the nearest Relation among Men to be the
Resemblance of their Minds and Sentiments. He was not mistaken in the Worth of
his Successor, who received the News of this unexpected good Fortune with an
Air that showed him less moved with the Benefit, than the Loss of the
Benefactor.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Notice is hereby given, That on Monday the 11th Instant, the Case of the Visit
comes on, between the Hours of Ten and Eleven, at the Court of Honor; where
both Persons are to attend, the Meeting there not being to be understood as a
Visit, and the Right of the next Visit being then to be wholly settled,
according to the Prayer of the Plaintiff.

The TATLER. [No 262.
Verba Togae sequeris, Junctura callidus acri,
Ore teres modico, pallentes radere Mores,
Doctus and ingenuo Culpam defigere Ludo.
Pers. Sat. 5.
From Saturday Dec. 9. to Tuesday Dec. 12. 1710.
Journal of the Court of Honor, etc.
TImothy Treatall Gent. was indicated by several Ladies of his Sisters
Acquaintance for a very rude Affront offered to them at an Entertainment, to
which he had invited them on Tuesday the 7th of November last past, between the
Hours of Eight and Nine in the Evening. The Indictment set forth, That the said
Mr. Treatall, upon the Serving up of the Supper, desired the Ladies to take
their Places according to their different Age and Seniority, for that it was
the Way always at his Table to pay Respect to Years. The ind ctment added, That
this produced an unspeakable Confusion in the Company; for that the Ladies who
before had pressed together for a Placo at the upper End of the Table,
immediately crowded with the same Disorder toward the End that was quite
opposite; That Mrs. Frontly had the Insoleuce to clap her self down at the very
lowest Place of the Table; That the Widow Partlett seated her self on the Right
Hand of Mrs. Frontly, alleging for her Excuse, that no Ceremony was to be used
at a Round Table; That Mrs. Fidges and Mrs. Fescue disputed above half an Hour
for the same Chair, and that the latter would not give up the Cause till it was
decided by the Parish Register, which happened to be kept hard by. The
Indictment further said. That the rest of the Company who sat down, did it with
a Reserve to their Right, which they were at Liberty to assert on another
Occasion; and that Mrs. Mary Pippe, an old Maid, was placed by the unanimous
Vote of the whole Company at the upper End of the Table, from whence she had
the Confusion to behold several Mothers of Families among her Inferiors. The
Criminal alleged in his Defense, That what he had done, was to raise Mirth,
and avoid Ceremony, and that the Ladies did not complain of his Rudeness till
the next Morning, having eaten up what he had provided for them with great
Readiness and Alacrity. The Censor frowning upon him, told him, That he ought
not to discover so much Levity in Matters of a serious Nature, and (upon the
Jury's bringing him in guilty) sentenced him to treat the whole Assembly of
Ladies over again, and to take Care that he did it with the Decorum which was
due to Persons of their Quality.

Rebecoa Shapely, Spinster, was indicted by Mrs. Sarah Smack, for speaking many
Words resiecting upon her Reputation, and the Heels of her Silk Slippers, which
the Prisoner had maliciousiy suggested to be two Inches higher than they really
were. The Prosecutor urged, as an Aggravation of her Guilt, That the Prisoner
was her self guilty of the same Kind of Forgery which she had laid to the
Prosecutor's Charge, for that she the said Rebecca Shapely did always wear a
Pair of Steel Bodice, and a false Rump. The Censor ordered the Slippers to be
produced in open Court, where the Heels were adjudged to be of the Statutable
Size. He then ordered the Grand Jury to search the Criminal, who, after some
Time spent therein, acquitted her of the Bodice, but found her guilty of the
Rump; upon which she received Sentence as is usual in such Cases.

William Trippit Esquire, of the Middle Temple, brought his Action against the
Lady Elizabeth Prudely, for having refused him her Hand as he offered to lead
her to her Coach from the Opera. The Plaintiff set forth, That he had entered
himself into the List of those Volunteers who officiate every Night behind the
Boxes as Gentlemen-Ushers of the Playhouse; That he had been at a considerable
Charge in white Gloves, Periwigs, and Snuff-Boxes, in order to qualify himself
for that Employment, and in Hopes of making his Fortune by it. The Council for
the Defendant replied, That the Plaintiff had given out that he was within a
Month of wedding their Client, and that she had refused her Hand to him in
Ceremony, lest he should interpret it as a Promise that she would give it him
in Marriage. As soon as their Pleadings on both Sides were finished, the Censor
ordered the Plaintiff to be cashiered from his Office of Gentleman Usher to the
Playhouse, since it was too plain that he had undertaken it with an ill
Design; and at the same Time ordered the Defendant either to marry the said
Plaintiff, or to pay him Half a Crown for the new Pair of Gloves and Coach-hire
that he was at the Expense of in her Service.

The Lady Townly brought an Action of Debt against Mrs. Flambeau, for that the
said Mrs. Flambeau had not been to see the said Lady Townly, and wish her Joy,
since her Marriage with Sir Ralph, notwithstanding she the said Lady Townly had
paid Mrs. Flambeau a Visit upon her first coming to Town. It was urged in the
Behalf of the Defendant, That the Plaintiff had never given her any regular
Notice of her being in Town; That the Visit she alleged had been made on a
Monday, which she knew was a Day on which Mrs. Flambeau was always abroad,
having set aside that only Day in the Week to mind the Affairs of her Family;
That the Servant who enquired whether she was at Home, did not give the
Visiting-Knock; That it was not between the Hours of Five and Eight in the
Evening; That there was no Candles lighted up; That it was not on Mrs.
Flambeau's Day; and in short, That there was not one of the essential Points
observed that constitute a Visit. She further proved by her Porter's Book,
which was produced in Court, that she had paid the Lady Townly a Visit on the
Twenty fourth Day of March, just before her leaving the Town, in the Year
1709-10, for which she was still Creditor to the said Lady Townly. To this the
Plaintiff only replied, That she was now under Covert, and not liable to any
Debts contracted when she was a single Woman. Mr. Bickerstaff finding the Cause
to be very intricate, and that several Points of Honor were likely to arise in
it, he deferred giving Judgment upon it till the next Session Day, at which
Time he ordered the Ladies on his Left Hand to present to the Court a Table of
all the Laws relating to Visits.

Winifred Lear brought her Action against Richard Sly, for having broken a
Marriage Contract, and wedded another Woman, after he had engaged himself to
marry the said Winifred Lear. She alleged, That he had ogled her twice ar an
Opera, thrice in St. James's Church, and once at Powel's Puppet-Show, at which
Time he promised her Marriage by a Side-Glance, as her Friend could testify
that sat by her. Mr. Bickerstaff finding that the Defendant had made no further
Overture of Love or Marriage, but by Looks, and Ocular Engagement; yet at the
same Time considering how very apt such impudent Seducers are to lead the
Ladies Hearts astray, ordered the Criminal to stand upon the Stage in the
Haymarket, between each Act of the next Opera, there to be exposed to public
View as a false Ogler.

Upon the Rising of the Court, Mr. Bickerstaff having taken one of these
Counterfeits in the very Fact as he was ogling a Lady of the Grand Jury,
ordered him to be seized, and prosecuted upon the Statute of Ogling. He
likewise directed the Clerk of the Court to draw up an Edict against these
common Cheats, that make Women believe they are distracted for them by staring
them out of Countenance, and often blast a Lady's Reputation whom they never
spoke to, by saucy Looks and distant Familiarities.

The TATLER. [No 263.
-- Minima contentos Nocte Britannos.
Juv. Sat. 2.
From Tuesday Dec. 12. to Thursday Dec. 14. 1710.
From my own Apartment, Dec. 13.
AN old Friend of mine being lately come to Town, I went to see him on Tusday
last about Eight a Clock in the Evening, with a Design to sit with him an Hour
or two, and talk over old Stories; but upon enquiring after him, his Servant
told me he was just gone to Bed. The next Morning, as soon as I was up and
dressed, and had dispatched a little Business, I came again to my Friend's
House about Eleven a Clock, with a Design to renew my Visit; but upon asking
for him, his Servant told me he was just sat down to Dinner. In short, I found
that my old fashioned Friend religiously adhered to the Example of his
Forefathers, and observed the same Hours that had been kept in the Family ever
since the Conquest.

It is very plain, that the Night was much longer formerly in this Island than
it is at present. By the Night, I mean that Portion of Time which Nature has
thrown into Darkness, and which the Wisdom of Mankind had formerly dedicated to
Rest and Silence. This used to begin at Eight a Clock in the Evening, and
conclude at Six in the Morning. The Corfeu, or Eight a Clock Bell, was the
Signal throughout the Nation for putting out their Candles and going to Bed.

Our Grandmothers, though they were wont to sit up the last in the Family, were
all of them fast asleep at the same Hours that their Daughters are busy at
Crimp and Basset. Modern Statesmen are concerting Schemes, and engaged in the
Depth of Politics, at the Time when their Forefathers were laid down quietly
to Rest, and had nothing in their Heads but Dreams. As we have thus thrown
Business and Pleasure into the Hours of Rest, and by that Means made the
natural Night but half as long as it should be, we are forced to piece it out
with a great Part of the Morning; so that near Two thirds of the Nation lie
fast asleep for several Hours in broad Daylight. This Irregularity is grown so
very fashionable at present, that there is scarce a Lady of Quality in Great
Britain that ever saw the Sun rise. And if the Humor increases in Proportion
to what it has done of late Years, it is not impossible but our Children may
hear the Bell-Man going about the Streets at Nine a Clock in the Morning, and
the Watch making their Rounds till Eleven. This unaccountable Disposition in
Mankind to continue awake in the Night, and sleep in Sunshine, has made me
enquire, Whether the same Change of Inclination has happened to any other
Animals? For this Reason I desired a Friend of mine in the Country to let me
know, Whether the Lark rises as early as he did formerly? And whether the Cock
begins to crow at his usual Hour? My Friend has answered me, That his Poultry
are as regular as ever, and that all the Birds and the Beasts of his
Neighborhood keep the same Hours that they have observed in the Memory of Man;
and the same which, in all Probability, they have kept for these Five Thousand
Years.

If you would see the Innovations that have been made among us in this
Particular, you may only look into the Hours of Colleges, where they still dine
at Eleven, and sup at Six, which were doubtless the Hours of the whole Nation
at the Time when those Places were founded. But at present the Courts of
Justice are scarce opened in Westminster Hall at the Time when William Rufus
used to go to Dinner in it. All Business is driven forward: The Land Marks of
our Fathers (if I may so call them) are removed, and planted further up into
the Day; insomuch that I am afraid our Clergy will be obliged (if they expect
full Congregations) not to look any more upon Ten a Clock in the Morning as a
Canonical Hour. In my own Memory the Dinner has crept by Degrees from Twelve a
Clock to Three, and where it will fix no Body knows.

I have sometimes thought to draw up a Memorial in the Behalf of Supper against
Dinner, setting forth, That the said Dinner has made several Encroachments upon
the said Supper, and entered very far upon his Frontiers; That he has banished
him out of several Families, and in all has driven him from his Head Quarters,
and forced him to make his Retreat into the Hours of Midnig^ and in short, That
he is now in Danger of be^ entirely confounded and lost in a Breakfast. The who
have read Lucian, and seen the Complai^ of the Letter T. against S. upon
Account of man Injuries and Usurpations of the same Nature, (...) not, I
believe, think such a Memorial forced a^ unnatural. If Dinner has been thus
postpo^ or (if you please) kept back from Time to Ti^ you may be sure that it
has been in Complia^ with the other Business of the Day, and that Su^per has
still observed a proportionable Distanc^ There is a venerable Proverb, which we
have a^ of us heard in our Infancy, of putting the Child^ to Bed, and laying
the Goose to the Fire. This w^ one of the Jocular Sayings of our Forefathers,
(...) may be properly used in the Literal Sense at p^sent. Who would not wonder
at this perver^ Relish of those who are reckoned the most po^ Part of Mankind,
that prefer Sea-Coals and Ca^dles to the Sun, and exchange so many chearf^
Morning Hours for the Pleasures of Midnig^ Revels and Debauches? If a Man was
only (...) consult his Health, he would choose to live h^ whole Time (if
possible) in Daylight, and to ^tire out of the World into Silence and Slee^
while the raw Damps and unwholesome Vapo^ fly Abroad without a Sun to disperse,
modera^ or control them. For my own Part, I value (...) Hour in the Morning as
much as common Libe^tines do an Hour at Midnight. When I find (...) self
awakened into Being, and perceive my Li^ renewed within me, and at the same
Time f^ the whole Face of Nature recovered out of the dark uncomfortable State
in which it lay for ^veral Hours, my Heart overflows with such sec^ Sentiments
of Joy and Gratitude as are a Kind (...) implicit Praise to the great Author of
Nature^ The Mind in these early Seasons of the Day is (...) refreshed in all
its Faculties, and born up wi^ such new Supplies of Animal Spirits, that she
finds her self in a State of Youth, especially when she is entertained with the
Breath of Flowers, the Melody of Birds, the Dews that hang upon the Plants, and
all those other Sweets of Nature that are peculiar to the Morning.

It is impossible for a Man to have this Relish of Being, this exquisite Taste
of Life, who does not come into the World before it is in all its Noise and
Hurry; who loses the Rising of the Sun, the still Hours of the Day, and
immediately upon his first getting up plunges himself into the ordinary Cares
or Follies of the World.

I shall conclude this Paper with Milton's inimitable Description of Adam's
awakening his Eve in Paradise, which indeed would have been a Place as little
delightful as a barren Heath or Desert to those who slept in it. The Fondness
of the Posture in which Adam is represented, and the Softness of his Whisper,
are Passages in this Divine Poem that are above all Commendation, and rather to
be admired than praised.

Now Morn her Rosy Steps in the Eastern Clime
Advancing, sowed the Earth with Orient Pearl,
When Adam waked, so custom'd; for his Sleep
Was Airy-light from pure Digestion bred,
And temperate Vapors bland, which the only Sound
Of Leaves and fuming Rills, Aurora's Fan
Lightly dispersed, and the shrill Matin Song
Of Birds on every Bough; so much the more
His Wonder was to find unwaken'd Eve
With Tresses discomposed, and glowing Cheek,
As through unquiet Rest: He on his Side
Leaning half raised, with Looks of Cordial Love
Hung over her enamored, and beheld
Beauty, which whether making or asleep,
Shot forth peculiar Graces. Then with Voice
Mild, as when Zephyrus on Flora breaths,
Her Hand soft touching, whispered thus; Awake,
My fairest, my espoused, my latest found,
Heaven's last best Gift, my ever new Delight,
Awake, the Morning shines, and the fresh Field
Calls us; we lose the Prime, to mark how spri^
Our tended Plants, how blows the Citron Gre^
What drops the Myrrh, and what the Balmy Ree^
Now Nature paints her Colors, how the Be
Sits on the Bloom extracting liquid Sweet.
Such Whispering waked her, but with startled E^
On Adam, whom embracing, thus she spoke:
O Sole! in whom my Thoughts find all Repose,
My Glory, my Perfection, glad I see
Thy Face, and Morn returned. --
The TATLER. [No 264
Favete Linguis. --
Hor.
From Thursd. Dec. 14. to Saturd. Dec. 16. 1710.
From my own Apartment, December 15.
BOccalim, in his Parnassus, indicts a Laconick Writer for speaking that in
Three Words which he might have said in Two, and sentences him for his
Punishment to read over all the Works of Guicciardin. This Guicciardin is so
very prolix and circumstantial in his Writing, that I remember our Countryman
Dr. Don, spealing of that Majestic and Concise Manner is which Moses has
described the Creation of the World, adds, "That if such an Author as
Guicciardin were to have written on such a Subject, the World it self would not
have been able to have contained the Books that gave the History of its
Creation.'

I look upon a tedious Talker, or what is generally known by the Name of a
Story-Teller, to ^e much more insufferable than even a prolix Wri^r. An Author
may be tossed out of your Hand, ^d thrown aside when he grows dull and tire^me;
but such Liberties are so far from being al^ed toward your Orators in common
Conver^tion, that I have known a Challenge sent a Per^n for going out of the
Room abruptly, and lea^ng a Man of Honor in the Midst of a Disserta^on. This
Evil is at present so very Common and ^pidemical, that there is scarce a
Coffee-house in ^own that has not some Speakers belonging to it, ^ho utter
their Political Essays, and draw Paral^ls out of Baker's Chronicle to almost
every Part ^f Her Majesty's Reign. It was said of two an^ent Authors who had
very different Beauties in ^eir Style, That if you took a Word from one of ^em,
you only spoiled his Eloquence; but if you ^ok a Word from the other, you
spoiled his Sense. ^ have often applied the first Part of this Criticism (...)
several of these Coffee-house Speakers whom I ^ave at present in my Thoughts,
though the Cha^acter that is given to the last of those Authors is what I would
recommend to the Imitation of my ^oving Countrymen: But it is not only public
Places of Resort, but private Clubs and Conver^ations over a Bottle, that are
infested with this ^oquacious Kind of Animal, especially with that ^pecies
which I comprehend under the Name of ^ Story-Teller. I would earnestly desire
these Gentlemen to consider, that no Point of Wit or Mirth at the End of a
Story can atone for the Half-Hour that has been lost before they come at ^t. I
would likewise lay it home to their serious Consideration, Whether they think
that every Man in the Company has not a Right to speak as well as themselves?
And whether they do not ^hink they are invading another Man's Property, when
they engross the Time which should be di^ided equally amongst the Company to
their own ^rivate Use?

What makes this Evil the much greater in Conversation is, that these Humdrum
Companion^ seldom endeavor to wind up their Narrations into a Point of Mirth
or Instruction, which might make some Amends for the Tediousness of them, but
think they have a Right to tell any Thing that has happened within their
Memory. They look upon Matter of Fact to be a sufficient Foundation for a
Story, and give us a long Account of Things, not because they are entertaining
or surprising, but because they are true.

My ingenious Kinsman, Mr. Humphrey Wagstaff uses to say, The Life of Man is
too short for a Story-Teller.

Methusalem might be half an Hour in telling what a Clock it was; but as for us
Postdiluvians, we ought to do every Thing in Have; and in our Speeches, as well
as Actions, remember that our Time is short. A Man that talks for a Quarter of
an Hour together in Company, if I meet him frequently, takes up a great Part of
my Span. A Quarter of an Hour may be reckoned the Eight and fortieth Part of a
Day, a Day the Three hundred and sixtieth Part of a Year, and a Year the
Threescore and tenth Part of Life. By this moral Arithmetic, supposing a Man
to be in the Talking World one third Part of the Day, whoever gives another a
Quarter of an Hour's Hearing, makes him a Sacrifice of more than the Four
hundred thousandth Part of his Conversable Life.

I would establish but one great general Rule to be observed in all
Conversation, which is this, That Men should not talk to please themselves, but
those that hear them. This would make them consider, Whether what they speak be
worth Hearing? Whether there be either Wit or Sense in what they are about to
say? And, Whether it be adapted to the Time when, the Place where, and the
Person to whom, it is spoken?

For the utter Extirpation of these Orators and ^ry-Tellers, which I look upon
as very great ^ts of Society, I have invented a Watch, which ^ides the Minute
into Twelve Parts, after the ^e Manner that the ordinary Watches are di^ded
into Hours; and will endeavor to get a ^tent, which shall oblige every Club or
Com^ny to provide themselves with one of these ^atches (that shall lie upon the
Table as an ^our-Glass is often placed near the Pulpit) to ^easure out the
Length of a Discourse.

I shall be willing to allow a Man one Round of ^y Watch, that is, a whole
Minute to speak in; ^t if he exceeds that Time, it shall be lawful for ^y of
the Company to look upon the Watch, or (...) call him down to Order.

Provided however, That if any one can make (...) appear he is turned of
Threescore, he may take ^o, or, if he pleases, three Rounds of the Watch
without giving Offense. Provided also, That this ^ule be not construed to
extend to the Fair Sex, ^ho shall still be at Liberty to talk by the ordi^ary
Watch that is now in Use. I would likewise ^rnestly recommend this little
Automaton, which ^ay be easily carried in the Pocket without any ^cumbrance, to
all such as are troubled with this ^firmity of Speech, that upon pulling out
their Watches, they may have frequent Occasion to ^onsider what they are doing,
and by that Means ^t the Thread of their Story short, and hurry to ^
Conclusion. I shall only add, That this Watch, ^ith a Paper of Directious how
to use it, is sold (...) Charles Lillie's.

I am afraid, a Tatler will be thought a very im^oper Paper to censure this
Humor of being ^alkative; but I would have my Readers know, ^at there is a
great Difference between Tattle and ^oquacity, as I shall show at large in a
following ^ucubration, it being my Design to throw away a Candle upon that
Subject, in order to expla the whole Art of Tattling in all its Branches as
Subdivisions.

The TATLER. [No 265
Arbiter hic igitur factus de Lite Jocosa
Ovid. Me^
From Saturday Dec. 16. to Tuesday Dec. 19. 1710
Continuation of the Journal of the Court of Honor, etc.
AS soon as the Court was sat, the Ladies of the Bench presented, according to
Order, a Table of all the Laws now in Force relating to Visits and
Visiting-Days, methodically digested under their respective Heads, which the
Censor ordered to be laid upon the Table, and afterward proceeded upon the
Business of the Day.

Henry Heedless Esquire was indicted by Colonel Touchy, of Her Majesty's
Trained-Bands, upon an Action of Assault and Battery; for that he the said Mr.
Heedless having espied a Feather upon the Shoulder of the said Colonel, struck
it of gently with the End of a Walking-Staff, Value Three Pence. It appeared,
That the Prosecutor did not think himself injured till a few Days after the
aforesaid Blow was given him; but that having ruminated with himself for
several Days, and conferred upon it with other Officers of the Militia, he
concluded, that he had in Effect been cudgelled by Mr. Heedless, and that he
ought to resent it accordingly. The Council for the Prosecutor alleged, That
the Shoulder was the tenderest Part in a Man of Honor; That it ^ad a natural
Antipathy to a Stick, and that ^ery Touch of it, with any Thing made in the
^ashion of a Cane, was to be interpreted as a ^ound in that Part, and a
Violation of the Per^n's Honor who received it. Mr. Heedless re^lied, That
what he had done was out of Kind^ess to the Prosecutor, as not thinking it
proper ^r him to appear at the Head of the Trained-^ands with a Feather upon
his Shoulder; and ^rther added, That the Stick he had made use of ^n this
Occasion was so very small, that the Pro^cutor could not have felt it, had he
broken it (...) his Shoulders. The Censor hereupon directed ^e Jury to examine
into the Nature of the Staff, ^r that a great deal would depend upon that
^rticular. Upon which he explained to them ^e different Degrees of Offense that
might be ^iven by the Touch of Crab-tree from that of ^ane, and by the Touch of
Cane from that of ^ plain Hazle Stick. The Jury, after a short Per^sal of the
Staff, declared their Opinion by the ^outh of their Foreman, That the Substance
of the ^aff was British Oak. The Censor then obser^ing that there was some Dust
on the Skirts of ^e Criminal's Coat, ordered the Prosecutor to ^eat it off with
his aforesaid Oaken Plant; and ^us, said the Censor, I shall decide this Cause
(...) the Law of Retaliation: If Mr. Heedless did ^e Colonel a good Office, the
Colonel will by ^is Means return it in Kind; but if Mr. Heedless ^ould at any
Time boast that he had cudgelled e Colonel, or laid his Staff over his
Shoulders, ^e Colonel might boast in his Turn, that he has ^ushed Mr.
Heedless's Jacket, or (to use the ^rase of an ingenious Author) that he has
rub^d him down with an Oaken Towel.

Benjamin Busy, of London, Merchant, was in^ted by Jasper Tattle Esquire for having
pulled out (...) Watch and looked upon it thrice, while the ^d Esquire Tattle
was giving him an Account of the Funeral of the said Esquire Tattle's fir^
Wife. The Prisoner alleged in his Defence^ Tha^ he was going to buy Stocks at
the Tim^ when he met the Prosecutor; and that, during the Story of the
Prosecutor, the said Stocks roe above Two per Cent. to the great Detriment of
the Prisoner. The Prisoner further brought several Witnesses. That the said
Jasper Tattle Esquire was a most notorious Story-Teller; That before he met the
Prisoner, he had hindered one of the Prisoners Acquaintance from the Pursuit of
his lawful Business, with the Account of his Second Marriage; and that he had
detained another by the Button of his Coat that very Morning, till he had heard
several witty Sayings and Contrivances of the Prosecutor's eldest Son, who was
a Boy of about Five Years of Age. Upon the whole Matter, Mr. Bickerstaff
dismissed the Accusation as frivolous, and sentenced the Prosecutor to pay
Damages to the Prisoner for what the Prisoner had lost by giving him so long
and patient an Hearing. He further reprimanded the Prosecutor very severely,
and told him, That if he proceeded in his usual Manner to interrupt the
Business of Mankind, he would set a Fi^ upon him for every Quarter of an Hour's
Impertinence, and regulate the said Fine according (...) the Time of the Person
so injured should appear to be more or less precious.

Sir Paul Swash Knight. was indicted by Peter Double Gent. for not returning the
Bow which he received of the said Peter Double, on Wednesday the 6 Instant, at
the Playhouse in the Hay-Market. The Prisoner denied the Receipt of any such
Bow, and alleged in his Defense, That the Profecutor would often times look
full in his Face, but that when he bowed to the said Prosecutor, he would take
no notice of (...) or bow to some Body else that sat quite on the other Side of
him. He likewise alleged, That severa^ Ladies had complained of the
Prosecutor, wh^ ^ter ogling them a Quarter of an Hour, upon ^eir making a
Courtesy to him, would not re^rn the Civility of a Bow. The Censor ob^erving
several Glances of the Prosecutor's Eye, and perceiving, that when he talked to
the Court, he looked upon the Jury, found Reason (...) suspect that there was a
wrong Cast in his ^ight, which upon Examination proved true. The Censor
therefore ordered the Prisoner (that ^e might not produce any more Confusions
in ^ublick Assemblies) never to bow to any Body whom he did not at the same
Time call to by his ^ame.

Oliver Bluff, and Benjamin Browbeat, were in^icted for going to fight a Duel
since the Erection ^f the Court of Honor. It appeared, That they were both
taken up in the Street as they passed ^y the Court, in their Way to the Fields
behind Mountague-House. The Criminals would answer nothing for themselves, but
that they were go^ng to execute a Challenge which had been made ^bove a Week
before the Court of Honor was ^rected. The Censor finding some Reasons to
^uspect (by the Sturdiness of their Behavior) that they were not so very brave
as they would ^ave the Court believe them, ordered them both ^o be searched by
the Grand Jury, who found a ^reast-Plate upon the one, and Two Quires of Pa^er
upon the other. The Breast Plate was immedi^tely ordered to be hung upon a Peg
over Mr. Bick^rstaff's Tribunal, and the Paper to be laid upon ^he Table for
the Use of his Clerk. He then or^ered the Criminals to button up their Bosoms,
and, if they pleased, proceed to their Duel. Upon which they both went very
quietly out ^f the Court, and retired to their respective ^odgings.

The Court then adjourned till after the Holidays.

Copia Vera, Charles Lilly.

The TATLER. [No 266.
Rideat and pulset lasciva decentius Aetas.
Hor.
From Tuesd. Dec. 19. to Thursd. Dec. 21. 1710.
From my own Apartment, December 20.
IT would be a good Appendix to the Art of Living and Dying, if any one would
write the Art of Growing Old, and teach Men to resign their Pretensions to the
Pleasures and Gallantries of Youth, in Proportion to the Alteration they find
in themselves by the Approach of Age and Infirmities. The Infirmities of this
Stage of Life would be much fewer, if we did not affect those which attend the
more vigorous and active Part of our Days; but instead of studying to be wiser,
or being contented with our present Follies, the Ambition of many of us is also
to be the same Sort of Fools we formerly have been. I have often argued, as I
am a professed Lover of Women, that our Sex grows old with a much worse Grace
than the other does; and have ever been of Opinion, that there are more
well-pleased old Women than old Men. I thought it a good Reason for this, that
the Ambition of the Fair Sex being confined to advantageous Marriages, or
shining in the Eyes of Men, their Parts were over sooner, and consequently the
Errors in the Performance of them. The Conversation of this Evening has not
convinced me of the contrary; for one or two Fop Women shall not make a
Balance for the Crowds of Coxcombs among our selves, diversified according to
the different Pursuits of Pleasure and Business.

Returning Home this Evening a little before my usual Hour, I scarce had seated
my self in my Easy Chair, stirred the Fire, and stroaked my Cat, but I heard
some Body come rumbling up Stairs. I saw my Door opened, and a Humane Figure
advancing toward me, so fantastically put together, 'twas some Minutes before
I discovered it to be my old and intimate Friend Sam. Trusty. Immediately I
rose up, and placed him in my own Seat, a Compliment I pay to few. The first
Thing he uttered was, Isaac, Fetch me a Cup of your Cherry-Brandy before you
offer to ask me any Question. He drunk a lusty Draught, sat silent for some
Time, and at last broke out; I am come (quoth he) to insult Thee for an old
fantastic Dotard as thou art in ever defending the Women. I have this Evening
visited Two Widows, who are now in that State I have often heard you call an
After-Life: I suppose you mean by it, an Existence which grows out of past
Entertainments, and is an untimely Delight in the Satisfactions which they once
set their Hearts upon too much to be ever able to relinquish. Have but
Patience, (continued he) till I give you a succinct Account of my Ladies, and
of this Night's Adventure. They are much of an Age, but very different in their
Characters: The one of them, with all the Advances which Years have made upon
her, goes on in a certain Romantic Road of Love and Friendship which she fell
into in her Teens; the other has transferred the amorous Passions of her first
Years to the Love of Cronies, Petts and Favorites, with which she is always
surrounded; but the Genius of each of them will best appear by the Account of
what happened to me at their Houses. About Five this Afternoon, being tired
with Study, the Weather inviting, and Time lying a little upon my Hands, I
resolved, at the Instigation of my Evil Genius, to visit them, their Husbands
having been our Contemporaries. This I thought I could do without much Trouble,
for both live in the very nex^ Street. I went first to my Lady Camomile, and
the Butler, who had lived long in the Family, and seen me often in his Master's
Time, ushered me very civilly into the Parlour, and told me, Though my Lady had
given strict Orders to be denied, he was sure I might be admitted, and bid the
Black-Boy acquaint his Lady, that I was to wait upon her. In the Window lay Two
Letters, one broke open, the other fresh sealed with a Wafer: The first
directed to the Divine Cosmelia, the second to the Charming Lucinda; but both,
by the indented Characters, appeared to have been writ by very unsteady Hands.
Such uncommon Addresses increased my Curiosity, and put me upon asking my old
Friend the Butler, If he knew who those Persons were? Very well, says he: This
is from Mrs. Furbish to my Lady, an old School-Fellow and great Crony of her
Ladyship's, and this the Answer. I enquired in what Country she lived. Oh dear!
says he, but just by in the Neighborhood. Why, she was here all this Morning,
and that Letter came and was answered within these Two Hours. They have taken
an odd Fancy, you must know, to call one another hard Names, but for all that
they love one another hugely. By this Time the Boy returned with his Lady's
humble Service to me, desiring I would excuse her, for she could not possibly
see me, nor any Body else, for it was Opera Night.

Methinks, (says I) such innocent Folly as Two old Women's Courtship to each
other should rather make you merry, than put you out of Humor. Peace, good
Isaac, (says he) no Interruption I beseech you. I got soon to Mrs. Feeble's,
she that was formerly Betty Frisk; you must needs remember het, Tom. Feeble of
Brazen-Nose fell in Love with her for her fine Dancing. Well, Mrs. Ursula,
without further Ceremony, carries me directly up to her Mistress's Chamber,
where I found her environed by Four of the most mischievous Animals that can
ever infest a Family: An old Shock Dog with one Eye, a Monkey chaned to one
Side of the Chimney, a great gray Squirrel to the other, and a Parrat waddling
in the middle of the Room. However, for a while, all was in a profound
Tranquillity. Upon the Mantle-Tree, for I am a pretty curious Observer, stood a
Pot of Lambetive Electuary, with a Stick of Liquorish, and near it a Phyal of
Rose Water and Powder of Tutty. Upon the Table lay a Pipe filled with Bettony
and Coltsfoot, a Roll of Wax-Candle, a Silver Spitting-Pot, and a Seville
Orange. The Lady was placed in a large Wicker Chair, and her Feet wrapped up in
Flannel, supported by Cushions; and in this Attitude (would you believe it
Isaac) was she reading a Romance with Spectacles on. The first Compliments
over, as she was industriously endeavoring to enter upon Conversation, a
violent Fit of Coughing seized her. This awakened Shock, and in a Trice the
whole Room was in an Uproar; for the Dog barked, the Squirrel squealed, the
Monkey chattered, the Parrat screamed, and Ursula, to appease them, was more
clamorous than all the rest. You Isaac, who know how any harsh Noise affects my
Head, may guess what I suffered from the hideous Din of these discordant
Sounds. At length all was appeased, and Quiet restored: A Chair was drawn for
me, where I was no sooner seated, but the Parrat fixed his Horny Beak, as sharp
as a Pair of Sheers, in one of my Heels, just above the Shoe. I sprung from the
Place with an unusual Agility, and so being within the Monkey's Reach, he
snatches off my n^w Bob Wig, and throws it upon Two Apples that were roasting
by a sullen Sea-Coal Fire. I was nimble enough to save it from any further
Damage than singeing the Foretop. I put it on, and composing my self as well as
I could, I drew my Chair toward the other Side of the Chimney. The good Lady,
as soon as she had recovered Breath, employed it in making a Thousand
Apologies, and with great Eloquence, and a numerous Train of Words, lamented my
Misfortune. In the middle of her Harangue, I felt something scratching near my
Knee, and feeling what it should be, found the Squirrel had got into my
Coat-Pocket. As I endeavored to remove him from his Burrow, he made his Teeth
meet through the Fleshy Part of my Forefinger. This gave me an unexpressible
Pain. The Hungary Water was immediately brought to bath it, and Gold-beaters
Skin applied to stop the Blood. The Lady renewed her Excuses; but being now out
of all Patience, I abruptly took my Leave, and hobbling down Stairs with
heedless Have, I set my Foot full in a Pail of Water, and down we came to the
Bottom together. Here my Friend concluded his Narrative, and, with a composed
Countenance, I began to make him Compliments of Condoleance; but he started
from his Chair, and said, Isaac, you may spare your Speeches, I expect no
Reply: When I told you this, I knew you would laugh at me; but the next Woman
that makes me ridiculous shall be a young one.

The TATLER. [No 267.
Qui Genus humanum Ingenio superavit, and omnes
Restinxit Stellas, exortus uti Aerius Sol.
Lucr.
From Thursd. Dec. 21. to Saturd. Dec. 23. 1710.
From my own Apartment, December 22.
I Have heard, that it is a Rule among the Conventuals of several Orders in the
Romish Church, to shut themselves up at a certain Time of the Year, not only
from the World in general, but from the Members of their own Fraternity, and to
pass away several Days by themselves in settling Accounts between their Maker
and their own Souls, in cancelling unrepented Crimes, and renewing their
Contracts of Obedience for the future. Such stated Times for particular Acts of
Devotion, or the Exercise of certain religious Duties, have been enjoined in
all civil Governments, whatever Deity they worshipped, or whatever Religion
they professed. That which may be done at all Times, is often totally neglected
and forgotten, unless fixed and determined to some Time more than another; and
therefore, though several Duties may be suitable to every Day of our Lives,
they are most likely to be performed if some Days are more particularly set
apart for the Practice of them. Our Church has accordingly instituted several
Seasons of Devotion, when Time, Custom, Prescription, and (if I may so say) the
Fashion it self, call upon a Man to be serious and attentive to the great End
of his Being.

I have hinted in some former Papers, that the greatest and wisest of Men in
all Ages and Countries, particularly in Rome and Greece, were renowned for
their Piety and Virtue. It is now my Intention to show how those in our own
Nation, that have been unquestionably the most eminent for Learning and
Knowledge, were likewise the most eminent for their Adherence to the Religion
of their Country.

I might produce very shining Examples from among the Clergy; but because
Priestcraft is the common Cry of every cavelling empty Scribbler, I shall show,
that all the Laymen who have exerted a more than ordinary Genius in their
Writings, and were the Glory of their Times, were Men whose Hopes were filled
with Immortality, and the Prospect of future Rewards, and Men who lived in a
dutiful Submission to all the Doctrines of Revealed Religion.

I shall in this Paper only instance Sir Francis Bacon, a Man who for the
Greatness of Genius, and Compass of Knowledge, did Honor to his Age and
Country; I could almost say to Humane Nature it self. He possessed at once all
those extraordinary Talents which were divided amongst the greatest Authors of
Antiquity. He had the sound, distinct, comprehensive Knowledge of Aristotle,
with all the beautiful Lights, Graces and Embellishments, of Cicero. One does
not know which to admire most in his Writings, the Strength of Reason, Force of
Style, or Brightness of Imagination.

This Author has remarked in several Parts of his Works, that a thorough
Infight into Philosophy makes a good Believer, and that a Smattering in it
naturally produces such a Race of despicable Infidels as the little profligate
Writers of the present Age, whom (I must confess) I have always accused to my
self, not so much for their Want of Faith as their Want of Learning.

I was infinitely pleased to find among the Works of this extraordinary Man a
Prayer of his own composing, which, for the Elevation of Thought, and Greatness
of Expression, seems rather the Devotion of an Angel than a Man. His principal
Fault seems to have been the Excess of that Virtue which covers a Multitude of
Faults. This betrayed him to so great an Indulgence toward his Servants, who
made a corrupt Use of it, that it stripped him of all those Riches and Honors
which a long Series of Merits had heaped upon him. But in this Prayer, at the
same Time that we find him prostrating himself before the great Mercy-Seat, and
humbled under Afflictions which at that Time lay heavy upon him, we see him
supported by the Sense of his Integrity, his Zeal, his Devotion, and his Love
to Mankind, which give him a much higher Figure in the Minds of Thinking Men,
than that Greatness had done from which he was fallen. I shall beg Leave to
write down the Prayer it self, with the Title to it, as it was found among his
Lordship's Papers, written in his own Hand; not being able to furnish my Reader
with an Entertainment more suitable to this solemn Time.

A Prayer or Psalm made by my Lord Bacon, Chancellor of England. MOST gracious
Lord God, my merciful Father; from my Youth up my Creator, my Redeemer, my
Comforter. Thou, O Lord, soundest and searchest the Depths and Secrets of all
Hearts; Thou acknowledgest the Upright of Heart; Thou judge the Hypocrite;
Thou ponderest Men's Thoughts and Doings as in a Balance; Thou measurest their
Intentions as with a Line; Vanity and crooked Ways cannot be hid from Thee.

Remember, O Lord! how thy Servant has walked before thee; remember what I
have first sought, and what has been principal in my Intentions. I have loved
thy Assemblies, I have mourned for the Divisions of thy Church, I have
delighted in the Brightness of thy Sanctuary. This Vine which thy Right Hand
has planted in this Nation, I have ever prayed unto Thee that it might have
the first and the latter Rain, and that it might stretch her Branches to the
Seas, and to the Floods. The State and Bread of the Poor and Oppressed have
been precious in mine Eyes; I have hated all Cruelty and Hardness of Heart; I
have (though in a despised Weed) procured the Good of all Men. If any have been
my Enemies, I thought not of them, neither has the Sun almost set upon my
Displeasure; but I have been as a Dove, free from Superfluity of Maliciousness.
Thy Creatures have been my Books, but thy Scriptures much more. I have sought
Thee in the Courts, Fields and Gardens, but I have found Thee in thy Temples.

Thousands have been my Sins, and Ten Thousands my Transgressions, but thy
Sanctifications have remained with me, and my Heart (through thy Grace) has
been an unquenched Coal upon thine Altar.

O Lord, my Strength! I have since my Youth met with Thee in all my Ways, by
thy Fatherly Compassions, by thy comfortable Chastisements, and by thy most
visible Providence. As thy Favors have increased upon me, so have thy
Corrections; so as Thou have been always near me, O Lord! And ever as my
Worldly Blessings were exalted, so secret Darts from Thee have pierced me; and
when I have ascended before Men, I have descended in Humiliation before Thee.
And now when I thought most of Peace and Honor, thy Hand is heavy upon me, and
has humbled me according to thy former loving Kindness, keeping me still in
thy Fatherly School, not as a Bastard, but as a Child. Just are thy Judgments
upon me for my Sins, which are more in Number than the Sands of the Sea, but
have no Proportion to thy Mercies; for what are the Sands of the Sea? Earth,
Heavens, and all these, are nothing to thy Mercies. Besides my innumerable
Sins, I confess before Thee, that I am Debtor to Thee for the gracious Talent
of thy Gifts and Graces, which I have neither put into a Napkin, nor put it (as
I ought) to Exchangers, where it might have made best Profit, but misspent it in
Things for which I was least fit: So I may truly say, my Soul has been a
Stranger in the Course of my Pilgrimage. Be merciful unto me, O Lord, for my
Savior's Sake, and receive me unto thy Bosom, or guide me in thy Ways.

The TATLER. [No 268.
-- O te, Bollane, Cerebri
Felicem! Aiebam tacitus, cum quidlibet ille
Garriret. --
Hor.
From Saturd. Dec. 23. to Tuesd. Dec. 26. 1710.
From my own Apartment.
AT my coming Home last Night, I found upon my Table the following Petition or
Project, sent me from Lloyd's Coffee-house in the City, with a Present of Port
Wine, which had been bought at a late Auction held in that Place.

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire Censor of Great Britain.
Lloyd's Coffee-house, Lombard Street, Dec. 23.
WE the Customers of this Coffee-house, observing that you have taken into your
Consideration the great Mischiefs daily done in this City by Coffee-house
Orators, do humbly beg Leave to represent to you, That this Coffee-house being
provided with a Pulpit for the Benefit of such Auctions that are frequently
made in this Place, it is our Custom, upon the first coming in of the News, to
order a Youth, who officiates as the Kidney of the Coffee-house, to get into
the Pulpit, and read every Paper with a loud and distinct Voice, while the
whole Audience are sipping their respective Liquors. We do therefore, Sir,
humbly propose, that there be a Pulpit erected within every Coffee-house of
this City and the adjacent Parts; That one of the Waiters of the Coffee-house
be nominated as Reader to the said Pulpit; That after the News of the Day has
been published by the said Lecturer, some Politician of good Note do ascend
into the said Pulpit; and after having chosen for his Text any Article of the
said News, that he do establish the Authority of such Article, clear the Doubts
that may arise thereupon, compare it with Parellel Texts in other Papers,
advance upon it wholesome Points of Doctrine, and draw from it salutary
Conclusions for the Benefit and Edification of all that hear him. We do
likewise humbly propose, That upon any such Politician's quitting the Pulpit,
he shall be succeeded by any other Orator that finds himself moved by the same
public Spirit, who shall be at full Liberty either to enforce or overthrow
what the other has said before him, and may in the same Manner be succeeded by
any other Politician, who shall with the same Liberty confirm or impugn his
Reasons, strengthen or invalidate his Conjectures, enlarge upon his Schemes, or
erect new ones of his own. We do likewise further propose, That if any Person,
of what Age or Rank soever, do presume to cavil at any Paper that has been
read, or to hold forth upon it longer than the Space of one Minute, that he be
immediately ordered up into the Pulpit, there to make good any Thing that he
has suggested upon the Floor. We do likewise further propose, That if any one
plays the Orator in the ordinary Coffee-house Conversation, whether it be upon
Peace or War, on Plays or Sermons, Business or Poetry, that he be forth with
desired to take his Place in the Pulpit.

This, Sir, we humbly presume may in a great Measure put a Stop to those
superficial Statesmen who would not dare to stand up in this Manner before a
whole Congregation of Politicians, notwithstanding the long and tedious
Harangues and Dissertations which they daily utter in private Circles, to the
breaking of many honest Tradesmen, the seducing of several eminent Citizens,
the making of numberless Malcontents, and to the great Detriment and Disquiet
of Her Majesty's Subjects.

I do heartily concur with my ingenious Friends of the abovementioned
Coffee-house in these their Proposals; and because I apprehend there may be
Reasons to put an immediate Stop to the Grievance complained of, it is my
Intention, That, till such Time as the aforesaid Pulpits can be erected, every
Orator do place himself within the Bar, and from thence dictate whatsoever he
shall think necessary for the public Good.

And further, because I am very desirous the proper Ways and Means should be
found out f^ the suppressing of Story-Tellers and fine Talke^ in all ordinary
Conversation whatsoever, I do i^sist, That in every private Club, Company,
(...) Meeting over a Bottle, there be always an Elbo^ Chair placed at the
Table, and that as soon a^ any one begins a long Story, or extends his
Di^course beyond the Space of one Minute, he (...) forthwith thrust into the
said Elbow Chair, (...) less upon any of the Company's calling out t^ the
Chair, he breaks off abruptly, and holds hi^ Tongue.

There are Two Species of Men, notwithstanding any Thing that has been here
said, whom ^ would exempt from the Disgrace of the Elbo^ Chair. The First are
those Buffoons that have ^ Talent of mimicking the Speech and Behaviou^ of
other Persons, and turning all their Patron^ Friends and Acquaintance, into
Ridicule. I loo^ upon your Pantomime as a Legion in a Man, or at least to be
like Virgil's Monster, with an Hundred Mouths and as many Tongues. -- Linguae
centum sunt, Oraque centum.
And therefore would give him as much Time to talk in, as would be allowed to
the whole Body of Persons he represents, were they actually in the Company
which they divert by Proxy. Provided however, That the said Pantomime do not,
upon any Pretense whatsoever, utter any Thing in his own particular Opinion,
Language, or Character.

I would likewise in the Second Place grant an Exemption from the Elbow Chair
to any Person who treats the Company, and by that Means may be supposed to pay
for his Audience. A Guest cannot take it ill if he be not allowed to talk in
his Turn by a Person who puts his Mouth to a better Employment, and stops it
with good Beef and Mutton. In this Case the Guest is very agreeably silenced,
and seems to hold his Tongue under that Kind of Bribery which the Ancients
called, Bos in Lingua.

If I can once extirpate the Race of solid and substantial Humdrums, I hope by
my wholesome and repeated Advices, quickly to reduce the insignificant
Tittle-tattles and Matter-of-Fact-Men that abound in every Quarter of this
great City.

Epictetus, in his little System of Morality, prescribes the following Rule
with that beautiful Simplicity which shines through all his Precepts. Beware
that thou never tell thy Dreams in Company; for notwithstanding thou may
take a Pleasure in Telling thy Dreams, the Company will take no Pleasure in
Hearing them.

This Rule is conformable to a Maxim which I have laid down in a late Paper,
and must always inculcate into those of my Readers who find in themselves an
Inclination to be very talkative and impertinent, That they should not speak to
please themselves, but those that hear them.

It has been often observed by witty Essay-Writers, That the deepest Waters are
always the most silent; That empty Vessels make the greatest Sound, and
tinckling Cymbals the worst Music. The Marquess of Hallifax, in his admirable
Advice to a Daughter, tells her, That good Sense has always something sullen in
it: But as Sullenness does not only imply Silence, but an ill-natured Silence,
I wish his Lordship had given a softer Name to it. Since I am engaged unawares
in Quotations, I must not omit the Satyr which Horace has written against this
impertinent talkative Companion, and which, I think, is fuller of Humor than
any other Satyr he has written. This great Author, who had the nicest Taste of
Conversation, and was himself a most agreeable Companion, had so strong an
Antipathy to a great Talker, that he was afraid some Time or other (...) would
be mortal to him, as he has very humo^rously described it in his Conversation
with (...) impertinent Fellow who had like to have be^ the Death of him.

Interpellandi Locus hic erat: Est tibi Matter,
Cognati, queis te salvo est Opus? Haud mihi qui qu^
Omnes composui. Felices, nunc ego resto.
Confice, namque instat Fatum mihi triste Sabella,
Quod puero cecinit divina mota Anus Urna.
Hunc neque dira Venena, nec hosticus auferet Ensis,
Nec Laterum Dolor, aut Tussis, nec tarda Podagr^
Garrulus hunc quando consumet cumque: Loquaces,
Si sapiat, vitet, simul atque adoleverit Aetas.
Thus translated by Mr. Oldham:

' Here I got Room to interrupt: Have you
' A Mother, Sir, or Kindred living now?
' Not one, they all are dead. Troth, so I guest
' The happier they (said I) who are at Rest.
' Poor I am only left unmurder'd yet:
' Have, I beseech you, and dispatch me quite,
' For I am well convinced my Time is come;
' When I was young, a Gipsy told my Doom.
' This Lad (said she, and looked upon my Hand)
' Shall not by Sword or Poison come to's End,
' Nor by the Fever, Dropsy, Gout, or Stone;
' But he shall die by an eternal Tongue:
' Therefore, when he is grown up, if he be wise,
' Let him avoid great Talkers, I advise.
The TATLER. [No 269.
-- Hae Nugae seria ducunt
In mala. --
Hor.
From Tuesday Dec. 26. to Thursday Dec. 28. 1710.
From my own Apartment, December 27.
I Find my Correspondents are universally offended at me for taking Notice so
seldom of their Letters, and fear People have taken the Advantage of my Silence
to go on in their Errors; for which Reason I shall hereafter be more careful to
answer all lawful Questions and just Complaints as soon as they come to my
Hands. The Two following Epistles relate to very great Mischiefs in the most
important Articles of Life, Love, and Friendship.

Dorsetshire, December. 20. Mr. Bickerstaff,
IT IS my Misfortune to be enamoured of a Lady that is neither very beautiful,
very witty, nor at all well-natured; but has the Vanity to think she excels in
all these Qualifications, and therefore is cruel, insolent, and scornful. When
I study to please her, she treats me with the utmost Rudeness and ill Manners:
If I approach her Person, she fights, she scratches me: If I offer a civil
Salute, she bites me; insomuch, that very lately, before a whole Assembly of
Ladies and Gentlemen, she ripped out a considerable Part of my Left Cheek. This
is no sooner done, but she begs my Pardon in the most handsome and becoming
Terms imaginable, gives her self worse Language than I could find in my Heart
to do, lets me embrace her to pacify her while she is railing at her self,
protests she deserves the Esteem of no one living, says I am too good to
contradict her when she thus accuses her self. This attones for all, tempts me
to renew my Addresses, which are ever returned in the same obliging Manner.
Thus, without some speedy Relief, I am in Danger of losing my whole Face.
Notwithstanding all this, I dote upon her, and am satisfied she loves me,
because she takes me for a Man of Sense, which I have generally thought, except
in this one Instance. Your Reflections upon this strange Amor would be very
useful in these Parts, where we are overrun with wild Beauties and Romps. I
earnestly beg your Assistance, either to deliver me from the Power of this
unaccountable Enchantment, or, by some proper Animadversions, civilize the
Behavior of this agreeable Rustic. I am,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, Ebenezer.


Mr. Bickerstaff,
I Now take Leave to address you in your Character of Censor, and complain to
you, That among the various Errors in Conversation which you have corrected,
there is one which, though it has not escaped a general Reproof, yet seems to
deserve a more particular Severity. It Is an Humor of jesting on disagreeable
Subjects, and insisting on the Jest, the more it creates Uneasiness; and this
some Men think they have a Title to do as Friends. Is the Design of Jesting to
provoke? Or does Friendship give a Privilege to say Things with a Design to
shock? How can that be called a Jest, which has nothing in it but Bitterness?
It Is generally allowed necessary, for the Peace of Company, that Men should a
little study the Tempers of each others; but certainly that must be in order to
shun what is offensive, not to make it a constant Entertainment. The frequent
Repetition of what appears harsh, will unavoidably leave a Rancour that is fatal
to Friendship; and I doubt much, whether it would be an Argument of a Man's
good Humor, if he should be rouzed by perpetual Teazing, to treat those that
do it as his Enemies. In a Word, whereas it is a common Practice to let a Story
die, merely because it does not touch, I think such as mention one they find
does, are as troublesome to Society, and as unfit for it, as Wags, Men of Fire,
good Talkers, or any other Apes in Conversation; and therefore, for the public
Benefit, I hope you will cause them to be branded with such a Name as they
deserve. I am,

SIR, Yours, Patient Friendly.


The Case of Ebenozer is a very common one, and is always cured by Neglect.
These fantastical Returns of Affection proceed from a certain Vanity in the
other Sex, supported by a perverted Taste in ours. I must publish it as a Rule,
That no Faults which proceed from the Will, either in a Mistress or a Friend,
are to be tolerated: But we should be so complaisant to Ladies, to let them
displease when they aim at doing it. Pluck up a Spirit, Ebenezer, recover the
Use of your Judgment, and her Faults will appear, or her Beauties vanish. Her
Faults begin to please me as well as my own, is a Sentence very prettily put
into the Mouth of a Lover by the Comic Poet; but he never designed it for a
Maxim of Life, but the Picture of an Imperfection. If Ebenezer takes my Advice,
the same Temper which made her insolent to his Love, will make her submissive
to hi^ Indifference.

I cannot wholly ascribe the Faults mentioned i^ the Second Letter to the same
Vanity or Prid^ in Companions who secretly triumph over their Friends, in being
sharp upon them in Things where they are most tender. But when this for^ of
Behavior does not proceed from that Source^ it does from Barrenness of
Invention, and an Inability to support a Conversation in a Way less offensive.
It is the same Poverty which makes Men speak or write smuttily, that forces
them to talk vexingly. As obscene Language is an Address to the Lewd for
Applause, so are sharp Allusions an Appeal to the Ill-natured. But mean and
illiterate is that Conversation where one Man exercises his Wit to make another
exercise his Patience.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Whereas Plagius has been told again and again, Both in public and private,
That he preaches excellently well, and still goes on to preach as well as ever,
and all this to a polite and learned Audience; This is to desire, That he would
not hereafter be so eloquent, except to a Country Congregation, the Proprietors
of Tillotson's Works having consulted the Learned in the Law, whether preaching
a Sermon they have purchased, is not to be construed publishing their Copy.

Mr. Dogood is desired to consider, that his Story is severe upon a Weakness,
and not a Folly.

The TATLER. [No 270.
Cum pulchris Tunicis sumet nova Consilia and Spes.
Hor.
From Thursday Dec. 28. to Saturday Dec. 30. 1710.
From my own Apartment, December 29.
ACcording to my late Resolution, I take the Holydays to be no improper Season
to entertain the Town with the Addresses of my Correspondents. In my Walks
every Day there appear all round me very great Offenders in the Point of Dress.
An armed Tailor had the Impudence Yesterday in the Park to smile in my Face,
and pull off a Laced Hat to me, as it were in Contempt of my Authority and
Censure. However, it is a very great Satisfaction, that other People as well as
my self are offended with these Improprieties. The following Notices from
Persons of different Sexes and Qualities are a sufficient Instance how useful
my Lucubrations are to the Public.

Jack's Coffee-house near Guildhall, Dec. 27. Cousin Bickerstaff,
IT has been the peculiar Blessing of our Family to be always above the Smiles
or Frowns of Fortune, and by a certain Greatness of Mind to restrain all
irregular Fondnesses or Passions. From hence it is, that though a long Decay,
and a numerous Descent, have obliged many of our House to fall into the Arts of
Trade and Business, no one Person of us has ever made an Appearance that
betrayed our being unsatisfied with our own Station of Life, or has ever
affected a Mien or Gesture unsuitable to it.

You have up and down in your Writings very justly remarked, That it is not
this or the other Profession or Quality among Men that gives us Honor and
Esteem, but the well or ill behaving our selves in those Characters. It is
therefore with no small Concern, that I behold in Coffee-houses and public
Places my Brethren, the Tradesmen of this City, put off the smooth, even and
ancient Decorum of thriving Citizens, for a fantastical Dress and Figure,
improper for their Persons and Characters, to the utter Destruction of that
Order and Distinction which of Right ought to be between St. James's and
Milkstreet, the Camp and Cheapside.

I have given my self some Time to find out, how distinguishing the Frays in a
Lot of Muslins, or drawing up a Regiment of Thread Laces, or making a
Panegyric on Pieces of Sagathy or Scotch-Plod, should entitle a Man to a Laced
Hat or Sword, a Wig tied up with Ribands, or an embroidered Coat. The College
say, this Enormity proceeds from a Sort of Delirium in the Brain, which makes
it break out first about the Head, and, for Want of timely Remedies, fall upon
the Left Thigh, and from thence in little Mazes and Windings run over the whole
Body, as appears by pretty Ornaments on the Buttons, Button-holes, Garterings,
Sides of the Breeches, and the like. I beg the Favor of you to give us a
Discourse wholly upon the Subject of Habits, which will contribute to the
better Government of Conversation amongst us, and in particular oblige,

SIR, Your affectionate Cousin, Felix Tranquillus.


To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire Censor of Great Britain.
The humble Petition of Ralph Nab, Haberdasher of Hats, and many other poor
Sufferers of the same Trade,
SHOWS,
THat for some Years last past the Use of Gold and Silver Galloon upon Hats has
been almost universal, being undistinguishably worn by Soldiers, 'Squires,
Lords, Footmen, Beaus, Sportsmen, Traders, Clerks, Prigs, Smarts, Cullies,
Pretty Fellows, and Sharpers.

That the said Use and Custom has been Two Ways very prejudicial to your
Petitioners: First, in that it has induced Men, to the great Damage of your
Petitioners, to wear their Hats upon their Heads, by which Means the said Hats
last much longer whole than they would do if worn under their Arms. Secondly,
in that very often a new Dressing and a new Lace supply the Place of a new Hat,
which Grievance we are chiefly sensible of in the Springtime, when the Company
is leaving the Town; it so happening commonly, that a Hat shall frequent all
Winter the finest and best Assemblies without any Ornaments at all, and in May
shall be tricked up with Gold or Silver to keep Company with Rusticks, and ride
in the Rain.

All which Premises your Petitioners humbly pray you to take into your
Consideration, and either to appoint a Day in your Court of Honor, when all
Pretenders to the Galloon may enter their Claims, and have them approved or
rejected, or to give us such other Relief as to your great Wisdom shall seem
meet.

And your Petitioners, etc.
Order my Friend near Temple Bar, the Author of the Hunting-Cock, to assist the
Court when this Petition is read, of which Mr. Lilly to give him Notice.

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire Censor of Great Britain.
The humble Petition of Elizabeth Slender, Spinster^
SHOWS,
THat on the 20th of this Instant Decembe^ her Friend Rebecca Hive and your
Petitioner walking in the Strand, saw a Gentleman before us in a Gown, whose
Periwig was so long and so much powdered, that your Petitioner took Notice of
it, and said, She wondered that Lawyer would so spoil a new Gown with Powder.
To which it was answered, That he was no Lawyer but a Clergyman. Upon a Wager
of a Pot of Coffee we overtook him and your Petitioner was soon convinced she
had lost.

Your Petitioner therefore desires your Worship to cite the Clergyman before
you, and to settle and adjust the Length of Canonical Periwigs, and the
Quantity of Powder to be made use of in them, and to give such other Directions
as you shall think fit.

And your Petitioner, etc.
Q. Whether this Gentleman be not Chaplain to a Regiment, and in such Case
allow Powder accordingly?

After all that can be thought on these Subjects, I must confess, That the Men
who dress with a certain Ambition to appear more than they are, are much more
excusable than those who betray, in the ado^ing their Persons, a secret Vanity
and Inclination to shine in Things, wherein if they did succeed, it would
rather lessen than advance their Character. For this Reason I am more provoked
at the Allegations relating to the Clergyman, than any other hinted at in these
Complaints. I have indeed a long Time with much Concern observed abundance of
Pretty Fellows in Sacred Orders, and shall in due Time let them know, that I
pretend to give Ecclesiastical as well as Civil Censures. A Man well bred and
well dressed in that Habit, adds to the Sacredness of his Function and
Agreeableness not to be met with among the Laity. I own I have spent some
Evenings among the Men of Wit of that Profession with an inexpressible Delight.
Their habitual Care of their Character gives such a Chastisement to their
Fancy, that all which they utter in Company is as much above what you meet with
in other Conversations, as the Charms of a modest are superior to those of a
light Woman. I therefore earnestly desire our young Missionaries from the
Universities to consider where they are, and not dress, and look, and move like
young Officers. It is no Disadvantage to have a very handsome white Hand; but
were I to preach Repentance to a Gallery of Ladies, I would, methinks, keep my
Gloves on. I have an unfeigned Affection to the Class of Mankind appointed to
serve at the Altar, therefore am in Danger of running out of my Way, and
growing too serious on this Occasion; for which Reason I shall end with the
following Epistle, which, by my Interest in Tom. Trot the Penny-Post, I
procured a Copy of.

To the Rev. Mr. Ralph Incense, Chaplain to the Countess Dowager of Brumpton.
SIR,
I Heard and saw you preach last Sunday. I am an ignorant young Woman, and
understood not half you said: But ah! Your Manner, when you held up both your
Hands toward our Pew! Did you design to win me to Heaven or your self?

Your humble Servant, Penitence Gentle.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
Mr. Proctorstaff of Clare-Hall in Cambridge, (...) received as a Kinsman,
according to his Reques^ bearing Date the 20th Instant.

The Distressed Son of Aesculapius is desired to be more particular.

The TATLER. [No 271.
From Saturday Dec. 30. to Tuesday Jan. 2. 1710.
THE Printer having informed me, That there are as many of these Papers printed
as will make Four Volumes, I am now come to the End of my Ambition in this
Matter, and have nothing further to say to the World, under the Character of
Isaac Bickerstaff. This Work has indeed for some Time been disagreeable to me,
and the Purpose of it wholly lost by my being so long understood as the Author.
I never designed in it to give any Man any secret Wound by my Concealment, but
spoke in the Character of an old Man, a Philosopher, an Humorist, an
Astrologer, and a Censor, to allure my Reader with the Variety of my Subjects,
and insinuate, if I could, the Weight of Reason with the Agreeableness of Wit.
The general Purpose of the whole has been to recommend Truth, Innocence,
Honor, and Virtue, as the chief Ornaments of Life; but I considered, that
Severity of Manners was absolutely necessary to him who would censure others,
and for that Reason, and that only, chose to talk in a Mask. I shall not carry
my Humility so far as to call my self a vicious Man; but at the same Time must
confess, my Life is at best but pardonable. And with no greater Character than
this, a Man would make but an indifferent Progress in attacking prevailing and
fashionable Vices, which Mr. Bickerstaff has done with a Freedom of Spirit that
would have lost both its Beauty and Efficacy, had it been pretended to by Mr.
Steel.

As to the Work it self, the Acceptance it has met with is the best Proof of
its Value; but I should err against that Candor which an honest Man should
always carry about him, if I did not own, that the most approved Pieces in it
were written by others, and those which have been most excepted against by my
self. The Hand that has assisted me in those noble Discourses upon the
Immortality of the Soul, the glorious Prospects of another Life, and the most
sublime Idea's of Religion and Virtue, is a Person who is too fondly my Friend
ever to own them; but I should little deserve to be his, if I usurped the Glory
of them. I must acknowledge at the same Time, that I think the finest Strokes
of Wit and Humor in all Mr. Bickerstaff's Lucubrations are those for which he
is also beholden to him.

As for the Satirical Parts of these Writings, those against the Gentlemen who
profess Gaming are the most licentious; but the main of them I take to come
from losing Gamesters, as Invectives against the Fortunate; for in very many of
them, I was very little else but the Transcriber. If any have been more
particularly marked at, such Persons may impute it to their own Behavior,
(before they were touched upon) in publicly speaking their Resentment against
the Author, and professing they would support any Man who should insult him.
When I mention this Subject, I hope Major General Davenport, Brigadier Bisset,
and my Lord Forbes, will accept of my Thanks for their frequent good Offices,
in professing their Readiness to partake any Danger that should befall me in so
just an Undertaking as the Endeavor to banish Fraud and Couzenage from the
Presence and Conversation of Gentlemen.

But what I find is the least excusable Part of all this Work is, That I have,
in some Places in it, touched upon Matters which concern both the Church and
State. All I shall say for this is, That the Points I alluded to are such as
concerned every Christian and Freeholder in England; and I could not be cold
enough to conceal my Opinion on Subjects which related to either of those
Characters. But Politics apart. I must confess, it has been a most exquisite
Pleasure to me to frame Characters of Domestic Life, and put those Parts of it
which are least observed into an agreeable View; to enquire into the Seeds of
Vanity and Affectation, to lay before my Readers the Emptiness of Ambition: In
a Word, to trace Humane Life through all its Mazes and Recesses, and show much
shorter Methods than Men ordinarily practice, to be happy, agreeable, and great.

But to enquire into Men's Faults and Weaknesses has something in it so
unwelcome, that I have often seen People in Pain to act before me, whose
Modesty only make them think themselves liable to Censure. This, and a Thousand
other nameless Things, have made it an irksome Task to me to personate Mr.
Bickerstaff any longer; and I believe it does not often happen, that the Reader
is delighted where the Author is displeased.

All I can now do for the further Gratification of the Town, is to give them a
faithful Index and Explication of Passages and Allusions, and sometimes of
Persons intended in the several scattered Parts of the Work. At the same Time,
the succeeding Volumes shall discover which of the whole have been written by
me, and which by others, and by whom, as far as I am able, or permitted.

Thus I have voluntarily done what I think all Authors should do when called
upon. I have published my Name to my Writings, and given my self up to the
Mercy of the Town (as Shakespeare expresses it) with all my Imperfections on my
Head. The indulgent Readers

Most Obliged, Most Obedient, Humble Servant, Richard Steel.

The End of the Fourth Volume.
AN INDEX TO THE TATLERS.
VOL. IV.
A.
ADversity, an Ease for it. Page 192 Advertisements, a Dissertation upon them.
154 Affection distinguished from Esteem. 75 -- Both nearly related in the Fair
Sex. 78 Alexander the Great, his Character. 10 -- The remarkable Incident
between him and his Physician. 88 -- His Speech to his Physician. 90 -- The
Irregularity of his Temper. 91 Alexander Truncheon, Foreman of the Male Jury in
Mr. Bickerstaff's Court of Honor. 278 Ambition, its Refuge when disappointed.
56 -- No true Happiness in the Success of it. 57 Ambition in Grotesque, what.
Page ^ Amicable Contribution (a Lottery) for raising t^ Fortunes of Ten young
Ladies. ^ Aminadab, his Letter to Mr. Bickerstaff. ^ Apollo, the God of Verse
and Physic. ^ Apot hecaries, great Orators. ^ Appetites, how to be governed. ^
Astraea, an unfortunate Wife. ^
B.
Bacon (Sir Francis), his Character. ^ Banbury, famous for Cakes and Zeal. ^
Beauty, an Overstock of it. ^ Bickerstaff (Issaac), his Opinion in a Law Case.
^ -- His Letter to the French King. ^ -- His Adventures in a Journey to the
Lands-End ^ -- His Project. ^ -- His Letter to Amanda in Kent. ^ -- His Advice
to Mr. Mills the Comedian. ^ -- His Answer to such as came to consult him about
their Success in the Lottery. ^ -- His Observations upon the Drawing of the
L^tery the first Day. ^ -- His Letter of Advice to a Fortunate Lady. ^ -- His
Entertainment of his Three Nephews, an^ a young Lady his Neighbor. ^ -- His
Remonstrance to a Lady of Quality. ^ -- His Receipt. ^ -- His Charge to the
Court of Honor. ^ Billingsgate-Scold, her Defense before a Magistrat^ ^
Blockheads, apt to admire one another. ^ Breeding, the highest Point of good
Breeding. ^ -- Often mistaken. 114, ^ Bridget Howde'e, an Advertisement against
he^ ^
C.
Caelia, her History. Page 37 Caelicola, his Character. 100 Callicoat, indicted
in the Court of Honor. 311 Cambrick, a Linnen-Draper, indicted by the Lady
Touchwood. 310 -- His Defense. 311 Case (Dr.), grown rich by Means of a
Distich. 224 Cato Junior, his Letter and Advice to Mr. Bickerstaff. 25, 26
Celamico, his Will. 322 Chances, a Character of that Play. 10 Chaplains, a
Discourse upon 'em. 289 Cheerfulness and Constancy, Qualifications absolutely
necessary in the married State. 13 Chloe, the Fortunate Lady, her Answer to Mr.
Bickerstaff's Letter. 82 Church Weather-Glass, when invented. 136 -- The
Description and Use of it. 137, 138, 139, 140 City-Shower, a Description of it.
214 Clarinda, her ill Choice. 256 Clement (Thomas), his Proposal. 320
Companions, what sort the most desirable. 84 Conversation, the Use and Abuse of
it. 159 -- A Medium to be observed in it. 242 -- What it chiefly turns upon.
248 -- The Humdrums in Conversation. 333, 334 Coupler, his Account of Jointures
and Marriage-Settlements. 43 Court of Honor erected by Mr. Bickerstaff. 266 --
His Account of the Members of it, and of its Proceedings. 267, 278, 293, 309,
336
D.
Dathan, a Jew, indicted in the Court of Honor for breaking the Peace. 296
Defiance, natural to the English. 106 Desires, Two most prevalent implanted in
us by Nature. Page ^ Devotion, the Pleasure and Dignity of it. ^ -- The false
Pretenders to it. ^ -- The Pleasure of it, as represented by Dr. South. ^ Diana
Forecast, her Letter to Mr. Bickerstaff. ^ Dissimulation distinguished from
Simulation. ^ Distaff (Jenny), her Apology for the Sex. ^ Downs, his Letter to
Mr. Bickerstaff. ^ Dozers, who. ^ Dramatists unskilful, the ill Effects of them
in the World. ^ Drinking, a Dissertation upon it. ^ -- The Viciousness of it.
ibid. etc. -- A Proviso against Drunkards in the Offices when Policies are
drawn upon Lives. ^ Drunkards die by their own Hand. Ibid D'Urfey, the Lyrick
Poet, mistaken in a Dedication. ^
E.
Enters sacrifice all their Senses and Understanding to their Appetites. 71
Education, a Letter to Mr. Bickerstaff concerning it. 196 -- The wrong
Education of the Female Sex. 259 -- A Proposal to reform it. 260 Elbow-Chair,
where proposed to be provided. 352 -- And for what Uses. ibid. Elliot, Master
of St. James's Coffee-house, his Request to the Censor. 54 -- Granted upon
Conditions. ibid. -- His Project in relation to the Drawing of the Lottery.
ibid. and 59 Envy often occasioned by Avarice. 169 -- How to be softened into
Emulation. ibid. Envy deforms every Thing. 170 Esteem distinguished from
Affection. 75 Examiner, reproved by the Censor. 217, etc.
F.
Familiarity, how distinguished. Page 161 Fardingale (Lady), her Advertisement.
244 Fashion, the Absurdity of it, when too strictly followed. 103 Feasts
considered. 70 Female Library proposed for the Improvement of the Sex. 260
Flatterers, few good ones. 84 -- The Qualities of an accomplished Flatterer,
ibid. -- The true Meaning of the Word. 85 -- In what Manner distingush'd from a
Coxcomb. 87 Flavia, her Jars with her Daughter. 77 Flavia, a truly fine Woman,
her Character. 103 Fools, the Way to make 'em Madmen. 86 Fortitude, what, as
described by Mr. Collier. 271 Fox-hunter, the Motives for his Hospitality. 57
Freemen, who their Superiors. 182 Friendship, when most manifeasted. 31 Frogs,
the Method used to plant them in Ireland. 206, etc.
G.
Gatty (Mrs.), her Character. 76 Good-Fortune, the ready Path to it. 59 Goodly
(Lady), her Fondness to her Children. 203 Grammar not rightly taught. 198 Great
Men, the Behavior of some of 'em to their Dependants. 31, etc. True Greatness
of Mind, wherein it consists. 62 Guicciardin the Historian, a prolix Author.
332 Gyges's Ring, the Use Mr. Bickerstaff has made of it. 236
H.
Heroic Virtue, wherein it consists. Page ^ Historical Paintings, the great
Advantage of them ^ Honor, the Seat of it. ^ -- A Court of Honor erected by
Mr. Bickerstaff ^ -- A Journal of that Court. 278, 293, 323, ^ Humphrey
Trelooby, his Complaint to the Censor. 230 Hunger, a Discourse on it. 70
I.
Jack Such-a-one, what sort of Men pass under that Title. 75 Jester, in what
manner to be distinguished from a Flatterer. 114 -- The richest generally the
best Jester. 160 Indenture of Marriage, drawn up by Mr. Bickerstaff. 46
Inquietude (natural), in what mauner to be cured. 56, etc. Jointures, the ill
Effects of them. 149, etc. Joseph, the Patriarch, his History. 193 Joshua
Fairlove, his Petition to Mr. Bickerstaff. 135 Journey, Mr. Bickerstaff's
Account of one to the Land's-End. 11, 12 -- His Inferences from it. ibid. etc.
Ithuriel (the Angel) makes a Present of his Spear to Mr. Bickerstaff. 211 --
The Use he put it to. ibid. etc.
L.
Law-Case, put to Mr. Bickerstaff. 4 -- His Answer. ibid. Letters to Isaac
Bickerstaff from Aminadab the Quaker. Page 2 -- From Downs the Prompter. 17 --
From an old Maid. 94, 105 -- From Plain English. 101 -- From J. L. 104 -- Upon
a Phrase in the Post-Man. 105 -- From Rebecca Midriffe. 116 -- From the Widow
Gimcrack. 141 -- From a Scold. 144 -- Another from Plain- English. 162 -- From
High-Church the Chaplain. 171 -- From an Almanack-Maker. 172 -- With a Present
of Wine. 187 -- From the Upholsterer. 188 -- From Ireland. 206 -- From B. B.
229 -- From Scoto Britannus. Ibid. -- From Pompey, a Black. 247 -- From a
Gentleman in the Country upon Drinking. 274 -- From a married Man and his Wife.
277 -- From a Chaplain. 288, 307 -- From Three Gentlemen, according to the new
Style. 305 -- From a Gentleman in Kent. 306 -- From a young Lady, addressed to
by many Lovers. 306 -- From Q. Z. upon Mr. B.'s Account of Nova Zembla. 308 --
From Th. Cl. 309 -- From Ebenezer, in Dorsetshire. 355 -- From Felix
Tranquillus. 359 -- From Almeira. 253 Lilly (Charles), his Reports. 266
Linnen-drapers of Westminster, their Petition to the Censor. 117 Literature,
the proper Effects of it. 37 Lloyd's Coffee-house, Proposals sent from thence
to Mr. Bickerstaff. 350 Long Heads, who. Page ^ Lordships, an Apellation on
what Occasions proper. 66 Lotius, his unequal Conduct. 99 Love of a Woman
inseparable from some Esteem of her. 78 Lucia, her Behavior to her Mother. 77
Lie, a pernicious Monosyllable. 297 Lysander, his Complaint to Mr. Bickerstaff.
113
M.
Makebate (Eliz.), indicted in the Court of Honor. 309 -- Her Punishment. 310
Male-Coquet, his Bed-Equipage. 237 Mandevil (Sir John), some of his Remains.
283 Marriage-Settlements, by whom first introduced. 43 -- The ill Consequences
of them. 150 -- A Regulation proposed. 153 Marriage-Life, the Caprices, and
Hazards attending it. 12, 42 -- Some Reasons for it. 44, 150 Morn, described by
Milton. 331 Mountebanks, their Artifices to ensnare the Vulgar. 224
N.
Nab, the Haberdasher of Hats, his Petition to the Censor. 361 Newman
(Richard), his Indictment in the Court of Honor. 297 Night, longer formerly in
this Island than at present. 328 Noses, a Dissertation upon them. 313
O.
Old Age, wherein delighted. 79 Old Bachelor, some Account of that Play. 16
P.
Palamede, his Adventure. Page 38 Pantomime, a Rule to be observed by him, and
a Liberty allowed him in Conversation. 352 Parents, their Conduct in general in
marrying their Children. 42, 43 -- Their unequal Love to them. 201 -- The
Folly, and Injustice of it. 203, 205 -- Wherein they may be allowed to be
particular. 202 Party, all Parties composed of Two Sorts of Men. 109 -- The
present Prevalence of Party. 190 Patience Gentle, her Letter to Mr. Ralph
Incense. 363 Patrick (St.), a great Destroyer of Frogs. 206 Patrons, their
Behavior to their Dependants. 29, etc. Peter Plumb, Merchant, indicted in the
Court of Honor. 293 -- His Defense. 294 -- And Sentence. 295, 296 Philosophy,
the Business of it. 168 Physic, observed by Mr. Bickerstaff. 225 Pictures, the
true Use of them. 90 Piety, the perfect Pleasure arising from it. 100 Pinners,
a Treatise of them recommended to the modern Head-Dressers. 102 A Platonist,
the Fore-Woman of the Jury in the Court of Honor. 279 Plainness of Dress the
best. 102 Poetry, the Foundation of it. 222 Polypragmon, his Character. 6, 7
Pyrrhus, reproved by a Philosopher. 56 Pythagoras, his Apothegm. 112
Q.
Quacks, their Artifices. 222 Great Friends to the Upholders. ^ Quality, what
the most essential to a Statesman. Page 24.
R.
Ralph Shallow, a fine Speaker. 34, 35 Retired Life. 261 Ridicule, the ill
Effects of it. 134 Riding, a wholesome Exercise. 258 Rigid, one of the
Compositions in all Parties. 109 -- Described. ibid. 110
S.
Satyr, if just, must be directed by Goodnature. 231 -- The ordinary Subjects
for Satyr. 232 -- The Vain Pretenders to it. 233 Scudamore (Sir), his
Adventure. 19, etc. Self-Regard, when most contemptible. 1 Settlements, the ill
Effects of them. 149, etc. Scholar, the many Pretenders to that Title. 36
Scolding, a great Enemy to Women's Features. 122 -- What usually makes Women
Scolds. 123 -- A Scold compared to a Witch. 126 -- A Remedy for this Vice. 145
Screnading, a silly Custom, reproved by the Censor. 146, 147 Shield of Love,
obtained by Sir Scudamore. 20 Shilling, the Adventures of it. 261 Show in
Germany, representing in Wax-work all the Religions in Great Britain. 298 -- A
Description of it. 299 Simulation distinguished from Dissimulation. 105
Slattern, described in her Bed. 236 Snuff, how, and when it ought to be
offered. 36 South (Dr.) quoted by the Censor. 72, 100 State Weather-Glass, the
Description and Use of it. 111 Story-tellers reproved. 333 Style, deprev'd by
our Modern Writers. Page 179 Supple, a Compound in all Parties. 109
T.
Tables of Respect and Intimacy. 115 Talkativeness, a Sign of Folly and
Ill-breeding. 240 Temple of Love, described out of Spencer. 20 Tirewomen, their
Ignorance. 102 Tom Courtly, his great Knowledge. 68 Tom Mercet, his Manner of
Conversation. 132, 133 Tom Springly, wherein an Hypocrite. 107 Tom Trueman
entered among the Heroes of Domestic Life. 109 Town-Lady, reproved by Mr.
Bickerstaff. 92 Town-Orators, their great Volubility. 240 Tradesman, when
deserving the Name of Gentleman. 81 Trusty, his Visits to Two Widows. 341
Tulips, the Variety of Names given them. 129
V.
Virginity, how properly to be dated. 94 Virtuoso's, their ridiculous Studies.
118 -- A Virtuoso's Will. 119, 120 Understanding (Good), a necessary Part of a
Scholar. 36 Urbanus, his great Condescension. 241
W.
Watch described, as invented by Mr. Bickerstaff. 335 Wine to whom, and when to
be allowed. 276 Wit Adventitious. 271 Wits professed, silly troublesome
Fellows. 131 Women have not those favorable Allowances Men give themselves.
Page 51 -- Their common Failing. 254
Y.
Young (Margery), her Life and Adventures. 163
FINIS.

