PHILOSOPHY. A POEM Addressed to the LADIES Who attend Mr. BOOTH's LECTURES.

By the BRICKLAYER.

DUBLIN: Printed by and for S. POWELL, in Crane-Lane.

M DCC XLVI.

PHILOSOPHY, A POEM.
TO Science sacred, Muse, exalt thy Lays,
Science of Nature and to Nature's Praise:
Attend ye Virtuous, and rejoice to know
Her mystic Labors, and her Laws below;
Her ways above with curious Eyes explore,
Admire her Treasures, and her God adore.
BEHOLD ye FAIR how radiant Colors glow,
What dies the Rose, what paints the Heavenly Bow,
The purpling Shade, the rich refracted Ray,
And all the bright Diversity of Day.
Lo! here the Magne^'s Magic charms the Sight,
And fills the Soul with Wonder and Delight,
In her coy Nature turns her Face aside,
And mocks the enquiring Sages learned Pride,
Here less reserved she shows her plainer Course
In mutual Contest of Elastic Force,
Saving each vital Frame from crushing Fate,
For inward Act sustains external Weight.
Which holds reciprocal in balanced Strife,
The Shield of Nature, and the Fence of Life:
The ambient Atmosphere embracing all
The wide Circumf'rence of this circling Ball,
The Vehicle of Life to those that breath
On solid Land, or liquid Waves beneath;
The Universe pervading, filling Space,
And like its Maker unconfined to Place.
WHAT pleasing Fervours in my Bosom rise,
What fixed Attention and what deep Surprise,
When quick as Thought the electric Vigor springs,
Swifter than Lightning on its rapid Wings,
A Flight so instant to no Space confined,
Eludes Ideas, and outstrips the Mind?
Lo! to the Brain the bright Effluvium flies,
Glows in the Heart and flashes from the Eyes:
Here the fond Youth wi^h ^^p^^^'d Eye shall gaze,
And proudly warm, enjoy the extatic Blaze:
See the proud Nymph partake his Flame by Turns,
See! like a Seraph, how she smiles and burns.
Contracted here by wondrous Art is seen
A boundless System in a small Machine;
Here human Skill to proud Perfection brought,
The mortal Mimic of Omnific Thought,
The Almighty's Model to the Mind conveys,
The Universe, and all it is Powers displays:
How wander Planets, how revolves the Year,
The Moon how changes, and how Comets glare.
The Sun's bright Globe illumes the unmeasured Space,
While waiting Worlds enjoy by Turns his Face,
From his bright Presence drink enlivening Rays,
From him their Seasons gain, from him their Days;
See Wisdom here her brightest Beams display,
To fill the Soul with philosophic Day,
The Springs unfolding of mechanic Laws,
Tracing through known Effects the eternal Cause,
Whose powerful Fiat* whose creative Will
First founded Nature, and supports her still.
Here godlike NEWTON's all capacious Mind,
(The Glory and the Guide of human Kind)
Shows wedded Worlds far distant Worlds embrace
With mutual Bands, yet keep their destined Space,
Roll endless Measures through the etherial Plain,
Linked by the social strong attractive Chain,
Whose latent Springs exert all Nature's Force,
Inwrap the Poles, and point the Stars their Course.
Mysterious Energy! stupendous Theme!
Immediate Mover of this boundless Frame,
Who can thy Essence, or thy Power explain?
The Sons of Wisdom seek thy Source in vain;
Thyself invisible, yet seen thy Laws,
This goodly Fabric thy Effect, and GOD thy Cause.
THRICE happy few who wisely here attend
The Voice of Science, and her Cause befriend:
Let others, heedless of their youthful Prime,
Squander on empty Toys their fleeting Time;
It Is yours with Reason's searching Eye to view
Great Nature's Laws, and trace her winding Clue;
Behold her Book the opening Page expand,
Filled with the Wonders of her Maker's Hand,
In awful Characters, which clearly shine,
Worthy of Wisdom, and of Power divine.
Peruse GOD's Ways, his perfect Workings trace,
In Nature's Mirror shines his heavenly Face.
To you, bright Nymphs, where Goodness charms us most,
The Pride of Nature, and Creation's Boast,
To you Philosophy enamored flies,
And triumphs in the Plaudit of your Eyes.
When Worth like yours her sapient Throne sustains,
The Queen of Science with true Splendor reigns;
By Beauty aided she extends her Sway,
And, won by you, Mankind glad Homage pay.
FINIS.

