ODES ON Various Subjects.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
EURIPIDES in Alceste. By JOSEPH WARTON, B. A. of Oriel College, Oxon.

LONDON: Printed for R. DODSLEY, at Tully's Head in Pall Mall; and sold by M.
COOPER in Paternoster Row. M.DCC.XLVI.

Advertisement.
THE Public has been so much accustomed of late to didactic Poetry alone, and
Essays on moral Subjects, that any work where the imagination is much indulged,
will perhaps not be relished or regarded. The author therefore of these pieces
is in some pain least certain austere critics should think them too fanciful
and descriptive. But as he is convinced that the fashion of moralizing in verse
has been carried too far, and as he looks upon Invention and Imagination to be
the chief faculties of a Poet, so he will be happy if the following Odes may be
looked upon as an attempt to bring back Poetry into its right channel.

ODES ON VARIOUS SUBJECTS.
ODE I.
To FANCY.
O Parent of each lovely Muse,
Thy spirit over my soul diffuse,
Over all my artless songs preside,
My footsteps to thy temple guide,
To offer at thy turf-built shrine,
In golden cups no costly wine,
No murdered fatling of the flock,
But flowers and honey from the rock.
O Nymph, with loosely-flowing hair,
With buskined leg, and bosom bare,
Thy waist with myrtle-girdle bound,
Thy brows with Indian feathers crowned,
Waving in thy snowy hand
An all-commanding magic wand,
Of power to bid fresh gardens blow
'Midst chearless Lapland's barren snow,
Whose rapid wings thy flight convey
Through air, and over earth and sea,
While the vast, various landscape lies
Conspicuous to thy piercing eyes;
O lover of the desert, hail!
Say, in what deep and pathless vale,
Or on what hoary mountain's side,
'Midst falls of water you reside,
'Midst broken rocks, a rugged scene,
With green and grassy dales between,
'Midst forests dark of aged oak,
Never echoing with the woodman's stroke,
Where never human art appeared,
Nor even one straw-rooft cott was reared,
Where NATURE seems to sit alone,
Majestic on a craggy throne;
Tell me the path, sweet wanderer, tell,
To thy unknown sequestered cell,
Where woodbines cluster round the door,
Where shells and moss o'erlay the floor,
And on whose top an hawthorn blows,
Amid whose thickly-woven boughs,
Some nightingale still builds her nest,
Each evening warbling thee to rest;
Then lay me by the haunted stream
Wrapped in some wild, poetic dream,
In converse while methinks I rove
With SPENSER through a fairy grove;
Till suddenly awoke, I hear
Strange whispered music in my ear,
And my glad soul in bliss is drowned,
By the sweetly-soothing sound!
Me, Goddess, by the right hand lead,
Sometimes through the yellow mead,
Where JOY and white-rob'd PEACE resort,
And VENUS keeps her festive court,
Where MIRTH and YOUTH each evening meet,
And lightly trip with nimble feet,
Nodding their lilly-crowned heads,
Where LAUGHTER rose-lip'd HEBE leads;
Where ECHO walks steep hills among,
Listening to the shepherd's song:
Or sometimes in thy fiery car
Transport me to the rage of war;
There whirl me over the hills of slain,
Where Tumult and Destruction reign;
Where mad with pain, the wounded steed
Tramples the dying and the dead;
Where giant Terror stalks around,
With sullen joy surveys the ground,
And pointing to the ensanguin'd field,
Shakes his dreadful Gorgon-shield!
Then guide me from this horrid scene
To high-archt walks and alleys green,
Where lovely LAURA walks, to shun
The fervors of the midday sun;
The pangs of absence, O remove,
For thou can place me near my love,
Can fold in visionary bliss,
And let me think I steal a kiss,
While her ruby lips dispense
Luscious nectar's quintessence!
When young-ey'd SPRING profusely throws
From her green lap the pink and rose,
When the soft turtle of the dale,
To SUMMER tells her tender tale,
When AUTUMN cooling caverns seeks,
And stains with wine his jolly cheeks,
When WINTER, like poor pilgrim old,
Shakes his silver beard with cold,
At every season let my ear
Thy solemn whispers, FANCY, hear.
O warm, enthusiastic maid,
Without thy powerful, vital aid,
That breathes an energy divine,
That gives a soul to every line,
Never may I strive with lips profane
To utter an unhallowed strain,
Nor dare to touch the sacred string,
Save when with smiles thou bid'st me sing.
O hear our prayer, O hither come
From thy lamented SHAKESPEARE'S tomb,
On which thou love to sit at eve,
Musing over your darling's grave;
O queen of numbers, once again
Animate some chosen swain,
Who filled with unexhausted fire,
May boldly smite the sounding lyre,
Who with some new, unequalled song,
May rise above the rhyming throng,
Over all our listening passions reign,
Overwhelm our souls with joy and pain,
With terror shake, with pity move,
Rouse with revenge, or melt with love.
O deign to attend his evening walk,
With him in groves and grottos talk;
Teach him to scorn with frigid art
Feebly to touch the unraptur'd heart;
Like lightning, let his mighty verse
The bosom's inmost foldings pierce;
With native beauties win applause,
Beyond cold critic's studied laws:
O let each Muse's fame increase,
O bid BRITANNIA rival GREECE!
ODE II.
To LIBERTY.
O Goddess, on whose steps attend
PLEASURE and laughter-loving HEALTH,
White-mantled PEACE with olive-wand,
Young JOY, and diamond-sceptred WEALTH,
Blithe PLENTY with her loaded horn,
With SCIENCE bright eyed as the morn,
In Britain, which for ages past
Has been thy choicest darling care,
Who made her wise, and strong, and fair,
May thy best blessings ever last.
For thee the pining prisoner mourns,
Deprived of food, of mirth, of light;
For thee pale slaves to galleys chained,
That ply tough oars from morn to night;
Thee the proud Sultan's beauteous train,
By eunuchs guarded, weep in vain,
Tearing the roses from their locks;
And Guinea's captive kings lament,
By christian lords to labor sent,
Whipped like the dull, unfeeling ox.
Inspired by thee, deaf to sond nature's cries,
Stern BRUTUS, when Rome's genius loudly called,
Gave her the matchless filial sacrifice,
Unable to behold her power enthralled!
And he of later age, but equal fame,
Dared stab the tyrant, though he loved the friend;
How burnt the Leonidas.
Spartan with warm patriot-flame,
In thy great cause his valorous life to end!
How burst GUSTAVUS from the Swedish mine!
Like light from chaos dark, eternally to shine.
When heaven to all thy joys bestows,
And graves upon our hearts -- BE FREE --
Shall coward man those joys resign,
And dare reverse this great decree?
Submit him to some idol-king,
Some selfish, passion-guided thing,
Abhorring man, by man abhorred,
Around whose throne stands trembling DOUBT,
Whose jealous eyes still roll about,
And MURDER with his reeking sword?
Where trampling TYRANNY with FATE,
And black REVENGE gigantic goes,
Hark, how the dying infants shriek,
How hopeless age is sunk in woes!
Fly, mortals, from that fated land,
Though rivers roll over golden sand;
Though birds in shades of cassia sing,
Harvests and fruits spontaneous rise,
No storms disturb the smiling skies,
And each soft breeze rich odours bring.
BRITANNIA, watch! -- remember peerless ROME,
Her high-tow'r'd head dashed meanly to the ground;
Remember, freedom's guardian, GRECIA'S doom,
Whom weeping the despotic Turk has bound:
May never thy oak-crown'd hills, rich meads and downs,
(Fame, virtue, courage, property, forgot)
Thy peaceful villages, and busy towns,
Be doomed some death-dispensing tyrant's lot;
On deep foundations may thy freedom stand,
Long as the surge shall lash thy sea-encircled land.
ODE III.
To HEALTH.
Written on a Recovery from the SMALLPOX.
O Whether with laborious clowns
In meads and woods thou love to dwell,
In noisy merchant-crouded towns,
Or in the temperate Brachman's cell;
Who from the meads of Ganges' fruitful flood,
Wet with sweet dews collects his flowery food;
In Bath or in Montpellier's plains,
Or rich Bermud s' balmy isle,
Or the cold North, whose fur-clad swains
Never saw the purple Autumn smile,
Who over alps of snow, and deserts drear,
By twinkling starlight drive the flying deer;
O lovely queen of mirth and ease,
Whom absent, beauty, banquets, wine,
Wit, music, pomp, nor science please,
And kings on ivory couches pine,
Nature's kind nurse, to whom by gracious heaven
To sooth the pangs of toilsome life it is given;
To aid a languid wretch repair,
Let pale-ey'd Grief thy presence fly,
The restless demon gloomy Care,
And meagre Melancholy die;
Drive to some lonely rock the giant Pain,
And bind him howling with a triple chain!
O come, restore my aching sight,
Yet let me not on LAURA gaze,
Soon must I quit that dear delight,
O'erpower'd by Beauty's piercing rays;
Support my feeble feet, and largely shed
Thy oil of gladness on my fainting head:
How nearly had my spirit past,
Till stopped by METCALF'S skilful hand,
To Death's dark regions wide and wast,
And the black river's mournful strand;
Or to those vales of joy, and meadows blessed,
Where sages, heroes, patriots, poets rest;
Where MARO and MUSAEUS sit
Listening to MILTON'S loftier song,
With sacred silent wonder smit;
While, monarch of the tuneful throng,
HOMER in rapture throws his trumpet down,
And to the Briton gives his amaranthine crown.
ODE IV.
To SUPERSTITION.
HENCE to some Convent's gloomy isles,
Where cheerful daylight never smiles,
Tyrant, from Albion haste, to slavish Rome;
There by dim tapers' livid light,
At the still solemn hours of night,
In pensive musings walk over many a sounding tomb.
Thy clanking chains, thy crimson steel,
Thy venomed darts, and barbarous wheel,
Malignant fiend, bear from this isle away,
Nor dare in error's fetters bind
One active, sreeborn, British mind,
That strongly strives to spring indignant from thy sway.
Thou bad'st grim MOLOCH'S frowning priest
Snatch screaming infants from the breast,
Regardless of the frantic mother's woes;
Thou led'st the ruthless sons of Spain
To wondering India's golden plain,
From deluges of blood where tenfold harvests rose.
But lo! how swiftly art thou fled,
When REASON lifts his radiant head;
When his resounding, awful voice they hear,
Blind IGNORANCE thy doting sire,
Thy daughter, trembling FEAR, retire;
And all thy ghastly train of terrors disappear.
So by the Magi hailed from far,
When PHOEBUS mounts his early car,
The shrieking ghosts to their dark charnels flock;
The full-gorg'd wolves retreat, no more
The prowling lionesses roar,
But hasten with their prey to some deep-cavern'd rock.
Hail then, ye friends of Reason hail,
Ye foes to Myst'ry's odious veil,
To Truth's high temple guide my steps aright,
Where CLARKE and WOOLASTON reside,
With LOCK and NEWTON by their side,
While PLATO sits above enthroned in endless light.
ODE V.
To a GENTLEMAN upon his Travels through Italy.
WHILE I with fond officious care,
For you my chorded shell prepare,
And not unmindful frame an humble lay,
Where shall this verse my CYNNTHIO find,
What scene of art now charms your mind,
Say, on what sacred spot of Roman ground you stray?
Perhaps you cull each valley's bloom,
To strew over VIRGIL'S laurell'd tomb,
Whence often at midnight echoing voices sound,
For at that hour of silence, there
The shades of ancient bards repair,
To join in choral song his hallowed urn around:
Or wander in the cooling shade
Of Sabine bowers where HORACE strayed,
And often repeat in eager thought elate,
(As round in classic search you trace
With curious eye the pleasing place)
^ This fount he loved, and there beneath that oak he sat.
How longs my raptured breast with you
Great RAPHAEL'S magic strokes to view,
To whose blessed hand each charm the Graces gave!
Whence each fair form with beauty glows
Like that of VENUS when she rose,
Naked in blushing charms from OCEAN'S hoary wave.
As often by roving fancy led
To smooth CLITUMNUS' banks you tread,
What awful thoughts his fabled waters raise!
While the low-thoughted swain, whose flock
Grazes around, from some steep rock
With vulgar disregard his mazy course surveys.
Now through the ruined domes my Muse
Your steps with eager flight pursues,
That their cleft piles on TYBER'S plains present,
Among whose hollow-winding cells
Forlorn and wild ROME'S GENIUS dwells,
His golden scepter broke, and purple mantle rent.
Often to those mossy mouldering walls,
Those caverns dark, and silent halls,
Let me repair by midnight's paly fires,
There muse on Empire's fallen state,
And frail Ambition's hapless fate,
While more than mortal thoughts the solemn scene inspires.
What lust of power from the cold North
Could tempt those Vandal-robbers sorth,
Fair ITALY, thy vine-clad vales to wast?
Whose hands profane, with hostile blade,
Thy story'd temples dared invade,
And all thy Parian seats of Attic art defaced!
They, weeping ART in fetters bound,
And gored her breast with many a wound,
And veiled her charms in clouds of thickest night;
Sad POESY, much-injur'd maid,
They drove to some dim convent's shade,
And quenched in gloomy mist her lamp's resplendent light.
There long she wept to darkness doomed,
'Till COSMO'S hand her light relum'd,
That once again in lofty TASSO shone,
Since has sweet SPENSER caught her fire,
She breathed once more in MILTON'S lyre,
And warmed the soul divine of SHAKESPEARE, fancy's son.
Nor she, mild queen, will cease to smile
On her BRITANNIA'S much-loved isle,
Where these her best, her favorite Three were born,
While The author of the Pleasures of Imagination.
THEREON warbles Grecian strains,
Or polished DODINGTON remains,
The drooping train of art^ to cherish and adorn.
ODE VI.
Against DESPAIR.
FArewell thou dimpled cherub JOY,
Thou rose-crown'd, ever-smiling boy,
Wont thy sister HOPE to lead
To dance along the primrose mead!
No more, bereft of happy hours,
I seek thy lute-resounding bowers,
But to yon' ruined tower repair,
To meet the god of Groans, DESPAIR;
Who, on that ivy-darken'd ground,
Still takes at eve his silent round,
Or sits yon' new-made grave beside,
Where lies a frantic suicide:
While laboring sighs my heart strings break,
Thus to the sullen power I speak:
" Haste with thy poisoned dagger, haste,
" To pierce this sorrow-laden breast!
" Or lead me at the dead of night,
" To some sea-beat mountain's height,
" Whence with headlong haste I Will leap
" To the dark bosom of the deep;
" Or show me far from human eye,
" Some cave to muse in, starve and die,
" No weeping friend or brother near,
" My last fond, fault'ring words to hear.
'Twas thus with weights of woes oppressed,
I sought to ease my bruised breast;
When straight more gloomy grew the shade,
And lo! a tall majestic maid!
Her limbs, not delicately fair,
Robust, and of a martial air;
She bore of steel a polished shield,
Where highly-sculptur'd I beheld
Socrates.
The Athenian martyr smiling stand,
The baleful goblet in his hand;
Sparkled her eyes with lively flame,
And PATIENCE was the Seraph's name;
Sternly she looked, and stern began --
" Thy sorrows cease, complaining man,
" Rouse thy weak soul, appease thy moan,
" Soon are the clouds of sadness gone;
" Though now in Grief's dark groves you walk,
" Where griesly fiends around you stalk,
" Beyond, a blissful city lies,
" Far from whose gates each anguish flies:
" Take thou this shield, which once of yore
" ULYSSES and ALCIDES wore,
" And which in later days I gave
" To REGULUS and RALEIGH brave,
" In exile or in dungeon drear
" Their mighty minds could banish fear;
" Thy heart no tenfold woes shall feel,
" 'Twas VIRTUE tempered the rough steel,
" And, by her heavenly fingers wrought,
" To me the precious present brought.
ODE VII.
To EVENING.
HAIL meek-ey'd maiden, clad in sober gray,
Whose soft approach the weary woodman loves,
As homeward bent to kiss his prattling babes,
He jocund whistles through the twilight groves.
When PHOEBUS sinks behind the gilded hills,
You lightly over the misty meadows walk,
The drooping daisies bathe in honey-dews,
And nurse the nodding violet's slender stalk:
The panting Dryads, that in day's fierce heat
To inmost bowers and cooling caverns ran,
Return to trip in wanton evening-dance,
Old SYLVAN too returns, and laughing PAN.
To the deep wood the clamorous rooks repair,
Light skims the swallow over the watery scene,
And from the sheep-cotes, and fresh-furrow'd field,
Stout plowmen meet to wrestle on the green.
The swain that artless sings on yonder rock,
His supping sheep and lengthening shadow spies,
Pleased with the cool, the calm, refreshful hour,
And with hoarse hummings of unnumber'd flies.
Now every passion sleeps; desponding Love,
And pining Envy, ever-restless Pride,
An holy calm creeps over my peaceful soul,
Anger and mad Ambition's storms subside.
O modest EVENING, often let me appear
A wandering votary in thy pensive train,
Listening to every wildly-warbling throat
That fills with farewell notes the dark'ning plain.
ODE VIII.
To a FOUNTAIN.
Imitated from HORACE, Ode XIII, Book III.
YE waves, that gushing fall with purest stream,
Blandusian Fount! to whom the products sweet
Of richest vines belong,
And fairest flowers of spring;
To thee, a chosen victim will I slay,
A kid, who glowing in lascivious youth
Just blooms with budding horn,
And with vain thought elate
Yet destines future war: but ah! too soon
His reeking blood with crimson shall enrich
Thy pure translucent flood,
And tinge thy crystal clear.
Thy sweet recess the sun in midday hour
Can never invade, thy streams the labored ox
Refresh with cooling draught,
And glad the wandering herds.
Thy name shall shine with endless honors graced,
While on my shell I sing the nodding oak,
That over thy cavern deep
Waves his embowering head.
ODE IX.
To the NIGHTINGALE.
O Thou, that to the moonlight vale
Warblest often thy plaintive tale,
What time the village-murmurs cease,
And the still eve is hushed to peace,
When now no busy sound is heard
CONTEMPLATION'S favorite bird!
Chauntress of night, whose amorous song
First heard the tufted groves among,
Warns wanton MABBA to begin
Her revels on the circled green,
Whenever by MEDITATION led
I nightly seek some distant mead;
A short repose of cares to find,
And sooth my love-distracted mind,
O fail not then, sweet PHILOMEL,
Thy sadly-warbled woes to tell;
In sympathetic numbers join
Thy pangs of luckless love with mine!
So may no swain's rude hand infest
Thy tender young, and rob thy nest;
Nor ruthless fowler's guileful snare
Lure thee to leave the fields of air,
No more to visit vale or shade,
Some barbarous virgin's captive made.
ODE X.
On the SPRING.
To a LADY.
LO! SPRING arrayed in primrose-colour'd robe,
Fresh beauties sheds on each enlivened scene,
With showers and sunshine chears the smiling globe,
And mantles hill and vale in glowing green.
All nature feels her vital heat around,
The pregnant glebe now bursts with foodful grain,
With kindly warmth she opes the frozen ground,
And with new life informs the teeming plain.
She calls the fishes from their ouzy beds,
And animates the deep with genial love,
She bids the herds bound sportive over the meads,
And with glad songs awakes the joyous grove.
No more the glaring tiger roams for prey,
All-powerful Love subdues his savage soul,
To find his spotted mate he darts away,
While gentler thoughts the thirst of blood control.
But ah! while all is warmth and soft desire,
While all around SPRING'S cheerful influence own,
You feel not, AMORET, her quickening fire,
To SPRING'S kind heat of all a foe alone!
ODE XI.
To a LADY who hates the Country.
NOW SUMMER, daughter of the Sun,
Over the gay fields comes dancing on,
And earth overflows with joys;
Too long in routs and drawing-rooms,
The tasteless hours my fair consumes
'Midst folly, flattery, noise.
Come hear mild ZEPHYR bid the rose
Her balmy-breathing buds disclose,
Come hear the falling rill,
Observe the honey-loaded be,
The beech-embower'd cottage see,
Beside yon' sloping hill.
By health awoke at early morn,
We'll brush sweet dews from every thorn,
And help unpen the fold;
Hence to yon' hollow oak we'll stray,
Where dwelt, as village-fables say,
An holy DRUID old.
Come wildly rove through desert dales,
To listen how lone nightingales
In liquid lays complain;
Adieu the tender, thrilling note,
That pants in MONTICELLI'S throat,
And HANDEL'S stronger strain.
" Insipid pleasures these! you cry,
" Must I from dear Assemblies fly,
" To see rude peasants toil?
" For Opera's listen to a bird?
" Shall Arcadia.
SYDNEY'S fables be preferred
" To my sagacious Alluding to those Ladies who have left their Novels and
Romances for the profound study of Mr. HOYLE'S book on Whist.
HOYLE?
O falsely fond of what seems great,
Of purple pomp and robes of state,
And all life's tinsel glare!
Rather with humble violets bind,
Or give to wanton in the wind
Your length of sable hair.
Soon as you reach the rural shade,
Will MIRTH, the sprightly mountain-maid,
Your days and nights attend,
She Will bring fantastic SPORT and SONG,
Nor CUPID will be absent long,
Your true ally and friend.
ODE XII.
On the Death of (...)
NO more of mirth and rural joys,
The gay description quickly cloys,
In melting numbers, sadly slow,
I tune my altered strings to woe;
Attend, MELPOMENE, and with thee bring
Thy tragic lute, EUPHRANOR'S death to sing.
Fond will thou be his name to praise,
For often thou heard'st his skilful lays;
ISIS for him soft tears has shed,
She placed her ivy on his head;
Chose him, strict judge, to rule with steady reigns
The vigorous fancies of her listening swains.
With genius, wit, and science blessed,
Unshaken Honor armed his breast,
Bade him, with virtuous courage wise,
Malignant FORTUNE'S darts despise;
Him, even black ENVY'S venomed tongues commend,
As Scholar, Pastor, Husband, Father, Friend.
For ever sacred, ever dear,
O much-loved shade accept this tear;
Each night indulging pious woe,
Fresh roses on thy tomb I strew,
And wish for tender SPENSER'S moving verse,
Warbled in broken sobs over SYDNEY'S hearse,
Let me to that deep cave resort,
Where SORROW keeps her silent court,
For ever wringing her pale hands,
While dumb MISFORTUNE near her stands,
With downcast eyes the CARES around her wait,
And PITY sobbing sits before the gate.
Thus stretched upon his grave I sung,
When strait my ears with murmur rung,
A distant, deaf, and hollow sound
Was heard in solemn whispers round --
" Weep not for me, embath'd in bliss above,
" In the bright kingdoms blessed of joy and love.
ODE XIII.
On SHOOTING.
NYMPHS of the forests, that young oaks protect
From noxious blasts, and the blue thunder's dart,
O how securely might ye dwell
In Britain's peaceful shades
Far from grim wolves, or tiger's midnight roar,
Or crimson-crested serpent's hungry hiss,
But that our savage swains pollute
With murder your retreats!
How often your birds have undeserving bled,
Linnet, or warbling thrush, or moaning dove,
Pleasant with gayly-glist'ring wings,
Or early-mounting lark!
While in sweet converse in a round you sit
On the green turf, or in the woodbine-bower,
If chance the thundering Gun be heard,
To grots and caves ye run,
Fearful as when LODONA fled from PAN,
Or DAPHNE panting from enamored SOL,
Or fair SABRINA to the flood
Her snowy beauties gave:
When will dread Man his Tyrannies forego,
When cease to bathe his barbarous hands in blood,
His subjects helpless, harmless, weak,
Delighting to destroy?
More pleasant far to shield their tender young
From churlish swains, that violate their nests,
And, wandering morn or eve, to hear
Their welcome to the Spring.
ODE XIV.
To SOLITUDE.
THOU, that at deep dead of night
Walk'st forth beneath the pale moon's light,
In robe of flowing black arrayed,
While cypress-leaves thy brows o'ershade;
Listening to the crowing cock,
And the distant-sounding clock;
Or sitting in thy cavern low,
Do hear the bleak winds loudly blow,
Or the hoarse death-boding owl,
Or village maistiff's wakeful howl,
While through thy melancholy room
A dim lamp casts an awful gloom;
Thou, that on the meadow green,
Or daisy'd upland art not seen,
But wandering by the dusky nooks,
And the pensive-falling brooks,
Or near some rugged, herbless rock,
Where no shepherd keeps his flock!
Musing maid, to thee I come,
Hating the tradeful city's hum;
O let me calmly dwell with thee,
From noisy mirth and business free,
With meditation seek the skies,
This folly-fetter'd world despise!
FINIS.

