ANALECTS IN VERSE AND PROSE, CHIEFLY DRAMATICAL, SATIRICAL, AND PASTORAL.

VOL. I.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR P. SHATWELL, OPPOSITE DURHAM-YARD IN THE STRAND; J.
DODSLEY, PALL MALL; AND T. DAVIES, RUSSEL STREET, COVENT GARDEN. MDCCLXX.

TO CHARLES DUNSTER, ESQUIRE. OF ORIEL COLLEGE, OXFORD.
DEAR SIR,
THE indefatigable means you took to convince me of your friendship, by
promoting the following trifles, made me take the liberty of inscribing them to
you; for indeed, I had scarce hinted my intention, when you took the earliest
opportunity of procuring those essentials, which have proved the means of my
bringing them to light; I am perfectly convinced, that you have humanity enough
to overlook the too many imperfections you will meet with, if you should have
patience enough to read my little Analects; for from my connections in
business, and the attention that I am, from an innate affection, obliged to pay
my fireside, have made me, in some measure, more inattentive, than I should
have been; I have inserted many, I could have wished to erase; because I had
not time to finish many pieces which I had begun; and indeed, I was out in my
calculation, in what would furnish a couple of volumes, but yet determined, not
to extend it in appearance; I mean, not as is generally done on these
occasions, to give much paper and little printing; I often wished to have found
you at my elbow, when I have sent a proof to press, that you might have given a
polish to the many rude, and uncultivated passages I am afraid you will stammer
at. -- However, I shall trust to your candor and good sense, to make such
allowances, as you shall think necessary; and when I see you, I am sure you
will show so much the gentleman, as to whisper my errors to me, that no
assiduous critic may know there is a fault, through you, when he has not
capacity enough to find it out himself. -- But this is rather unnecessary, as I
am so circumstantially convinced of your friendship and esteem; for I always
perceived, on those occasions, that you seemed happy, rather to throw a veil
over an error in your friend, than expose it to the greedy ear of envy, for the
sake of self-ostentation, or the elevating plaudits of a select society.

I was once in hopes, that the Nut-brown Maid would have made its appearance on
the the stage, but Mr. GARRICK gave me so many sufficient reasons why it would
not do, (not altogether divesting it of merit) that I resigned my hopes with
pleasure, knowing, from the many material marks of friendship I have
experienced from that gentleman, if it had been perfectly calculated, he would
have given it the fairest chance in his power; therefore I printed it, hoping
it might afford some little entertainment in the closet. You was pleased some
time ago to send me a few corrections you had made, in what I had given you to
look over, but by some accident or other, I had the misfortune to lose them,
which was of no little concern to me, as what they were, have escaped my
remembrance, so that at least I am convinced, you will meet with the same
errors again; whence I thought it necessary to give you some reason, why I have
not adhered to your amendments; but if ever a future opportunity should offer,
on the like occasion, I will endeavor to be more careful.

SIR, I am, with the greatest respect and sincerity, your most obliged, and
humble servant, GEORGE SAVILLE CAREY.

CONTENTS TO VOL. I.
THE Nut-Brown Maid, an Opera of three Acts Page 1 Momus, a Criticism on the
Performers at the Theater in the Hay-market 93 The Victim, a Poem inscribed to
John Wilkes, Esquire. 109 Young Jockey of the Carron Side, set by Mr. Barthelemon
127 Wolly, a Scotch Song, set by Mr. Barthelemon 129 Celon, a Song, set by Mr.
Snow 130 A Catch 132 Patty of the Green, a Song 133 A Dialogue-Song between
Clody and Clara 134 An Epistle to a Friend in the Country Page 136 Verses on a
Distressed Family 138 On Mr. and Mrs. Prince's Birth-days 141 Epigram on Dr.
Weezle 143 An Elegy on the Death of Lord Eglington, in the manner of
Chevy-Chace 144 The Bird's Nest, a Fable 160 The Petticoat, a Political Song
162 The Peasant and the Ant, a Fable 164 The Pretty Maid of Chelmsford 167 An
Evening's Walk 169 An Epigram on Lord G -- 180
THE NUT-BROWN MAID.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
HENRY, a young Nobleman. EDWIN, a young Gentleman under missfortunes.
SIGHTLESS, a Country Justice. Clowns. ROBIN, ALLAN,
Jailor. Gentlemen of the Hunt. Constables. Forresters, Peasants, etc.
EMMA, beloved of Henry. AETHELIA, Henry's Sister. CELIA, her Attendant. Mrs.
SIGHTLESS. SUE.
THE NUT-BROWN MAID.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A Grove, with a prospect behind of a fine rural country; Emma, disguised as a
Sheperdess, sitting on a green bank under a tree; the curtain drawing up with
soft music, and Emma sings as she sits on the back of the stage. Emma. YE
secret shades, ye verdant plains,
Where peace her gentle sway maintains,
Whilst round her fair and tranquil throne,
No sighs are heard, no tears are shown;
But love and sweet content are seen,
And every face appears serene;
O let a maiden join thy train,
'Till happy with her banished swain.

SCENE II.
Enter Allan and Robin, listening to her singing. Allan. She is somewhere here
about, I Am sure.


Robin. And yonder she sits.


Allan. 'Slife, and so she does, and a charming lass she is -- Egad I Will to her.


Robin. Hold man, perhaps it is a fairy.


Allan. If she be, I don't care; I must change a word or two, be what she will.


Robin. You may if you please, for I go no further.

[ Emma sees them, and comes forward.
Allan. She Is flesh and blood I see by her steps: he that would run away from
such a fairy ought never to see such another -- pray, pretty maid, are you
married? -- hey! not speak? -- hum, I dad, she is sulky methinks? -- what may
she want now? -- hum, an husband I warrant; or perhaps she has got one, and
wants to be rid of 'm.


Robin. That is to say, she is either married against her will, or it is against
her will she is not married.


Allan. Pray, young woman, be'ant you well.


Emma. No indeed, yet I should be much better if you would do me one favor.


Robin and Allen. Aye, that we will, any thing you shall say.


Emma. But you will be sure, both of you, to keep your words.


Allan. Never doubt it, sweetheart, never doubt it.


Emma. Then you cannot do any thing that will please me more than to take
yourselves away.


Robin. Oh, oh, she can speak you find.


Allan. Wounds, she is 'stound me.


Emma. Why are ye not gone?


Robin. Aye, aye, come along; troth if you don't I Will tell Sue.


Allan. I don't care for that neither; I must break my word for once.


SONG.
Say, say, what you will,
I Will tarry here still,
My heart is entrapp'd in a snare;
Go, go, and tell Sue,
You Have naught else to do,
But stay here I will, I declare.

Emma. Aye, prithee do, and you will do well.


Allan. Edad then I Will follow, go where you will, my lass.


Emma. You had better go follow the plough.


Allan. Nay, nay, now, thou dost'nt think so, I am sure: come let us be better
acquainted.


Emma. Prithee, clod, begone; for thou wilt make thyself as hateful to me as thou
art troublesome.


SONG.
Hence, away, thou hateful clown,
Thou silly blockhead, hence:
Go seek some bumkin of thy own,
Like thee unknown to sense.
[Exit.
SCENE III.
Allan and Robin manet. Allan. Who could have thought so pretty a creature
could have been in such a passion.


Robin. Aye, she is a trimmer I warrant ye; there is many a fair face with a foul
tongue they say; you had better stick to poor Sue, if she knew you was here she
would be breaking her heart I suppose.


Allan. There Is no harm, man, in having two strings to one's bow; for when one
is too full of her airs I like to have another to fly to.


Robin. And yet you are mightily mift too when Sue happens to smile at any body
but yourself.

[Huntsmen and horns heard at a distance.
Allan. Hark! the hounds.


Robin. IN dad so there are, [hollows] hoick! hoick! hoick! hoo, hoo, by George
I Will be one in the chase.


Allan. So you may if you will, but I Will have a chase of my own; I Will after yon
pretty faced puss.


Robin. An you do, I Will tell Susan, mark that my lad.

[Exeunt Robin and Allan.
SCENE IV.
An open Plain. Enter Henry in a hunter's dress singing. What station on earth
such true pleasures can yield
As love in the grove, or the stag in the field:
When fatigued with the chase in the grove we repose,
And Dian her tribute to Cupid bestows.
Now to sair Emma, who knows not who I am, but believes me to be a banished
man: I have played upon her in disguise, and in a peasant's garb, made more
advancements in her good esteem than the gayest knight, or fopling of the
court, with all the glaring outside of success, who woo but with their clothes.

[An hollowing heard without. But yonder come some gentlemen of the hunt,
proclaiming by their shouts the pleasures of a well-spent day.


SCENE V.
Enter Huntsmen, etc. Joy to ye, gentlemen, the sport has been successful.


1st Huntsman. Thanks to you, Sir.


2d Huntsman. I think I never saw so fine a chase; there has been much danger
too.


Henry. The more the danger greater still the sport. I saw a rustic scouring
yonder cliff, and being eager in pursuit, unluckily he tript, and tumbled
headlong down, but fortunately for him he was received by the friendly stream
below, which broke his fall, that otherwise must have broke his neck.


Both Huntsmen. Ha! ha! ha! poor fellow.


1st Huntsman. If he had happened to have been in love, such a tumble might
have cured him. -- But come, my appetite is keen, I linger for refreshment,
let us toward home.


2d Huntsman. Your company will be a pleasure to us, Sir, if you are disposed
this way.


Henry. Sir, my disposition is to comply with every kind entreaty; the day is
on the decline, and I am far from home; my horse is at a cottage near at hand
-- this is my way, and should have been right glad if chance had made it yours.


1st Huntsman. Then take good care you meet not with a witch.


Henry. A witch!


2d Huntsman. Aye, but a lovely one, with many charms, and witches deal in
charms you know.


SONG.
Take care, good Sir, how you pass,
There Is danger, I assure you,
Should you meet the pretty lass
Perhaps she may allure you.
There is witchcraft in each eye,
No mortal can resist 'em;
Pouting lips of coral die,
Oh! how I could have kissed 'em.

Henry. I do not understand you; enchantment and witchcraft! what may you mean?


1st Huntsman. Why, Sir, I Will tell you: as we came along the skirts of this
wood, a lovely damsel, wrapped in thought, was walking to and fro beneath the
shade; now and then she would press her hand against her breast; then, with eyes
full of loveliness and tears, she would look around, sigh as if her gentle heart
would break, and of a sudden, cry, Oh, wretched me!


Henry. Of what appearance, pray?


2d Huntsman. She wore the habit of a shepherdess. We entreated the cause of
her distress; but she rebuked us for our pains with such a modest grace that we
retired.


Henry. Poor girl! a love affair perhaps?


1st Huntsman. I fancy so.


2d Huntsman. I wish I had been the happy object: I Would have given my fortune for
her love.


Henry. Then you might have had it, I dare say.


1st Huntsman. I imagine if we had persevered, a little patience might have
brought her to our purpose.


Henry. Not if she be really in love; reason will argue ineffectually, when
love is rooted in the heart.


SONG.
Reason to love is urged in vain,
No force can break his silken chain,
He reigns without control:
Unseen the God directs his dart,
But soon we feel the envenomed smart
Lie rankling in the soul.

2d Huntsman. Then we'll think no more of her: so good day to you, Sir; I Will go
and make love to a sirloin and a bowl of punch, and I warrant I make 'em submit.

[Exeunt Huntsmen singing one way, and Henry the other.
SCENE VI.
A Grove. Emma disconsolate. Emma. I seek, alas, in vain: Oh, my Henry, where
art thou hid? perhaps he is happy with my rival now: sure there is no pain like
love: What shall I do? I Have lost my way, fatigued and faint in a doubtful
search: hold, if I my mistake not, there is a village in my view; I Will even
thence and seek refreshment there.


SCENE VII.
Enter Allan. Allan. You see I Have overte'en you, sweetheart; I told you I would
follow you.


Emma. Was ever maid so wretched! I had no sooner promised myself a comfort,
but I am interrupted by a fool.


Allan. What be'ant you well yet?


Emma. Good clown leave me.


Allan. Clown, forsooth clown! [aside] I, I, I, am not a clown, sweetheart.


Emma. Then you're as simple.


Allan. If you was a little better acquainted with me you would not say so.


Emma. I am sure of it already. What would you have? Why do you follow me so?


Allan. Why I cannot help it, because I love you.


Emma. And for that I must fall in love with thee too? being the most frightful
of thy sex: if that don't rid me of him, I shall begin to pity him, lest he
should feel on my account what I for Henry feel. [Aside.]


Allan. Ah, I don't mind that though; you don't think so, I Am sure: you pretty
lasses like a deal of courting.


SONG.
You frown and look shy,
But I know not for why,
It Is only to try if I love:
Should I go away,
I know you would cry stay,
Ods niggars but I Will never move.
I know very well,
If you love you wont tell,
But smother with art your desire.
You may call me a fool,
And seem to be cool,
When your pretty dear heart is on fire.

[Enter Henry unseen] Henry. As I live it is my Emma in disguise: 'Sdeath, but
why is this rustic with her? Is it for him she came or me? I Will know. She shall
not see me yet, I will first turn myself to a wizzard; concealed in that I Will
sift the secret out.

[Exit.
Emma. Pray, good fellow, leave me; if thou do love me I Am sorry for it from
my soul, since my heart is another's, it is not in my power to love; I would be
thy friend in any thing else; but let me beg of thee never to mention love to
me again.


Allan. O but I will; I know you cannot help loving when you are a little better
acquainted with me; for I have often heard my granny say that two chumps that
had been a good many years together in our house, fell in love with one
another, and it was a hard matter to part them.


Emma. That is to say, should I be as great a log as thyself, I must of course
fall in love with thee, if there were nobody else in the world.


Allan. Hey! how is that? You puzzle me there too; I don't know what to make of
that saying; I never heard of it before in all my born days; Will you say it
again? I Will guess at it better; (I dad she talks better than Sue; she will be too
much for me if I don't take care). [Aside.


Emma. This looby teazes me to death; would to Heaven I could get rid of him;
his obstinacy makes me begin to fear him; I am perplexed when I think what I
have done! I dare not go home, and if I stay here I shall be ruined and
suspected: O my Henry, thy Emma's lost, a wanderer forlorn.


SONG.
O could my voice but reach thine ears;
Did thou but see these falling tears
Thou woulst not let me here complain
Or drop one single tear in vain.
Some friendly guardian lend me aid,
Direct a poor bewildered maid.
Tell me, O tell me, if you can,
Where I shall find my banished man.

Allan. I dad you are a main good singer; if thou sing'st much more in that
strain it will bewitch me; Sue cannot sing half so well: she can sing nothing
but,

[sings] As I trudged out one morning to Derry-down dale,
To eat a hot cake, and to drink some good ale,
I met with a maiden whose cheeks were as red,
As a sweet damask rose or a strawberry bed.
I learnt her to sing it though by the bye; can you sing it? It Is a good merry
song, if you knew it.


Emma. Pray thee go sing by thyself; I am not disposed for mirth just now: take
thyself away, good fellow, and some other time I may listen to thee.


Allan. Why that is kind too; but where shall I see you another time?


Emma. Why here perhaps, or hereabout.


Allan. But what will you give me for remembrance?


Emma. Any thing you shall ask that is in my power.


Allan. Done with you, done with you; give me a kiss -- it is a fair bargain.


Emma. What shall I do? I believe I must hold him my hand to get rid of him.
Why if thou will promise to go away directly thou shall kiss my hand.


Enter Henry in a conjurer's dress, seeing Allan kiss Emma's hand. Henry.
Torture! what do I see? Is it possible?


Emma. Heavens! Who is this? [Seeing Henry.


Allan. The devil I believe -- he is ugly enough -- don't be afraid -- he shall not
hurt thee.


Henry. Ye gentle pair fly not from me; be happy, I Will retire again rather than
disturb you, for lovers like to be by themselves.


Allan. Why that is true enough, old one; you are right there: I warrant you
have been in love in your time.


Henry. I have, and feel the pangs of it to this day.


Allan. Poor soul, poor soul.


Henry. Fair one I have something to impart to thee in private, and what
concerns thee nearly.


Allan. No, no, don't hear him, he is a wizzard; come away, sweetheart, come
away.


Henry. Clodpole hold thy peace.


Allan. Don't call me clodpole, an you do, I Will give you a clout.


Henry. Fair maid will you answer me one question?


Emma. Alas! I know not what to say.


Henry. Tell me then, do you not seek a banished man?


Emma. Heavens be witness, I do indeed!


Henry. Would intelligence on that head be welcome to thee?


Emma. My heart, my eyes, my ears are open to receive it; speak -- speak of him
forever.


Allan. Plague on's ugly face I say; I don't like 'im, he is bewitched the
pretty creature already.


Henry. As what I Am going to say requires secrecy, I must beg this swain to
retire a while 'till I have related my story; but if your affections are so
strongly rooted that you cannot bear a moment's separation, I will withdraw and
let it die with me.


Emma. No, rather talk forever, if Henry be thy theme; if thy story be retarded
by this fellow's presence, would to Heaven I had a giant's strength that I
might spurn him from my sight; for like an hateful insect has he teazed me,
'till I sickened with impatience and disgust.


Robin within. Hola! Sue! Sue! here, my lass, here they are.


Emma. More interruptions! perplexing fates!


Allan. Hey dey! what Sue? [speaks in a fright] O the devil take this wizzard I
say; this is some of his doing I suppose: Sue would never have come I Am sure if
he had not conjured her: she never could have found me if the devil had not had
a hand in it. [Aside.]


Enter Robin. Robin. So master Allan we have found you, in the devil's company
too I believe, at last. [seeing Henry] What do you call him when he is ready?


Allan. A wizzard of the woods if you like: I believe in my heart he has
bewitched this sweet creature here.


Robin. And here comes one that you have bewitched I Am afraid.


Enter Sue in a passion and in tears. SONG.
Sue. Alas, alas, I see it is true;
O Allan, you have deceived your Sue,
With your promises so civil;
O you sly bewitching devil!
I could tear myself to pieces;
My fear and jealousy increases:
I Will go and hang me on yon willow,
And, when dead, I Will haunt thy pillow.
Thou never shall find a maid so true,
As poor deceived distracted Sue.

Allan. Nay, but Sue, now Sue; don't go to frighten one: who the devil put all
this in thy head? Don't be jealous girl, don't be jealous.


Sue. Don't you give me cause then, you false-hearted deceitful cruel creature?
Jealous! how would you like to have been served so? Did not you threaten to
hang yourself last night if I ever let Ralph kiss me again? And now you have
been raking the duce knows where, after the devil knows who all day long.


Robin. Well said Sue; give it him, ha, ha, ha, I dad this is the best sport I
have seen some time.


Allan. Nay, you should not blame me for being a little waggish: Did not you
say you loved a rake to your heart? Why I have done no harm.


Sue. I am sure you cannot have been doing any good when you have been in the
woods all day with such a wanton looking hussy as that is; I wish she was in
the house of correction, a straggling rambling minx.


Emma. Alas, I am undone!


Sue. There, there, she says she is undone.


Allan. But not by me! I have not done it.


Emma. Creature, cease thy infamy, and take thy looby and thyself away.


SONG.
Ye reptiles, earthworms, fly this place,
Ye refuse of the human race,
I will no more your scandal bare,
Whilst thus I Am racked 'tween hope and fear;
For O I Have lost the dearest swain
That ever trod the verdant plain:
Ye cruel ministers of woe,
Why do you rack a maiden so?

Sue. There, do but hear her now; she is crying because she thinks she has lost
you. O the hypocrite! 'twill break my heart; I Will never believe but there has
been something between you.


Robin. Well done Sue.


Allan. Why, you're mistaken now; there has been nothing but -- but -- but --


Sue. But what? Oh mercy upon me! he is afraid to say what.


Allan. Nothing but words.


Robin. Oh if there has been nothing between them but words, they must have
been very close together indeed, Sue.


Henry. I can hear no more of this; if you don't all instantly leave this
place, I will rivet you in a tree, or turn you all to stone; I Will cramp your
limbs with my magic power 'till ye shall beg to die.


Robin. O, the devil take all the wizzards I say.


Henry. What? say you so again, and I Will encircle you with toads and adders --
away -- begone.


Robin. Lud have mercy upon us. Pray don't, and I Will away directly. Well done
Sue [Sue runs off in a fright]. Come, come Allan, you don't know who you have
got in company with.


Allan. If I don't acquaint his worship I Will be hanged, mind that Mr. Conjurer.

[ Allan, Robin and Sue Exeunt.
Henry. Now, maiden fair, to my story.


Emma. I Am all attention.


Henry. Alas, to be further plunged into affliction; I fear you are in love: if
so, I am sorry for you indeed; and if Henry be the object of your affections,
I Would have you cease to love, and fix on some one more deserving. He is a
reveller, an outlaw, and in my opinion will come to some unseemly end.


Emma. Ah me, when shall I meet a comfort more!


Henry. Never in him I fear: Henry is betrothed to many, but is false to all:
he makes it his study to deceive your sex, and boasts of it when done.


Emma. Still must I love him. O my heart! alas, it is breaking, Henry! Oh my
Henry! [She faints.]


Henry. O matchless girl! I have killed thee I Am afraid! Curse on my cruelty! I
have made too severe a trial of her taintless love. -- Hold, she revives;
thanks to the fates, who are kinder to me than I deserve. -- What shall I do?
If I discover myself to her now, the sudden transition of grief to joy may kill
her quite. Sweet maid take comfort.


Emma. Where is comfort to be found if my Henry be false?


Henry. I am his friend, and will be yours. I never failed in my persuasions
whenever I wanted to work him to my purpose; and indeed I have given him a
worse name than he deserves. Why he is so great a changeling he believes all
women to be more fickle than himself; this I Have often heard him say; adding
too, that if he could once find out a maid constant and sincere in her
affections to a proof, he would take her to his heart forever: I Will to him, and
convince him of your sincere regard and matchless love.


Emma. O take me with thee too.


Henry. That would mar all; leave it to me, I will hazard my life in the
success.


SONG.
Take comfort, thou deserving maid,
Thy matchless truth shall be repaid;
Thy Henry, swift as thought, shall fly,
And cheer thy love-afflicted eye.
Em. O may thy friendly speech succeed,
Then will thou make me blessed indeed;
And if I ever ungrateful prove,
May heaven rob me of my love.

Enter Justice Sightless, Allan, Robin, Sue, Constables, Husbandmen, etc.
Justice. Lay hold of him, and I Will take care of her: I Will see whether your
enchantment or my authority be strongest.


Henry. Good Sir, what do you mean?


Justice. O, I Will tell you presently: you will turn people into stone, and wedge
them up in trees will you? If you be a wizzard, as I Am afraid you are, I Will see
what I can turn you into.

[ Emma weeps.
Robin. Wounds, how grim he looks!


SONG.
Althof, measter wizzard,
You growl in your gizzard,
It will not one farthing avail;
His worship has caught you,
Now soon shall be taught you
What conjurers do in a jail.
You made Allan untrue,
To rosy cheek'd Sue,
And fright the poor girl into fits:
What you said, I declare,
Made me wonder and stare,
And scared me quite out of my wits.
Would his worship permit,
I do think it more fit,
To set the old rogue in a blaze:
Though hard loaded with chains,
He may 'scape all our pains,
Since the devil will help him he says.
Then let us lead him along
To a stake that is strong,
And give him a taste of the fire:
There is nothing can thrive
While the wizzard's alive,
Then send him at once to his sire.
[Exeunt omnes.
The End of the First Act.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
A room in Sightless's house. Enter Sightless in his cap and nightgown. SONG.
I Crept out of bed, and I slipped on my clothes,
And I left my old wife in a hearty good doze:
I turned the key softly, and opened the door,
Whilst she most conveniently set up a snore.
At other times, faith, I have thought it uncivil,
And wished her often snoring away at the devil:
May she snore, may she snort; may she snort, may she snore:
May she take such a nap that she never wake more.

Sightless. I Am bewitched with this wench to be sure; for of all the red and
white, the soft and smooth, I never saw her equal; she ran in my head so much
all night, that I did nothing but dream of her: I must feel how her pulse beat:
I would not send her to prison for fear somebody else might make too free with
her, troth. Odds me, here she comes! I intended to have had the pleasure of
waking her myself, but she has prevented me.


SCENE II.
Enter Emma. Sight. So, sweetheart, you're up: what, did not you sleep well?


Emma. I have not slept at all.


Sight. Not slept?


Emma. Scarce a wink.


Sight. Then I Am afraid you have been contriving how to make your escape.


Emma. That I never can, for I am bound in chains forever.


Sight. Bound in chains? How how do you mean, lass, bound in chains? Why you
talk in your sleep to be sure: Where the deuce be your chains? I see nothing of
'em.


Emma. I feel them though, but would not break 'em for the world.


Sight. Good lack-a-day, she is certainly asleep yet: E'dad I Will wake her though;
hallo! hallo!

[Lays hold of her and shakes her.
Mrs. Sightless enters listening. Emma. Bless me, Sir, what is the matter?


Sight. What Is the matter child! You walk in your sleep!


Emma. I rather think that you walk in your sleep, who cannot see that I Am
awake.


Sight. I'dad perhaps I do: hey -- no, no, I Am not asleep: come, hussy, give me
a buss; and that will wake me, were I dead.


SCENE III.
Mrs. Sightless rushes in upon him. Mrs. Sightless. Yes, I dare say it would:
you're asleep are you! You're asleep, and you must come here to be kissed
awake: O you vile man! This is what you had her in the house for! This is your
conscience, is it! You would not send her to prison forsooth, for fear she
might prove innocent; and now you have sneaked out of bed, like a false-hearted
monster as you are, in your sleep on purpose to have this sanctified hypocrite
wake you with her kisses.


Sight. No, no, my dear, you have convinced me that we were both awake with a
vengeance; I wish you were asleep with all my heart.


Mrs. Sight. Yes, I dare say you do.


Sight. Yes, and the devil take him that wakes you, should you sleep 'till
Doomsday.


Mrs. Sight. O you brute! you savage! you scandalous good-for-nothing creature
you! but this is all your doing, madam Wag-tail, I Will soon send you a packing!
-- Hussy, I Have a good mind to tear your eyes out.


Sight. You had better tear your tongue out, you jealous pated fool you! What a
clack you keep indeed!


Emma. Madam hear me.


Mrs. Sight. I will not hear you: don't talk to me: I shall go mad I believe.


Sight. You're mad enough already I think.


Mrs. Sight. And who may I thank for it but you? but I Will be revenged.


Sight. Why, look you wife; you are only making a fire for yourself all this
time: you will burn yourself up with your own fury: I did ask the young woman to
kiss me indeed, but 'twas only in joke.


Mrs. Sight. In joke! a pretty joke indeed! If I had not come in as I did, I
dare say you would have made a serious affair of it by this time! In joke forsooth!
A very modest joke, I dare say!


SONG.
Palm not your wanton tricks on me,
Your base designs, vile man! I see:
No, no, I will not despair.
Fierce fury in my breast shall rise:
What! bring your minx before my eyes?
This is too much to bear.
My vengeance shall you both pursue;
I Will do for her -- I Will do for you --
These favors I Will return:
Although her tender heart should break,
The wizard's fate shall she partake,
And both together burn.

Emma. Madam, you may form what opinion you will of your own, because time and
appearances may have given you some authority for your suspicions: nothing but
ill manners and a guilty mind can warrant your judging so illiberally of a
stranger.


Sight. Blessings on her, she prattles like an angel.


Mrs. Sight. Prithee, wench, don't prate so pertly to me: do you know who I am?


Emma. Yes, madam, I am very sensible to whom I Am talking; a splenetic --


Sight. A what! a lunatic! mind what you say girl; remember she is my wife, and
therefore claims respect.


Emma. I Have said nothing but the truth, Sir, and I shall always pay a greater
regard to that than her ungenerous reflections, or your authority.


Sight. Hey! what do you say? Do you mean to affront me for my indulgence? I
must seem to quarrel with her for the sake of peace and quietness, or I shall
have a dog's life on it else. [Aside.


Mrs. Sight. Aye, aye, I Am glad on it; I Am glad you begin to find her out.
Innocent! yes she is very innocent, to be sure, you may see that; but as
impudent as you please: send her to prison, I insist on it -- an impudent
straggling hussy!


Sight. I believe I must indeed: she makes but a bad use of my civility: come,
come, you shall go to prison hussy; I Will see if I cannot make room for you there.


Mrs. Sight. No, no, I Will save you that trouble; I Will take care to make room
for her myself, I warrant you.


Emma. Alas! my resolution totters -- arm me with fortitude, ye gracious
powers, nor leave me to despair.


SONG.
Come Hope, thou blooming maid, appear,
Shield, O shield me from despair.
Teach me, ye gods, to undergo
The love-tormenting pangs of woe.
And if I die, O let me prove
A faithful monument of love:
Then, then, my Henry, shall thou see,
Thy Emma kept her words with thee.

Mrs. Sight. Come, come, away with you; I Have something else to do than to hear
your whining forsooth.


Sight. Aye, aye, to prison with her. I have a key for that lock too; I Will have
a peep at her there. [aside.]

[Ex. Omnes.
SCENE IV.
A Farm House. Enter Allan, Robin, and Sue. Sue. No, no, I will not speak to thee;
I will not look at thee; I will not think of thee, I will not, I will not, so I will not.


Allan. Nay, plague on it Sue, don't be hard hearted: you know I love you, you
know I do.


Sue. I don't know it, nor I will not know it, you shall not love me.


Robin. Well said Sue, don't give out, remember the girl in the grove.


Allan. Hold thy tongue Robin, and don't be a fool.


Robin. A fool! not I indeed, I Am not in love, I Am wise enough for that.


SONG.
The fair or the hrown,
A smile or a frown,
All ever are equal to me:
I laugh and I smile,
Love cannot beguile
A heart that is jovial and free.
Let fond loving swains,
Keep signing their pains;
No wench shall my freedom annoy,
And yet I am sure
For love there is a cure,
Since time will that passion destroy.

Sue. [to Allen] Don't keep teazing me so; don't think I can forget it, don't.


Allan. Ay, but you can forgive it Sue: you had always a pure tender heart of
your own.


Sue. No, the duce take me if I do.


Robin. No, don't Sue, make him repent it all the days of his life.


Allan. If thee don't hold thy tongue I Will make thee repent it.


Robin. Ha, ha, ha, wilt?


Allan. Yes I will.


Robin. No, no, thee cannot do that, except thee could make me in love with
every wench that I meet, like thyself, to yelp after this, and to whine after
the other, and -- odds niggars don't mind him Sue, don't mind him, he is in love
with a thousand.


Sue. O what a fool have I been!


Robin. A fool indeed.


Allan. It Is as false as old nick.


SONG.
Your words I deny,
Don't give me the lie:
I never loved any but Sue.
You fain now would try,
To part Sue and I,
But, Robin, your nonsense will not do.
You may giggle and grin,
I care not a pin,
If Sue will believe that I love:
Although you impeach
You cannot make a breach,
Since truth will each falsehood remove.

Robin Pshaw, pshaw, no more of this nonsense: Sue what do you think of me,
hey? Come give me a buss and tell me.


Sue. Prithee, Robin, don't play the fool with me.


Robin. I play the fool! not I indeed! prithee don't lay your bargains on me;
it is you that have played the fool I Am afraid, I Am sure I Would no hand in it; if
you have made a slip I cannot help it.


Allan. You was always a fool.


Robin. A fool! ha, ha, ha, give me thy hand o'that -- how is it brother? -- if
I be a fool, I Am sure I must be some relation of yours.

[ Sue sets up a cry.
Robin. Hey! to pass, what is the matter now?


Sue. To say I had made a slip!


SONG.
I wish I never had seen a man,
They Are treacherous as the devil,
And like the devil too, they can
Be very, very civil.
O dear! O dear! what shall I do?
I Am sure my heart will burst:
You false deceitful wretches you,
Of monsiers you're the worst.
[Exit Sue, Allan going after her, Robin lays hold of him and prevents him.
Robin. Why, you would not be such a fool, would you?


Allan. Yes but I would.


Robin. No, no, let her come to herself; if she will not bear a joke now and then,
I would not give a rush for her.


Allan. 'Swounds, but I shall have never a sweetheart at this rate.


Robin. Pshaw, pshaw, what a simpleton you are indeed! you want sadly to hurry
your neck into the noose methinks: come, come, you and I will have a little
sport first.


SONG.
For should you Sue wed,
And lead her to bed,
No mortal so happy as you:
The honey-moon past,
You Will find at the last
The wonder will cease to be new.
Come, come, then away,
It Is foolish to stay,
With me trudge along to the wake;
There Is plenty you will find,
To cheer up your mind,
And she you like best you may take.
[Ex. Robin and Allan.
SCENE V.
Henry in Prison. Henry. It Is high time now to make enquiry after my love; I Have
had a restless night on it; this is a trial I never dreamt of; if she bears this
with fortitude, she will be indeed the wonder of her sex, and worthy the
richest diadem on earth: that I love her, my heart and soul can witness: if
after this she talks of love and Henry, I shall be convinced that women can be
constant, and every doubt must fade; but who comes here? a stranger; and a
prisoner I suppose; perhaps he can inform me where my Emma is disposed.


SCENE VI.
Enter Edwin. Edwin. Your pardon, Sir, I Have interceded with the jailor for
admittance, and should be glad of your consent to exchange a word or two:
report has made me curious, but if it has made me too impertinent, I will
retire, and not offend you.


Henry. Sir, you do me honor; I am glad to see you: 'sdeath, who can this be?
his face is most familiar to me [aside]: Sir, you are welcome.


Edwin. I thank you Sir.


Henry. Ah, me!


Edwin. You seem disturbed Sir.


Henry. A thought came across the sunshine of my hopes; but now -- but now it is
fair again.


Edwin. There is something more than common about this man, and a sensible
affability that pleases me much. [Aside.]


Henry. You seem to muse Sir; I hope you have no design?


Edwin. As your suspicions are but natural, they do not much surprise me; but
on my faith I Have no design: I am a prisoner as yourself, and should have been
glad, had it been your inclination too, to have passed an heavy hour now and
then together, and been friends, that is all.


Henry. You speak, Sir, like a gentleman, and are most welcome I assure you;
and as you have offered me your friendship, you shall find me grateful and
sincere: I Am grieved to find a man with such a heart, in such a situation; but
come, let us be cheerful.


SONG.
Though care with heavy hands oppress,
And fortune leaves us to distress,
Yet should the Gods once condescend,
To bless me with a single friend,
I would not call the fates unkind,
Though thus imprisoned and confined,
Friendship should drive my cares away,
And make me hope a better day.

Edwin. I have not had so agreeable an interview these twelvemonths.


Henry. These twelvemonths! I hope you have not been here so long.


Edwin. Much longer Sir.


Henry. I Am sorry for it; your crime surely must be great indeed, to incur so
long a punishment.


Edwin. I think I may venture to say it is more an accident than a crime.


Henry. Prisons were not made for the unfortunate, but the wicked and
abandoned: may I presume to enquire the cause? perhaps I may have it in my
power to be your friend.


Edwin. Alas, I am afraid not in such a case: my father's death was all the
cause.


Henry. Imprisoned for your father's death! Shall I entreat your name? perhaps
I am too bold.


Edwin. My name, Sir, is Edwin: I was born at Philodale.


Henry. At Philodale! as I live my old schoolfellow, and my sister's lover; how
fortunate! [aside] but I cannot understand, Sir, how your father's death could
be the cause of your imprisonment.


Edwin. When he died he left a person in this neighborhood his executor
(Sightless) who you must have seen; but, though he bears the name of Justice, he
is, I am afraid, as great a stranger to her rules, as he is to pity. He ever
pretended that my father died involved; and, as I could not contradict it, was
forced to think so too: this was a sad shock, though the least of my affliction;
for I was betrothed to the lovliest maid, whose fortune was almost equal to her
beauty; but, alas, becoming destitute and poor, could never think of seeing her
again, and wrote her word I meant to pass the seas, never to return.


Henry. O most distressing tale! but pray go on.


Edwin. Before my father died, having an occasion for a certain sum, previous
to his knowledge, which I had scarcely hinted to his worship, but he begged he
might oblige me; I thought it kindness, and gladly embraced the opportunity; I
gave my note with promise of a double interest; but ere the best of fathers had
closed his eyes, and my time for the payment of the debt unfortunately expired,
he hurried me to prison, where I have been a sad and melancholy being ever
since: I would have wrote to certain friends, but he has cruelly deprived me of
that advantage by giving the jailor the strictest charge never to place a pen
and ink within my reach, or let one letter pass the door, which action has
often made me think he is played me foul.


Henry. No doubt Sir: O the villain! come my worthy friend, do not despair: I
have a charm about me that shall extricate us both: if you dare venture to
assist, I Will prove your friend: I have a stratagem on foot, by which you will
find I ll make a fair example of his worship, and you shall be revenged; and if
they refuse us liberty, here is a key that will unlock the strongest bolt.


Edwin. Then you may command me, and depend on my integrity; I shall not dread
the consequence or danger, since if we fail they cannot make us greater
prisoners than we are; if they take my life 'twill be a charity.


Henry. If I don't preserve both life and liberty, I Will resign my own; I want
to be your friend.


Edwin. And I want liberty; propose your plan, I long to be in action.


SONG.
Who would not die
For liberty?
What wretch would bear to live a slave,
And fear the cord, the rack, or grave?
I will not bear,
Nor guiltless wear
The cruel chains of infamy;
No, no, I Would sooner die.

Henry. Then to the point: you have heard no doubt on what suspicion I was
committed; the superstition of the rusticks, has possessed 'em merely from my
appearance, that I deal in witchcraft.


Edwin. 'Twas that report that first excited me to visit you.


Henry. When I found they first suspected it, I endeavored to make 'em believe
that I really did, by threatening them in the most romantic phrases. -- But I
may depend on your integrity you say.


Edwin. You may, Sir, on the forfeit of my life.


Henry. Then, that you may not be deceived, I am not what I seem.


Edwin. Indeed I did suspect it.


Henry. No more on that head at present; but why I bear this character you
shall know hereafter; be satisfied, you shall not remain a prisoner here
another day; were I to declare myself they would gladly give me liberty; yet as
I have a reason for this strange project, I will go through it.


Edwin. You transport me with pleasure and astonishment.


Henry. What most concerns me is, there was a fair one in my company, whom they
have imprisoned too, without the smallest circumstance of guilt, only that she
was with me.


Edwin. There was the most lovely maid I ever saw brought this morning to the
prison.


Henry. This morning!


Edwin. Scarce an hour since.


Henry. That Is strange! has she not been here all night?


Edwin. I can assure you, no: Sightless and his wife brought her this morning;
and when his worship left the prison, he gave the strictest orders to the
jailor, that none should see her but himself, which made me pity her indeed.


Henry. You amaze me! 'Sdeath, but this disturbs me: could not one speak with
the jailor?


Edwin. Most certainly: I Will call him hither if you please.


Henry. Sir, you will much oblige me if you would.

[ Edwin goes off the stage and calls the jailor, and reenters immediately.
Henry. Don't you think he might be prevailed upon to let us see her?


Edwin. I doubt it much: such men as him are generally strangers to humanity,
and seldom will be moved to a good action by any thing but a bribe.


Henry. That he shall have with all my heart.


Edwin. Here he comes.


SCENE VII.
Enter Jailor. Jailor. 'Swounds, master Edwin, you call with as much authority
as his worship: What the plague is the matter with you? I thought you had been
hanging yourself, and was calling me to cut you down.


Edwin. That is very probable to be sure.


Jailor. Why I would have done it for you to be sure for my own sake.


Edwin. How for your own sake? what interest could you have in that?


Jailor. What! why your carcass and your clothes: the one I should have got a
trifle for from the surgeons, and the others I would have sold to the rag-shop.


Henry. What a savage! Faith, my friend, you seem to have a good notion.


Jailor. Aye, have NOT I master?


Henry. Nobody a better -- Methinks you and I shall agree very well.


Jailor. I don't know that though.


Henry. I dare say we shall: could you let me change a word or two with the
young woman you had brought into prison this morning?


Jailor. No. -- You speak with her hey? What should such an old codger as you
want with a young woman? no, no, it will not do; it will not do.


Henry. Will this do? [shews him money.]


Jailor. Hey? why as you say -- I don't know but it may; they are pretty
looking fellows enough seemingly.


Henry. Are they not? I thought you and I should agree; I Am an excellent
physician you see; I know the strength of your constitution better than
yourself you find.


Jailor. Why aye, you carry a pleasant kind of physic about you; few make a wry
face at it, I fancy.


Henry. Don't I? Well, what do you say; shall we agree?


Jailor. I don't know what to say to it; in faith I Am almost afraid.


Henry. Pshaw man, what should you fear?


SONG.
Pray who can say you are to blame,
Since all your betters do the same?
My lord makes harvest of his place:
Then prithee where is the great disgrace?
The crime is sure not worse in you,
Should you pursue the maxim too:
For greater knaves at any hour,
Will for a bribe restrain their power.

Jailor. Faith, dad, I like your notion; you seem to be a good hearty cock;
give me your hand: you will not blow me I hope? you understand me.


Henry. No, upon my honor.


Jailor. Why then it is agreed.


Henry. Then take your reward, and show us the way: come my worthy friend, you
must bear me company.


Jailor. You don't take him with you I hope. [meaning Edwin.]


Henry. Yes, by all means.


Jailor. Nay with all my heart; though by the bye, take care his worship don't
pop in upon you; I expect him here anon, he seems to have cast a longing eye
upon her himself.


Henry. That will be lucky again, I shall be there to protect her: [aside] O
never fear us, we'll take care of ourselves.


[Without.] Jailor! jailor!


Jailor. Coming, coming: here take the key; she is in the best room: you know
the way master Edwin; and so good luck to you.


Henry. We thank you.

[Exit Henry and Edwin.]
Jailor. Blame me but this is a good dose; 'Egad I should like to take such
physic every day.

[Exit Jailor.
SCENE VII.
Changes to another part of the prison, and discovers Emma. Emma. Surely the
fates do mean to counteract all my hopes: how perplexing! I was enraptured with
the highest expectation of seeing my Henry ere this, and now he is lost
forever: would I could see the honest stranger once again; perhaps he might
inform me where to send to him; for did he but know the perilous situation I am
in, he would surely think of some way to release me. Alas! should the tidings
reach my father's ears, I am undone.


SONG.
Come, come, my Henry to my aid,
Release thy poor distracted maid:
For thee these trials do I bear,
But O! how cruel and severe.

SCENE VIII.
Henry and Edwin enter in conversation. Henry. You understand me?


Edwin. Perfectly -- behold the fair one.


Henry. O my delight! but thou shall grieve no more: I am convinced.


Emma. [seeing them] Bless me! the stranger's here: surely he o'erheard my
prayers.


Henry. Pardon me, thou lovely fair one, for intruding on you thus, for I am
more concerned for your misfortune than my own: I could not rest 'till I had
seen you once again.


Emma. Nay you are welcome, for you talked of Henry.


Henry. As we broke off so abruptly in our conversation relating to that youth,
I have taken this opportunity, with your permission, to renew it.


Emma. O you are kind indeed! -- Is this a friend of Henry's too?


Henry. He is.


Emma. Then he is most welcome. [ Edwin bows.]


Henry. And is it possible amidst your present perils and calamity, you can
think so much of Henry.


Emma. I think of nothing else.


Henry. Then shall he know how much thy truth outrates his highest
expectations; for though I spoke unkindly of his worth, I but dissembled, he
loves with equal warmth, and seldom speaks but you he makes his theme: he will
be transported with your virtue, and shall know it.


Emma. Know it! alas, which way?


Henry. I have a stratagem on foot for your escape, if you will assist me in
it, I will instantly convey you to your banished man.


Emma. I Will risk my life on such a promise.


Henry. His worship will be here to visit you anon: leave this gentleman and me
to manage him, and doubt not of success.


Emma. May heaven prosper your endeavors.


Henry. And hark, he comes! we'll retire from his sight a while 'till we seize
our opportunity.

[ Henry and Edwin retire.]
Emma. Alas! I tremble at the task.


SCENE IX.
Enter Sightless. Sight. Well, my little rogue, how do you find yourself by
this time?


Emma. Not very well you may suppose, Sir, in my present situation.


Sight. I fear not; I fear not indeed: but you should not have been here if I
could have helped it: my wife, you see is a terrible woman; she will be obeyed.


Emma. And your compliance, Sir, was a proof of your humility and justice.


Sight. Well said, sweetee, well said; and so it was: I wish she was dead though
by the bye; I Would make thee the happier for it: nay, I Will make thee happy now, if
thou wilt love me.


Emma. That I never can.


Sight. Ah, but you must, and you shall; 'sdeath, if you don't I Will make you.


Emma. Inded, Sir, I never can.


Sight. But you must, and you shall: I have it in my power, and I Will make thee
hussy; or I Will -- come, come, I will not be angry; give me a bufs, and I Will
forgive thee. [He endeavors to kiss her.]


Henry and Edwin come behind him, tie a handkerchief over his eyes, and drag
him off the stage. Emma. Heavens! how will this end! I dread the consequence!


Re-enter Henry and Edwin, Henry in the Justice's clothes. Henry. Now, now, my
fair one, if you will take your liberty you shall have it; in this disguise I can
command your discharge.


Emma. I Will embrace the opportunity, though I dread it.


Henry. You, my good and faithful friend, may expect your liberty without
delay: I Will return and make example of his worship presently.

[Exit Henry and Emma at one door, and Edwin at the other.
SCENE X.
Discovers Sightless gagged, with his hands tied behind him, making a noise and
stamping about the stage. Enter Jailor. Jailor. Hallow! what the devil is the
matter with you old boy? What do you make such a damned noise for? Did not I
tell you to take care of his worship? You a conjurer! you a devil! by the bye,
now he is blindfolded with his hands tied, I Have a good mind to pick his
pockets: [aside] Hey! let me look again -- by the lord it is his worship
himself: the old one has played him a trick: -- shall I release him or no?
[Sightless makes a noise again] Coming, your worship: blame me I must release.
[Jailor releases him.]


Sight. Oh the damned villains! where are they gone? I Will have 'em all hanged:
go bring 'em to me directly.


Jailor. And please worship, I Am afraid they are off.


Sight. Off! who is off?


Jailor. Why, and please your worship, the young woman and Mr. Wizzard, as they
call him.


Sight. What, have you let 'em out?


Jailor. Blame me if I did not take him for your worship, having your worship's
clothes on.


Sight. And you have let them out then?


Jailor. O yes, your worship, they are off indeed!


Sight. Then if you don't find 'em again you shall be hanged in their stead,
mark that; but where is the rest? there were half a dozen of 'em I believe.


Jailor. I fancy not, and please your worship? I don't believe there was any
body in company with him but master Edwin and the girl.


Sight. Edwin! what have you let him out too?


Jailor. No, your worship.


Sight. That Is lucky, that is lucky; he shall be hanged for the rest, that is
some comfort: after the others, you dog!

[Exit Jailor.
SONG.
O I Will be revenged if I live;
I Will never, no never forgive
Such scandalous treatment as this:
Was there ever such a knave
On this side the grave,
To gag up the jaws of Justice?
[Exit.
The End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
A Plain. Henry and Emma, Henry yet in Sightless's clothes. Henry. NOW we are
safe I hope; and as I have promised, you shall find I Will keep my word: see you
yond grove? thither go, and as sure as truth thy Henry shall meet thee there:
I Will bring him with me ere you well arrive yourself.


Emma. May Heaven bless you if you do. -- My Henry! shall I see my banished
Henry!

[Exit Emma.
Henry. And he shall meet the too, thou matchless fair one, with a heart as
warm as ever glowed with love.


SONG.
O what a jewel can compare
With the taintless heart:
No pollished gem is half so fair,
As Emma without art.
[Exit Henry.
SCENE III.
Enter Jailor, Constable, and Husbandmen. Jailor. Aye, aye, this must be the
way.


Constable. 'Sniggins, if we should take 'em it would be rare sport.


Jailor. Edad, an we don't it will be bad sport for me though, if his worship
keeps his word.

[An hollowing without.
Constable. Hallow! hallow! who be you when you're ready?


Jailor. Fetter me but it is his worship himself.


Constable. In troth and so it is -- well the more the merrier I say: God bless
his worship, he is a good natured gentleman, I say he is.


Jailor. You say he is, that is a sign you know much of the matter to be sure;
I Am afraid we shall see little of his good nature 'till we have taken the
wizzard and his wench again; but mum -- here he comes.


Enter Sightless. Sight. Well, my brave lads, what news?


Jailor. An't please your worship, we met an old fellow just now, who told us
he saw 'em on this road together.


Sight. Away with you then, away with you; don't stand here, but after 'em, or
they will be gone to the devil else.


Constable. Your worship will follow I hope?


Sight. Aye, Aye, I Will follow, I Will follow; away with you, away!

Exeunt all but Sightless.
SONG.
By the Lord, if I take 'em once more,
I Will hold 'em as fast as old nick:
I Will fetter the son of a whore,
And make him pay dear for his trick.

SCENE III.
Discovers Emma in a grove. Emma. I Am distressed 'tween hope and fear, in doubt
if Henry will meet me here or not, and in fear the stranger may deceive me.


SONG.
DUETTO.
She. Ye gentle ministers above,
Who rule the heart and guide the eye:
Once more restore me to my love,
Or Emma soon, too soon must die.

SCENE IV.
Henry enters in a shepherd's dress, and lays hold of her hand; Emma starts.
He. O live! O live! thou dearest maid,
And think of grief and death no more:
No, no, that lilly never shall fade,
If I Have the power to restore.

Emma. My Henry!


Henry. Come to his heart, thou truest maid! [Embracing.]


Emma. Blessed be the hand that pointed me the way: blessed be the tongue that told
me where to come.


Henry. Rather blessed be she that followed such a guide with such unequalled
faith.


Emma. Would I could see the worthy friend again, that I might think of some
reward.


Henry. Nay, in truth thou ow'st him none; for thou have over paid him for his
pains.


Emma. Alas, I Have paid him nothing!


Henry. Indeed, indeed thou have! I was thy guide, thy lover, and thy friend!


Emma. Is it possible?


Henry. It is, and true. [A noise at a distance.]


Emma. Ah me! we are taken again; for see the hateful crew has traced us hither.


Henry. So much the better; it is just as I would wish.


Emma. So much the better?


Henry. Fear not my love, there is no danger; they will be glad to let us go
again: I beg, my love, that you will not show one sign of fear; for as sure as
you are fair, so sure you will find no danger: Shall I swear?


Emma. No, no, I have no further doubt; I will not fear: if Henry says it, Emma
must believe.


Henry. Generous maid! that we may not be overcome, I Have previously sent for
certain friends of mine to meet me there.


Emma. Friends! alas, what friends?


Henry. Anon you shall know all: the Justice is a knave, and I Will expose him to
the world; but here come his brainless instruments: I Will divert myself with
their stupidity; and seem to make resistance: pray be cheerful, and all will be
well.


SCENE V.
Enter Jailor, Constable, Peasants, etc. Jailor. Oh! by the king of good luck
here is ma'am! with a new acquaintance faith; but where is the old one? though by
the bye I fancy she will be the most welcome prize to his worship, and therefore
I Will secure her first: come, miss, if you please, you shall go back again to
his worship with me.


Henry. Go back to his worship! for what?


Jailor. For what! O his worship will tell you presently: he will be here in a
trice.


Henry. His worship is a knave, and you're a fool: tell him I say so.


Jailor. Why, you dog, if you say so again I Will take you to jail along with her.


Henry. I Will say it and prove it.


Jailor. You will?


Henry. I will.


Jailor. And so you shall, my lad; if you don't you shall see I Will prove you a
fool presently -- lay hold of him.

[Constable, etc. seize him.
Constable. His worship's a knave, is he! and you will prove it! a pretty fellow
indeed!


Jailor. If he does I Will be hanged.


Henry. You shall all be hanged if I don't.


Jailor. Aye, aye, who will hang me, pray?


Henry. I will.


Jailor. I Will give you leave to do that, my boy, when you please; but I fancy
the gallows is groaning for you already.


Henry. Hands off I say!


SONG.
Ye villains let me go,
Or ye too soon shall know,
I Will make ye glad to do it:
Ye blockheads let me pass,
His worship is an ass,
And I will make him rue it.

SCENE VI.
Enter Sightless's footman. Footman. What have ye got 'em again?


Jailor. Aye part of 'em; and an impudent fellow here, who calls his worship a
knave and an ass.


Footman. His worship an ass! 'swounds he will be hanged?


Jailor. I Will take care of that.


Henry. You Would better take care of yourself.


Jailor. Never plague your head about that. What have you done with his
worship? [to the Footman.]


Footman. He was tired to death, and went back again with some gentry we met,
who came from the lord knows where, to have a look at the wizzard.


Jailor. They Are come a day after the fair then: I wish we had got the old dog;
it would be a few pence in my pocket.


Henry. That Is very good; [aside to Emma] Come, why don't you lead us to
prison? Why do you keep us both here?


Jailor. You're in a hurry methinks: you're the strangest hand I ever met with;
but I Will oblige you for once; so come, come along. Constable you would better hike
after the old one, and take one or two along with you; then if you take him the
prize will be your own you know.

[Exeunt.
SCENE VII.
A Cottage. Enter Robin. Robin. Lud, what a dangerous thing it is to meddle
with other folk's matters! mocking is catching, that saying is true enough: Sue
and I, forsooth, were only trying to make Allan a little jealous or so; but her
kisses have stuck so close to my lips, and her good natured looks, I am afraid
have bewitched me. Now, as one may say, I find myself over head and ears in
love: ratt'un, I don't know what to make on it; I wish I had not meddled with
her: and yet somehow, I don't wish so neither: 'edad, an I thought she could
love me, I should be mainly pleased: I Will have a trial for her; I Am a little
uneasy about her too; and yet I Am strangely pleased methinks -- I Am most
certainly in love, that is flat. -- Sue has something more than herself to give
away too; old Quickset, her father, has got a few good pounds by him I warrant
me; and that is all Allan is in love with, in my opinion.

SONG.
I Am in love, lack a day! to be sure,
I Am afraid I shall find it too true:
But where shall I find out a cure,
Except from a kiss of dear Sue?
How Allan will laugh at me now!
I called him so often a fool:
And yet I cannot help it I vow,
For I Am pinned like a dunce to my stool.
'Odds niggins, here they come together; I Will slip behind this bush, and hear
what they say.


SCENE VIII.
Enter Allan and Sue. Allan. Why surely Sue, you cannot love Robin; if you do
you are strangely bit: he never loved a girl in his life, and always laughed at
every body else that did: I Am sure you only do it to plague me now.


Sue. Nor you don't love Dolly Hedger to be sure: don't think to deceive me
Allan; she has told me of all your tricks; you have just served her as you have
me; but you shall never deceive me again: love Robin indeed! if he was here I Would
give him my hand before thy face.

[ Robin runs between them; and takes Sue by the hand; Sue screams out.
Robin. I dad that is bravely said; I Will take it, and thank thee to boot: I Am
always ready to receive a good bargain, you see.


Allan. Prithee make free with thy own, man.


Robin. Why so I do; she said she would be mine; besides, she is none of yours, you
never deserved her.


Allan. Don't I?


Robin. No you don't; you have got twenty and deceive 'em all; and that girl is a
fool that believes you, say what you will.


Sue. He seems to be in earnest! [aside.]


Allan. But say what you will, they will believe me.


Sue. You're a conceited fool now for your pains; you shall find yourself
mistaken in me however, if there was not another man in the world.


Robin. Especially when there is another at hand that loves you so well.


Allan. Now who would deceive her?


Robin. Why you if she would let you.


Allan. You love her, hey?


Robin Yes, I love her.


Sue. Nay, Robin, now, I am sure you deceive me.


Robin. Murrins take me if I do.


Sue. Nay now, you make me laugh: I never heard you talk of loving before.


Allan. I should like mainly to know what kind of love it would be.


Robin. Should you? why I Would marry her directly, and make her a good husband
when I Would done; that is more than you can do in my opinion.


Sue. Nay, Robin, don't joke too far.


SONG.
O I can never believe
Another of your sex;
You promise, to deceive,
You love but to perplex.
It Is cruel and unkind,
To trifle, toy and play,
When all you have in your mind
Serves only to betray.

Robin. Why look you Sue, I never loved a girl in my life before, I confess,
and should not have loved you now, in my opinion, had I not seen you so often
made a fool of by another; and always knowing thee to be an honest, modest,
good-natured lass, I could not help loving thee, somehow.


Allan. Will you believe him Sue? ha, ha, ha.


Sue. I don't know what to say to it -- I Have a a good mind. [aside.]


Robin. She Will be a fool if she believes thee any more however.


Sue. You seem to be in earnest methinks.


Robin. An I be'ant I Will be hanged: if you think you can love me, give me your
hand, and you shall not doubt me any longer.


Sue. Why, what wilt do man?


Robin. Do! What I ought, to be sure.


Allan. What is that pray?


Robin. What Is that! why I Will tell you again and again: I Would take her to church
directly, and not stand sniv'ling and playing for a twelvemonth, and deceive
her when I Have done. -- If she will give me her hand, you shall see if I don't.


Sue. Then take it and welcome.


Robin. Blessings on thee! that is kindly said.


Allan. Why, Sue, thou art not in earnest sure?


Sue. Indeed but I am.


Allan. Pshaw, pshaw, don't make a fool of one.


Sue. You Have made one of me long enough.


Allan. But you will not marry him Sue?


Robin. Aye, but she will though.


SONG.
Come follow to church and you will see,
I Will make her a wife
For the rest of her life,
And she a kind husband of me.
At night when we merrily trip,
You may come to the wake,
And taste the bride-cake,
But never more taste of her lip.
[Exit Robin and Sue.
Allan. Odds heart what shall I do! who could have thought it! I Am almost ready
to hang myself. -- If he marries her I Will make a cuckold of him, as sure as
he is born.

[Exit Allan.
SCENE IX.
The Prison. Edwin solus. Edwin. Sure fate has doomed me to inevitable
destruction: every effort that I Have made to restore my liberty has
unfortunately proved the means of making me still more a prisoner: the
stranger, my fair-spoken ally, is not yet returned, and night is near at hand:
Sightless, who never wanted spur to prick him on to cruelty, now will aggravate
each circumstance, which he thinks will reach my life. -- Well, if my friend
should never return again, I Am likely to be released by death.


SONG.
Like one benighted and forlorn,
No guide to point my way,
Who wishes the return of morn,
Or Cynthia's silver ray.
With fear he steps and looks around,
At every tree retreats:
He trembles at each fancied sound,
And every bush he meets.
Should fate have doomed him to his end,
In vain for light he calls;
In vain he asks for guide or friend,
When down the steep he falls.
[Exit Edwin.
SCENE X.
Sightless's house, a tree with a bench before it. Enter Sightless, Aethelia,
Attendant and Forresters. Sight. Here, fair lady, is my house, such as it is:
will you do me the honor to walk in and give me your good company? My wife is
a little jealous, or so; but you need not mind that: pray walk in; it will not be
long, I dare say, before we have our conjuring gentleman again.


Aeth. I thank you, Sir, there is a pleasant air abroad which is very agreeable;
with your leave, I had much rather rest me here a little. [sits down on the
bench.]


Sight. By the by, I Am not sorry for that neither: it may save me a supper
perhaps. [aside.] Why, as you say, Madam, it is very pleasant to be sure: this
is a favorite tree of mine; I often make it my bench of authority, and try my
criminals here.


Aeth. Beneath this tree!


Sight. Aye, marry do I: this tree was set by a grandfather of mine, and has
had many a rebel hung upon it since he died; and if I should once more meet
with this wizard again, he shall have the honor of hanging upon it himself,
and you shall have the pleasure of seeing him, if you please: I am sure you
never saw a greater rogue hanged in your life; and I Have got another in prison
at present shall keep him company.


SONG.
I Will hang 'em, I Will hang 'em together,
And gibbet them both when I Have done,
To be battered about with the weather,
And melted away with the sun.
I Will hang 'em both here, I declare it,
With a fatal inscription before 'em;
I Would have every mortal beware it,
And dread an high judge of the Quorum.

Aeth. Sure you will not hang him, Sir?


Sight. Not burn him you mean! hang him! O yes, you may depend upon that.

[The tabor and pipe heard without.
Aeth. What call you these, Sir?


Sight. Some fool has got himself married I suppose; if he has got him as good
a wife as mine, he had better staid a little longer, and have been hanged with
Mr. Wizard and Co.

Enter Robin, Sue and others, dancing after the tabor and pipe across the
stage; they pull off their hats as they pass. Away with ye, away with ye; you
had need be merry forsooth: I hate to see such a parcel of fools.


Aeth. I must confess it gives me infinite pleasure to see them so happy.


Sight. Aye, but how will they look by and by? that is the joke.


Aeth. That we cannot tell; a good heart ever makes a pleasant eye.


Sight. If that be true, your ladyship's a good heart of your own, for you have
a main pleasant eye, I can tell you that.


Aeth. You Have a pleasant tongue of your own to tell me so; how true I will not
say; nor will I thank you for the compliment, because that would be accepting
of what I don't deserve.


Sight. Troth but you do deserve it; and therefore must accept on it, and as a
rarity too; for I seldom give my compliments away without return.


Aeth. Then you sell 'em, I presume.


Sight. No, no, lack a day, not I; when I compliment a lady, I mean to get a
kiss if I can, when a man --


Aeth. His money I suppose?


Sight. Hum, ah, why sometimes, as one may say, on some occasions or so: faith
she is a sweet one! and as wise as a judge; she will be too much for me if I don't
take care: -- what a chance had I here now were I not married! -- O plague on
that bitter old jade at home I say, she is a tough one, or the devil would have
had her ere now. [aside.]


Aeth. I wonder we have not seen my brother yet. [to her attendant.]


Atten. It is very strange!

[A noise without.
Sight. O here they come! here they come! now you shall see the very devil
himself.


Aeth. I shall beg to be excused the sight.


Sight. Don't fear, madam, don't fear; I Have too much power over his devilship,
than to let him do so sweet a lady any harm.


Aeth. I shall not fear that devil much that is afraid of you.


SCENE XI.
Enter Henry and Emma, guarded by the Jailor, etc. Sight. So, madam Gad-about,
you have found your way back again! but where is the son of old Beelzebub, the
wizard?


Jailor. And please your worship we have not taken him yet; master Constable
and two or three more are after him: I suppose they will bring him anon: I
thought it best to bring young madam back first, lest she might give us the
slip again.


Sight. Right, lad, right: but who have you here?


Jailor. One of the wizard's acquaintance, I find: my lady and he were together.


Sight. What is he? and where does he come from?


Jailor. I don't know, and please your worship; they were together, as I said;
and when I talked of taking her away, he began to abuse me, and called your
worship a fool and an ass.


Sight. An ass! an impudent rascal! I Will ass you sirrah! I Will ass you, ye
villain, I will! you shall prove me an ass or I Will prove you a goose.


Henry. That your worship's an ass needs no proof, or a goat rather.


Sight. Sirrah! sirrah! how dare you talk to me in this manner? do know who
thou art talking to?


Henry. Perfectly well.


Sight. Tie him neck and heels, an impudent scoundrel! and to prison with him.

[They seize hold of Henry.
Henry. Nay, give me leave to strip first.

[ Henry discovers himself.
Henry. Now, Sir, I Am at your service: I was the wizard.


Aeth. My brother! astonishment!


Sight. Lord Henry!


Emma. My Henry a lord!


Sight. Mercy upon me! what will become of me?


Henry. Why don't you put your threats in practice Justice? where are your
ropes and your gibbets? methinks your worship cools upon it: what, not a word?
shame on thee! well may thou stiffen with thy guilt! I could forgive thy
imprisonment and insolence to me; but when I think on thy ungenerous and
execrable behavior to this lady, my temper catches fire at the deed, and whets
me to revenge.


Sight. Ah, your lordship! mercy! mercy! we are all frail.


Henry. But not all villains too I hope, like thee: nay, be ever dumb: can
there be excuse for thee! old and full of sin. -- What would have been thy
guilt, if fortune had not thrown me in the way to avert thy design, when like a
monster as thou art, thou threatenedst to force this fair one to compliance: is
it possible thou can form an excuse for such a crime? no, no, though her
beauty's so divine, that saints beholding her might break off their prayers,
and beg to taste the perfume of her lips. -- Come! come to my heart! thou
matchless piece of fortitude and love! [embraces] with heaven's will and thine,
we'll part no more.


Emma. Nay, then let danger threaten as it lists.


Aeth. I Am all astonishment and wonder!


Henry. O sister! take this jewel to thy breast; for she is a paragon of
constancy: I Have tried her truth, and, like the purest gold, have found her
speckless: she has gone a pilgrimage for me by day and night, through all the
perils of the dreary wild, and never faulter'd in a word or thought. Here, take
her, Aethelia, for she is one you long have wished to see: -- behold the
matchless Nut-brown Maid!


Aeth. Indeed! then you could not have presented me with a maid more welcome.
[embraces her.]


Emma. So kind a saying from so fair a friend, delights me much.


Aeth. Though my expectations were other than I Have met, I Am far more pleased in
the disappointment.


Henry. That Is kindly said; so generous an acknowledgment deserves a good
return; nor shall you find me backward to be grateful; I Will endeavor to repay,
though what I give may prove unwelcome.


Aeth. Where is the need? why would you lessen my regard, by thinking I have an
interest in my love?


Henry. Mistake me not, I only wish you happy as myself.


Aeth. That you know can never be, since you are in possession of the dearest
object of your heart, and mine is lost forever.


Emma. Alas! I pity you from my soul!


Henry. Never despair: with his worship's leave I Will take the liberty to send
for a gentleman, a friend of mine, and a most intimate acquaintance of the man
you love; who, I am persuaded, can give you some account; nay, will convince
you he still survives and loves you.


Aeth. Heavens! what do I hear!


Henry. What says your worship? will you condescend to oblige me?


Sight. In any thing your lordship shall please to ask: 'sheart, I Am glad he is
so pleasant, 'faith. [aside.]


Henry. Then send this instant for that injured youth, whose tale I fain would
hear again, that you may be a weeping auditor like me.


Sight. Who may your lordship mean?


Henry. The gentleman that helped me to escape.


Emma. What means my Henry?


Aeth. You make me tremble with conjecture: pray unfold the mystery, and ease
me of suspense.


Henry. The prisoner shall unriddle all; have patience but a little while, and
you will be paid for it. -- Your worship seems to hesitate: I Have not been used to
ask a favor twice, and therefore must demand him now: send for him, I say, or
take his place yourself for the refusal.


Sight. Oh, I Will send for him to be sure, my lord. -- Poor soul! -- Jailor go
fetch him hither directly. [Exit Jailor.] I hope your lordship did not doubt my
sending for him. -- Oh that I had hanged him a twelvemonth ago, and then he
would not have stood in judgment against me now! [aside.]


Henry. How fares my Emma? she seems impatient. -- O let no thought but joy
intrude upon the best of minds. -- Sister, be cheerful; I Will make you smile
before we part: you came to see a wizard, you will allow; and that you may not be
disappointed quite, I Will prove myself a conjurer at least.


Emma. If one who deals in mysteries be such, you are a conjurer indeed. -- O
this provoking curiosity! but I Am sure it bodes no ill since my Henry is
concerned.


SONG.
No more shall doubts invade my breast,
No more through woods and wilds I Will roam,
For Emma's heart shall be at rest,
While Henry's bosom proves it is home.
Where late the owl and nightingale,
Made night with double gloom appear;
There shall my Henry tell his tale,
And every grove and valley cheer.

Aeth. Alas, what can it mean! my heart seems conscious of some strange event;
I Am all surmise and fear.


Henry. And here comes one will tell you what it means.


Sight. Ah, poor soul! here he comes!


SCENE XII.
Enter Edwin. Aeth. Edwin!


Edwin. Aethelia! lord Henry!


Aeth. From oblivion or the grave returned!


Henry. From oblivion, if you please Aethelia; but as great a stranger to the
grave as you.


Emma. Is the gentleman an acquaintance of your sister's then?


Henry. He is, my love, the most intimate one in the world; and yet you see
they hardly speak to one another.


Emma. Alas, I pity their confusion.


Henry. Edwin, thy hand -- there is Aethelia, she is most glad to see thee,
though ashamed to own it yet, because her passion is a secret one: thou art
inclined to speak I know, but thy misfortunes, and appearance, I perceive, make
thee set too light a value on thyself: excuse me Edwin, I am as much thy friend
as ever, and am overjoyed to see thee; my sister there is something more than
friend, and she of course is glad to see thee too; I have presumed to speak
your inclinations, and flatter myself was pretty near the mark.


Edwin. For me, my lord, you have spoken as if some friendly genius had
whispered in my ear the dictates of my heart: but can Aethelia think on one so
poor, so sad as I? though I must confess the loss of her has been the greatest
sorrow that I Have felt, when barred from liberty and light.


Aeth. Nay then, my every doubt is hushed: nor will I blush to own, when 'midst
the gayest pageantry of life, I felt a sorrow for my Edwin's loss I never could
overcome.


Edwin. What do I hear! Oh, I could live upon the sound forever! love in spite
of fortune and her frowns, now makes me bold, and in Aethelia's name, I feast
on bliss eternal.


Henry. Now, sister, I hope you will own I Have a good knack at wizardizing?


Edwin. Is it possible you could assume that character so well?


Henry. As sure as you are here, through my enchantment.


Emma. What could have been your motive first?


Henry. Your beauty was the motive, and your matchless constancy has proved the
great reward, and confuted my every doubt of woman's love. -- O it is such
ecstasy of bliss to find the maid I love, the fairest of her sex, so true, so
faithful, and so kind.


SCENE XIII.
Enter Mrs. Sightless. Mrs. Sight. Where is she? a jade! an impudent hussy!

[ Sightless stops her, and claps his hand upon her mouth.
Sight. 'Swounds, are you mad! don't you see who is before you!


Henry. Pray Sir let her go on: let us hear what the good lady has to say.


Mrs. Sight. Nothing.


Sight. Nothing is a good answer; it is the soonest said you know my lord.


Henry. I wish I had no more to say to you; but in justice to this injured
gentleman, I must have a further hearing on his account; 'till when I shall beg
you will accept his lodgings for yourself, a night or two, which you have so
generously bestowed on him this twelvemonth past.


Mrs. Sight. This is all your own doings. -- I thought what it would come to,
I Will be hanged if I did not. -- O mercy on me!


Sight. My lord! your lordship! -- for heaven's sake! for my wife's sake!


Henry. I have no time to hear you now; therefore, Mr. Jailor, I beg you would take
care of his worship: give him this gentleman's apartments; keep the locks fast
upon him, and on the peril of your own life, that you give him liberty, 'till
you hear from me: here is something for encouragement; I know you love a bribe.
[gives him money.]


Jailor. God bless your honor my lord: I hope your honor, my lord, will not
let me be brought into a scrape for it.


Henry. Take care of his worship, I say; and you have nothing to fear.


Jailor. Enough said my lord: I Will take care of him, I warrant you. -- Upon my
soul, your worship, I Am sorry for it; but I cannot help it you see, therefore
your worship had better be budging to crib and make the best on it.


Mrs. Sight. O what distraction is this! [cries bitterly.]


Henry. Away with 'em jailor; I Am sick of their company.


Jailor. Your worship had better take heart.


Sight. O what a pickle I Am in!

[Exeunt Sightless, Mrs. Sightless, and Jailor.]
Henry. Now naught but pleasure and delight shall crown the coming hours.


Edwin. And lo! the villagers appear, with pipe and tabor; see they come this
way.


Henry. They shall be welcome all: come, my Edwin, the sound of joy shall drive
each dull and languid vapor hence; whilst Emma, the dearest treasure of my
heart, and mind, shall be the burden of each rustic's song.


SONG.
Hen. Now let every swain appear,
Come, come, ye maidens far and near,
With hearts elate, exempt from care,
From wake, from harvest-home and fair.
CHORUS.
Then let a pageant wreath be made,
To crown the matchless Nut-brown Maid, and.
A month of holidays we'll keep;
Each lovesick maid shall cease to weep:
No jealous doubts shall ever infest
A lover's heart, or break his rest.
CHORUS.
Then let a pageant wreath be made,
To crown the matchless Nut-brown Maid.

MOMUS, A POEM:
OR, A CRITICAL EXAMINATION INTO THE MERITS of the PERFORMERS, AND COMIC
PIECES, AT THE THEATER ROYAL in the HAY-MARKET.
MOMUS.
NO more shall Monkey's mimicry engage;
No more shall Cats and Dogs usurp the stage Alluding to Signior Placido's
Monkey, etc.
,
See Momus' sons, a single unit higher,
Divert the town with their detractive fire,
While patents royal are to Merit thrown,
To please Sir Francis Sir Francis Blake Delaval.
and a tasteless town.
See Foot the foremost of the mimic race,
Amuse the town with scandal and grimace;
While private characters each scene adorn,
Held up by him to meet the public scorn.
Where custom's brought on some peculiar mode
Of speech, or air, out of the common road;
If but deficient in a leg or eye,
Or, from misfortune, chance to look awry,
This maimed mimick, favored so by fate,
That he might still more truly imitate;
With self-vain zeal a stupid laugh to raise,
He with a low audacity conveys
His borrowed puns, with a sarcastic face,
Joined by the meanest of the acting race,
Without restraint his dearest friends expose, --
But Foot and friendship are eternal foes.
Never did folly, with such sway, maintain
Her seat, and, with her baby rattle, reign
Over Apollo and his laurell'd sons,
With glees and catches, mimicry and puns.
Like the loud quack, in some small country town,
Who, with his fool, entices every clown;
Displays his pranks, his filthy nostrums vends,
And, with a puff, their quality commends:
So Foot his own loud brazen trumpet blows,
And would, like him, his trash for wit impose:
As wrecks and rubbish follow every tide,
So every blockhead joins the laughing side.
Blessed with a face of humor, to engage
At once a drooping, and a laughing age,
Shuter with some pretensions to a name,
Stands forth distinguished in the book of fame:
The grateful public will for humor take
Whatever blunder he may chance to make;
Who, fond of laughter, oddity and whim,
Have fixed the mask of Comedy on him.
With face by Bacchus and by Venus marred,
For he with both the mighty powers warred;
In word expressive, and in gesture dry,
In action simple, with a meaning eye,
See Weston gravely force the hearty smile,
Nor pall with low buffoonery the while:
Whenever in Sneak or Drugger he appears,
Garrick attends with patient eyes and ears,
And owns his humor natural and true,
For Garrick must give genius her due.
See Dibble Davis better half the year
A mere poltroon -- a hero how appear!
Unnotic'd and obscure he struts unknown,
An utter stranger to the injured town,
'Till Foot, his patron, impotent and wise,
At once convinces each beholder's eyes,
That merit often beneath oppression dwells,
For see how Davis now himself excells.
Aimwell, Cassio, nay, and many more,
Such parts were never acted so before,
And that my Muse may show her meaning plain,
Hopes never to see 'em murdered so again.
An arrant stroller, from the lord knows where,
A true itinerant, now here, now there,
Who often from barn to barn, from town to town,
Ten nights has labored for a single crown;
See Bannister assume (unawed by shame)
A mimic's vile and despicable name;
For Bannister a Wilkinson would be,
But cannot so truly imitate as he.
To ape the manner of some better play'r,
An act ungen'rous, at the best, unfair;
Why should one actor villainously try
To damn another in the public eye?
Either by malice or by envy led,
To hurt his brother in his fame or bread?
When to the world it is evidently known,
He never could boast a method of his own.
Such are a pest and scandal to the stage,
And who but Foot would any such engage?
For all must own the stage was never designed
To point at this, or that, but all mankind.
Even devotees must own the stage of use,
Where it don't leave instruction for abuse.
Led by conceit, and fond of stage applause,
Yet stands condemned, if judged by acting laws;
With face, nor voice, nor action, to commend,
Or win one single auditor his friend;
See Sowden, great in capitals, appear,
Disgust the eye and grate the dullest ear;
For he most surely, of all human kind,
Was never by nature for the stage designed:
Long in Hibernia has he trod the field,
Where judgment often to prejudice must yield,
And with no small indulgence and regard,
Though every night some noble part he marred.
See him return, declining, and in age,
Riding, his only Hobbyhorse, the stage,
And with a boyish zeal the toy embrace,
Though time with years has wrinkled over his face.
Of vulgar accent, and of bully's pink,
A rolling sidle, with a knowing wink,
Coarse and robust, who might perhaps engage,
Had he been cast on the Broughtonian stage:
Palmer, self-confident, attempts to please,
In high wrote parts of elegance and ease;
But like to him, who rolled the stone in vain,
Will never the summit of his hopes attain;
Yet must we own him some small share of praise,
When Bruin, Loader, and such parts he plays;
He Is sure to please while in this line he steers,
For in such parts he still himself appears.
Then let him ever in that track remain,
Where he is sure, some small applause to gain,
And never more in gentlemen and beaux,
Disgrace the stage, the author and the clothes.
Barry, each season, might delight the town,
But that we have better actors of our own:
Yet think not, Barry, that I will disgrace,
Or mean to herd him with the common race;
He is an Actor every judge must own,
And long has proved the sav'rite of the town,
'Till Powell chanced within his walk to tread,
And plucked the blooming laurel from his head:
Yet in Othello must each actor yield,
There even Garrick must give up the field:
All own him for the part by nature framed,
And think of Barry when Othello's named.
Not so thy son, when in each part he tries,
To copy thee, too often from nature flies;
Yet will it faintly bear the name of fault,
To follow close the manners we are taught:
From thee, his every method he conceived,
From thee, each beauty and each fault received,
Nor should we deem him destitute of art,
Did he with decency perform one part.
O could my ardent, yet unwilling muse,
Obtain one kind and plausible excuse,
And, without censure, be indulged to spare,
And overlook the errors of the fair --
But chaste Astrea guides my feeble hand,
And will not listen to my warm demand.
Blessed with a form of elegance and ease,
Two requisites that must for ever please,
Who for a season might perhaps engage,
When Yates, awhile, retires from the stage:
See Dancer now each high-rate part possess,
And try to picture virtue and distress,
But judgment seems to leave her in the dark,
Whenever she aims to hit the doubtful mark.
With bold presumption, in despite of shame,
Jefferies attempts to join the rank of fame,
And void of judgment, attitude and speech,
She aims at characters above her reach;
When poor Alicia with distraction raves,
And calls for racks, for thunderbolts, and graves;
Did Cinderilla ever scold so well,
When in her airs she bids you go to hell?
When drove by love and passion and despair,
And having lost all hopes, begins to swear;
So sad Alicia, when by Jefferies played,
A mere impetuous termagant is made.
Forgive me, Jefferies, if I speak my mind,
True satire never leaves one fault behind;
But since she is brought thy errors forth to view,
So shall she speak of thy perfections too.
In third-rate parts, where nature don't require
Such skill in action, or such force of fire,
When nor by pride nor by ambition led,
The paths of mediocrity you tread,
There, spite of censure, shall thou justly raise,
The smile of pleasure and the voice of praise.
See one in parts of wit and humor, strive
To catch the manner of a Pope or Clive;
For Gardener the copyist betrays,
In every part of humor that she plays,
And from her acting it is plainly shown,
She likes their method better than her own;
But such, a barren genius declares,
Who, having no intention, borrows theirs.
Behind appear a despicable race,
Without one single requisite or grace,
Beneath the notice of my honest muse,
Who but to mention, would herself abuse.
Names both to genius and to fame unknown,
The needy stragglers of each country town;
Fit but to form some necessary group,
Or to complete Foote's miserable troop,
When furnished out with truncheons and with clothes,
See 'em a royal company compose.
By these enforced, and armed with impudence,
See him invade the boundaries of sense,
Break through the rules of judgment, wit, and taste,
And lay, with ridicule, their kingdoms waste;
Pleased with his own, behold the mocker strive,
With some success, his Grub-street to revive,
Vide one of his Puffs in the Gazetteer, on Thursday, the 9th of July.

And every season palls us with the same,
'Till jaded patience sickens at his name.
Each man of candor must in this agree,
His merit lies in inconsistency:
Pleased with the promise of some joyous fun,
Away to Foote's the herd unthinking run:
He gains his riches at the fool's expense,
Despised and shunned by every man of sense.
High on Parnassus would he wish to ride,
And, unrestrained, the winged courser stride;
But is it not most evident to all,
The limping Bard has had a fatal fall.
A famous play-wright would he seem to be,
A very Phoenix to posterity. --
Grief! that his name must with his body die,
And all his bantlings with their father lie,
When, lacking his distortion and grimace,
Their sole protection and their only grace,
Spurned and detested in some wiser age,
Will never more get footing on the stage.
Of these, the Minor, at the head we see,
Born at the time of his necessity;
When threatened by the horrors of a jail,
Was forced to hoist up every tattered sail;
And must have sunk had not the tortured Cole,
(Who, like a pirate, he unjustly stole)
Buoyed him, when sinking, to the welcome shore,
And saved at once his vessel and his store.
The Liar too, his masterpiece confessed,
A very fustian-jacket at the best.
The Mayor of Garratt next we bring to view,
Which we must own both laughable and new,
But candor will admit of no excuse,
Where she beholds such personal abuse.
His Patron, Commissary, even all
His filthy drolls, beneath this censure fall.
His Orators, a very hodge-podge see,
Made up of rubbish and absurdity,
Crammed full of puns, of nonsense and parade,
With neither plot, or meaning to it is aid:
But while to wit he makes the least pretense,
Or tries to introduce one line of sense;
With vain attempt he stammers at the task,
A very Midas in Apollo's mask.
These grown quite threadbare, and worn out with age,
Like Foot himself, a nuisance to the stage,
He Is brought his Tailors, like a thrifty friend,
To botch their elbows and their linings mend;
Did Smithfield ever produce a bill so rare,
When Punchinello was the hero there?
Did ever Flockton's tragedy excel?
Was ever shew-bill drawn up half so well?
Did ever quack with such parade engage?
Not even Rock when he adorned the stage:
Did Tailor ever with patchwork form a coat,
And without measure too, as Foot has wrote?
Did ever play-wright exercise his quill
With half that humor, or with half that skill?
And stocked, like him, with true poetic lore,
Write such a Taylor's tragedy before.
Tried, and condemned by the indulgent town,
The father will not his newborn idiot own:
But fain would bribe the bawdy muse it is mother,
To lay the frightful monster on another.
Yet if with close inspection you should trace
The striking outlines of the infant's face,
The father's strong resemblance you will behold,
As die to die, cast in the self-same mould.
As Epicureans with luxuriant waste,
Who lose at once their appetite and taste,
And try to teaze the stomach every hour
With something sweet, or else with something sour;
Or when the rake is quite indiff'rent grown,
Sated with all the pleasures of the town;
See him from place to place with transport fly,
In search of pleasure in variety.
When sick of high life he begins to grow,
He tries to find a relish in the low;
Foot next arises to his vacant mind,
For there he is sure the simplest fare to find;
No heavy sentence to perplex the brain,
No searching morals on the mind remain,
But, like the froth, dissolving in the taste,
And, ere it meets the lip, begins to waste:
While in our ears he dins the mighty pother,
It enters one, and hurries out at the other.
THE VICTIM, A POEM:
INSCRIBED TO JOHN WILKES, ESQUIRE.
THE VICTIM.
IN vain the Nine, with all their charms invite,
In vain, though urged by zeal, may poets write,
Pamphlets and novels, magazines and plays,
From day to day a short sensation raise;
And like the rocket mounting to the sky,
Catch with delight the pleasure-hunting eye
But ere the heart is warmed, the joy is over,
They blaze, they bounce, and strait are seen no more.
O for that art, the sacred art divine,
That taught thee, Wilkes, to form the living line,
To charm the soul, to search the guilty breast,
To rouse the Favorite from luxuriant rest;
Who, spite of power, or tyrannic pride,
Dares to be just, and take the weaker side,
Whenever oppression, or when party rage,
O'erwhelms a starved and unsuspecting age.
In times of old, but times alike to these,
Full of corruption, luxury and ease;
When virtue bled at Mammon's gilded door,
And naught was thought a crime, -- but being poor;
When Famine stalked rapacious through the land,
Whilst Justice slept with daggers in her hand;
When senators, for gold, at murder winkt,
And godlike Mercy long had been extinct;
When injured Merit long had su'd in vain,
And famished peasants left the fertile plain;
When Science, spurned, to foreign nations fled,
And Wisdom often at Folly's altar bled;
In such an age, how rare, alas, to find
One man existing with untainted mind.
Yet of such god-like mortals have I read,
When Rome bore all these errors on her head;
Who durst, in spite of tyranny and pride,
Stem the rough torrent of the raging tide.
That Rome could boast her worthies it is true;
Blessed be my stars, for Britain boasts 'em too;
And must maintain her liberty and fame,
Whilst she preserves, unstained, a Camden's name;
Through him each Briton keeps secure his door,
And dreads despotic messengers no more; --
Yet must he own, nor think it a disgrace,
To Wilkes he owes his dignity and place.
Though Liberty's in every breast infused,
By all adored, and yet by all abused,
The verriest wretch that treads the lawless streets,
Will take the right of every lord he meets:
My lord, in councils, hold superior sway,
And takes each charter'd privilege away,
Usurps each blessing, given us from above,
And tries each wholesome custom to remove.
O may destruction wait the villain's head,
Who first the baleful seeds of faction spread?
Scotchman or English, whosoe'er he be,
May fate prescribe an ax his destiny,
May Justice all his latent projects mar,
And six his hateful head on Temple Bar,
Scotchman or English: I will not dispute,
The greater knave, a B -- -- -d or a B -- e,
Or sound the cause from whence such evils rise,
I Will leave that task to time's all-seeing eyes,
And wait the promise of the wise and great,
Who move by interest's mighty wheel of state.
You're wrong, at such a time, old Caution cries,
With head often shaken, and uplifted eyes,
Grave and important, eloquent and slow,
Pretending every thing on earth to know;
You're wrong, said he, it is not for you or I,
To plague ourselves, and preach of liberty;
Let others fill their heads, and crack their brains,
Give us the pleasure; take who will the pains;
Address an exile! -- it is a fruitless scheme,
You ought to make some minister your theme,
Some panegyric, or some lofty ode,
If to the great you mean to make your road;
It Is better far, than exercise your pen,
In holding up to view the faults of men; --
Yet hold, I cried, your counsel pray forbear,
I will no more such admonition hear:
And may contempt for ever blast my lays,
Whenever I flatter where I mean to praise.
Though pale Detraction with her hundred heads,
Her aconitum through the nation spreads,
Infects each mind, and dims each candid eye,
And stupifies the babe credulity;
Yes, I will speak! though vengeance over me hung
With threatening eyes to stop my ardent tongue;
Though exiled, and by party overthrown,
Bereft of every rent-roll of thy own,
Denied, in peace, to tread thy native land,
Where every foreign beggar bears command;
Where knaves, from every shore, in splendor tread,
While many a worthy Briton dies for bread.
Shall I forget? when welt'ring in thy blood,
I saw thee panting for thy country's good;
Sanguine in Liberty's immortal laws,
I saw thee fall a martyr to her cause;
Struggling, against death, with Roman fortitude,
Till thou his all-destroying arm subdued.
But Fate preserved thee for some better end,
To prove ere yet a sinking nation's friend.
In spite, what dull Indiff'rence may suggest,
For fools are ever apt to think the best;
And, like the ox, no dangers ever dread,
Till the sad stroke falls heavy on their head;
For, O my country! feel you not the wound?
Look back awhile, and cast your eyes around;
View but the lawns, where once with glee you fed,
Where Plenty once her choicest treasure's spread:
Where peace was wont to smile throughout the plains,
And labor met reward for all her pains.
Now Famine takes her seat, whose baleful eye,
Blasts every blade, and kills each matchless die;
Peace leaves her cot, and Plenty takes her flight,
Whilst rose-lipt Hope is overwhelmed in night,
Sunk is each eye, and sallow every cheek,
The rifl'd poor in vain for refuge seek,
In vain the hunger'd infant cries for bread,
While the sad mother droops her woeful head;
Her breast its wonted aliment denies,
And famine-struck her little cherub dies;
Fell Hyporborean laws, alas prevail,
Sunk is each science, crowded every jail;
Famine and pride now rule with dreadful awe,
Overwhelm fair Commerce, and pervert each law.
The sacred mandate first by heaven assigned,
Willed by the God of Nature for mankind,
Fair order and society to frame,
And make eternal love's extatic name; --
See human laws, presumptive break the tie,
And set the faith bound-hand at liberty;
Divorce succeeds divorce, whenever the mind
Debased is to some other face inclined;
Unknown to love, yet urge the holy state,
Submit the knee, and rashly stipulate;
They greet the portion, but return the wife,
With scanty pittance for the rest of life;
F -- -- oy, the muse abominates to see,
So vile a part so well performed by thee;
The mind corrupt, to every vice a slave,
Thy every act still constitutes the knave.
But such examples are the subjects own,
They cannot say they have 'em from the throne;
There in the greatest may you plainly see,
The envied state of true tranquillity;
A royal pattern for a nation's guide,
To all who wish to list on virtue's side;
The best of father's in the best of kings,
In whom benevolence for ever springs!
A lovely offspring dimpl'd over with charms,
To grace the throne, or weild the British arms;
When years mature shall call 'em to defend
A nation's right, and prove each subject's friend;
To dignify with fame the living page,
And be the wonder of some future age.
Sealed be each eye, and deaf be every ear,
To shield the heart, and stop the ebbing tear,
Dark was the hour, and involved in night,
When Rapine reigned, assassins shunned the light.
When Agathonian riots gorged the soul,
And traitors trembled at the midnight owl,
When bawds for pay, seduced the blushing fair,
Entrapping Virtue with a golden snare.
I'll-star'd Lucretia! at that fatal time,
Ripe in thy charms, and tempting in thy prime;
The lustful Tarquin stole into thy arms,
And rifl'd all thy virgin-boasted charms.
What days but these could such a deed restore?
What man could act it but a Baltimore?
And who like him could grace the amorous page;
The debauchee, and Tarquin of the age?
Unhappy maid, may Justice plad thy cause;
Nor suffer Mammon to subvert her laws,
To set fair Truth and Innocence aside,
And overwhelm thee in a golden tide.
O may some Camden rescue thee from shame,
Nor let the mighty stigmatize thy name,
Reveal each action to the public eye,
Restore each truth, invalidate each lie,
Nor let the potent ravisher prevail,
How well soever he varnish over his tale;
May fierce Alecto, with gorgonian locks,
In vengeance chase him to the Stygian rocks;
To howl unpitied on the burning shore,
Where the baleful fiends eternal discord roar.
Each nation boasts its own peculiar vice,
From constitution, or from mere caprice;
France is to fashion an eternal slave,
And ever known more politic than brave:
The Britons rout 'em on the sea or field,
But to their fashions and their follies yield,
Who ever show, deny it if you can,
The arrant coxcomb overcomes the man,
So fond of mode and nonsense are we grown,
We scarce can relish one thing of our own.
But from our pu'rile and unstable state,
We meanly condescend to imitate.
The hattremendous once, and deeply brimm'd,
Anon behold it to a cockle trimmed;
The shoe once buckl'd half way to the knee
Anon it is buckled to the toe you see,
And Monsieurs coat attracts with equal charms,
Whether the skirts hang from the hips or arms;
When every alien, take it for a rule,
Will call his awkward coppiest a fool;
What height of madness, and what mode intense,
At once to forfeit decency and sense.
O never more the British name degrade,
Nor be again the dupes of fashion made;
But be yourselves, bold, generous and wise,
And all such foreign frippery despise.
The Scotch, all maxims but their own deride,
From native envy, or from native pride;
Bold in the field, and lettered in the school,
Declares the Scot cannot be quite a fool;
Though bare each hill, and steril every plain,
They try to culture and manure the brain.
From this their pride proceeds, whose bootless store,
For ever keeps dame Fortune from the door.
Edina, ever with a jealous eye,
Frowned on her sister's vast fertility,
Often has she led her legions to the field,
And smote Britannia's adamantine shield,
Whose fierce repulse obliged her famished band
To keep the limits of her native land;
The sword in vain with all her might she drew,
In hope our envied nation to subdue;
To institute her base despotic laws,
To save a Stewart, and defend his cause;
Whose sanguine name has left a purple stain,
Fit to adorn a priest-rode tyrant's reign.
Now hostile hopes subside, the supple knee,
Pretended friendship, and hypocrisy,
Make more advancements in the public weal
Than all the havoc of the pointed steel;
For what but discord has been heard alone,
Ever since a Stuart stood so near the throne,
To whom can Fate these murmurings impute
But the despotic principles of B -- -.
Exotic maxims cause domestic broils,
And every tranquil happiness despoils;
The knavish tutor, politic and kind,
Protests his friendship but conceals his mind,
Which ever leaning to some selfish end,
He acts the villain most to seem the friend;
My lord lays open his unwary heart,
And falls a victim to a traytor's art.
Fond of her flights the muse would fain intrude,
To draw unskilled, a faint similitude,
'Tween who, or what, I Will leave mankind to guess,
Or those who wish a nation's happiness;
By other's folly we are often shown
The hateful mirror, and despise our own:
All can behold the blemish but the blind,
To let him feel it then is surely kind.
Once on a time, the famed historian writes,
Skilled in the annals of the Troglodites: --
(Capricious realm, in Africa remote,
Where feeds the pard, where climbs the mountain-goat:)
A noble youth, benevolent and kind,
To vice a foe, to every good inclined;
Born to a throne, and raised to high degree,
Ere he had tasted of maturity;
Sprung from a stock that had been long adored,
Whose valiant arms a welcome peace restored;
A long contention with a tyrant held,
And made the thistle to the olive yield.
The plains rejoiced, and blessed the great event,
And drank the cup of plenty and content:
Even infants whispered great Muzeedan's name,
And virgins crowned him with the wreath of fame.
A slave from Envy, and from Famine sprung,
All supple was his knee, all sweet his tongue:
Yet held Muzeedan in eternal hate,
His foe's dear kinsman, and his advocate:
Albuda he, a northern mountaineer,
His looks were agalastic and severe;
His eyes malignant, with a tear concealed,
While he his story to the youth revealed;
Feigned a false zeal, and flattered in his praise,
The track each villain takes ere he betrays;
And like the pill all gilded to the eyes,
Few can discover where the poison lies;
Till with celerity it makes its way
Through every pore, and shuts the eyes from day.
The slave prevailed, the youth too soon believed,
The mind untainted, is the first deceived;
His manners gentle, and his speech was fair,
His breast kept no malignant tenant there,
Save what Albuda introduced by art;
Who drained the springs of virtue from his heart;
Infusing strange chimera's in his mind,
To rule tyrannic, and oppress mankind;
When every needy minion of his own,
Was introduced, and planted round the throne.
Lost to himself, Muzeedan's mind gave way,
And bore the scepter with despotic sway:
The subject saw it, and in murmurs loud,
A threatening discord breathed throughout the crowd;
Whilst hydra-like, Revenge reared up her head,
At whose dread roar the peaceful village fled;
Domestic broils, and savage war began,
And with destruction through the nation ran:
Rebellion drew her sword, whose hand, like fate,
Shock the foundation of the throne and state.
Albuda saw it with enraptured eyes,
And vulture-like he stood to seize his prize,
Plunged the vile poniard in Muzeedan's side,
And bathed his fingers in the purple tide;
Then with his legions, who in secret lay,
Stole the long envied diadem away,
Rushed on the crowd confused, who thought to save
Their liberty, but fell still more a slave;
With eyes dejected, and with tears they viewed,
The sacred name of liberty subdued,
And with despair and agony they saw,
Rise in her stead each hyperborean law,
Whose arms oppressive made the subject groan,
From the hard burdens of a tyrants throne.
O may each monarch shun Muzeedan's fate,
And every subject closely eye the state,
Nor suffer one Albuda more, so near,
To whisper poison in a prince's ear.
May plenty flow, and public discord cease,
May Brunswick reign in everlasting peace: --
Cursed be the tongue -- audacious -- that shall dare
To vent its poison on a name so fair;
Whose royal stock bore terror in the field,
And yet with lenity the scepter held;
Mercy subdued the warlike victor's breast,
And justice shone illustrious on his crest;
Peace was the study of his royal mind,
At once the friend and father of mankind.
SONGS, etc.
YOUNG JOCKEY OF THE CARRON SIDE.
Sung by Mrs. Barthelemon at Marybone.
Set to Music by Mr. Barthelemon.
YE silly lasses of the green,
Your leers and smiles are vain,
Who try with gaudy geer to wean
My bonny bonny swain.
He sees your scarlet knots and bows,
But views them with disdain,
For I alone receive the vows,
Of my dear bonny swain.
He is the wonder and the pride
Of all the rural plain,
No shepherd treads the Carron side
Like my dear bonny swain.
While Carron gently steals along,
To hear his lovely strain,
The flocks and herds impatient throng
Around my bonny swain.
Next Sabbath is our wedding day!
I never shall fear again,
Lest some might steal the heart away
Of my dear bonny swain.
Then, lasses, try with all your skill
My Jockey's love to gain,
When I have both the heart and will
Of my dear bonny swain.
SONG.
Sung by Mrs. Barthelemon at Marybone.
Set to Music by Mr. Barthelemon.
SURE Wolly will never return back again,
I Have waited this hour or more;
Like the poor linnet, I am left to complain,
That sits on the whinns of the moor;
When will my Wolly return?
When will my Wolly return?
Some damsel has stole the dear heart of my swain,
And I shall never see my sweet Wolly again.
The thrush and the ousel are now gone to rest,
The bat and the owl are a-wing,
The sun has this hour been sunk in the west,
And night-lulling nightingales sing;
Alack and a-well-a-day,
What can my Wolly delay?
Some damsel has stole the dear heart of my swain,
And I shall never see my sweet Wolly again.
SONG.
Sung by Mrs. Baddeley at Vaux-hall.
Set to Music by Mr. Snow.
THE morn was fair, and Phoebus peept
Over the blue mountains head,
While in his cavern Boreas slept,
And Morpheus fled the mead.
The cowslips opened their velvet leaves,
And incensed every vale,
Whilst Cupid wantoned on the trees,
Rocked by some gentle gale.
Young Celon came by four o'clock,
To meet his lovely fair,
Neglecting all his tender flock,
That once was all his care.
With plaintive notes he lulled the grove,
Till Eddie trod the plain;
But soon as he beheld his love,
He changed his mournful strain.
Like Flora's handmaid, decked in green,
The smiling fair appeared,
Her countenance was all serene,
At once beloved and feared.
With Love and Joy, fixed on each face,
They rambl'd blithe and gay,
And with a mutual fond embrace,
They fixed their wedding day.
The smiling maids and jolly swains,
Donn'd in their best array,
Came trudging over the verdant plains,
And made a holiday.
In rustic dance and merry song,
None cared to be outdone;
The swains they wrestl'd all day long,
And gambol'd down the sun.
A CATCH.
To be sung by Three Men as the Lines are numbered.
1 WHAT makes a modern gentleman
10 The glory of the nation
5 To be as simple as you can
8 A coward in a passion.
7 To keep a whore and starve a wife
2 The tailor and the tonser
9 Damme, boys, but that is life
4 To have a wife and sconce her.
11 The world must end as it began
6 Say, is it not the fashion
3 Wed first, then whore, that is the plan
12 A world of innovation.
SONG.
Whenever my Patty trips the green,
I feel a pleasing pain;
She gives a luster to the scene,
The Dian of the plain.
How does my heart with rapture heave,
When for an humble bow,
A grateful curtsey I receive;
Say, is it love or no.
Would I a happy shepherd were,
And she a shepherd's maid,
That I might tell my tale sincere,
Beneath some rural shade.
But now with awe I view each charm,
And fear my flame to own,
Lest she should all my love disarm,
With one indignant frown.
Ye Gods inspire me to the deed,
Incline the maid to hear,
For, O I love! I love indeed!
And with a heart sincere.
List, lovely Patty, to my strain,
And ease my tortured breast;
Ye Gods, I Would never more complain,
If once with Patty blessed.
A DIALOGUE SONG.
CLODY and CLARA. IS it because I love you more
Than mortal man ever loved before?
Is it your sport to use me so,
Will you not marry, Clara?
Clara. No.
Why will you tease me every day,
When I Have so often said ye, nay?
Have I not often bid you go?
Prithee now leave me, Clody.
Clody. No.
Would you then see poor Clody die,
Rather than with his suit comply?
Have you no feelings for my woe,
When I so dearly love you?
Clara. No.
Were you in love all day to pine,
And at my door all night to whine,
My heart would still the harder grow;
Now will you follow Clara?
Clody. No.
Since you're so savage and unkind,
I Will try some other maid to find;
But none shall ever treat me so,
For Clara has discharged me.
Clara. No.
I hope my Clody does but rave;
Have I not been thy loving slave?
I was in joke, pray do not go;
Will you not Clara marry?
Clody. No.
You Have teas'd the humble mouse too long,
You Have done your faithful Clody wrong,
Now to the winds my love I Will blow,
And heed no more your yes or no.
Clara. Prithee, my Clody, do not go.
Clody. Have you not, said too often, no.
Clara. Are you not joking? sure you are!
Clody. Have you not born the joke too far?
Clara. But I will never more do so,
Say, will you not believe me.
Clody. No.
TO A FRIEND IN THE COUNTRY.
SPITE of the hub-bub of the town,
Between the multitude and crown;
To 'scape the sousing of a shower,
And crib unto myself an hour;
I in a coffee-house took shelter,
For troth it rained helter skelter:
I know what I had there to do,
So down I sat to write to you;
Yet I should be most glad to see
You do the same, and write to me;
Though now, you say, you spend your time
To better purposes than rhyme:
Love has stolen that heart away,
That used so wantonly to play,
On famed Parnassus' musing hill,
Or near the Heliconian rill;
Most glad I am; (and yet I pine
So dear a comrade to resign)
Most glad I am, the smiling boy
Has let you taste Hymenial joy;
The most substantial bliss of life,
A constant, loving, virtuous wife;
With joy I hear; in fancy see,
Nor envy your tranquillity;
I would not covet from a brother,
I only wish I Would such another;
A country house as far from town,
A horse that I could call my own,
A dog and gun at my command,
Well matched or trained to my hand:
To hear the bleating herds complain;
When land-storms drive them from the plain;
Or when at morn with joy they bleat,
Their fleecy friends again to meet:
And then reflect on what I Have seen,
When I Have in Covent Garden been;
Where thieves and vintners, pimps and whores,
Crowd around their hellish doors;
A tricking, flattering, fawning race,
Who Are glad to whisper your disgrace;
But loudly to your face commend,
And give you credit like a friend;
But soon they bring you to repent,
And raise your debt to ten per cent.
Yet hold, my Muse, I prithee hold,
The shower's over, my coffee cold;
Pray do not run me out of rhyme,
Left I should want another time.
VERSES On a distressed Family, that were ruined by a Great Man's Promise.
Supposed to be spoken by the Father.
NO, no, I will no more believe,
Or listen to thy tale,
Thou shall no more my ear deceive --
Thy promises are stale.
No more the fancied prospect view,
That charmed my anxious eyes,
Which thou uncharitably drew,
Thy falsehoods to disguise.
For ever darkened be the scene,
That led me first astray;
Where Hope was clad in lively green,
And Promises were May.
Ah, why should that strong anchored maid,
Lend knaves so fair a cloak?
For promises with Varo fade,
Before they well are spoke.
Hence, thou bewitching, smiling fiend,
Thou shall no more delude;
Thy word is smoke, thy promise wind,
But ah, what wind so rude?
Now on a wide and troubled sea,
Am I for ever tossed?
And, Varo, when I think on thee,
My peace of mind is lost.
The mournful partner of my breast,
My little cherubs too,
Alas, my heart is sore distressed,
When ere I think of you.
How does it rack me to despair,
To hear my Mira sigh;
Or when the big heart-cleving tear,
Stands trembling in her eye.
When round my knees, with lisping grief,
My little dear ones prate;
I once could give their wants relief,
But now it is too late.
Bereft of all domestic joys,
I strive to hope in vain;
A broken promise often destroys,
But seldom cures again.
ON MR. AND MRS. PRINCE'S BIRTH-DAYS.
The one born on Christmas Day, the other on Christmas-Eve.
HARK! the Robin-red-breast sings,
And with his little gladsome wings,
Rejoices that the season's near,
Which brings high merriment and cheer;
When every Bumpkin's morning cry,
Is ale and cake, roast beef and pie;
Poor Robin on the threshold comes,
And feasts upon the scattered crumbs;
When full, he mounts the snow-clad tree,
And sings his carol merrily.
At such a time, would you believe,
Fair B -- was born one Christmas-Eve;
Fame and Report still farther say,
A Prince was born on Christmas Day;
As if both eager to partake
Of the rich well-sugar'd cake;
As if each bore a greater mind,
Than one day more to be confined;
But hearing each exalted voice,
They came impatient to rejoice.
Ere eighteen winters had slid by,
Young Cupid, like an archer fly,
Together met 'em in a grove,
Talking over the theme of love;
When leaves were green, and Flora spread
Her varied carpet over the mead;
He took his aim with godlike art,
And pierced at once, the Prince's heart;
He aimed another at the fair,
Then, laughing, cried, I Have shot a pair;
As a true sportsman always sends
His wounded game to treat his friends;
As Hymen and the God of Love,
Were ever known as hand and glove;
He sent, and signed 'em with his name;
Hymen received, and with his flame,
He touched their hearts, and bound their hands,
And bid 'em follow his commands;
To wear his signet on their breast,
Whether exalted, or distressed;
Nor let one cold indignant frown,
Ever wither Love's immortal crown;
Then healed the wounds which love had made,
They both consented and obeyed:
The Prince a husband still remains,
And she a Princess -- both in chains;
But wear them cheerful, and confess
The chain of love is happiness.
EPIGRAM ON DR. WEEZLE,
Doctor to the honorable Lumber Troop; who voluntarily gave his attendance,
and officiously attempted to ruin a young gentleman and a tender family; -- who
never injured him.
OFficious, Sir, with strut and look so big,
With lanthorn body and tremendous wig;
Is It not enough, that for mere want of skill,
You daily some unhappy patient kill?
Must you, when all your filthy nostrums fail,
Lurk, bailiff like, and drag your friends to jail;
You take the life, take soul too, all you can,
Turn bailiff for the Devil; -- that is your plan.
You lurk so cunning, and look out so well,
The Devil need not doubt you will furnish hell.
ON THE DEATH OF LORD EGLINGTON.
In the manner of the Chevy Chase.
THE morn was fair, the air serene,
And cheered each shepherd lad,
The rustling woods were dressed in green,
The vales with verdure clad.
Ceres her golden crops had shorn,
And harvest-home had sung;
With Dian's hounds and early horn,
The hills and valleys rung.
At such a time, on such a day,
Lord Eglington arose,
Then sallied he with horse away,
And to the woodland goes.
His coat was all of Saxon green,
And velvet was his cap;
A neater sportsman never was seen,
To scout the mountain lap.
A bolder steed, a braver Sir,
Never followed hunter's cry,
For ever he plied the chafing spur,
He seemed to ride and fly.
His dogs well trained, no better sure,
Ere couched at command;
A gun more certain and secure,
Never graced a sportsman's hand.
Over rocks, through woods, and down the steep,
Like Perseus in his pride;
'Twould glad the heart to see him sweep,
Adown the mountain side.
Beneath an hill, alack! the day!
A lurking poacher stood;
All eager, watching for his prey,
Beside a lonely wood.
Who thought ere long, some snipe or hare,
Would rise within his shot;
He cocked his gun, he trimmed his snare,
But little proved his lot.
Anon a lovely woodcock stired,
Within the watery brake,
Which soon the watchful spaniel heard,
Who to his master spoke.
The poacher heard the fond alarm,
And saw the victim rise;
He poised his piece with skilful arm;
He shot and hit his prize.
Then instantly recharg'd with speed,
And watched with greedy eye;
But little thought who next would bleed,
What nobler game should die.
Unlucky shot, unlucky bird,
To loose thy harmless state;
Unlucky Eglington that heard,
The summons to thy fate.
O had thou elsewhere been engaged;
We had not felt this woe;
Had thou in warlike combat waged,
With some more noble foe.
Some fiend of fate was sure abroad,
And mischief bore command;
Thy stars combind in one accord,
And death stood dart in hand.
My lord pursued the fatal sound,
With anger in his mind,
And in the vale the poacher found,
Upon his gun reclined.
When thus he 'gan the man to chide,
That durst invade the law;
Who strove his gun and game to hide,
And blushed with guilt and awe.
Resign, presumptious hind, resign!
Thou have no business here;
These lands and woods thou know are mine,
Resign, or thou wilt pay dear.
I Will not resign thou haughty lord,
Although these lands are thine,
I Have said it, and I Will keep my word,
The gun shall still be mine.
The hand that gave each creature breath,
And planted every tree,
Will shield me from the hand of death,
As soon as it will thee.
Impartial nature never designed,
That lords alone should reign;
To tax the air, to rule the wind,
The tyrants of the plain.
I feel an appetite and will,
A thirst for pleasure too,
And have as great a right to kill,
And eat, as well as you.
Now boiled the blood within the veins,
Of brave lord Eglington;
Rage unbridl'd all her reins,
Whilst veng'ence spurred him on.
With blood all blurted in his face,
And lightning in his eyes;
I Will not endure this language base,
From one like thee he cries.
Harsh was the language which he spoke,
Like Hercules he frowned;
And with a stout and pithy oak,
He struck him to the ground.
As one felled by a thunder stroke,
He speechless lay awhile;
Then half recovered, thus he spoke,
In melancholy style.
Inhuman lord! you little know,
The means that brought me here;
You might have spared each cruel blow,
And yielded me a tear.
Is it because that chance has thrown
Thee into fortune's arms,
To call these woods and vales thy own,
Which yield a thousand charms.
Is it for this, that thou should be
So cruel and unkind,
A stranger to humanity,
Where poverty you find.
It is because thou art in need,
Of what my gun has slain;
If that should be the case, indeed,
I never would shoot again.
Or if like me, thou should depend,
On what the fields afford;
Who, save my gun, can boast no friend,
To furnish out my board.
For know proud Lord! I should not care,
To venture forth for game;
Were I not hunted by despair,
To risk my life and name.
Go to yon cot, and there survey,
A scene Would melt a stone,
Where often I sigh the live-long day,
In melancholy moan.
Where the sad mother weeping stands,
Surrounded by a brood,
That lift their little harmless hands,
And cry aloud for food.
Where through the low and shattered wall,
Keen blows the whistling wind,
When snows in fleecy showers fall,
And winter bites unkind.
When trees that late with leaves were hung,
Small icicles adorn;
And where the cheerful thrushes sung,
The stock-doves sit forlorn.
There bolden'd by my wretched state,
Through these fair lands I roam;
And when good luck shall prove my fate,
I bring my treasures home.
With joy I see my infants feed,
And bless the lucky day;
I feel no sorrow at the deed,
While round my hearth they play.
Audacious clown, replied my lord,
That dares thus to my face,
Thy lawless practices record,
And boast an act so base.
But these instructions I Will not bear,
And therefore clown resign;
Thou shall, nor woodcock shoot nor hare,
While these fair lands are mine.
Throw down your arms and go your gate,
And follow good advice;
You will repent it man, too late,
If here you venture twice.
I Will go my gate, the poacher cried,
And here offend no more.
The world, thank Heaven's, fair and wide,
'Twas made for rich and poor.
It Is gi'en the bold and pampered steed,
To brouze in pastures gay;
On rich and luscious food to feed,
And wanton all the day.
Whilst Nature's slave, the humble ass,
Dejected, meek, and poor,
Is glad a leisure day to pass,
Upon the barren moor.
Released his burden, there he feeds,
And thinks the thistle sweet;
He asks no more than nature needs,
A belly full's a treat.
He thirsts not for the gold he bears,
When weary on the road;
But ever happy he appears,
If moderate his load.
So I emburden'd with distress,
Denied these vales to tread;
I Will forth to yonder wilderness,
And seek my daily bread.
The forest broad, the dreary wilds,
Though poor, may yet be kind;
There fortune, yield me but thy smiles,
Then blow the roughest wind.
I ask not for her gold, nor wealth,
Be those for lazy pride;
Give me but raiment, food, and health,
The rest let fools divide.
There spite of thee, thou haughty peer!
I Will drink tranquillity;
Nor shall I live again in fear,
Of such a thing as thee.
Cease, cease thou presumptious slave,
Nor think I Will list to thee?
Thou empty moralizing knave,
How dare thou preach to me.
Resign thy gun, thou loon, I say,
Or by my soul I swear,
I Will make thee fellow, rue the day,
That ever thou came here.
Then aiming at the poacher's head,
Who laughed at what he spoke;
As if he meant to strike him dead,
Even at a single stroke.
The poacher to evade the blow,
Three paces back retired;
His face with passion 'gan to glow,
As if his heart were fired.
I swear then, by my breath and blood!
My gun and I will not part,
To prove that it is contents are good,
Here take 'em to thy heart!
This done, down upon the ground he fell,
Like to a wounded deer,
And sighing wished a long farewell,
To his Corina, dear.
Now all aghast the poacher stood,
To see his deed so foul;
Convulsed boiled his guilty blood,
And horror seized his soul.
As one distact and wild was he,
All stiffen'd with surprise;
Then falling on his bended knee,
Aloud to heav'en cries.
Have mercy! mercy! Gracious God!
Withold the hand of death!
O spare, O spare thy dreadful rod!
O spare, O spare his breath!
Where shall I go, where shall I hide?
How 'scape thy wondrous eyes?
How drive the spector from my side,
When conscience -- murder cries?
Accursed be this vile machine!
Accursed the luckless hour!
O had I in the desert been,
Where savages devour.
Or near the threatening billows swell,
Had I been doomed to stand;
Where thy prophetic mermaids yell,
Along the dreadful strand.
O! had some sky-lark raised in air,
Or had it proved my lot,
That snipe, or partridge, quail or hare,
Had fallen beneath my shot.
For, ah! I little thought to find,
Such noble game as thee;
Or that the fates had ever designed
This bloody task for me!
Dear hasty youth, could I restore
That life I Have taken away,
I would my better stars implore,
And pine from day to day.
O let me raise thy drooping head,
And lift thee from the ground,
And leave, O leave, this goary bed,
Whilst angels heal the wound!
With deathly cheek, and fainting eye,
The bleeding Earl replied;
O bear me Poacher, ere I die,
To my Corina's side.
There let me take my last farewell,
Once more behold her charms,
That fame to future times may tell,
I died within her arms.
Do this! be all thy sins forgiven,
Although by thee I bleed,
Do this! and may all-judging heaven,
O'erlook thy bloody deed.
The tears fast down the Poacher's cheek,
In streaming showers fell;
He beat his breast, he strove to speak,
And strove to say farewell.
Grief choked all utt'rance for a while,
But now to words gave way;
When in a soul-destracted style,
He 'gan with tears to pray.
Great God of mercy, yet restore,
This sad, this bleeding lord;
For O his goodness wounds me more,
Then could his keenest sword.
O spare my shame, my grief, despair,
O spare his precious life,
In pity to that tender fair,
His wished his promised wife.
Ah me! she comes, my hateful deed,
Is blown through all the world;
I soon shall be, (too sure I read)
To dark perdition hurled.
My glass is run, Time tolls my knell,
My wretched reign is over. --
My wife, my little babes farewell,
I never shall see you more.
Accursed am I, of all mankind,
To leave ye thus undone;
Ah! where will you a father find,
When I am dead and gone.
With eyes distract, disheveled hair,
The sad Corina came;
Her cries and shriekings pierced the air,
With calling on his name.
The names of Death and Eglington,
She joined in accents sad. --
In pity mighty God look down;
-- O let me not be mad!
Will thou eclipse him from my sight.
By death's relentless hand?
My blessed Sun, that shon so bright,
The wonder of the land!
He saw her pangs, her voice he heard,
He pressed her to his side;
Death in his face, all pale appeared,
He blessed her, sighed, and died.
THE BIRD'S NEST. A FABLE.
FOUR giddy boys played truant once,
Who never blushed at name of dunce;
But rather choose to live as fools,
Than bear confinement in the schools:
As near a wood they chanced to stray,
They found a bird's-nest in their way;
All eager, scrambling for the nest;
But one much taller than the rest,
Secured the prize; each claimed a share,
The tallest did not hold it fair,
And with an aggravating frown,
He vowed he would keep it all his own;
The rest with rage were fit to burst,
When each declared he saw it first;
And rather than give up their right,
They 'gan to quarrel, next to fight;
The nest was on a hay-cock put,
'Till they decided the dispute.
A clown just by, emerging lay,
To see 'em once begin the fray,
He knew he should (for he was wise)
While they were fighting, steal the prize;
No sooner had the fray began,
But with the nest, away he ran;
The scuffle over, to his cost,
The hero found his prize was lost.
Each 'gan to simper at his brother,
To find, that after all their pother,
The potent point so soon decided,
And every share so well divided.
THE PETTICOAT, A NEW SONG.
To the Tune of Chevey Chase.
'TWAS sometime, worthy sirs, in May,
No matter in what year;
When boys and girls together play,
And drink in merry cheer.
It happened once, a waggish set,
Bethought 'em of a joke;
And near a mighty mansion met,
The Lord on it to provoke.
High in the air a trophy bore,
In Faith a strange conceit;
And crowding round his lordship's door,
They hallowed bread and meat;
A magistrate in truth was he,
Of noble blood derived;
No mortal had a heart more free,
His equal never survived.
The uproar drew his lordship out,
To know what it could mean;
But on his chaps received a clout,
That sent him in again.
But turning round, he cast his eyes,
And viewed the shameful scene;
Revenge! revenge! revenge! he cries,
Was ere the like on it seen.
A pettycoat and breeches hung,
Both dangling on a pole;
The street with claps and hissing rung,
Enough to charm one's soul.
The meaning soon his lordship knew,
And straight he raised a band;
Who joining him, like hero's flew,
And seized it sword in hand.
Did ever knight in days in yore,
Atchieve such envied fame;
Did ever mortal man before,
Deserve so great a name.
The k --, God bless his royal heart,
Of his own wise accord;
Straight acted he the k -- y part,
And gave him due reward.
Now, high in council seat he is placed,
To rule over rich and poor;
Was ever k -- before so graced,
By any man before.
Now be it known to great and small,
The wonders he has done;
And to his fame let bunters ball,
As through the streets they run.
THE PEASANT AND THE ANT. A FABLE.
THE fields were ripened all around,
And Ceres' head with corn was crowned;
Pomona with her fruits arrayed,
And plenty (coy, much envied maid)
Her horn of bounty careless held,
And dropped a gift in every field.
A peasant, walking through the grain,
Was heard to murmur and complain.
His face was wan and meagre grown,
And hunger stamped him with a frown.
A laden ant was passing by,
And, with her small insectic eye,
She looked upon the abject man,
And, with revilings thus began:
"Art not ashamed, ungrateful clown,
"Amongst such crops thy wants to own,
"Whilst smiling plenty round thee stands,
"Inviting thy unwilling hands.
"Thou poor incorrigible knave,
"Thy sloth will bring thee to the grave.
"Benevolence is thrown away,
"On such as thou art every day.
"How can thou ever think to thrive,
"Except with industry thou wilt strive
"To help thyself, when there is given
"Before thine eyes such stores from heaven?
"Had I one opportunity
"Like this, I Would lay such plenty by.
"In such a season I Would provide
"Enough for all my days beside.
"But I Am obliged each day to roam
"Many a furlong from my home,
"And cry, good luck, when'er I pick
"From off the ground a single stick;
"Or, in some long or rutty lane,
"I find by chance a single grain.
"Had I the art, and strength like you,
"To reap, to thresh, to bake, and brew,
"I would not murmur nor complain
"At winter's snow or summer's rain,
"Which heaven in each season sends,
"To answer all its wiser ends."
"Thou boasting thing, (the clown replied,)
"Thou little crawling piece of pride,
"Or stop thy foul reproaching breath,
"This moment else shall be thy denth;
"For all thy counsel's mere pretense,
"To show thy mighty share of sense,
"Thy industry and insolence,
"Thou would not in this manner prate,
"Were thou like me of human state;
"Were what I Have reaped, and what I Have sown,
"Like what thou gather'st, all my own,
"My barns should every one be stored,
"And I, as well as thou, would hoard. --
"I own the seasons plenty send,
"Were men like ants, each other's friend;
"I would not now come murmuring here,
"Were food and raiment not so dear.
"Those times thou sure must own are bad,
"When there is no victuals to be had;
"When Nature sends her stores at large,
"And Earth does all her gifts discharge,
"'It Is not by God, but man denied,
"Who feasts in luxury and pride:
"For see, yon infant starving dies,
"With all this bounty before his eyes."
THE APOLOGY.
There is no reason to comment,
The moral is most evident.
The PRETTY MAID of CHELMSFORD.
A Pretty maid both kind and fair,
Dwells in Chelmsford town,
Her pleasing smiles, her easy air,
Engages fop and clown.
Being accosted the other day,
By a clumsy 'squire,
Who asked her if she knew the way
To quench a raging fire.
Water, Sir, replied the maid,
Will quench it in a trice,
O no, said he, you little jade,
I Have tried that once or twice.
Then Sir, said she, it is past my skill,
To tell you what will do;
I Am sure, said he, you know what will;
There Is nothing can but you.
Alas-a-day what do you mean,
Replied the pretty fair;
I Would have you try it once again;
You never should despair.
Despair I cannot, cried the 'squire,
While you are in my sight,
It Is you must quench the burning fire,
You set it first alight.
Then strait he clasped her round the waist,
And forced from her a kiss,
Ho! ho! said she, is that your taste;
Then pray you, Sir, take this.
And with a pail, placed at the door,
She sluic'd the amorous 'squire;
Your'e welcome, Sir, to this and more,
To quench your raging fire.
AN EVENING's WALK.
ONE Summer's eve, when every swain was housed,
When Sol had scarce one glimmer left behind,
Each little star, faint glittering, cast a ray,
And spangled over the dusky robe of night.
Fond of the scene, I wandered far from home,
Over level lawns, and flower-breeding vales,
Till weary nature slackened in my steps,
And made me halt upon a friendly bank.
Calm through a bridge, there ran a peerless stream,
That scarcely moved the ozier's slender wand:
Here I took my stand, and viewed the solemn scene.
The bat had been an hour on the wing,
Chasing the night-fly and the buzzing gnat:
The purblind owl had left the ancient tower,
Prowling with flossy wing along the mead.
Anon, as out of Chaos, shot a ray
Of chearing light, quivering over the hills,
As yet too weak to struggle with the dark;
Or, as the Egyptian queen, far off beheld,
Shot her first beams on the Italian shore,
Her brilliant train reflecting on the waves,
Making the Tybur like a golden sea.
Clouds that o'er-hung the horizon, unseen,
Appeared in view, like silver-skirted troops,
Waiting the up-rise of the queen of night.
Slow she approached, and smiled upon the world,
Opening fresh landscapes to my wondering eyes.
Philomel now cheered the embow'ring grove,
The woodlark too, mistaking it for day,
Joined her sweet notes with emulating strains.
Near to my left there stood an ancient pile,
By wasting time, and savage war defaced,
Like a reduced and hoary-headed chief,
Commanding awe, even in destruction.
On its flinty fides deep-dy'd ivy clung;
Its roof was capt with velvet-grounded moss,
And round its base, wild weeds and flowers grew,
The stinging nettle with the briars blend,
The secret haunt of adders and of toads.
Through the wide breaches of the rock-built walls,
Pale Cynthia beamed her lucid columns down
Upon the verdant slope, in lines direct and clear,
Reflecting on a dimpled brook below.
A solemn silence now overspread the globe,
Save when the minew wantoned on the stream,
And left a circle spreading to the brink.
Anon, as wind from out some hollow cave,
A deep-felt sigh from out the ruins came,
As from a heart just bursting with its load,
Which straight was answered with a voice of woe,
Like sorrow soothing the more sad despair.
Awhile I stood, in doubt, to know the cause,
Or to retreat, least some deluding fiend,
Feigning the voice of grief, meant to destroy.
At length resolved, with caution I approached,
O melting sight! my wounded heart ran over,
And emptied at my eyes -- A mournful pair,
The woeful partners of affliction sat,
On the low basis of a mouldering urn,
And opened to my view a tragic scene.
Concealed, I stood, observing their distress;
She, in her lap, an infant cherub held,
A lovely boy, the offspring of their loves.
Her eyes were bent with sorrow on the babe,
While in her face the little dear one smiled,
And then, with tears of misery and love,
She clung him eager to her throbbing breast.
The wretched husband on her neck reclined,
Striving to cheer his melancholy dame,
Feigned a hope, though foreign to his heart:
But when he found despair had seized her soul,
His tears burst forth, and bathed his manly cheeks,
And on his bended knees he trembling fell,
Lifting his eyes with anguish against the sky,
With invocations loud, and agonizing sighs,
Imploring heaven for a ray of peace,
Till his loud accents shook the vaulted roof,
And rift his tortured breast. -- I could no more,
But flying to his aid with heart distressed,
He fixed his eyes with furious glare upon me,
And threatened me with death if I advanced;
Like the fierce tiger, assailed by hunters,
In his dreary den, he stood defensive over his young,
Shielding 'em from danger. With humble voice,
And friendly tears, I moved him to attend,
And listen patient to the voice of pity.
Joy then, with fear and admiration mixed,
Overspread each face, and as I spoke, they blessed;
Hope, like the sun that clouds had long o'erveil'd,
Flushed on their cheeks, extinguishing despair.
Ye woeful pair let your suspicions cease;
If friends forsake, and creditors pursue:
If you once more can trust a thought to hope,
And think it possible to meet a friend,
Tell me your story, and you yet shall find
That fate relents, and ceases to afflict.
Though here to you a stranger I appear,
To mercy I am none; to see another wretched,
Makes me wretched too: by serving others,
I still myself oblige, and meet reward,
Ample reward, a tranquil happiness!
Seeing others so, by me made happy.
I Would rather wipe the tear of grief away,
Than add a ruby to a monarch's crown,
And win a prince's promise for my pains.
If fate's not given you over to despair,
And you will accept of friendship once again,
Cheer your sad hearts -- let every fear subside,
Nor doubt a stranger yet may prove a friend;
If you would be happy, tell me but in what,
I Will try my every means to make ye so.
Thou gracious being! (if thou art human)
For thou speak with a celestial tongue,
Let me embrace thee; -- O! pardon me, too,
That I assailed thee with the threat of death,
When thou but meant to save me from his shaft;
For O! thy words were welcome to my soul
As mollient dews that fall upon the mead,
When parching Sol has curled each verdant blade;
Thou have preserved to me the dearest rose
That ever scented gale, the sweetest bud
That ever eye beheld, or tempted death to kill,
(This drooping fair one, and her smiling boy,)
For they have suffered more than I dare tell,
And to repeat, is more than I can bear:
She once, alas, was Fortune's favorite,
And Minerva's pride, the tender fondling
Of a wealthy pair -- O! sad remembrance;
Provoking tears! when will ye cease to flow!
These eyes have long been strangers to a smile;
Excuse me, friend, if they disgust thee.
We sing of others woe, but cry our own;
My heart has gushed at a thousand veins,
To see the sufferings of a matchless wife. --
There was a time, when this forsaken hold,
At such an hour, would have given delight,
When solitude and night would give a scop^
To thought, and yield a pleasing melancholy
To the jaded mind, o'ercharg'd with pleasure
And variety; but now, how dreary and forlorn
It seems; and as we tell our mournful tale,
With double horror echoes back each word,
Mocking adversity, in hollow sounds, --
Telling us over what is death to hear. --
Such tales as mine, good friend, I often have read,
Such woeful scenes have often been played;
With sympathizing heart I Have heard and seen,
And dropped a tear for the oppressed and brave;
But ere I Would slept the fiction fled my breast,
And time would leave no traces on the mind.
When we become the objects of distress,
Remembrance stamps it with an iron seal
Upon our hearts, and every thought is death.
But to my story, it is my friend's desire --
I am no stranger to this gloomy pile,
I often have paid a visit to these walls,
And often admired the romantic form,
When the fair morn invited me abroad,
When fertile nature dasy'd every hill,
And every meadow blushed a purple hue:
When thrushes sang, and linnets charmed the grove;
My heart then drank in pleasure at my eyes,
And felt no interrupter by the way,
No wretched thought to dash it back again. --
My father was a man of wealth and note,
(And held a mansion in a village by)
A better never gave being to a son: --
I having read of mighty things abroad,
Of ancient Rome and grand Cairo's court,
The wealth of India and Egyptian wilds.
With thirst for novelty and desire,
I urged my father, and at length prevailed
That he would let me venture on a tour,
And prove the truth of history and report. --
It Is six years since I left my native home;
Since when, so many wonders I have seen,
That curiosity at last grew sick.
Returning home, I crossed the mighty Alps;
A deadly sickness seized me on the way,
And made me seek for succor and a friend;
A greater rarity than all I Would met.
An ample dwelling opened to my view,
To which I bent my way, and shelter asked,
And was received at once a welcome guest.
With mild compassion they beheld my state,
And strove to cheer me with a friendly voice.
Dismounting here, I would have entered in,
But that my feet their wonted use denied:
My limbs gave way, and let me to the ground;
When this dear fair came running to my aid;
She raised me up, and led me careful in,
And every day a true attendance paid:
When I was struggling with the pangs of death,
And with consoling hope, she would drop a tear,
Imploring heaven to preserve my life.
Her supplications did at length prevail.
No sooner had I conquered one compeer,
But found my heart was with another taken,
Love, to whom I soon submitted, and embraced.
And made my hostess partner of my life,
But here partaker in affliction too; --
Her father was a Briton, once of wealth,
And held a mansion in that happy isle,
Till revolution and domestic broils,
Destroyed his lands, and plundered all he had,
(Save a few stores, in fecret he had saved,)
Putting himself and family to flight,
To seek for refuge in a foreign land. --
The action robbed the good man of his life,
And in distress the mournful widow left,
With this fair comforter to buffet life,
And shield her from a base ensnaring world.
Here eighteen months I lived in social joy,
And in the desert found the dearest wife.
The kindest mother ever man could boast,
Her better spirits so outworn by grief,
That made her frame, like frozen lillies, fade,
Recline, and droop unto the earth again.
Not having heard one tiding from my friends
For many a day, then we for England made;
And ere we reached the shore, the wind blew high,
And frowning Neptune on the surface foamed,
Throwing up watery mountains in our way,
And, in his anger, dashed us on a rock:
Some twenty perished in the yawning deep,
But we escaped, to meet a harder fate.
We saved our lives, but saw our cargo sink:
No sooner had I stepped with pleasure on the shore,
But met the tidings of my father's death,
From one misfortune often comes a crowd,
For some malignant enemy of mine,
Informed the good old man I Would long been dead.
And ere he died, he chose another heir.
And left him all his fortune and estate.
Here, each glaring circumstance arose,
And filled me with surprise: I asked his name,
"Landore, he cried, a wealthy neighbor here."
Landore! ye mighty Gods, how just!
I am that heir thy worthy father chose,
And for his friendship and his love to me,
I Will give his son his fortune back again.
I had enough before to make me happy,
And but resign that superflux to him,
Which fate had chosen me steward to a while,
To quit my claim upon a just demand.
EPIGRAM ON LORD G --.
MY Lord has often said, he scorns
The wretch who'd fain conceal his horns,
And, from his heart, quite full of glee,
He wished all cuckolds in the sea.
A merry wag (pleased with the whim)
Replied, my Lord, Pray can you swim?
END OF VOL. I.

