ANALECTS IN VERSE AND PROSE, CHIEFLY DRAMATICAL, SATIRICAL, AND PASTORAL.

VOL. II.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR P. SHATWELL, OPPOSITE DURHAM-YARD IN THE STRAND; J.
DODSLEY, PALL MALL; AND T. DAVIES, RUSSEL STREET, COVENT GARDEN. MDCCLXX.

CONTENTS TO VOL. II.
THORNEY, Laben, and Dolein, a Pastoral, in two parts Page 3 The Cottagers, an
Opera, in three Acts 13 A Poetical Dialogue between the Author of an Opera, and
the Composer of the Music 65 The Happy Husband 73 An Epistle to a Friend in the
Country 74 A Song, set by Mr. Barthelemon. 75 An Epistle to a Friend 76 The
Fatal Incident 78 An Epistle to a Friend 82 An Allegory on Friendship 86
Sunday, a Poem 87 An Elegy on the Death of a Friend 94 The Banks of Chelmer
Page 99 The First of May 106 A Pastoral on the Death of Mr. Charles Churchill,
and Mr. Robert Lloyd 110 An Epistle to a Friend 113 On the Death of Bonnell
Tornton, Esquire. 115 The Fopling and the Ewe, a Fable 116 Queries, addressed to a
Friend 119 Prologue to the Merry Midnight Mistake 122 Epilogue to the Merry
Midnight Mistake 124 Prologue to Redowald, a Masque 126 Epilogue to Redowald, a
Masque 128 Shakespeare's Jubilee, a Masque 129 An Epigram on an Ugly Woman 150
The Old Women Weatherwise, an Interlude 152 An Epistle to a Friend, who seemed
to have a pleasure in conferring his Favors on the Author, but a greater in
telling him of them 171 On receiving some Complimentary Verses from a Lady 174
Epigram, or having received a Compliment, on account of the Performance of a
new Burletta 176 Epigram, on a Drunken Man and a Fish-Woman Page 177 Epigram,
on a Modern Gentleman 178 On Pleasure 179 Epigram, on a Tippler 180 On a Cobbler
and his Creditors 181 Epigram, on a Female Virago and Actress 187 Epigram on a
Spendthrift and a Hypocrite 188 The Banks of Yarrow, in Imitation of a Scoth
Ballad 189 Epigram on Le Fevre's curing the Gout 190 On a Lady, who had left
the Picture of her favorite Child at the Frame maker's 191 Epigram, on a
Poetaster 192
THORNEY, LABEN, AND DOLEIN, A PASTORAL.
Dolein, complaining of his melancholy state, as he sits beneath a bending
willow, that shades a brook, is observed by Thorney and Laben, who hear him
bewailing his misfortunes to the stream; they interrupt him, lest his passion
should drive him to desperation, and to death. THORNEY. STAY, Laben stay,
see thou not yonder swain?
Methinks I hear him too, in grief complain,
Stranger he is to me, but yet I Will know
The cause, from whence those strains of anguish flow;
He often has passed my cot by break of day,
And as he moved, some doleful strain he would play.

LABEN. Well does he tune his pipe, for yester-morn
I saw him roam on yonder brow forlorn,
Anon he sat him down beneath a tree,
And played such sweet and plaintive melody,
The groves were hushed, the linnets on the plains,
Forgot their own, and listened to his strains.

THORNEY. Fair too he seems, and comely in his form,
What pity it is, that sorrow should bestorm
A breast so mild, and rob his seemly face,
Of every smile, and every youthful grace. --
Alas, alas, what new afflictions rise!
Fast stream again his sad uplifted eyes.

LABEN. As the pale snow-drop, on its chilly bed
Bending to earth its melancholy head,
So freezing care inclines him to the earth,
Ere time has brought maturity to birth,
See how he heaves, and with desponding look,
Turns his sad eyes upon the heedless brook.

THORNEY. Alas, alas, his dread intent I fear,
Too plain, too plain the symptoms now appear;
O let us fly, and ere it be too late,
Heal his poor bosom, and prevent his fate,
Stop, if we can, the rapid floods of grief,
And if he will take, we'll give his wants relief.

DOLEIN. Ah me! methought, some friendly accents near,
With earnest voice, came whispering to my ear:
'Twas fancy spoke, that gave my wish a tongue,
But hope too long has on my patience hung;
No man shall see my tears, none hear me groan,
No tongue shall tell my tale, I Will die alone.

THORNEY. Live, shepherd live, and be thy woes forgot,
Fate has in store for thee a better lot,
For lo, this swain and I are come to save,
And step between thy sorrows and the grave;
Tell us thy tale, that we may share thy grief,
And give thy laden bosom some relief.

LABEN. Look not amazed, thou solitary swain,
Show us the cause, the fountain of thy pain,
That we as swift as stock-doves on the wing,
May stop at once the fountain and the spring:
My cot's hard by, there go and seek repose,
Till thou shall please thy story to disclose.

DOLEIN. Ye gentle-hearted swains that sympathize,
And view my wretched plight with flooded eyes,
Ah, would it aught to me or you avail,
I Would tell you over and over my woeful tale:
Too sad, are now my sorrows, to relate,
Too long the story, and too sure my fate,
For death alone must my physician prove,
I Have lost my herds, my lambkins, and my love.

THORNEY. Cease, cease thou sad, thou melancholy swain,
To figh, to weep, to wander and complain;
Nor yet despair, because forlorn and poor,
We Have got to spare, and thou shall share our store,
If death has robbed thee of thy constant love,
Some other maid may yet as constant prove.

DOLEIN. It cannot be, my firm resolve is made,
My heart is with her in the billows laid,
The cruel floods have washed her from my side,
I saw her floating on the dreadful tide,
This frame no more shall keep my soul a slave,
Like her I Will die, within a watery grave.

LABEN. Rash swain, forbear, thy stars may yet be kind,
The waves may pity, and the sighing wind
May waft her yet surviving on the shore;
Hope, and the fates, may yet thy love restore;
Then look more cheerful, thou desponding swain,
Thou yet may meet her on the usual plain.

DOLEIN. Thou best of friends, thou'st reasoned me to life,
Thou'st set my greatest doubts with hope at strife;
I will suspend awhile my rash design,
The winds and waves may yet my love resign,
May yet in pity to my mad'ning pain,
Let me behold Phidele's eyes again.

PASTORAL II.
Dolein sees Phidele laying on a sunny bank, as yet but half recovered from the
fright and fury of the flood, he is transported into inexpressible extacy, and
joy; he is going too precipitately to throw himself before her, but is
persuaded by Thorney and Laben to desist awhile, for fear the sudden joy might
overcome her; they first apprize her of her Dolein's being safe and well, then
soon afterward, introduce him. DOLEIN. DEceive me not, my sad, my wishful eyes,
It is Phidele sure, that yonder lies:
She breathes! she breathes! -- ye blessed Fates how kind!
Thanks to my stars, the waters and the wind!
O let me fly, the lovely maid to cheer,
And whisper joy and comfort in her ear.

THORNEY. Yet hold fond swain, nor let excess of joy,
Nor greedy love, thy living hopes destroy.
Life faintly seems to glimmer in her eyes,
And soon may be extinguished with surprise,
Let this kind swain and I, with tender care,
First show the coming pleasure, to the fair.

DOLEIN. O fly then, dearest friends, ere't be too late,
Evade, evade, the threatening hand of fate,
From your sweet counsel it is, that I survive,
And see my dear Phidele yet alive;
On your sweet counsel, Dolein still depends,
Blessed be the stars, that sent him two such friends.

LABEN. Like mild physicians, we'll address the maid,
Who sooth the dying, when in anguish laid,
To calm the tides of sorrow and despair,
We'll talk of thee, and cheer the drooping fair;
Then when her breast is tempered for the scene,
We'll say her shepherd comes across the green.

DOLEIN. Succeed; and heaven be your next reward,
May angels all your friendly deeds record,
May months of joy, and years of love repay
The faith and friendship, you have shown today.
My grateful heart, my ebbing eyes overflows,
Say, how shall Dolein pay the debt he owes?

THORNEY. Behold the fair one press her swelling breast,
As if by phrenzy or by love distressed;
I Will on and wipe away each scalding tear,
And tell the maiden, that her lover's near:
Look cheerful, shepherd, and thou soon shall see,
We'll crown thy hours with felicity.

LABEN. Sweet maid, give ear, I come with no pretense
To gain thy love, or give thy heart offense,
Thy sorrows and thy story well I know,
I come, my mite of friendship to bestow;
To cheer thy soul, to heal each doubt and pain,
To tell thee of thy living, weeping swain.

PHIDELE. Blessed be thy tongue, thou hospitable swain,
No bird ever warbled in so sweet a strain.
Does Dolein live? my heart is healed with joy,
Shall I again behold my plaintive boy?
Alas, I thought him in the billows laid,
And wished to die beneath some gloomy shade.

THORNEY. Behold he comes impatient over the plain,
To meet his fair Phidele once again.
Smile, lovely maid, and throw thy fears away,
Thou yet shall hear him on the mountain play,
Again your flocks shall feed in yonder vale,
Again, by moonlight, hear the nightingale.

DOLEIN. My loved Phidele has the waves controlled!
Ye blessed Fates, and do I yet enfold
My dear Phidele in my welcome arms;
The floods were sure assuaged by thy charms,
The winds were sure subdued by thy sweet eyes,
And yielded Dolein back his darling prize.

PHIDELE. At Dolein's voice the threatening winds were hushed,
Through dark'ning clouds the conscious Phoebus blushed,
The waves that shook the willows with their roar,
In pity washed me to the welcome shore;
In pity sure, my shepherd, 'twas to you,
For sure no shepherd yet was half so true.

THE COTTAGERS, AN OPERA: IN THREE ACTS.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
BRAINLY, a Country 'Squire. CELON, a young Shepherd. HYLAS, Father to Celon.
SIMON, his Cousin. TRUSTY, Steward to Brainly. First Reaper. Second Reaper.
Third Reaper. Hermit. A little Boy, his Son. Traveller. Thieves.
WOMEN,
Mrs. BRAINLY, Wife to 'Squire Brainly. EDDIE, her Daughter.
Housebreakers. Attendants on the 'Squire.
THE COTTAGERS.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A Room in Brainly's House. Enter Brainly, Mrs. Brainly and Trusty. Brainly.
ALONG with Celon, say you? I Am astonished! O she is a forward young Hussy! but
I Will stop her gadding; -- Are you sure of this? [To Trust.


Trusty. Yes, truly, Sir, for she has been out for this month past, at four and
five o'clock in the morning; I could not think where she went to, till the
other day, when going over the green pastures; there I saw Celon and her,
billing and cooing like too young pigeons.


Brain. Indeed? odds my life, I remember now; -- ah, she is a coaxing young pug;
that is where she gets her posies from I suppose, which she comes holding up to
my nose in a morning, with a how do you do? my dear papa, [Mimicks her] O the
jade!


True. I thought it were best to tell your worship, least some harm might come
of it.


Mrs. Brain. A mighty industrous soul indeed! thou had better have been
minding thy own business, I think, than to strive like an ill-natured fool, to
set my child and her father at variance.


Brain. Hold your tongue, pray madam, and let him speak; he sees her follies,
though you cannot, and it is honest in him to tell me of them.


Mrs. Brain. Why sure Mr. Brainly, I may speak in my turn.


Brain. It Is not your turn yet Madam.


Mrs. Brain. I am sorry my dear, to see you so angry, -- don't think that I
approve of her proceedings; no, far be it from me; but I cannot help taking
notice how ready the fellow is to tell you of her faults; for he sees they work
upon you to excess, and you are as eager to hear what gives you so much pain;
if he had generously told me of it before, I would have put a stop to it ere
now, and you might have escaped all this uneasiness; for if our children are to
bear the censure of our servants, what child will escape slander? I don't doubt
what he has said to be true, but while he sees it feeds your anger, and he
finds himself listened to, he may turn surmises into facts, and she may be
stigmatized where ever she goes, as being guilty of what she never dreamt of.


Brain. Well, well, it does not signify holding this harrangue about her, --
I Am determined to have her kept at home, and then I Am sure she will be safe, let
the world then say what it pleases; -- go fetch her hither Trusty.

[Exit. Trusty.
Mrs. Brain. Marry I doubt it much, even then; and whether the creature (that
has taken so much pains to tell you her faults) would not be the first in the
world that would strive to make her guilty of another; for I know he is very
sweet upon her when our backs are turned.


Brain. Poh, poh, what do you think the fellow's a fool?


Mrs. Brain. No, but I think he would make a fool of you, and I, and the whole
family, if he could.


Brain. Pshaw, pshaw, I see you have some antipathy to the poor young fellow,
because he is honest, and so want me to turn him about his business; but here he
comes, [Enter Trusty] Well sirrah, what is the reason you did not bring Eddie
with you?


True. Why in good truth I cannot find her.


Brain. Not find her! why what the plague is the wench set out already?


True. O yes Sir, she is been up and gone these three hours.


Brain. Has she indeed? I fancy I shall fetch her home again in half that time,
if Cupid has not furnished her wings. -- Come along with me Trusty. -- My dear
you may expect us here again presently.

[Exeunt Brainly and Trusty,.
Mrs. Brain. I wish you success with all my heart, -- poor foolish girl! I pity
her; it is natural -- for the heart will follow where the eye is pleased.

[Exit. Mrs. Brainly.
SCENE II.
Celon and Eddie seated in a pasture. Edd. It Is the fairest morn I ever saw; I
warrant they are all asleep at home, but hardly dream that I am here with you.


Celon. O let 'em sleep until the sun sets again, then I shall have my Eddie
with me all the day.

AIR I.
Cel. Thy father and thy mother sleeps --
There Love has had his fill;
And Eddie to her Celon creeps,
When all the plains are still;
The sun and Eddie rise at once,
And gild the hills around;
The lark awakens at her steps,
And leaves the dewy ground.
My lambkins skip at her approach,
And all their dams look gay;
While Zephyr, in his airy coach,
Upon the tree-tops play.

Edd. If my father should ever suspect my coming hither, I Am afraid he would never
let me come again; would you not pity me?


Cel. I should pine myself to death, and be like a wandering lunatic in
despair: for when you are from me but an hour, I think that every flower looks
drooping, and every bird fits mourning for your return.


Edd. Be witness for me all ye hills and groves, how dear I prize my Celon's
love, not all the wealth my father boasts, should rob me of that joy.

AIR II.
Edd. O grant us thus to meet each morn,
Upon so fair a plain,
Where linnets whistle on each thorn,
In love's melodious strain.
While Celon whispers notes more sweet
Than ever linnet sung,
And thus each morn such blessings meet,
As fall from Celon's tongue.

Cel. Would tomorrow were our wedding day, I long to call thee mine, I Have had
sad dreams of late; but I hope they tend to nothing ill toward us.


Edd. Pray tell me what they were, and I Will be your interpreter,


Cel. Not now my love, they will prey upon thy gentle spirits, and dash our
promised joys. Let us go to yonder valley now, and pick the sweetest flowers
there, blue-bells and violets, that I may weave a crownet for my queen.


Edd. Even where you please, nor will I ever complain, so I go with you; --
here [pulls out a book] I Have brought thee another book this morning, it is the
prettiest I could find; and thou shall read it to me.


Cel. You're ever kind -- But I fear my love you will get some anger from your
father, if he should chance to miss it -- What is it you have brought me now?


Edd. The Nut-brown Maid. [gives him the book] my father never will miss it, he
minds nothing but his horses and his dogs; so pray thee sit down and read it to
me.


Cel. Nay, but you must excuse me now; I can read it when you are gone; now it
will be killing too much precious time.

AIR III.
Cel. Whilst thou art here I cease to read,
Throw by my pipe, forget my reed,
Nothing on earth such pleasures bring,
As when I hear my Eddie sing.
For when you are gone, I Will learn from this,
When I no more can toy and kiss,
How other shepherds bore their pain,
Until they meet their loves again.

Edd. Very well, Celon.


Cel. Nay be not angry, I own I Am much obliged to you for these indulgencies;
and but from the instruction of those volumes you have brought me, I should
have been a poor companion for my Eddie; they have, in some measure, taught me
how to please; to know my humble situation blessed when you are with me, and more
serenely to bear the pain when you are gone.


Eddie. Listen! listen! methought I heard the voice of some one near; and now I
see 'em too. O! it is Trusty and my father.


Cel. They have beheld us, and 'twill be in vain to fly. Alas! what shall we
do! -- how could this happen?


Brainly within.) I see you, you jade, I Will stop your strolling, I will hussy;
[Enters] and as for thee, thou sheep-biting dog, I Will have thee sent into
another country, [takes Eddie from him.


Cel. It matters not where you send me, or where I go, since you have taken her
away. [looking tenderly on Eddie.


Brain. The boy's certainly in love? I'gad it grieves me to see them look so
pitifully at each other; I could find in heart to leave 'em together again.


True. Aye truly it is a pity, Sir, but consider the consequence, it will be the
talk of the whole country, that 'Squire Brainly's daughter is courted by a
shepherd.


Brain. Ods-bud and so it will; come, hussy, come; -- thou may stay behind
and whine a little, [to Celon.


Edd. Dear father permit me to take a parting kiss!


Brain. A parting kiss! what before my face! why they have bewitched one another,
I believe! No, no, no, no more kissing here? come along; and if you cannot live
without kissing, there is your great doll at home, you may kiss and hug that all
day if you please, come away I say.


Edd. O can you forget yourself, or did you never love; surely if you did, you
would not practice so hard a trial for so small a crime.

AIR IV.
Edd. Adieu my love, ye flocks adieu,
Farewell ye happy plains,
More blessed than I, by far are you,
While Celon here remains.
Farewell ye little warblers all,
Ye larks that upward rise,
No more shall I attend your call,
Or meet my Celon's eyes.

Brain. Come along I say, or I Will break thy neck.


Cel. O do not hurt her, for indeed she is done no harm.


Brain. If thou have done her none, I shall be satisfied, and I Will take care
thou shall do her none hereafter.

[Exeunt all but Celon.
Cel. This is the sorest wound I ever felt; would she had been as poor as
myself, or that I had been a 'squire's son.

AIR V.
Cel. Unequal fortune, equal fate,
Was ever lot like mine?
Thus high and low in every state,
Beneath some grief repine.
The rich are cursed with fears and pride,
The poor man with despair;
The lover's patience often is tried
By some unfeeling fair.
^ut mine is the worst of woes indeed;
The maid that I adore,
Is by a father's hand decreed,
Never to see me more,

SCENE III.
Brainly's House. Enter Brainly, Trusty, and Eddie. Brain. Here Mrs. Brainly,
we have brought your daughter home, and I desire you will make it your business to
keep her there so long as she lives, -- what piping again, what the devil ails
thee now?


Edd. Have I not cause to weep, to hear myself doomed a prisoner for life, and
by my father too?


Brain. You Would better be a prisoner here hussy, with a good house over your
head, and victuals in your belly, than strolling the mountains, and starving
under a hedge, along with that booby you would got along with this morning.


Mrs. Brain. What could induce thee, child, to make so strange a choice?


Edd. His gentle nature, besides he loves me dearly as himself.


Brain. No doubt but he loves himself well enough; but what do think he
loves thee for, hey, fool?


Edd. For loving him, which I will do for ever.


Brain. So, so, so, so, there is for you now! take her out of my sight, or I
shall certainly do her a mischief; -- O you wanton young jade; go take her up
stairs, and lock her in her bedchamber directly.

[Exit. Mrs. Brainly and Eddie. Brainly sings. AIR VI.
Was ever father living,
So distressed as I;
These women are deceiving
As the very sky;
They first look clear,
And promise fair,
Then rises up a cloud,
That covers all the atmosphere,
And thunders burst aloud.
[Exeunt Brainly and Trusty.
SCENE IV.
Celon by the side of a wood. Cel. I Will rest me here a little, nothing that I
see or hear will give me comfort now. [comes forward.

AIR VII.
Cel. Full eighteen years I lived in bliss,
Upon yon verdant plain,
From many a maid I stole a kiss,
But never felt a pain.
'Till Eddie's face I first beheld,
I knew nor grief nor care;
My eyes against my heart rebelled,
If ever I shed a tear.

Enter Hylas and Simon in Conversation. Hylas. I tell thee the girl has made
her escape, by the help of a tree, that hung against her window, for somebody
has told her that Celon was fled into another country, and I am sorely afraid I
shall find it too true.


Cel. True thou wilt find it indeed, if Eddie is gone, I Will search every country
round but I will find her. [Aside and Exit.


Sin. Marry luck forbid, cousin, for I loved him as if he had been a child of
my own, and did intend to have left him all that I had when I died.


Hyl. Ha, thou art very kind; for though I say it, he had as much to say for
himself as the parson of the parish; if I could but set eyes on him again, I
should be easy; I have not seen him since four o'clock in the morning, and if I
don't find him before night, I shall break my heart.


Sim. I'fecks I think I see him yonder, running across the meadow.


Hyl. Where, where?


Sim. Yonder loo'thee the other side that large tree.


Hyl. Odds heart and so it is; pray thee cousin, for thou can run faster than
me, go thou before, and I Will after and halloo lustily behind.

[Exeunt.
Enter three Reapers. 1st. Reap. Come along, come along, and be hanged to you,
what a yawning you make, indeed, why now because you have got your bellies full,
I suppose you have not a heart to go to work again.


2d. Reap. 'Swounds what a din thou make indeed, thy bawling beats my yawning
I Am sure; one would think thou had not had thy belly full this month past;
I'fecks I Am afraid thou art one of those I heard our old dame talking of
the other day, more noise than work.


3d. Reap. No, no I suppose he only wants to get his work done before he
begins, that he may go a sweat-hearting; for as soon as he gets home, he begins
to make such a washing and combing of himself, with his ribbands at his knees,
and his buckles at his sho'en, that he never gives himself time to eat or
drink, but out he goes to rosey faced Sue, down by the mill.


2d. Reap. Aye, aye, I suppose he gets his belly-full there. I believe in my
heart folks are bewitched, nowadays, there is the dickens to pay, about Celon
and the 'squire's daughter; this love's as bad as a plague, I think, its
catching.


1st. Reap. Take care it does not catch thee then; it has many a time caught a
wiser man.


2d. Reap. I'fecks if it does, I know how to cure myself.


1st. Reap. I don't doubt but thou have a good opinion of thyself.


2d. Reap. Marry if one don't like me, I Will seek out for another.


1st. Reap. And love never a one above an hour.


AIR VIII.
A foolish lover like a child,
That with a toy does play,
Who Is gaudy sides his heart beguiled.
And pleased him for a day.
But if by chance his wandering eyes,
Another should survey,
The last is thought a golden prize,
The first is thrown away.

3d. Reap. Heigh, ho; this love is a strange thing, I think.


2d. Reap. No, no, there is nothing so common. I heard our parson say the world
was grown foolish, and this is a sure sign he sometimes speaks the truth.


3d. Reap. Why so I think indeed, Celon must be a fool now to think of marrying
the 'Squire's daughter, I warrant the 'Squire would see him hanged first.


2d. Reap. And must not she be a fool to think of marrying Celon; why this
makes good the text; the world's grown foolish, and they are two of the
greatest; I think in my heart they are even worse than this fool here.


1st. Reap. Fool! who do thou call fool; if it were not now for losing so
much time, I Would show thee who was the greatest fool.


3d Reap. 'Swounds what a passion he is in, I Have heard say these lovers grow mad
sometimes, if you should teaze him too much, perhaps he will grow mad too, and
then I suppose he will be for biting.


2d. Reap. Aye, aye, let him alone, let him alone, he may kiss and court all
the guts out of his belly, for what I care.


3d. Reap. Come let us to work again, or we shall have the sun down ere we begin.


2d. Reap. Troth and so it will, and it will not get up at thy bidding again, but
that shall not give me any uneasiness:


AIR IX.
My heart is my own,
And a stranger to care,
Content is my throne,
I sit without fear.
At night I retire,
With health and with ease;
The lasses admire,
And study to please.
But if I don't find
They Will please in their part,
'T may fire the mind,
But shall not touch the heart.

1st. Reap. That was my mind once, but I could not help changing it.


3d. Reap. That Is a sure sign you kind of creatures never know your own minds.


2d. Reap. Why that is true enough; Celon used to swear and protest he would never
marry, and now you see how well he keeps his word.


3a. Reap. And he may not be the happier for all he is so great with the
'Squire's daughter; for they say there is nothing but snarling and bit^ among
the gentryfolkes.


AIR X.
The poor with content,
Are richer by far,
Than a king in his tent,
Or a lord at the bar.
No fear of being worse,
Ever troubles his breast;
Though empty his purse,
At night he can rest.
No armies overthrown,
No causes ill tried,
Shall ever make me groan,
Or turn for a bribe.

2d. Reap. Hold, hold, who are these coming across the barley field.


1st. Reap. Odds life I Will be hanged, if it ben't, our master and his cousin.


2d. Reap. Let us sneak off then, as fast as we can.


1st. Reap. No, no, they see us now, and we'd better stay and know the worst
on it.


3d. Reap. The dickens take your sweethearting I say, I suppose there'll be the
duce to pay.


2d. Reap. What a pack of fools we look like now.


Enter Hylas and Simon. Hyl. What in the name of old nick do ye all here, has
any of you seen Celon lately?


3d. Reap. No not we master, we han'not seen him these two days.


Hyl. Why go seek him then, and he that finds him first shall have a holliday
for a week.


2d. Reap. Shall he master, I'fecks then I Will give a good look out, and bring
him home an I can.


Hyl. Away with you then. [Exeunt Reapers.] Come cousin, thee and I Will go and
get us a horse a piece, and we'll set out too; wayst-heart I Have run myself
almost out of breath already, and I don't know how soon I may want a little.

[Exeunt Hylas and Simon.
The End of the First Act.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
A Hermit's Cave. A Hermit, and Crito a little boy his son appears. Crito.
You Have often told me, I should see the place where I was born, and where my
mother died: believe me Sir, I should like it much; I think I Have seen it an
hundred times in dreams already, and if indeed it be so pleasing in reality as
in dreams, I Am sure it must by far excel this sad dwelling.


Herm. I Am afraid indeed thou'll think it so, therefore it is, I fear to let
thee go.


Crit. Why fear? do you think I would not come again.


Herm. I hope so, but there is a thousand little play-fellows would rival me,
and thou would want to stay thee there.


Crit. Indeed they should not, I Would rather stay here all my days than you should
be in fear,


Herm. Thou art my cherub again for that; and ever a month I Will let thee go.

[Eddie crosses the cave.
Crit. O well-a-day, do but turn about, and see what is passing cross the cave.


Herm. A woman, or a fairy, I Will speak to her, however.


Crit. Believe me Sir, she seems in sorrow.


Herm. Peace with thee fair one, if thou will deign to tell, whither do thou
sojourn?


Edd. Alas! I cannot; first tell me stranger, who ever thou art, (for thou
bear the face of friendship) did thou not see a lovely shepherd, sad as
myself, pass this way.


Herm. In truth fair maid no human form, save this of thine, has passed this
cave these many years.


Edd. Alas! I Am sore distressed.


Her. If thou dare trust me with thy story, I Will promise thee all the aid
that I can give.


Edd. I thank thee; nor do I think that I should fear to trust thee, for thou
bear as kind a face as ever I saw, save his I took for; for O he is the
gentlest swain that ever smiled on maid, I first beheld him tending on his
father's sheep upon a mountain's brow; he humbly bowed and with a gentle look
he stole my willing heart, and I as willing gave my hand; he knelt and kissed
it; and, with more than shepherd's grace, told me how much he loved; I believed
him because he wept, then sighed and took my leave; but every morning ever the
sun beams kissed the dimpl'd brook, I stole to him again. So happy we, like two
fair vessels on a calm sea borne, long sailed together; till my father's angry
hand, like a rude tempestuous wave, dashed us both asunder.


Herm. Alas I pity you; what was your lover's name?


Edd. Celon.

[Crito weeps.
Herm. What is it child that makes thee weep?


Crit. The story that she told you.


Herm. I love thee for thy mother's spirit, just so would she overflow, when
ever she heard of suffering virtue.


Edd, I love him too for his friendly tears, come and let me kiss thee; my
heart is full of gratitude, but I Have no means of recompense, save tear for
tear. Alas! I must yet go on, for while I live, I will pursue my love, if ever
I return, I Will make you some amends.


Crit. Pray don't go, my father will be very kind.


Herm. Let me entreat you to stay a little, this boy is my only child, the only
comfort I have on earth, he shall attend you; there is a mountain, whose lofty
head o'erlooks the country round for many a mile, thither shall he go, and with
his young discerning eyes, try if he can see which way your Celon wanders. -- I
prithee Crito go this instant, and if thou should any one chance to see, wind
thou thy horn, and beckon them to stay. [Exit Crito] Mean while I would advise
that you retire into yon harbor, and rest yourself, till I go and seek for
something that may comfort you.


Edd. Indeed you are too kind, I have not deserved these indulgencies from you,
but since you have promised to be my friend, I do not know a time that I ever
stood so much in need of one.


Herm. Be cheerful, and doubt not, but ere long we shall hear some tidings of
your Celon.

[Exit Hermit.
Edd. Then you will be a friend indeed.

AIR XI.
Ye nodding forests, verdant plains,
Ye limpid brooks that murmur by,
In your retreats there yet remains
A friend to sad calamity.
[Exit Eddie.
SCENE II.
A Heath. Enter Brainly, Trusty, etc. Brain. We Are certainly on the right road
my lads; but hold, who have we here, a fellow traveller? perhaps he may give us
some intelligence; I Will enquire however.

Enter Passenger. Save thee friend, whither be'st going?


Passen. To the first cottage I can find; for I have had a long day's journey
of it, and have not seen a dwelling, where I could get me any refreshment.


Brain. Nor did not meet with any body on the road?


Passen. Yes, waystheart, a lovely youth, almost in despair.


Brain. And did thou not speak with him then?


Passen. Yes, that I did, and wish I could have been his friend.


Brain. Why; what was his complaint then?


Passen. Alas-a-day, he told me he had lost the sweetest maid on earth, and
came this way in search of her.


Brain. Did he so? 'Slife that must be Celon, here I Will give thee this purse,
if thou wilt tell me where he is gone.


Passen. Alas, I cannot tell thee, for when I could give him no intelligence of
his love, he left me; I stood awhile and watched him, and when he got to yonder
oak, that dips its brim into the brook, he sat down and drank of the cold
stream, then rose again, and made his way to the top of yonder hill; and
turning round seemed to search with his eyes all the vales below. Anon (as if
he had some one seen) he hurried off again; but descending on the other side, I
lost sight of him.


Brain. We'll after him directly; as for thee my friend, thou will find a
cottage hard by, take this and get thee some refreshment.


Passen. Good luck attend thee for thy kindness.

[Exit Passenger.
Brain. Come along lads, we are upon the right scent, and if we should start the
puss, we'll run her down and take her home alive.

[Exeunt Omnes.
SCENE III.
The Hermit's Cave. Enter Hermit and Eddie. [Crito is seen by 'em.] Herm. Lo!
here comes Crito, I hope he brings some news.


Edd. I doubt there is none of Celon.


Herm. Doubt not, [Enter Crito] welcome my darling; well what have seen.


Crit. A man, who is making toward the cave; I saw him straying near the
mighty cliff; and then, as you desired, did wind my horn; I waved my hand, he
answered thus, and then set off with speed this way.


Herm. Now what think you fair-one?


Edd. It certainly is my Celon, and yet I think it almost impossible; but if it
should some other prove, I fain would not be seen.


Herm. Therefore least it should, I would advise, that you retire again into
the cave, 'till I have made some sure proof.


Edd. I will, -- but pray if it should prove my love indeed, let it not be a
moment ere you call me forth again.


Herm. You may be assured of that; haste, haste, methinks I hear his footsteps
near already.


Edd. I Am gone -- Alas I tremble so my legs will scarcely bear me.

[Ex. Eddie.
Crit. See father, he is entering the cave.


Herm. He bears the form that she describes. [Enter Celon] Welcome youth, most
welcome, I invite thee for my guest; thou seem aweary; I shall be glad to be
thy comforter.


Cel. I thank you -- weary I am indeed, in search of what I fear I never shall
see again.


Herm. Never despair, nothing is ever lost beyond our hopes but reputation. Is
it for the living that you seek?


Cel. Living she was last night, and well.


Herm. It is a woman then; what is the fair one's name?


Cel. Eddie. Fair as the cristal stream.

[Hermit whispers Crito.
Herm. You Would know her then, no doubt, were you to see her?


Cel. Why do you ask me that? Is it possible I could not know the thing I saw
but yesterday?


Herm. Say, do you know that fair-one?

[Crito and Eddie appear.
Cel. Know her! O ye miraculous powers, it is my Eddie! [He runs and embraces
her.


Edd. Celon! O I scarcely can believe that I Am awake.


Herm. I bear witness you are not in a dream, and am glad that I have partly
been the means of all this happiness.


Cel. O may you be blessed with every thing that is good, what shall we do to make
you some amends?


Herm. I am already satisfied in seeing you so happy.


Edd. He shall be our father, and we will stay here all our days, and Crito too
shall be my brother.


Herm. Say, Crito, would thou not like to have a sister?


Crito. Yes, and I should like to have a brother too.


Herm. It Is well replied; but now it grieves me that I have none but homely
fare, that you might eat with me.


Cel. We are in no need; this is feast enough for me, I have no room for any
thing but love.


AIR XII.
The heart when thirsty with desire,
No draught can quench the burning fire,
Until the spark that caused the flame,
'Presented to the eye again;
But when it comes again to view,
The soul with transport will renew
It Is native ease, and fill the breast,
As mine is now, with Eddie blessed.

Edd. I feel no pain, nor hunger, but my sighs have made me thirsty.


Herm. Go, Crito, to the spring, and haste hack again. [Ex. Crito] Pardon my
offering you so cool a cordial, it is the best this world affords me.


Edd. It will be received as kindly as the most costly one; and on condition I
might stay me here with Celon, I could content me with it all my days.


AIR XIII.
Eddie. I will stay here all my life,
When I am my Celon's wife;
We'll taste each spring,
And dance and sing,
Across the hills so green;
Thou shall be my lord and king.
And I will be thy queen.
Celon. At night when all the world's asleep,
I Will go fetch thee all my sheep;
I Will watch the dams,
Thou feed the lambs,
And so we'll spend each day;
Our father here shall join our hands,
And thou shall cry obey.

Edd. I Am glad they have drove us hither now, for here we can love in their
despite, nor fear their parting us again.


Herm. I fear the trial will prove worse than the idea; the hard means of life
you will be obliged to submit to here, will I fear dash your future hopes; but
believe me you are welcome as the morning.


Cel. We are assured of that, and free from danger, they will hardly find us here
-- therefore we'll risque whatever else may happen.


AIR XIV.
Since luck has brought us here together,
I fear nor cold nor stormy weather.
With this loved mate, I fear no fate,
That may hereafter threat my state,
The hand today that brought us here,
May send us comfort all the year.

Enter Crito. Crit. Returning home from the well, I saw four travelers coming
on this way; and, seeing me, they eyed me to the cave.


Herm. More miracles? it is very strange, I now begin to fear some sad event.


Cel. Some travelers, I suppose, that have lost their way, and followed Crito
for intelligence.


Herm. Some ignis fatuus sure has drawn the world this way.


Edd. Let us retire.


Cel. Be not afraid my love, we have no enemies here.


Brain. [within.] Here they are my lads, here they are; make haste or they will
give us the slip again. [Eddie faints] Hey day, who have we here!


Enter Brainly, the rest following him. True. The devil and one of his imps, I
believe, only they have hid their cloven feet.


Brain. Odds heart, my child is dying, help some of you help, to hold her up.
-- O thou damned dog, I wish thou had been hanged a twelvemonth ago, thou'st
killed my child, thou have thou dog, [pushes Celon away.] my dear, my Eddie,
[Eddie coming to life] poor creature! how she pants! softly, softly, she is
coming to herself again. [fanning her with his hat] How is it with thee? thy
father is not angry with thee child, come, come, don't be frightn'd, thou
shall not be hurt.


Edd. (weeping) My father! O well-a-day -- where is my Celon, you wont kill him
I hope.


Brain. Kill him! no not I! though I don't care how soon he was hanged.


Edd. Alas, alas, you said you was not angry, and now you have forgot your saying.


Brain. No, not with you child, I came to fetch you home; but we'll leave him
to find his way himself.


Edd. Nay pray let him go with me too.


Brain. No, no, not I indeed, I Am not so fond of his company.


Edd. Nor wont you let me see him when at home?


Brain. Not if I can help it, we'll have no more visiting of witches and
wizards here; nay he may be the devil for ought I know.


Edd. Did not you say just now you would be kind?


Brain. So I think I am, for taking you away and carrying you to a good home
again.


Edd. If that is kindness, I Would rather you would be unkind, and let me stay here
all my life.


Brain. So I suppose; no, no, I did not come all this way for nothing, so come
along, since you don't know when you are doing wrong, I shall make bold to tell
you when you don't do right.


Edd. Farewell my dearest Celon, farewell, I shall --


Brain. Come, come, no whining; a short parting's always best, so help me some
of you to force her away.

[Exeunt Brainly, etc. with Eddie.
Cel. Farewell, most lovely maid, my heart shall follow thee wherever thou
go, -- O most unnatural father!


AIR XV.
O Cupid God of love,
Take now a wretched pair,
Beneath thy friendly care;
Use all thy art, while now apart,
To keep us from despair.
Protect that lovely maid,
So injured and oppressed,
In love so much distressed,
She is so meek, her heart will break,
Unless by thee redressed.

Herm. Alas! I pity you from my heart, and wish I could administer some comfort
to your sorrow, let us retire into the cave and compose yourself awhile.


Cel. No I will follow her, whatever fate befall me.


Herm. Whither will thou go? night will overtake thee, ever thou can reach
thy father's dwelling.


Cel. Aye and so it will if I stay here; I thank thee for thy care, but I can
no where rest if Eddie be not near, I thank thee for all thy friendship; think
me not ungrateful, thus to leave thee, but when the heart is from the body
torn, the spirit soon must die; therefore I must go. A kind farewell to both,
my heart is now so full of grief, that I can nothing say; but once more
farewell.

Exit Celon.
Herm. Farewell kind youth, and may thou never meet so hard a trial more; O
wretched world, I have felt thee sharp as the keen air, and now methinks, I see
myself in this sad youth, a goodly heart overwhelmed in grief; come, Crito,
we'll in and rest, thou see what it is to mix with man; how hard they deal
with one another.

[Exeunt Crito and Hermit.
The End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
A Moonlight Scene. Celon under Eddie's Window. Celon. HERE rests my Eddie,
and if she knew that I was here, it would not be long ere I beheld her.


AIR XVI.
Thou silver Moon, O lend thy aid,
And light me to the charming maid,
Send forth some power from above,
And help me once more to my love.
O turn her cruel father's heart,
Let mercy touch the hardest part;
Let pity stop his threatening rage,
And think on Eddie's tender age.

Enter three Robbers, at the 'Squire's door, trying to break into the house.
Cel. Alas, I am betrayed, and yet they are strangers all to me; I fear some ill
intent, they are breaking open the door; I must interpose, lest my Eddie should
be in danger. [They enter the house.] Hold you there, what mean you, by
entering the house in that manner, and at this time of the night?


1st. House-br. Knock him down! Knock him down! silence him, or we shall
miscarry.


2d. House-br. You proceed, -- I Will manage him, I warrant me.

[Two of them enter the house, the other stays behind, and attacks Celon; Celon
disarms him, and afterward knocks him down with his own weapon, then pursues
the other two into the house: mean while the maimed one crawls off the stage,
and makes his escape, -- there is a great bustle within.]
Brain. [within] Bring 'em along lads, bring 'em along.


Enter Brainly in his shirt, Mrs. Brainly, and a number of servants, in great
confusion, with the Rogues, and Celon as a confederate. Brain. We Have secured
the villains! hold up the lanthorn, and let us see who we have got; 'sdeath and
heart, why this is Celon! Run, wife, directly, and see to the girl, she may
have been in the plot, and made her escape, for what I know. [Exit Mrs.
Brainly.] Ho, ho, young gentleman, have we caught you; what, because I would
not let you ruin my daughter, you and your comrades came to cut my throat; but
I Will stop your course, I assure you, now; -- what break into my house at
midnight! O you villain, you damned dog; this is your love too, the devil take
all love-affairs, I say.


Cel. You say so now, Sir, because you're past 'em.


Brain. And so shall thou be soon; if I don't have thee hanged, I Will give any
body leave to hang me; -- go, one of you, and get a halter, and tie 'em all
three together; lock 'em in the barn or the stable till bye-and-bye, and I Will
settle accounts with 'em all.

[Exit servant.
Cel. As I hope for mercy --


Brain. Mercy! O yes, a deal of mercy, thou shall be hanged, and that will
prevent thy doing any more mischief. Come bring 'em away.

[Exeunt Brainly and the rest.
SCENE II.
Enter Mrs. Brainly and Eddie. Edd. To prison, did you say, Mamma?


Mrs. Brain. They Are all confined in the barn or stable together, and that is
much the same, your father's determined to have 'em all hanged.


Edd. And Celon too? [she weeps.


Mrs. Brain. Why, does not he deserve it, Child?


Edd. I hope not, I am sure he never meant harm.


AIR XVII.
Why thus, ye powers, do ye strive,
To heap distress on me alone,
Say, have you doomed a maid to live,
Beneath the willow shade to moan.
Let not your vengeance fall severe,
Upon a maiden so distressed,
Release, release my Celon dear,
And pluck the sting from Eddie's breast.

Mrs. Brain. Here comes thy father and Hylas, there'll be a strange to-do, I
suppose.


Edd. I fear so too.


Enter Brainly, Hylas, and Trusty. Brain. So Miss Thrifty, you are up, I see;
-- it is a wonder thou'st not been a wooing ever now; But I suppose thou waits
for thy deary's coming to thee this morning, and therefore I Will send the
gentleman an invitation myself. -- Trusty, go, take somebody along with thee,
and fetch those hang-dogs to me.

[Exit Trusty.
Hyl. I hope your worship will have mercy on my poor boy!


Brain. Yes, if he deserves it, not else, I assure you.


Hyl. Ah, but consider.


Brain. I do consider, and pity you with all my heart; I would not have such a
son for the world; and I think, the sooner you get rid of him, the better. --
He must be dealt with according to law; and that, I fancy, will hang him.


Hyl. Oh law! that ever I should have any thing to do with thee? O my poor boy,
who ever thought thou were born to be hanged!


Edd. Hanged! my Celon hanged!


Brain. Hanged! aye, and thee too, for aught I know, for being his confederate.


Edd. O spare his precious life!


AIR XVIII.
If not my Celon, pity me;
Behold me at your feet,
While thus, upon my bended knee.
Make not my woes complete.
Will you throw that rose away,
That once you thought so sweet,
And let it wither and decay,
Like daisies under feet.

Brain. Get out of my sight.


Mrs. Brain. How can you plead so, child, for one that came to take away your
father's life?


Hyl. Her father's life! -- no, not he poor soul.


Brain. Oh, here he comes, -- now let him plead for himself. [Enter Trusty,
Celon, and House-breakers.] A pretty set of fellows, truly.


Hyl. Waystheart, how he looks! O my poor boy, [runs to Celon] what has
bewitched thee, to bring these troubles on thy poor father's head?


Edd. Celon!


Brain. Get away, Miss Fitchet; keep silence till I examine 'em, one by one. --
You fellow in the black coat, do you hear; hem, hem. -- I admit thee king's
evidence, -- stand forth, and speak like a man, say, what were your intentions
for breaking into my house so abruptly; but mind you speak the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth.


1st. Thief. I will, and please your worship.


Brain. Well, mind you do. -- Proceed.


1st. Thief. Our intentions were, and please your worship, to have plundered
the house, forced away your daughter, and to have murdered all those that
interposed.


Brain. There Is pretty fellows for you, there is pretty fellows. -- Now
neighbor Hylas, what do you think of your innocent son? these are all his
contrivances.


Hyl. Good lack, good lack-a-day, I know not what to think, I Am almost beside
myself.


Cel. If your worship will please --


Brain. Hold your tongue, sirrah, till it comes to your turn, if you interrupt
me again, I Will send you back, without any further examination. Well, but again;
-- say who was the contriver of this dreadful plot.


1st. Thief. No one here, and please your worship.


Brain. No one here? -- take care, if I find thee deviate from the truth, I Will
have thee hanged up directly -- who was it then, and where is he?


1st. Thief. He can tell you best, [pointing to Celon.] we left him and the
other scuffling at the door together, when we two entered the house.


Brain. Who do you mean, Celon?


1st. Thief. I don't know his name; I know, I felt the weight of his fury; --
'twas he that gave me this cut of the head.


Brain. Odds heart, how is this! was not he in the plot?


1st. Thief. No, and please your worship, (if I must speak the truth) had it
not been for him, we should have carried our point.


Hyl. Huzza! huzza! what think you of my son now? what think you of my son now?


Brain. I don't know what to think, this is a point would puzzle a Lord Chief
Justice; -- stay, stay, I Have something yet to start, what business, in the name
of Old Nick, could he have there, at that time of the night?


Cel. Waiting in hopes to see Eddie again.


Brain. Was that all?


Cel. Yes, as I hope for mercy; -- I had scarce been there a moment, ere these
ruffians came, accompanied with another; who (while these two entered the
house) they left to encounter me; but I proving conqueror, left him on the
ground; and in pursuing these, was taken prisoner as an accomplice.


Brain. Is all this really true, you Sir? [to the 1st. Thief.


1st. Thief. Yes, in good faith, every word.


Brain. Why then he deserves her, were she a princess; here, take her, boy, and
a thousand blessings go with you both.


Cel. Ten thousand blessings, and thanks in return.


Hyl. Let me give my blessing too; -- may you be as happy, as the King and the
Queen; -- odds heart, I shall jump out of my old skin again. [gives a caper.


Brain. Take this fellow to prison, the other I Will set at liberty.


2d. Thief. I have a demand on your worship, before I go; -- will your worship
stand to your own words.


Brain. Thou saucy rascal, do thou think a man of character, a Justice of the
Little, dare break his word? If thou ever find me breaking my word, I Will give
thee leave to send me to prison in thy stead.


2d. Thief. Then you must either hang Celon, or give me leave to hang your
worship.


Brain. 'Sheart, I believe he has me, and for thy remembrance, I Will forgive
thee, so get thee gone about thy business. [Ex. Thieves.] I plainly see, if a
man was to be accountable for all he says in a passion, he might be hanged
presently. Come, this has been a strange day; but now we'll have nothing but
dancing and feasting for a week.


Hyl. Odds bud lad, you are made for ever. -- Madam Brainly, I must have a
buss, and wish you joy of a son. [kisses her.


Mrs. Brain. I Am overjoyed too, to find that we are all deceived.


Cel. And I Am overjoyed, after all my fears, to find that I am not deceived,
for I Have got, in reality, all I ever wished for.


AIR XIX.
Like sailors surrounded at sea,
For ever 'tween hope and despair;
But when they the harbor once see,
Away flies their trouble and care.
And soon as they step on the shore,
The comforts still greater appear;
They relish the blessing the more,
By thinking they once were in fear.

Brain. Ah, you young rogue, you have changed your tune. -- Friend Hylas, give me
thy hand, I Will make thy son a 'squire.


Hyl. A 'squire! hear'st thou that, lad? wounds and wherrykins, thou wilt be as
great as a lord, by-and-by.


Col. I Am as great already, in my opinion, at least, I Am as happy, I Am sure.


Edd. And I Am much happier.


Brain. Heaven bless you both, you have fought hard for one another; we'll have a
merry wedding on it.


AIR XX.
I never was so pleased in my life,
At making of husband and wife,
Though I Have been at full threescore,
I never saw a pair,
That promised so fair,
In all my good days before.

Hyl. Here comes cousin Cymon; here cousin, here cousin, here is Celon as great
as the Lord Mayor of London.


Cy. I heard of it all on the road, and so came hobbling hither to see the
young couple, and give 'em my blessing too; -- may you live to be as old as
Mathusalem, I say.


Cel. Thank you, uncle, though ever that time, I fancy, we shall be as weary of
the world, as you sometimes appear to be.


Hyl. We Are to have such doings! ah, the young dog, how he sniggers; --
'sdeath, I munnot call him dog, neither, that is a little too free, now he is a
'squire; did hear that, cousin? did hear that, cousin?


AIR XXI.
We'll ring the bell,
And make a fire;
While the tune tells,
My boy's a 'squire.

Cel. This is more than you dreamed, I believe, cousin.


Cy. I Am glad, that I Am awake to see it.


Cel. So am I, for I feel it in reality.


AIR XXII.
Cel. Since fate has ended all our woe,
And brought my Eddie to my arms;
All the ills that teased us so,
Vanish now before her charms.
Edd. Our former sufferings are repaid,
By this mutual joy at at last,
Nor shall our future joys ever fade,
By thinking on the ills that is past.
Both. But thus in transport spend each day,
'Till our griefs are driven away.

A POETICAL DIALOGUE BETWEEN THE AUTHOR OF AN OPERA, AND A COMPOSER OF THE
MUSIC.
MUSICIAN. WELL, good Sir, I Have read your Play,
Your Opera, I meant to say;
The style is simple, plot quite new,
My head upon it, it will do.

POET. Your head upon it, very right,
Were that the case, perhaps it might;
Your head, I mean, what it contains,
The harmony that is in your brains;
We must, you know as well as I,
Please both alike, the ear and eye.
Your head must give the pleasing sound,
The audience hearing to confound,
Whenever the verse is not so good
As I would have it, if I could.

MUSICIAN. Between us, Sir, we'll make it bear.

POET. O trust me, Sir, I don't despair,
Should I succeed in play-wright trade,
For it is the first I ever made,
I shall have reason then to crack.

MUSICIAN. The first? indeed! faith you have a knack;
But give me leave to start a hint,
Though you may think there is nothing in it.
In music, Sir, there is a mode,
Would you evade the common road.
In O, let all your couplets end,
(I tell you this now as a friend)
As some might say, this line is fine-O,
Another cry, that note's divine-O:
Good music, Sir, is all the thing,
'Twill give your halting verse a wing;
My notes shall make your verses fly,
Through pit, through box, and gallery,
And make the house with raptures roar,
Encore! Encore! Encore! Encore! --

POET. Upon my word, I do not fear it.

MUSICIAN. No, that you will not, when once you hear it.

POET. Faith, you delight me; -- i'gad, I vow,
I almost think I hear it now:
But who shall play the lover's part,
Vernon, you know, is very smart.

MUSICIAN. For Vernon, I Would not give a souse,
'T had better be at the other house;
Mattocks, you know, is sweet and fine,
And little Pinto most divine.

POET. It Is true, she gives a song its graces,
But then, she makes such horrid faces:
Arne was the only girl for me,
Such life she had, such harmony,
My ears devoured every note,
Ere well they left her little throat,
Her unaffected, easy style,
Did so bewitch and so beguile,
I was a statue all the while,
Save that my heart made such a thumping,
As from my bosom it was jumping.
And Vernon, you must own has taste,
His action good, his method chaste.

MUSICIAN. Well, well, we will not disagree,
Whose part, or this or that shall be,
'Twill prove our interest and our ends,
To join opinions and be friends,
And that we never may be foes,
Another hint I will propose,
For it has always been my plan,
Never to quarrel with a man,
Whenever his interest shall combine,
And terminate alike with mine.

POET. I like your notion, I confess,
For concord often brings success.

MUSICIAN. Indeed, my worthy Sir, it is true,
It rests in me as well as you;
And by the self same rule agree,
It rests in you as well as me.
A method next, I Will lay you down,
Whereby you will so bewitch the town;
The method's good, nay it is true,
There is no method else will do.
Be frequent in your repetitions,
It is the taste of all musicians,
And as your songs are yet unset,
I Will tell you how; videlicet.
Suppose your verse should end in rapping,
Or it might as well be tapping,
Observe how quick the notes will move it,
I Am sure you will not disapprove it;
Here Is the way it must begin,
But, if I Am out, you will put me in.
What means this palpitation?
What means this palpitation?
What means this rapping and tapping,
Rapping and tapping and rapping,
Tapping and rapping and tapping,
Rapping and tapping and rapping?
Or should the word, perchance be jumping,
The next word that occurs, is thumping;
Suppose me acting now, and dressed,
And thumping this way, on my breast,
And while I am the audience treating,
Alternately, the words repeating,
Thumping and jumping and thumping,
Jumping and thumping and jumping,
Thumping and jumping and thumping,
Jumping and thumping and jumping.
There Sir, don't you think it pretty?

POET. I do not think it very witty.

MUSICIAN. What have we to do with wit?
Let but the words the music fit,
The audience never care a jot,
Whether the verse is good, or not;
Then pray you, Sir, don't talk of wit,
The people will but laugh at it.

POET. So I would have 'em, by the by.

MUSICIAN. Oh! I had rather see 'em cry;
To have some soft and melting strain,
First raise the heart, then down again,
To keep the the soul in constant flutter,
Then flounce it --

POET. in some ditch or gutter.

MUSICIAN. Methinks you're fond of jokeing grown.

POET. Nay, Sir, I think the joke's your own;
Talking of hearts, and souls, and music,
Enough to make a Turk or Jew sick,
And therefore, Sir, I plainly see,
Your muse and mine will never agree;
I never can yield to your pretense,
That Sounds can fill the place of Sense.

THE HAPPY HUSBAND. A SONG.
WHERE the gentle spring was flowing,
Whilst the primrose pale was growing,
Every morn I told my tale
To fair Padella of the vale.
And whilst with artless notes I played,
Beneath the friendly noontide shade,
Padella often would join with me,
In sweetest notes of melody.
Too short the longest day appeared,
Whilst fair Padella's voice I heard,
Too long appeared the shortest night,
When ever the nymph was from my sight.
But now Padella is my bride,
Nor night nor day shall now divide,
Nothing but death's resistless dart,
Shall force us ever more to part.
TO A FRIEND IN THE COUNTRY.
SINCE to the town you have bid a long adieu,
To seek retirement, and your health renew,
Which nightly revels had too much impaired,
Or when too much of Venus you had shared,
Till grave reflection bid you judge between
The charms of M -- lb -- y and the rural green;
Then since to softer scenes your heart's inclined,
My muse may now a friendly welcome find,
And you disposed to listen to her strains,
Whilst she in rural notes sings over the plains,
While fancy leads her over the shepherds lawn,
At close of evening, or at early dawn:
Though Edgware feels not Auburn's dreary fate,
Though Chandau lives not near with princely state,
Yet has thy Villa left, a thousand charms,
Thy wine gives ardor, and thy converse warms;
The fields adjacent yield the endless game Cricket, etc.
,
Though small thy gardens, yet they are known to Fame A beautiful statue of Fame
stood in his garden.
;
Each grave old Cit, as he goes jogging by,
Longs for her matchless leg and lilly thigh,
And from his heart, would fain with fate agree,
To have old Joan, his wife, as cold as she:
While here you talk a rainy hour away,
Or in the sunshine, join in rustic play,
Or when disposed for solitude and talk,
To have some H -- d join your ev'ning's walk,
No artful gambler ever should open my door,
In hopes to win another hundred more;
No, by the Gods! such sharpers would I scorn,
And let the beggars die, as they were born.
SONG.
Set to music by Mr. Barthelemon.
TALK not of books, of dress, of riches,
Talk not of Bacchanalian joy,
For beauty it is that most bewitches,
All nature's governed by a boy.
At Cupid's touch even heroes tremble,
To beauty, stoics often submit,
And nothing, Clara can resemble,
That has not beauty, love and wit.
AN EPISTLE TO A FRIEND.
I Cannot yet, say what you will,
Lay by the d -- n'd mischievous quill;
I cannot for my soul refuse,
The invitation of my muse,
The restless jade will every day,
Throw some strange subject in my way.
And I, as restless as herself,
Cannot throw it wisely on the shelf,;
I cannot pass a villain over,
Or see the sufferings of the poor;
Nor can I at a blockhead wink,
But out I blunder what I think.
In hopes to make some reformation,
Amongst the jockies of the nation,
Who trick us some how every day,
Or steal some privilege away. --
When half-bred critics come to mind,
The pest of genius and mankind,
Whose pockets seldom hold a groat,
Whose merit lies, in finding fault.
A needy prostituted tribe,
Who damns, or praises, for a bribe;
Forsa'en of Genius and the Muse,
Fell Envy teaches 'm abuse;
From foul malignancy of spirit,
They turn a jealous eye to merit,
In secret stab her every hour,
Whenever they have it in their power.
Like coward thieves in ambush fight,
Or rush upon you in the night:
For while they wound unknown, unseen,
They Are sure you cannot fight again.
With these, and what I daily meet,
In the newspapers and the street,
My Muse, as mutt'ring in my breast,
Will Not let me have a moment's rest,
But flutters, struggles, pants, and pines,
Until the peevish hussy finds,
I Am fired with an inclination,
To give a vent to every passion.
I often would pester you with rhyme,
But greedy care will not give me time,
For when a thought has come to mind,
Or when I Have found the muse as kind
As I could wish, I Have sat me down,
And rhimes have on the paper grown,
Uninterrupted for a while,
In a pure unlabored style;
But often the business of the day,
Drives my willing Muse away.
Each infant thought distracted dies,
And fancy through the window flies.
THE FATAL INCIDENT.
IT IS full six months, cried Aladin,
Since Emina I Have seen,
Say, was it not a sorry sin,
To leave my fairy queen?
Say, was it not a sorry sin,
To force me so away,
And make me plod through thick and thin,
"Over hills and far away?"
To make me soldier against my will,
And go the lud knows where,
And what is alas, more cruel still,
To force me from my dear.
It Is fourteen days since last I heard,
Or had one single line,
And she is forsa'en me, I Am afraid,
But sure the fault's not mine.
We parted at this very style,
I thought I should have died;
I took my leave, and all the while,
The lovely creature cried.
Plague on the man, be who he will,
That first the wars began,
But may he be more plagued still,
That schem'd the Militia plan.
Why should they fix on me forsooth,
Who never got drunk and swore,
There Is Ralph and Hal, aye, and in truth,
I could name twenty more.
There Is Thomas now, as great a rake
As ever trod the lea,
He got with barn, at our wake,
Poor Sally Mapletree.
Our Joe got drunk and beat his wife,
Until she scarce could see,
And yet for all, upon my life,
They needs must fix on me.
But I Will no longer time delay,
With thinking what is past,
I Am glad I Have got so safe away,
To see my love at last.
O how my heart with fancy throbs,
To think we soon shall meet;
From her the Rofe its color robs,
The Hyacinth its sweet.
I shall be 'sham'd to see her too,
In this strange soldier's dress,
But if her heart like mine be true,
She Will not love me the less.
I Will even across the churchyard now,
And see my Emina,
She lives at foot of yonder brow,
Where yon white lambkins play.
Here stands the church, where she and I,
Together often have been,
And hope once more, yet ere I die,
To go with her again.
When she some morning by my side,
O! would it were today!
Shall go a maid, but turn a bride,
Dressed like the queen of May.
Then luck attend! I Will even away,
In this same soldier's trim,
Desire will not let me stay,
To make myself more prim.
Ah me! what name's on yonder stone,
That meets my tortured sight!
It Is Emina's! it is here is alone! --
Then to the world, good night.
For, like the barbed-shafted dart,
It plunges through my breast,
Fast bleeds within, my wounded heart,
But here I Will give 'em rest.
O cruel fate! I cannot bear
To look upon her grave;
Strike me to earth, nor longer spare
A love-distracted slave.
Alas! I feel my blood retire,
My eyes grow dim apace,
The fates have heard my last desire,
We'll in the grave embrace.
AN EPISTLE TO A FRIEND.
MAY I not hope your patience will endure
The plain wrought offering of a Muse obscure.
Say, shall it be less welcome 'cause it came
Signatur'd by one beneath the heed of Fame?
Reduced by fortune to an humble state,
Denied by genius ever to be great.
Alas! I Am lost in thinking what to say,
Till thought kills thought, and drives my muse away:
At length I doze, and wander in my dreams,
Hunting new epithets, sentiments and themes;
Then pleased I wake, but find my treasures flown,
Before my eager hand can set 'em down.
How hard to please myself -- what shall I do,
In such a case, how please the world and you?
My fancy breeds apace, no mortal's more,
But then the produce proves so very poor,
'Twill scarce deserve admittance at your door,
My days, thank fate, are well employed; at night
I spin a rhyme or two by candlelight.
To aim at fame is dangerous indeed;
Scores make attempt but very few succeed.
Far be the thought, the fatal thought from me;
For ever let me boast humility;
To please a few, and that same few my friends,
Will be the summit of my hopes, -- my ends
Would be fulfilled, could I with humble-stride
Tread the smooth plain with H -- d by my side.
Let others try the lofty hill to climb,
Soaring scholastic 'bove the reach of rhyme;
Clad in the vest of Sophs, regardless stand,
The praise or censure of the Critic's hand;
Thirsting for pathos to confound the sense,
Like useless gewgaws shaming the expense:
O be it mine to speak in nature's strain!
At once to picture, and at once explain; --
No pomp of words could ever enrapture me,
Like pure-wrote sounds, in plain simplicity,
To trace out nature's wild and endless scene,
Her painted valleys, and her wood-lands green:
There can I seek for themes when fancy dies,
Walk through the forest, and observe the skies;
Nor seek in vain -- each day sends something new,
Some newborn beauty rises to my view.
Could I but steal the art of painting here
These scenes in verse, as they to me appear;
Had I the power with that art to please,
To paint 'em well, and paint 'em too with ease:
Could I like you, at once ensnare the mind,
Engage the eye, and keep the heart confined,
And do it too with such engaging grace,
With manly strides the paths of nature trace,
The Muses then should claim each mite of time,
And every thought I Would jingle into rhyme.
Vain hopes, alas! -- but hopes are apt to please,
And fancied pleasures sometimes give us ease.
Credulity, a mild and simple maid,
Too often, alas! by promises betrayed,
Follows the phantom Hope, with steps so fast,
Till Disappointment kills her at the last.
Never let me be so cursed, as to depend
Upon a Promise, or to lose a friend,
Nor pin my hopes too closely on the sleeve
Of old or young; I Have found 'em both deceive;
The silvered poll is apter ever to sin,
Than he who never felt razor on his chin;
Old age breeds craft, and near his elbow chair
Sits Folly placed, his favorite and heir;
Peace to all such, if such can peace enjoy,
Whose shallow promise tends but to destroy
Their neighbor's peace, -- that wretch I envy not,
Who boasts a name by broken friendship got;
For ever will I bar my homely door,
Against the greatest knave, so meanly poor.
Conscience shall haunt the disingenuous slave,
And time shall lead him blindfold to his grave.
I boast no art, thence can no credit lose:
I paint to show my meaning, not confuse:
No rogue to flatter, nor no friend abuse.
The meanest figure, claims as great a share
Of skill to paint it well, as the most fair.
But those the meanest of the mean I call,
Who gain, with all my pains no praise at all,
You that by nature have an heart designed
To hear and heal the sufferings of mankind,
May you never trust the wretch whose friendship tends
To no one's good, but his own private ends.
AN ALLEGORY ON FRIENDSHIP.
WHAT strange migrations happen every day,
How short, alas, is friendship's golden reign!
Like opening rose-buds drink the dews of May,
Then shortly fall in winter's lap again.
The glowing beam, whose life-creating fire,
Warmed every root, and bids the cowslips peep,
Declines its aid, and 'bove the clouds retire,
And leaves them, in their former state to sleep.
SUNDAY, A POEM.
HAIL holy day, by heavenly laws designed
A consolation to all human kind,
To man and brutes a day of peace and rest,
Would man but own his duty, and be blessed:
As when the harp, in Jesse's golden days,
Tuned every sabbath to Jehovah's praise,
By holy prophets, and by virgins strung,
When truth and faith inspired every tongue;
Or when his son with eloquence divine,
(The greatest favorite of the sacred Nine)
Made the proud Saul, whenever he touched his strings,
Bow his stiff neck, and own the King of Kings.
Observe the present age, -- how vain, how strange!
How true sang he, who told us, "all things change."
A puny race of infidels and fools,
True slaves to vice, and fashion's gaudy tools;
Strangers to virtue, enemies to fame,
Except in foreign dress, or foreign name.
My Lord sends forth his hopeful heir to roam
To foreign climes, to bring new fashions home:
Caught with their manners and their taste, he burns,
And after six years travel, he returns
A flimsy fop, a coxcomb and a fool, --
A greater dunce, than when he left the school:
Quick at intrigue, to gamble, or to fight,
A debauchee, if not a s -- te.
Britain and France with emulation try
TO outdo each other in absurdity.
For here at home what vast excess we see,
In city fops, and city quality:
Is there a folly introduced at court,
But straight on swiftest pinions of report,
It through the city in a trice is fanned,
And introduced, -- sor taste, at second hand?
With cards and routs their Sunday is employed,
And every Christian virtue is destroyed.
Mode will bewitch, all eyes may plainly see,
And nothing charms like flimsy gaiety:
In all degrees, at every age, we find,
There Is naught like fashon captivates the mind:
Do but observe the rich Sir Traffick's wife,
Old and deformed, upon the verge of life,
With fulsome art, she rolls her faded eyes,
And thinks to make a conquest ere she dies;
While in their dress, there is no distinction seen,
'Tween sixty-six, and she of gay sixteen.
But to my theme; my muse at random strays,
And with a tedious prelude, she delays
My better meaning, and perverts my plan,
I Will paint the scenes from nature, if I can;
We raise subscriptions and new churches build,
But heaven knows how seldom they are filled.
Should Sunday shine a summer's day, and fair,
Behold what legions round the town repair;
What flocks to Richmond and to Windsor drive,
And buz and sip, like drones about a hive,
At every welcome tavern which they meet,
Affecting bucks, and asses prove complete,
On hackney'd steeds, the giddy blockheads fly,
Who kindly drag 'em home, perhaps, and die;
Of all the slaves dame nature's given us here,
There Is none so noble, treated so severe,
As the kind steed, that is ever yet been cursed,
To have his last load greater than his first.
Then worn with hunger, slavery and age,
Finds still a harder journey to engage;
Than when in youth and vigor he would bear
My Lord a mile or two to take the air.
But such is fate, when useless and grown old,
To some unfeeling monster he is sold.
Each needy wretch his thirst for taste declares
Whene'r he speaks, but more by what he wears;
Often is the fancy of some brainless prig,
Couched in the choice of his enormous wig,
And often we learn the tenor of the fair,
By the fly glance, or belle-affected air.
Is there a nymph oppressed by Fortune's frown,
That beauty might indeed have stamped her own?
Behold her sailing in the pink of taste,
Trump'd up with powder, frippery and past,
Resolved against Fortune, beauty's force to try,
(The greatest powers now beneath the sky,)
Rather than fate her conquest should impede,
She Will not retreat, though virtue's sure to bleed.
Behold what droves to Bagnigge Wells repair,
Crowding together for the sake of air,
And strictly keeping Sunday's weekly fair.
Sunk in a vale, this fair retreat is placed,
And with a mountain on each side is graced;
Receiving all the rubbish of the town,
That has for ages, there, in loads been thrown.
Smooth through its flat, a muddy riv'let streams,
And down its sides a wholesome churchyard teems;
Here, close pent up by thousands, we repair,
And praise the water, liquor and the air:
Here lovesick couples every Sunday run,
They marry next, and find themselves undone:
Soon shifts the scene, the passion next is cloyed,
And all their promised happiness destroyed.
Behold a pair, that but two years ago,
She a conquette, and he a city beau,
Now look with sorrow at their former state,
And curse the burden of their present fate.
Married, they walk indifferent and grave,
Whilst worldly cares their every thought enslave:
He, at a distance, from the crowd retires,
She, at a distance, leaves her gay desires.
See, self-admir'd, Miss, of four feet high,
Display her charms, and with an ogle, try
To captivate some dull unwary spark.
She often shoots, but seldom hits the mark:
For should the rogue some imperfection spy,
Her crooked legs, or bolster'd shape, awry:
If the high shoulder, which she would fain conceal,
Some thoughtless turn should cruelly reveal,
No new device, how well soever it is dressed,
Will win the lover to her strutting breast.
If such a wretch would deal in Hymen's laws,
Let her throw off her frippery and gaze;
Nor vainly try, with self-imagin'd charms,
To win the lover to her stunted arms.
To charm with person, never make pretense,
But try to please with gravity and sense;
Plain be your dressed, seem conscious of defect,
Let love subside, and try to win respect.
Should some grave friend of sixty, seek a wife,
A needful helpmate, at the verge of life,
Who Is with your virtues, not your person moved,
Is better far by such to be approved,
Than try with such a form to make a prize,
Or hope in vain to charm a lover's eyes,
Who will but rally, flatter and despise.
Devote no more your Sunday to intrigue,
Nor longer keep your vanity in league;
For where the person and the mine is awry,
We seldom find it catch a lover's eye.
Let not white Conduit, Bagnigge, or the Spaw,
One Sunday more your vain attention draw,
Where swarms of fools, of coxcombs, bucks and beaux,
Adore themselves, and next themselves, their clothes,
Where belles repair to catch, and to be caught,
Who never yet gave being to a thought.
You, on whom Fortune has been pleased to smile,
Lay by your giddy pleasures for awhile;
Regard the cries of nature in distress,
Consine awhile your appetite and dress:
Where Fortune's given enough, and some to spare,
Let the remainder be the poor man's share.
AN ELEGY ON THE DEATH OF A FRIEND.
Farewell, kind youth! my friend farewell!
Since fate will have it so;
Cease, cease, the solemn passing bell,
Nor rggravate my woe.
In plaintive notes my muse shall sing
Thy merits and thy name,
And on her weak, but plaintive wing,
She Will bear thee up to fame.
What though obscure, thou spent thy days
A friend to virtue's cause,
Thy merits still demand my lays,
To whisper thy applause.
The lonely bud that blows obscure
Beneath the spreading thorn,
Often preserves a scent more pure,
Than what the tops adorn.
I little thought, my dearest friend,
To see thee dead so soon,
For who could think the day would end,
Before it well was noon?
Thy noon of life an evening proved,
Thy sun ran quickly down,
Thy morning was by all beloved,
Thine eve without a frown.
Through life with even pace thou stee'rd,
Without one single foe,
(By friends beloved, by truth revered,)
Lest envy made them so.
But who could be a foe to thee,
A friend to all mankind:
Whose breast was all tranquillity,
With harmony combined.
How often have I at peep of dawn,
Thy friendly summons heard,
And with thee trod the verdant lawn,
Before the sun appeared.
From Richmond hill to Twick'nam dale,
How often have we strayed,
Charmed with the thrush and nightingale,
That sang in Dysart's shade.
When cloudy mists from off the brooks
Proclaimed a summer's day,
With glee we talked of men and books,
And argued time away.
Whenever a wild romantic scene,
Has struck our wandering eyes,
And where the magic circle's been,
Great Shakespeare would arise.
Where gentle Zephyrs blew serene,
As through the copse we steered,
Or when some garden we have seen,
Great Milton has appeared.
When nature dasy'd over the lawn,
And blossomed every tree,
The humble Thompson's muse would dawn,
Like pure simplicity.
When over the hill we have chanced to stray,
And viewed some mansion by,
Often with a smile, I Have heard thee say,
"Its wealthy Lord must die."
Thou envy'dst not the proud his wealth,
His luxury and pride,
Thy only boon, a little health,
But that the Fates denied.
Thy honest ear would never attend
The vile detractor's lie,
But with a manly zeal defend
Both friend and enemy.
Often when the lark had closed her wings,
The Moon began her reign,
I Have heard thee touch thy magic strings,
And play thy usual strain.
Scarce had the Thames sent up a breeze,
Or dews fallen on the ground,
But through the gentle waving trees,
I heard the pleasing sound.
Enraptured have I stood alone,
Beneath a cooling shade,
With extacy I Have caught each tone,
In soft pianos played.
But now the evening charms no more,
No more the morn delight,
Since morn nor evening can restore
Thee back again to sight.
No more shall I at break of day,
Thy friendly summons hear,
Nor with thee over the woodlands stray,
Before the Sun appear.
In sad remembrance over thy tomb,
Thy requiem will I sing,
When night with dull and awful gloom,
Shall spread her raven wing.
THE BANKS OF CHELMER.
THOUGH Windsor boasts her tyrants and her kings,
Her shady groves, her forest and her springs;
Her lofty temples, and her costly gems,
Her murmuring Loddon, and her silver Thames;
Admit my Muse so tread in humbler lays,
And sing, though lowly, in fair CHELMER's praise.
What though thy banks, by kings were never trod,
No stately savage graced thee with a nod;
Thou happ'ly 'scap'd the arbitrary frown,
Nor felt the curse, of being near a crown.
Once, on a time, there lived a rural pair,
The gentle Philo, and Salina fair;
The sad Leander loved not more than he,
When, armed with love, he dared the raging sea;
No story'd fair could ever boast a mind
More pure; no maid could show an heart more kind
Than she; her tresses played about her waist
In flowing curls; her head, with posies graced,
Like the fair lilly essenc'd every gale,
While over the lawn she tript, or through the dale.
On CHELMER's banks the gentle pair first trod,
Ere this fair land felt vile oppression's rod;
In golden times, when love over interest stood,
And statesmen fought their king and country's good;
He tended flocks, while she the diffaff played,
Upon the brow, or near some friendly shade.
Long had their breasts felt Cupid's gentle flame,
And stifled love with common friendship's name;
Till bursting forth, the blaze dispelled the smoke,
And Philo first to his Salina spoke: --
We Have long, my fair Salina, trod these plains,
In summer's heat, and winter's drenching rains;
We often steal the honey from the bees,
And often we pluck the blossom from the trees,
Their tempting sweetness urge us to the deed,
But yet we find 'em cloy us as we feed.
There grows one flower, yet, that I revere,
Survives in bloom, throughout the killing year,
Whose tempting blush, and never-fading smell,
By far, all blossoms of the spring excel;
Whose damask leaves distill a balmy dew,
That breeds desire, and maintains it too;
I often behold it, as I tread the mead,
And every day, my longing eyes I feed
With fond desire; till at last I pine,
Sigh to myself, and wish the blossom mine.
Still must I pine, still must I sigh in vain,
It Is you must ease my hopes, and cure my pain;
Within your reach it hangs, within your breast,
To make me wretched, or to make me blessed.
Nay, cease to grieve, the fair Salina cried,
Have you ever asked me ought, that I denied?
Sure you have found me selfish and unkind,
To think, I bear about so poor a mind:
Did you a Lambkin or an heifer choose,
You never knew me such a boon refuse.
Then bring me, Philo, where this wonder grows,
Be it a lilly, hyacinth or rose;
Be it the fairest bud that ever sprung,
The sweetest blue-bell ever fairy rung,
Within my reach, or in my power to give,
If Philo ask it, Philo shall receive.
Thanks lovely maid, -- but O! you will change your mind,
When you this fair, this blooming beauty find.
Nay doubt me not, nor yet my truth decry,
Let not my word, upon suspicion, die;
Let not your thoughts be timid and unkind,
Till I Have my promise, and my truth declined:
No tempting sweet, no rose that ever sprung,
Shall make me faulter in my heart or tongue;
Never let me tread these fertile banks again,
Nor walk with Philo over the verdant plain,
When I forget the promise I have made,
Banish Salina to some distant shade.
Nay, lovely maid, be ever, ever near,
Should you, should fair Salina disappear,
These lonely plains would be more lonely still,
And burs and thistles grow on every hill;
To yonder brook then let us bend our way,
And there behold the prodigy of May;
And there behold, my heart's, my soul's delight,
My wish by day, and all my dreams by night.
Methinks, it is strange, that one poor simple flower,
Should, over an heart like yours, obtain such power;
The be, it is true, and butterfly will rove,
And sport around, with animated love,
When every flower rising to their sight,
Invites the heart, and yields 'em new delight;
The sun declines apace, let us instant go,
And try, if I will keep my word, or no.
Then straight they trip together over the plain,
And bands of Cupids followed in a train.
To bind two hearts with wreaths that never fade,
And prove the promise of a tender maid;
The banks they reach, and next, the crystal brook,
In which young Philo bid Salina look.
The banks are pleasant, and the stream is clear,
But yet I see no rose or lilly near;
Some cruel swain has stole it, ever we came;
In such a case, can I be ought to blame?
Say, can you nothing in the stream behold?
No perfect beauty of celestial mould?
See you not something, like yourself appear?
The substance of that shadow, I revere; --
Thou art the substance, thou, my boasted bloom,
It Is thou must ease my heart, or seal my doom.
Ungen'rous swain, how could you thus ensnare,
With studied arts, a poor unguarded fair!
Am I the fairest, Philo ever saw,
Could poor Salina such defire draw?
Alas! I grieve to think what I have done,
Things end in sorrow, that are rash begun;
Let me recall it, sure I was asleep;
Must I, indeed, my artless promise keep?
Must I, perforce then, give myself away,
To be the idol of a single Day?
To be forgot, if Philo ever should see,
Some other maid, still fairer yet than me?
But O! remember, should you ever find
Some other maid, more fair, more true, more kind,
Forget not then, who once you deemed a prize,
Nor make your captive fair, a sacrifice.
O never! never! talk not so again,
Such fancied ills will rive my heart in twain. --
Here do I vow, and when I prove unkind,
Teem down ye clouds, and unloose the wind;
Let forked lightning through my cottage shoot,
And thunder tear whole forests by the root;
Let every lamb, that in my pastures stray,
By turgid floods be caught, and washed away;
Let me be sunk in famine and despair,
Beneath the horror of the warring air.
Nay, gentle swain, my heart would bleed, to see
Thee made the spectacle of misery;
Should thou prove kind, and keep thy passion true,
I won'd not wish a fairer swain than you.
When I prove false, -- but that can never be,
My health, my life, my every hope's in thee;
If this fond heart should ever a traitor prove,
And violate the sacred laws of love,
Let shame be painted on my guilty breast,
And sorrow hunt me from the bed of rest.
What shall I say, -- for O, I cannot feign
What I am not, were I the world to gain;
What shall I say, to make my fair believe,
These tears are real,
Cease, O! cease to grieve;
Here, take my hand, my heart I would resign,
But that has fled this many a day to thine;
My breast, forlorn, often led me to despair,
Save when, methought, I felt my Philo's there.
O! let me clasp it to my panting breast,
Heal my fond heart, and give it endless rest.
Ye woods and vales, that heard the lovely sound,
Tell it in echoes to the plains around;
Let the sweet woodlark raise his notes divine,
Telling each swain, that fair Salina's mine.
THE FIRST OF MAY.
MY tale I take from times of old,
When truth was more esteemed than gold;
When pride walked threadbare and despised,
When folks were better exercised
Than nowadays, when broils and strife
Defiles the story of each life.
A country villa, near a green,
Inhabitants, but twice sixteen;
An honest 'squire held the hall,
Surrounded by a turfen wall,
The friend and landlord of 'em all.
A neighborhood so well inclined,
So simple, honest, and so kind,
Each tried his neighbor to excel,
In friendship, and in doing well.
As soon as morning dawn appeared,
Or early chanticleer was heard,
Ever the fond herds began to feed,
Or Fairies fled the blushing mead,
The thrifty villagers arose,
And from the bed of sweet repose,
They met the labors of the day,
And cheerful, sung the time away;
At eventide, when work was done,
They all returned at setting sun,
And met upon the plain -- with glee
They pip'd, and danced upon the lee;
There in a lowly, simple state,
They felt the joys that fly the great;
No load of conscience galled their breast,
Content and labor gave 'em rest.
'Twas now the rosy morn of May,
When Flora, in her best array
Bedecked each little rising hill
With cowslips sweet, or daffodil;
A may pole tall, with garlands hung,
And rows of birds eggs neatly strung,
Was placed upon a verdant green,
A tribute to the morning's queen.
Each rustic summons forth his fair,
And round the pole they all repair.
The 'squire amongst the rest arose,
As 'twas his custom to dispose
Of various gifts, upon that day,
And gave good ale and cakes away.
Twelve garlands one small hillock graced,
In simple order each was placed.
The honest 'squire now proposed,
That each, by choice, should be disposed;
Said every swain had equal right
To any garland, now in sight,
And all beneath, if ought should be,
To claim, his right and property.
For each, some little prize contained,
So that the loser, something gained,
Though some were greater than the rest,
Each swain now strove to choose the best.
Young Ralph, a fair and comely swain,
The very hero of the plain,
Beheld fair Alecy, on her way,
No star so bright, no nymph so gay;
Her small and easy waist was bound
With wreaths most sweet; her head was crowned
With every flower of the field,
That Flora's self, to her might yield.
She, on her head a garland bore,
Its equal never was seen before.
Young Ralph set off full speed, to meet
This lovely maid, this nymph complete,
And struck the rest with great surprise,
To see him claim her for his prize;
He first bereaved her of her crown,
And claimed the maiden, all his own.
Now every youngster on the plain,
Looked with envy on the swain,
But all in justice did declare,
He won the maid; -- the trick was fair.
The 'Squire paused, and shook his head,
His hearty smile of humor fled,
To see his child another's claim,
And now he 'gan himself to blame.
The swain beheld the good man's eyes,
With tears, he offered back his prize.
The 'Squire, charmed at such a deed,
Cried, you deserve her now indeed!
It glads me much, young swain, to find,
Thou bear so great, so good a mind;
Here, take her, lad, -- I murmur not,
If she is contented with her lot.
She smiled consent, and cheered the drooping swain,
She gave her hand, her meaning to explain.
The 'Squire saw, and blessed the blooming pair,
And three loud vollies broke the peaceful air.
A PASTORAL ON THE DEATH OF MR. C. CHURCHILL, AND MR. R. LLOYD,
The latter dying soon after the news of the former's death.
JONNY and ROBIN. JONNY. AH! Robin, have thou heard the news?
Our blithest swain is dead,
The greatest favorite of the Muse
Is in the churchyard laid.

ROBIN. Thou do not sure, my CHARLEY mean,
My true and faithful friend?
If so, alas! my woes again,
Will never have an end.

JONNY. I would it were not him indeed,
I Am grieved the news to tell,
I know thy honest heart will bleed,
Thou lov'dst the swain so well.

ROBIN. Ah! woe is me, what shall I do!
How ease the pangs I feel,
Thy words have cut my life-string through,
More absolute than steel.

JONNY. Nay, do not go and leave me too,
To wander here alone,
To sit beneath the churchyard yew,
To weep beside thy stone.

ROBIN. Alas! kind youth, alas, I die,
My eyes begin to fade,
I soon shall with my CHARLEY lie,
Beneath the yew-tree shade.

JONNY. Ah! most distressed and wretched me,
To live to see this day,
I Will sit beneath some gloomy tree,
And sigh my soul away.

ROBIN. Nay, pray thee live, thou worthy swain,
And hope a better day,
Let not my lambs die on the plain,
When I am turned to clay.

AN EPISTLE TO A FRIEND.
I Said I Would write, but did not dream,
Of loosing by the way -- my theme;
I Have been this half hour in a pother,
To think, how I should find another,
For all I Would gathered in my head,
I found, alas, this morning fled;
I scratched my head, implored the Muse,
But found it all of little use;
Sometimes a thought would strike my pate,
About the Troglodites of state,
A savage kind of folks, you know,
That lived five hundred years ago,
Much alike, in all their ways,
To those we have in our days;
But bright-ey'd Caution stopped my hand,
And gave me then to understand,
The danger that attends the task,
Should we but try, to strip the mask,
From off some false, fair-seeming knave,
Who Is every thought is to enslave
His king and country every hour,
For every knave is fond of power:
A little fellow never ought
To tell a great one of his fault,
For very like, for all his pains,
The other may knock out his brains,
Who having little of his own,
He Is anxious for another's grown.
I Will leave such themes, to such I'feck,
That neither care for head or neck,
Who run full tilt, through muck and mire,
To set themselves, and world on fire.
I hear you say, -- what, cannot you find,
Amongst the race of human kind,
Another subject to engage,
And live in this abandoned age!
No worthy character distressed,
By some purse proud knave depressed;
No worthy friend fall in your way,
To elevate your tardy lay?
Why yes, I have, I own it too,
Memory brings it to my view;
Whenever of friendship I would talk,
I Am sure to meet you in my walk.
ON THE DEATH OF BONNELL THORNTON, ESQUIRE.
SEE Genius hangs her rueful head,
Like pity all in tears,
And sighing, cries, my THORNTON's dead,
For see, his shrine appears.
Wit raised the smile, whenever he spoke,
Enforced by manly sense,
He never urged a single joke,
That gave the least offense.
No praise could ever make him vain,
No foe enforce a frown,
Yet could he feel for other's pain,
As sharp as for his own.
Where will the needy find relief?
Where merit, meet a friend?
That while they tell their tale of grief,
Shall one like him attend?
Though fate has closed thee in the urn,
Thy name shall never die,
Thy matchless wit shall ever burn,
To endless memory.
Adieu, my dearest friend, adieu!
These lines are due from me,
For every rising hope I view,
Was planted first by thee.
THE FOPLING AND THE EWE, A FABLE.
A Fopling dressed in all his tinsill'd pride,
With knot, and rapier dangling by his side,
With foppish gate he tripp'd along the street,
And feared each clumsy mortal that he met,
Lest his silk hose might some rude splash receive,
Or filthy sweeper, brush his crimson sleeve:
An Ewe, hard drove, and panting for her life,
To 'scape the savage butcher and his knife,
Hopeless and faint, she could no farther fly,
And though all innocent, was loath to die;
The Fopling she beheld, to him she flew,
And thought she might be safe, if once he drew
His sword, in pity to her wretched state,
And at his feet, she 'gan to supplicate;
"Take pity, Sir, the Ewe in anguish cried,
"O, pluck the rapier from your noble side,
"Oh! let your gracious mercy interpose,
"And stop the bloody purpose of my foes;
"Life, Sir, is sweet, when I alas, am dead,
"My lambs will perish in the frozen mead,
"They yet are young, and want a mother's care,
"To shield 'em from the sharp inclement air."
The Fop, enraged to think a brute should meet,
And interrupt his passage in the street,
He was too proud the gross affront to brook,
And with an haughty, but unmanly look,
Drew forth his sword, and plunged it in her side,
The hapless victim fell; but ere she died,
In mournful accents she addressed my Lord,
Her tears gushed briefly forth, at every word:
"If It be your reason that provoked the deed,
"If It be your justice, that I guiltless bleed,
"My fellow brutes more mercy would have shown,
"Even tigers might, had they my story known;
"Had they my lambkins heard, in yonder plain,
"Bleating, in hopes to see their dam again;
"Helpless and young, they will stray the barren moor,
"But never must see their tender mother more,
"Ungrateful Lord; no beast was ever so rude,
"For savages will show some gratitude;
"The coat that makes your Lordship now so fine,
"Grew on my back, was once a coat of mine;
"The tender meal today, on which you fed,
"Sprang from my womb, and for your pleasure bled,
"But I Am too bold, by far, I fear, too rude,
"To charge a courtier with ingratitude;
"Forgive me, Sir, though bold the truth I say,
"Courtiers receive, but seldom will repay,
"Their hearts ungrateful, no compunction feel,
"I sought thy aid, but met thy fatal steel."
QUERIES, ADDRESSED TO A FRIEND.
OUR betters seem to make a rout,
To find the cause of famine out,
Pretend the mystery is too great,
To tell us why we have no meat;
Nor can our ablest statesman's head,
Find out the cause, we have no bread.
The reason's plain, I Will tell you why,
I don't believe, they ever try.
But should they want to lay a tax
Upon our heavy-laden backs,
There is not one, but knows the way,
To do it for us, any day.
Like dog in the fair, they shift about,
Today in place, tomorrow out;
Nor shall you find the best resign,
Without some motive or design
To wriggle into better bread; --
Then can you think he will plague his head
About such things as you or I,
Who were but born to starve and die?
QUERY I.
Were they, like poor men, apt to feel
An appetite, without a meal;
Say, would they not soon find the way,
To move this obstacle away?
II.
Would forestallers and regretors,
Until now, have 'scap'd their betters,
If some great rogue, 'tween you and I,
Had not given them authority?
Thieves are seldom hanged for stealing,
Where my Lord's a fellow-feeling.
III.
If one knave should chance to swing,
O that would be a happy thing.
In such a case, it is ten to four,
But he would impeach a hundred more;
And then l'd lay you nine to ten,
That half of them were n -- n,
Or such to whom we give the name,
For they, by birth assume the claim,
And have not in reality,
The smallest claim to quality.
Titles that once were bravely won,
That have through generations run,
May grace at last some worthless fool,
Perhaps some haughty fav'rite's tool,
In some base office exercised,
And by his countrymen despised.
THE PROLOGUE TO THE MERRY MIDNIGHT MISTAKE. Written by a gentleman of
Chelmsford, and acted by a set of gentlemen of that place, for their amusement,
who had never perfo^m'd before.

WITH much reluctance they have brought me here,
To try your patience, and to cure my fear;
But if, in trying, I should chance to fail,
You soon will see me (Frenchman-like) turn tail.
Our Author's here behind, in such a taking,
Scratching his head, shivering and shaking,
For fear his comic bantling should not please --
He here presents you with his prologue fees;
A little canting, and a thousand smiles --
For complimenting, more than truth, beguiles:
So he, poor man! since canting is the mode,
Must needs go plodding in the common road;
Begs you would let his brat walk unmolested,
Should the poor thing chance to be divested
Of Congreve's wit, or Dryden's nice connection:
For sure, the poorest child claims some protection.
And if, in walking, it should chance to trip,
Or falling, cut its little nose or lip,
You Will please to save the poor declining thing,
By kindly catching hold the leading-string.
Some, proudly pleased in finding out a fault,
But mostly those, who cannot digest a thought;
Rude Nature gave 'em rancour to condemn,
But buried all their candor in their phlegm.
Or (like enough) some sage good dame may frown,
Displeased with every notion but her own,
And in her pride, from pious motives, say,
"There Is nothing good can come from out a play;"
And kindly showing it is not from her spleen,
But judges wisely what she is never seen.
For many Author's have unjustly bled;
Their plays being damned before a line was read.
The Actor too, your candor must implore,
If Actors those, who never played before;
Unskilled, unstudied, in these stage-affairs --
They Have other business to engross their cares --
They only do it to oblige a friend;
No other motive, secret pride, or end,
Save this -- to force a gentle smile from you --
We'll do our best -- it is all the best can do.
THE EPILOGUE TO THE MERRY MIDNIGHT MISTAKE.
I Tell you, I will -- Plague on it, I Am so teased --
The Author thinks, his firstling has not pleased;
I say, he is quite mista'en; it wonnot do;
He Will not be easy, till he hears from you.
He wants poor me, your anger to amuse,
By trumping up some frivolous excuse.
I fain would lay it on the acting now;
But that his modesty will not allow --
I Would lay it on the Prompter -- if I knew how.
You plainly see, I Have no excuse at all,
The best way'll be, to let the curtain fall. --
Yet hold -- I Have something yet to say -- aye right;
We'll do better, Sirs, another night;
We'll be more perfect, act with better spirit,
For application is the way to merit.
Fear's the great tyrant in a doubtful breast,
From thence, our first attempts are seldom best,
Could we have acted, as we did intend,
Not one soul here, but would have been our friend.
Thanks to that simile -- by Jove, methinks I hear
You kindly say -- "We need not be in fear,
"Because there is none but friends and neighbors here."
Thanks for this good confession, it is very kind,
I long to carry this good news behind.
They Are all distressed to know, what I have done,
And I Am as much impatient, to be gone.
THE PROLOGUE TO REDOWALD, A MASQUE. Written by a young gentleman of sixteen.

WERE it not, Sirs, impossible to find,
A subject suiting every reader's mind,
A Prologue or a Preface would be vain,
Because we know, that no one would complain;
And yet, I Have seen a well wrote piece go down,
And please (though rare) the better half, the town;
An half-bred prig, to show superior skill,
That scarce could read, or knew the use of quill,
Has sallied forth, with envy in his eye,
And spite of fate, would shame itself defy,
And Critic-like, to do the thing he ought,
Would find a beauty, in an errant fault;
That not enough, to prove himself a fool,
Would murder beauties, by the same rule.
Our infant-author hopes his piece may fall
In better hands, or else in none at all;
Just from the lap of Genius, bends his way,
No famed Parnassian fields, where Poets stray;
But finds it culled and shorn, a barren field,
That furnished ages, now will hardly yield
A single shrub, but what we have seen before
Be-clipt and turned, and twined into a score.
Such as they are, he brings to public view,
And if you find there is old ones with the new,
Pray tell me, Sir, that famous Poet's name,
That living bard, that does not do the same.
If near his neighbor's produce he intrudes,
For nature's self has her similitudes;
The self-same thought might strike both you and me,
And I the last, stand charged of piracy.
You Have here in hand, a little moral piece,
Nor stole from France, nor Italy, nor Greece,
A child of fancy, nurtured by the mind,
If bad comes on it, I know 'twas well designed.
THE EPILOGUE TO REDOWALD, A MASQUE.
Should some grave wit our Author's piece decry,
And damn the plot from mere acerbity;
Let gentle candor rise and take his part,
And own, he is shown more genius than art.
To write a play, you will own is no small task,
Then what must be the labor of a Masque?
Fancy must aid the Bard, where nature fails,
And daring Genius muster all her sails;
Our nonag'd poet unregarding Time,
Slipped from his wing, and towering forth sublime,
Surveyed the Muses with enraptured eyes,
Adored their tracks, and mounted to the skies. --
Should it be said, ambition was the cause
That urged him first to write; -- or vain applause;
Ere you convict him of a thirst for fame,
Turn to the title, and find out his name.
SHAKESPEARE'S JUBILEE, A MASQUE.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
APOLLO, TRAGEDY, COMEDY, CERES, MINERVA, HECATE, THREE WITCHES, OBERON, FAIRY
QUEEN, PUCK, A BAND OF FAIRIES, SIR JOHN FALSTAFF, CALIBAN, ATTENDANTS AT THE
JUBILEE.
SHAKESPEARE'S JUBILEE.
Enter Three Witches. RECITATIVE. FIRST WITCH. WELL met, my wayward sisters,
once again,
Ye spell-fraught offspring of great SHAKESPEARE's brain,
Immortal spirits were we made by him,
Whose fame-beam'd glory, time can never dim.
Let Us to his Jubilee with speed repair,
And meet his favorite son; for he will be there.

AIR I.
Tune in Harlequin Sorcerer.
Over Avon let us flec,
To great Shakespeare's Jubilee,
There in revels, all day long,
Join unseen the mortal throng.
Over Avon, etc.

RECITATIVE. SECOND WITCH. Where Is Hecate gone?

THIRD WITCH. At Acheron she waits,
Making secure the tripple-bolted gates
Of dark perdition; where, with fell distraction,
Pale envy raves, with malice and detraction.
Foul-favour'd harpies, happy to destroy
Each deed of merit, and each promised joy.

SECOND WITCH. There let 'em howl and rave till I release 'em,
And fierce Alecto with new tortures teaze 'em:
While I upon the wind's swift coursers ride,
Close by the harping Aeolus's side.

AIR II.
Tune, In the Witches, a Pantomime.
Come, come, come, come, come away.
Let us be merry,
Let no spell our time delay,
But fly the ferry.
We nor pay, or tax, or toll,
No mortal law can us control.
Then come, come, come, come away.
[Exeunt.
Enter Oberon, Fairy Queen, Puck, and Band of Fairies. AIR III.
Tune, Merry Sailors. Slow.
QUEEN. Beware the ground,
Look careful round,
If near no deadly reptiles dwell;
Let all beware,
The magic snare,
Of hell-born Hecate and her spell.
CHORUS.
Beware the ground,
Look careful round,
If near no deadly reptiles dwell.

RECITATIVE. OBERON. Prepare, ye elves, my summons all attend,
Your dumb attention for a moment lend;
The mortals all prepare to revel soon,
And try with luster to eclipse our moon.
Great SHAKESPEARE's matchless fame they mean to sing,
Whose spirit often joined us in the ring;
When we by moonlight have our gambols played,
Around some haycock, or within some shade.

AIR IV.
Tune, Allemand in the Masquerade, Drury Lane. Slow.
It Is now serene,
We'll trip unseen
Oe'r Avon's lovely banks so green,
All free-cost we,
At Jubilee;
Will sip and sip around:
Where some that sup
Too deep of the cup,
May need a friend to hold 'em up;
And some fair maid
May want our aid,
To save her from the ground.

RECITATIVE. PUCK. Before your gracious summons we pursue,
I Will tell you something odd, and something new;
Last night, when half the world was fast asleep,
I chanced into a sot-house club to creep,
Where tailors, weavers, butchers, bakers, sat,
Disputing high of politics and state;
Here sat a Methodist, a man of blood,
Who thought no precepts but his own were good.
There a poor tailor, one of vast persuasion,
A politician, fond of innovation,
A very coward, yet he swore he would ^ight,
Before he would lose one privilege or right.
He looked all fierceness, and he talked most brave,
And yet he proved himself a fool and slave.
From morn to night, he sat a muddl'd sot,
Bound like a vassal, to his score and pot.
His heart often gave his fruitless tongue the lie,
For he loved liquor, more than liberty.
Anon, a vehement debate arose,
And then I whipped across his burning nose;
Sometimes I Would tickle him. I love to teaze,
And then, to clear his head, would make him sneeze,
When next, our SHAKESPEARE on the carpet came,
Though all were strangers to his worth and fame;
The puritan declared, he could not see,
What could be meant by SHAKESPEARE's Jubilee.
He thought it impious -- avarice betide him,
He could not bear to see ought go beside him.
Mankind were too profuse, but hell should stint 'em,
They Would better bring their mite to Doctor Squintum.
I saw their minds were dark, and out of spite,
I was resolved to leave them without light;
I broke their pipes, and blew their candles out,
And left them making such a horrid rout,
Swearing and jolting, one block against another,
Each blockhead felled his loggerheaded brother;
I laughed, until my sides were fit to crack,
Then hi'd me hither on an owlet's back.

QUEEN. Well did thou serve them, dull and heady fools,
Set on, like curs, to be their masters tools.

PUCK. Where are you bound?

OBERON. To yonder flowery vale,
For, hark! how heavy sings the nightingale,
That from her harsh and melancholy lay,
She sees some token of approaching day.
The cowslip, daisy, and the daffodil,
Begin t'appear on yonder verdant hill,
Let Us deck ourselves, before the early be
Bereaves them of their precious quality.

PUCK. Well, by the way I Will drink, or else I choke,
With last night's heat and stink, its noise and smoke.

AIR V.
Tune, The May-blown Flower.
I Will drink a draught of crystal dew,
And dye it of a purple hue,
All pleasing to the eye;
For in it a bilberry I Will squeeze,
The nicest appetite to please,
Then strait to Stratford hie.

RECITATIVE. OBERON. I Will lead the way, over some smooth moss-grown walk,
Where stone nor stubble shall our journey balk.

AIR VI.
Tune, In the Elopement. Bradshaw's Warehouse.
Follow, follow, follow me,
Over lake, and over lea,
No fen shall stink, no bramble tear,
No foul contagion reign in air,
But gentle spirits like ourselves,
Little, harmless, airy elves.
Shall salute us heartily,
As we pass them merrily.
[ Puck going.
RECITATIVE. QUEEN. Stay, stay, good Puck, awhile; methinks I see,
Coming this way, a massy prodigy,

OBERON. A Firkin sure, but he will afford some sport,
And entertain awhile, our Fairy court.

PUCK. It Is fat old Jack, a most diverting knave,
It Is Falstaff, charm-call'd from his quiet grave.

OBERON. It Is even so, a thirsty, greedy Jack,
I trust he comes to surfeit with our sack.
To it he brings an appetite most keen,
We'll talk of sack, but we'll remain unseen,
Poor monster, how he puffs and pants for breath,
He Is had a sturdy struggle sure with death.

Enter Falstaff, yawning. FALSTAFF. I Have had a swinging nap, or was I dead?
It seems most like it, by my fear and dread.
Cold as an isicle, dry as a toast,
Am I Jack Falstaff, or Jack Falstaff's ghost?

PUCK. You Are not Jack Falstaff, no, you are but a Jack, See Henry IV. Part I.

Eat up with lust, and craving still for sack.

FALSTAFF. What puny whistler in the wind art thou?
Who fain would chatter, but ashamed to show
Thy beastly self, because thy graceless shape,
Too much, perhaps, resembles that of ape.
Why Hal! Why Page! Why Bardolph?

OBERON. They Are asleep,
Where worms and maggots over their ashes creep,
As they do thine, although thy sprite's released,
To pay attendance at thy master's feast.
Brought by his genius from thy mouldering cell.

FALSTAFF. To know the fate of heaven or of hell!
Zounds! how I quiver, Percy, were he here,
Could not have filled me half so full of fear.
Why did they send for me? Would I were back.

PUCK. You Would better stay, and here carouse with sack;
Anon you will see the sumptuous table spread,
Good sack in plenty on the sideboard laid,
And SHAKESPEARE's son distinguished at the head.

FALSTAFF. Rare, by the gods, why this my lads, will do,
If you but make your goodly saying true.

AIR VII.
QUEEN. Come, come, let us haste, let us haste away!
Behold the golden streaks of day;
From yonder cottage chimney, look,
Pillars rise of curling smoke,
And dispersing into air,
Tell, some early housewife's there.
Trip it, trip it hastily,
Follow Oberon and me.

RECITATIVE. FALSTAFF. What are you gone without me? hip! hillo!
Let Us have a look at you before you go.
Well, Jack! and what art then to think of this?
Their invitation true, was not amiss.
Upon the whole, too, they are plaguey civil,
But that is a trick, used sometimes by the devil:
Whenever he wants to gain some potent end,
He Will wheedle, and profess himself a friend;
Let them be devils then, as I Am old Jack,
I Will not refuse -- if devils offer sack.

AIR VIII.
Tune, Queen Mab. Pantaloon's locking up of Columbine.
Were they from the devil,
Let 'em be but civil;
Yes, will I smack,
Their dainty sack,
And drink what they please:
Let 'em only try me,
And with sack supply me,
I Will be all day
Most blithe and gay,
And browse at my ease.

Thunder and Lightning. Enter Hecate and Three Witches. RECITATIVE. HECATE.
Welcome! thou shall a guest most welcome be,
And join with us in mirth and revelry!
Receive our son, and instantly make room,
To take this visitor across your broom.
[Falstaff shows great fear.
AIR IX.
Assemble, assemble, assemble,
Ye airy spirits, blithe and nimble,
Ye mortals briskly run;
For bark! the trumpets loudly sounding,
From heaven to the earth resounding,
Proclaim the feast begun.
[They endeavor to get Falstaff across the broom.
RECITATIVE. FALSTAFF. Out, out, ye old carl-cats; out, with ye, hags!
Ye imps of old Satan, made up of rags;
Ride behind you! by the lord, I Would as soon,
Get up and ride, with a lousy baboon.
Ye faggots of filth; you,

WITCHES. Ho, ho, ho, ho! [laughing.

HECATE. Come, give him a ride, let him like it or no.
[They force him across, and fly away with him. Falstaff cries out.] [Exeunt.
GENIUS OF SHAKESPEARE. Ascend, grim night, with all thy starry train,
Spur thy fleet dragons through the dusky air;
Nor leave one chilling planet now behind,
But high above the reach of mortal eye,
Soar to the Zenith; where enwrapt in Ether,
Thou shift'st thy sable vest for heavenly blue.
Come, grave Aurora, with thy twilight taper,
Call up the shepherd from his drowsy bed,
Waken the sleeping groves, bid all the tribe
Of feathered songsters rise with harmony
Unequalled; fill with airs the rustling groves. --
Come, Flora, fair industrious maiden, come,
Open the dewy buds which night had closed,
Wreath thee with garlands, culled from every vale.
Ascend, great god of day, and over the arch
Spread thy gold streamers, and with thy bright beams
Drive every vapor from the moistened earth.
Muse-fam'd Apollo, from thy orient chair,
Favor yon temple with thy heavenly form;
Where rosy Cherubs hang in swelling wreaths,
Where columns rise, of sapphire mixed with gold,
Placed here by mortal hand, in grateful duty
To thy all-fav'rite son; who viewed thy rays
With wonder, and the attentive world
Declared the glories of thy happy reign.

THE PROCESSION.
GRAND MARCH IS PLAYED. NIGHT ascends with a starry mantle, drawn by dragons
through the air. Aurora with a taper, representing twilight; with garlands of
flowers, which blossom in her hands. As she walks gently down the stage, birds
are heard to sing, and soft music, as in the air; the rays of the Sun appear in
the greatest glory, and the clouds seem all fretted with gold; the light
increases, and discovers a magnificent and extensive temple, with Cherubims
playing, sitting on festoons and wreaths of flowers, which are twined about
most beautiful columns of sapphire and gold. Apollo rises as the Sun. Flora,
with a basket of stowers, and a garland on her head, scattering flowers as she
walks along the temple. Ceres, decorated with her implements of harvest, and a
wreath of corn; Pomona, with a cornucopia; Minerva, in a chariot of polished
steel, drawn by lions; Diana, with her quiver; Tragedy and Comedy, in their
proper habits, followed by the Nine Muses, the Fairy King and Queen, and a Band
of Fairies. Witches descend in thunder. Falstaff, Caliban, Pistol, and all
SHAKESPEARE's favorite Characters, walk two and two down the temple; Apollo
comes forward, his chair rises, reveals a pair of lofty gates, he opens them,
and discovers the statue of SHAKESPEARE. ODE, BY APOLLO.
BEGIN, thou favorite bard of Thrace,
Now touch thy golden lyre;
Assist, ye sweet harmonious race,
And every breast inspire;
Let not a sound
Sink to the ground,
But notes, like gentle gales arise,
Charming each attentive ear,
Raise the smile, or fall the tear,
And lift the soul above the skies.
Assist, ye bounteous, ye celestial nine,
To make the joyful chorus all divine.
CHORUS.
Sound, sound the trump, the trump of Fame;
Proclaim immortal SHAKESPEARE's name;
Around his head the laurel twine,
Favorite of Nature and the Nine.
Sweet Sylvan maids, whose softer strain
Delights the shepherd's breast;
Soothing some sad and lovesick swain,
Or sing his cares to rest;
Repeat your lays
To SHAKESPEARE's praise,
That sung, like you sof^ themes of love,
How this shepherd would admire,
How that maiden would retire,
Like the chaste and fleeting dove:
Sing in the strain that he was wont to do,
For who, but him, can sing of love like you.
Sound, sound the trump, etc.
Ye Naiads that in secret glide
Upon the silver wave;
Of Avon's gentle rising tide,
Or in the fountain lave;
And as you float,
With watery note,
Such as the Swan, when dying fings;
Do not forget what music hung,
Upon the Swan of Avon's tongue,
Whene'r he musing plumed his wings. --
To every river, every fountain tell,
This is the Swan of Avon's festival.
Sound, sound the trump, etc.
Ye spirits that reside in air,
Or in deep caverns dwell,
Such as boast intentions fair,
Or fiends from native hell,
Come hither now,
Such sprites as owe
To his creative boundless muse,
Your existence, birth, and name,
Come and revel to his fame;
Let Hecate every charm diffuse.
What mortal, sprite, or Fairy can deny,
To sing their master's immortality?
CHORUS.
Sound, sound the trump, the trump of Fame,
Proclaim immortal SHAKESPEARE's name;
Around his head the laurel twine,
Favorite of Nature and the Nine.
AN EPIGRAM ON AN UGLY LADY,
Who thought herself handsome, and who often made use of a common piece of
finesse peculiar to pretty women: "HOW CAN YOU SAY I AM PRETTY?"
CELINDA is ugly, pretends often to know it,
But she thinks, that she is handsome, and often will show it;
If you tell her she is handsome, she will say, how you flatter,
She Would wish to be taller, and fairer, and fatter;
But should you still further in converse proceed,
And talk of a nymph, that is handsome indeed,
She Will soon show her mind, which you plainly may see,
She thinks there is no creature, so handsome as she.
THE OLD WOMEN WEATHERWISE: AN INTERLUDE.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
CRAMP. TWITCH. RHEUM.
THE OLD WOMEN WEATHERWISE.
Enter Twitch and Cramp. TWITCH. GOOD morrow neighbor, how do you do?

CRAMP. Good morrow, goody Twitch, to you.

TWITCH. It Is sorry weather, neighbor Cramp.

CRAMP. Ah! very dirty, very damp.

TWITCH. By the gnawing in my shoulder,
Before we are a fortnight older,
I fear, we worse and worse shall see.

CRAMP. Ah! that we shall, for my poor knee
Twitches and throbs, and gives me pain;
Depend upon it, it brings us rain.

TWITCH. Nay, I must differ from you there;
I rather think, it will be fair;
For, by the burning in my toe,
And by this corn of mine -- oh! -- oh! --
Good lack a day! it makes me sweat --
Oh! the burning and the heat!
Besides, my cat so whisk'd about,
Up stairs and down, made such a rout --
And that is a sign, I always find,
That brings us either frost or wind.

CRAMP. My cat for all the world's as strange,
Whenever the weather's 'bout to change,
Makes such a racket, and a squalling,
Just like Italian catawawling.

TWITCH. Pray tell me, Goody, how is that?

CRAMP. Why, don't I tell you? -- like a cat.
I Will tell you how, at least, I Will try. --
A long-legg'd fellow, six foot high,
I heard once singing on a stage,
I swear, it set me in a rage,
To see a man, so fine and tall,
Have such a movement, and a squal.

TWITCH. Well, I, methinks, should like to hear 'em.

CRAMP. O lud-a-mercy, I cannot bear 'em.
You Have heard the story, I do not doubt,
Where pussy makes a horrid rout,
About her tail,

TWITCH. No, not a word on it,
I don't remember, to have heard on it.

CRAMP. Then I Am sure, 'twill make you smile,
For it is the true Italian style,
And I will try to squal it you,
Just as the male Italians do.
SONG.
Poor Puss was once at frisky play,
Upon a high and windy day;
She wisk'd up stairs, then round the floor,
And then she would hurry out of the door;
The wind blew to the door at last,
And caught her by the tail so fast,
She scream'd, she squall'd,
She scratched, she bawled,
She spit, she swore, and 'gan to rail,
But with her fury, lest her tail.
God send a change, then, very soon!
And, if we judge it by the Moon,
The new one which appeared last night,
Lay on her back, and shone so bright,
That, I assure you, on my word,
She looked as sharp, as any sword.

TWITCH. What says old Sodo? -- he has learning,
And, has, beside, a quick discerning;
He soon could tell, should he but look
Into his fortune-telling book.

CRAMP. I saw him, scarce three nights ago;
But then he terrified me so,
I could not rest all night in bed,
His story ran so in my head.
Sometimes he called the Moon a punk,
And said, that Neptune made her drunk,
And that she tippl'd greedily,
Upon the spring-tides of the sea; --
One night (this great fore-teller said)
The Moon was getting into bed,
And in her reelings, had the lot,
To break her crystal chamber pot;
That, he attributes one great reason,
Why we have had so wet a season.

TWITCH. Nay, I myself have seen her rise,
With sanguine nose, and blood-shot eyes!
Sometimes, indeed, I Have seen her shroud
Her head in shame, behind a cloud. --
Say, what is the reason? --

CRAMP. Why, I think,
As Sodo says, the Moon must drink.

TWITCH. If that indeed, should be the case,
I think she is wise, to hide her face.
SONG.
All things in nature, nay, all kind of people,
Are apt oftentimes, to thirst and to tipple;
The finick and frible you always will see,
Sit over their coffee, cat-lap, or tea;
And the clown will regale,
Over his noggin of ale;
Pray then, why should not we,
Since we find it agree,
Regale on a dram, that at once will expel,
The spleen and the cholic, whenever they rebel.

CRAMP. Once I remember, it was told,
When I was scarcely nine years old;
The earth had been all flooded over,
For six and thirty days, and more;
'Twas the opinion of the wise,
Who knew the motion of the skies,
The Moon had turned her turvy-topsy,
And drank herself into a dropsy;
The reasons given, were most various;
Some said the archer Sagittarius,
As he one night was passing by,
He let a bearded arrow fly;
And to this day, some folks will tell ye,
He hit the Moon plump in the belly;
Which tapping her, for five weeks a'ter,
She teemed upon the earth, her water.
Others gave it out, it was her grief,
And that suits most with my belief;
For now, too plainly it appears,
She means to drown us with her tears.

TWITCH. But here comes neighbor Rheum, I vow,
Who wears a very thoughtful brow;
I wonder where my lady's been,
She shakes her head; what can she mean?

Enter Rheum. RHEUM. Goodies, I Am glad to see ye --
Health and happiness be wi'ye!

TWITCH. What news? what news!

RHEUM. Sad news, alas!
If what I Have heard, should come to pass.

CRAMP. What have you heard?

RHEUM. Nay, I Have seen,
A wonder, where I lately been;
For, coming home, at twelve last night,
I saw a most alarming sight;
No good to this world it portends --
No -- that I can assure ye friends. --

TWITCH. Good lack! you speak and look so bitter,
It sets me in a horrid twitter;
My toothless gums together chatter,
I want, yet fear, to know the matter.

RHEUM. Well, well, -- I Will tell ye all about it --
I Will tell ye truth -- ye need not doubt it. --
Last night I saw a flaming Comet!

CRAMP. Good gracions heaven keep us from it!

TWITCH. A Comet! -- Pray, what says our friend?

RHEUM. He says the world is near an end:
And I believe his saying's right --
Oh! what a striking, awful sight!
For such a swinging tail it bore,
I never saw the like before.
Nay more -- he says -- (but that between us) --
'Twill swinge the bum of madam Venus!
And what is worse -- we are all undone --
'Twill tumble us into the sun.

TWITCH. Have mercy on us all, I say,
And grant, we never may see that day!

RHEUM. Nay, ye have further ills to fear,
Last night I saw such signs appear,
Such sights, as I never saw before,
And hope, I never shall see 'em more;
Such strange convulsions in the air,
Nay, as I live, I do declare,
I saw whole armies by the ears,
Clashing their shining swords and spears,
Such streams of blood ran down the sky --
Well may you wonder; it is no lie;
I had not well overcome the shock,
But straight I heard of Portsmouth Dock. Alluding to its lately been set on
fire.


TWITCH. Indeed, indeed, we have cause to fear,
When Comets and such things appear;
They Are seldom seen, but at a season,
Big with civil strife and treason;
That season, I Am afraid, is come,
Which soon will put a final doom
To poor old England's happiness,
And leave us beggared in distress.

CRAMP. Before that time, it does infer,
There'll be a bustle and a stir;
Harsh words will pass, and high debate,
Between the multitude and state.

RHEUM. Few nights ago (like Jonny Bunyan)
After eating of an onion,
Nature chanced, as 'twere to steep
My senses in lethargic sleep,
I dreamed the Sun had got a spot,

TWITCH. Oh! that is another powder plot.

RTEUM. But yet, I dreamt a stranger thing,
I thought, I saw a headless king.

TWITCH. Oh! that is the very worst of dreams,
The Sun of England's lost his beams.

RHEUM. Dames, list awhile, and you shall hear,
While all these wonders now appear;
In nature, all things have their season,
And nothing is, without some reason.
The mightiest States, nay Kings and all,
Have had, you know, their rise and fall.
Nature will not brook obstruction,
So must the world soon meet destruction.
It, by the almanac appears,
The world has been six thousand years,
In one vast progressive state,
And we shall be or soon or late --

CRAMP. Brought to some horrible conclusion,
Some awful hurly and confusion.

RHEUM. Nay, goodies, goodies, I implore ye,
Let me go on with my story:
Our summer's over, you will say,

TWITCH. That is past, this many a day,

RHEUM. The autumn next, these days we'll call,
For it is too clear, we are in the fall.
Europe can boast more mighty things,
More popes, more priests, more laws, more kings,
Nay, I might add, it boasts more pride,
Than all the wicked world beside,
But now it is in a state supine,
And in a gallopping decline.
So, at the last, we shall be hurled
From this same winter of the world,
Into one vast and dread migration.

CRAMP. We Are in a horrid situation.

TWITCH. Oh! dreadful, and distressing thought,
Oh! wicked world, great is thy fault.
I always said, and you will agree,
Whatever happened, was to be.

RHEUM. And we shall ^ee, too sure a doom,
What is to he, will surely come.

CRAMP. Oh your prognostication's right,
What is not wrong, of course is right;
So we shall soon meet some transition,
Either to glory, or perdition.

RHEUM. Methinks, we hold this theme too long,
What say ye, goodies, to a song.

CRAMP. With all my heart; and I Will begin,
Though now I sing not worth a pin.
SONG.
O lack-a-day! O lack-a-day!
What shall I do, what shall I say?
Come, never think,
But let us drink,
'Till we have washed our sins away.
Then let it snow,
Or let it blow,
[pulls a bottle out of her pocket. When we are lined with brandy O!
For if we die,
'Twixt you and I,
We have a weary jaunt to go.
[they dance the hays, and then all drink.
RHEUM. When the horrors grow too strong,
There Is nothing kills 'm like a song.

CRAMP. When song and dance will not prevail,
And all your wise prescriptions fail --

TWITCH. At such a time, it is very handy,
To have hard by, a little brandy.
SONG.
TWITCH, with the bottle in her hand. Wet the other eye,
Wet the other eye,
Let Us be jolly,
Melancholy
Is a folly;
Then refrain --
It Is in vain
To complain,
Let us wet the other eye. [drinks.

CRAMP. Would I had lived in David's days,
Or when the pious poet says
The priests were wont their horns to blow --

RHEUM. Ah! we had been in heaven now!

SONG.
Psha! psha! what does it signify,
Whether today or tomorrow it prove;
Since we are all of us sure to die,
Let us enjoy the passion we love.
Come let us have a noggin, my Goodies, a noggin,
Come let us have a noggin to cheer up the heart;
Give me a good cordial, for we must be jogging,
Let Us toss off a bumper before we depart.
[Exeunt singing.
N. B. At the conclusion of every song, they amble the hays together, to the
tune they have sung.

TO A FRIEND,
Who seemed to have a pleasure of conserring his favors on the Author, but a
greater, in telling him of them.
I Wrote a letter long ago,
But did not like it, you must know,
So rather chose to take my time,
And write my own defense in rhyme,
Though not in your be-crabbed style,
To spatter, threaten, and revile;
Nor with a cruel aggravation,
Remind you of each obligation.
Though Fortune, (may the devil have her)
Never gave it, me, to do a favor,
Never dropped an ingot at my door,
But kept me ever, ever poor.
What matters then all inclination,
It is the deed gets reputation;
The heart, the will, are both as naught,
The poor must always be in fault,
And if, when wronged, he makes defense,
Each word is construed insolence.
His obligations may enslave him,
But all his truth can never save him.
Two at a time, was it not hard? Received two letters at once.

Lashing away at one poor bard,
In whipcord rhimes, enough to flea,
A puny, thin-skinn'd scribe like me.
However, I rest, with this content,
I Am of your charges innocent,
And should your friendship me forsake,
I will one observation make;
Where fortune smiles not, friendship's weak,
The slightest fault the chain will break;
In doing good we soon are tired,
Except by interest we are hired,
Lest to some gain our labors point,
Friendship is soon put out of joint:
It is in nature, not in you,
And with us from the cradle grew;
I do not say, that you're to blame,
For I myself might prove the same,
Had I, as you did, every day,
Thrown some advantage in your way,
I might have sicken'd at the thought,
To be too kind, may be a fault.
By some I Am flattered, some caressed,
I stand a tiptoe with the best.
To say I want, would not be true,
I eat and drink, as well as you,
And have by far a greater share
Of wholesome ale, and wholesome air;
Wines of the best, each day I drink,
I cannot be badly off I think.
Although your lines were harsh and rude,
You never shall say, ingratitude
Inherits any part of me,
'Till I have lost my memory.
I know you feared nor sun nor shower,
To do what service in your power;
It would be worldly, base, unkind,
To shut such actions from my mind;
Though poor, I find, that every day,
Throws some new friend into my way,
And though they wish, and treat me well,
They never shall make my heart rebel
Against a M -- s or a R -- e,
For all the gewgaws of the globe.
Then let not mere conjecture breed
Her airy crimes, it is hard indeed,
Beneath imagined ills to groan,
Which fancy's fertile hand has sown,
For in good faith, I should not choose
So old and rough a friend to loose:
However tenacious I may be,
Rebukes appear less harm in thee,
Because I know, thy only aim,
Was to have handed me to fame.
Enough of this, I hope an answer,
Without abuse too, if you can sir.
ON RECEIVING SOME COMPLIMENTARY VERSES FROM A LADY.
ALETHEA, with my muse I send,
Happy to have so fair a friend,
And since you say, you like my rhyme,
I Am glad, the day will give me time,
To jingle out my numbers rude,
From duty and from gratitude.
Happy, my B -- t -- ll, here, to tell,
I like my correspondence well,
Thy taste for Clio, and for letters,
Will set thee far above thy betters,
Or those, the world our betters call,
Whose fortune is their boasted all,
Whose fortunes do at once control
The dearest passions of the soul;
But those who have nothing else to boast,
Are lucky blockheads at the most;
For ever to their wealth a slave,
And creep unheeded to the grave;
No friend behind they leave to tell,
They ever thought or acted well,
Or that they one good day enjoyed,
In manly sentiment employed.
Are we not then far richer, say,
Who seldom pass a single day,
Without a social friendly hour,
When sprightly fancy often will tower
Above the reach of vulgar bliss,
And reason into happiness,
Employ that reason we have given,
From fertile nature, and from heaven.
Then let us, B -- t -- ll, spend our time,
In easy converse, and in rhyme,
True friendship never can be sold,
It stronger grows, as it grows old.
EPIGRAM, On having received a compliment, on account of the publication of a
new Burletta.
YES, Patrick is an Irishman, indeed,
There Is few, like him, in compliment succeed,
He praised my piece, and said, 'twas full of spirit,
Had my Musician shown a spark of merit,
It must have run full twenty nights or more,
Had not the music been so flat and poor:
I scarce had left the puppy half an hour,
Before my good Musician (rather sour)
For I before had told him what was said,
Which had some small resentment in him bred,
But Patrick 'gan to praise, in different style,
He now began the poet to revile,
Said, had the verse been equal to his sounds,
He must have cleared a good five hundred pounds;
He thanked the blockhead for his taste and feeling,
But cursed him in his heart, for double-dealing.
EPIGRAM, ON A DRUNKEN MAN AND A FISH-WOMAN.
A Fish-woman once, with a kit on her head,
Pickle-Salmon was felling, to buy her some bread,
Tom Guzzle was drunk, and he dealt for a pound,
He had not well bought it, before that he found,
The Salmon was dry, and quite without liquor;
He threw back his bargain, and swore he would kick her:
Hold, hold, said the woman, pray be not so rough,
Though your Salmon was dry, you have liquor enough,
I wonder, indeed Sir, to find you so fickle,
For you seem to be in a very fine pickle;
I Have seen pickle-salmon, an hundred or more,
But never saw a goose so well pickled before.
EPIGRAM, ON A MODERN GENTLEMAN.
YOUNG Trifle, a fop and a rattling rake,
Resolved last summer, a journey to take;
He Would traveled through France, and had got into Spain,
Took it then in his head, to turn back again,
Was met, unexpected, by one in the Strand,
Whom he strutted up to, and took by the hand,
Ha, ha, said his friend, is it you, my boy Jack?
What fortune of war, pray, has driven you back?
Plague on you, I thought you at Rome or the Hague.
I should have been there, but for war and the plague,
So my country I visit, as I would a friend,
From whom I would wish to obtain some good end.
ON PLEASURE.
CLAD in her orient vest behold,
Like Phoebus in the morn,
Fair Pleasure with her crown of gold,
The maiden, Hope adorn.
Upon a throne of sapphire bright,
The envied nymph appears,
For her, old Nox often yields to light,
And Time calls back his years.
Gay Vanity, her handmaid, stands,
All smiling by her side,
And Folly claps his baby-hands,
The son of wealth and pride.
Dull prodigals her nectar sip,
Nor see her dark decoys,
She holds her honey to their lip,
But soon, too soon destroys.
Often near some maiden's glass concealed,
Where perfume fills the room,
She makes kind nature often yield,
And gives a poisoned bloom.
EPIGRAM, ON A TIPPLER.
TRAFFIC, a low but wealthy sot,
Had made too free with porter-pot,
He wished himself asleep in bed,
But feared his wife would comb his head?
She was a very rough physician,
Whenever he was in that condition. --
A comrade told him with a jeer,
Your legs will not bear you home, I fear;
Why then I Will trust to my good porter,
For he is an excellent supporter.
Your porter's good, that I Will allow,
But he is, I fear, your master now;
If you use your slave too free,
He Will treat you often contemptuously;
Whenever he finds his master reels,
He sometimes will trip up his heels.
THE COBBLER AND HIS CREDITORS.
AN honest Cobbler and his wife,
Who never had a moment's strife,
Industrious, honest, yet so poor,
They could not keep the wolf from door,
In spite of all their care and pains,
Heavy their labor, small their gains;
Great his soul, little was his all,
A true attendant on his stall,
Save, now and then, perhaps he would hug,
With too much zeal, the alehouse mug;
When thoughts grew heavy, always found,
To make them lighter, was to drowned,
And in good draughts of wholesome beer,
To bury all his load of care.
His brats would often make much ado,
This wanted stockings, that a shoe;
He found his troubles daily grew,
'Spite what he could say or do,
His wife from morn to night would scrub,
Her knuckles bare at washing tub;
She hoped her troubles soon would end,
If fortune once would prove her friend,
Her hopes often made her seem to bear
Her troubles with a better air
Than she would otherwise have shown,
Had not she her reasons known.
For she by Gypsies had been told,
Her coffers should be lined with gold,
And she had often lucky been,
When at fair or wake she is seen,
The raffle-stand, or chanced to draw
The longest, and the lucky straw. To draw the straw is a method made use of in
some countries, in raffling, to determine the prizes, which often is a metal
punch-ladle, spoon, knife and fork, etc.

For eight long years she would made a hoard,
And hid it underneath a board,
That Time had loosened in the floor,
On purpose to receive the store;
Unknown to Snob, for she was sly,
She weekly put a tester by,
Till she had saved ten guineas bright,
She thought they shone a lovely sight;
It made her heart ach often to think,
Of risking all her pretty chink.
Which she so often with joy beheld,
When they with hope her heart have filled,
But as her luck had often been kind,
She still resolved to hold her mind;
Resolved her fortune soon to try,
So entered in the lottery.
But from that day no rest she had,
Her husband often thought her mad,
He never a night went up the stairs,
But found his pious wife at prayers;
Saint Whitfield had been preaching there, He had preached upon the Common.

Which filled the Cobbler full of fear;
He begged, from praying she would desist,
He thought her turned a Methodist,
A Methodist! she made reply,
I Have other methods in my eye,
Think you, such fellows can exhort one,
I Am praying to my mistress, Fortune.
Ah, you may kneel, and you may pray,
She Will never mind a word you say;
Pray, pray to God to send us bread,
And don't get Fortune in your head,
A fickle, partial, flaunting jade,
She seldom lends the poor her aid.
Lord bless you, man, you talk so odd,
Pray, does not fortune come from God;
It is to him, from day to day,
To him I do for fortune pray.
One day Snob sat at alehouse-door,
For he had got a plaguey score,
He did not care to venture in,
The white-chalk'd lines made such a grin;
He wished he could the score erase,
It star'd so grimly in his face;
He called a pint, it was refused him,
The hostess threatened and abused him;
In vain all pleading now to her,
What mattered his being customer;
What though he many pounds had paid,
Nothing would pacify the jade,
All obligations she forgot,
Whenever he owed her for a pot. --
He much lamented his condition,
Yet he had not the least suspicion,
That she would a catchpole near, in waiting,
While they the matter were debating,
He now began, enraged, to scold her,
But straight felt some one tap his shoulder,
Then turned around, quite stiff with wonder,
As if he had been struck with thunder;
He pleaded wife and family,
His hostess would hear no reply,
Avarice did her breast control,
She Would no compassion in her soul;
The catchpole said he could not stay,
And would have hurried Snob away,
Had not his wife come, with a Spark,
Full of his scrapes, a broker's clerk;
She 'gan to hug him, and she cries,
My ticket, Snob, is come a prize!
Psha, what the devil, are you mad?
Cried Snob, you fool, you never had
A ticket in your life, not you.
Indeed, good Sir, her saying's true
The Clerk replied, ten thousand pounds,
This day was drawn her prize: Odszounds,
My boy, if what you say be true,
Good hostess, I Will be one with you.
It Is true enough, for here behold,
The weighty bags of shining gold.
The hostess all confused appeared,
When she the confirmation heard,
Would made believe too, if she could,
She meant to do it for his good;
But all her coaxing would not do;
He paid the score, the bailiff too:
Now, huzzy, you may shut the door,
Your house I Will never enter more,
I Will sue you for your insolence,
That shall be my sole pretense;
Whenever I visit you again,
You shall you scoundrel then explain.
He kissed his wife, and then sat out,
To know, how it could come about.
EPIGRAM, ON A FEMALE VIRAGO AND ACTRESS.
DAME C -- ve, one day, her Mantua-maker met,
As she chanced turn the corner of a street;
She said, her gown was unbecoming made,
Then called her stupid dowdy, cheating jade.
The woman told her she would a hellish spirit,
And thought, no creature but herself had merit.
C -- ve then replied, with an indignant pout,
You see, you b -- ch, I throw my spirit out;
The other cried, I keep my spirit in;
And so you ought, cried C -- ve, for yours is Gin.
EPIGRAM, ON A SPENDTHRIFT AND A HYPOCRITE.
OLD Pierrot often complains that he is poor,
And poor, the blockhead always ought to be,
He gambles much, his daughter plays the whore,
His wife she drinks until she scarce can see.
Then Perriot, cease to beg and to complain,
Nor let thy self-made misery yearly fall,
Upon thy kind deluded friends again,
If thou had mints, old dice would have 'em all.
Is It not enough, that full of trick and sin,
Thou play'st the fool and knave upon the stage,
But must thou try to take compassion in,
By pleading injured honesty and age.
THE BANKS OF YARROW, IN IMITATION OF A SCOTCH BALLAD.
I.
WHY turns my Jen her head awa,
My little blythsome sparrow,
That used to wanton, smile and play
Upon the Banks of Yarrow.
II.
When the primrose blowed so pale,
She looked so winsome marrow,
And with her smiles she cheered the dale,
And crowned the Banks of Yarrow.
III.
Ah, what is it makes my Jenny weep,
What makes her looks aw sarrow,
Has she lost her favorite sheep,
That feed on bonny Yarrow.
IV.
Alas, alas, I mainly fear,
The cause of aw this sarrow,
She Has seen some other lad more dear,
Upon the Banks of Yarrow.
V.
Ah well is me, Ah well-aday!
I see what caused this sarrow,
I Will over the hills and far away,
And think na mare of Yarrow.
EPIGRAM, ON LE FEVRE'S CURING THE GOUT.
OLD Guttle, one morning, was making a rout,
And grinn'd with the pangs of the torturing gout,
Nurse talked of a cure; but he would not believe her;
She told him, the gout was now cured by a Fever.
Then I Will keep the gout, madam Nurse, if you please,
Your remedy's worse than my present disease.
EPIGRAM, On a Lady, who had left the Picture of her favorite child at the
Frame-makers.
MOther Dote, in a pet, at the Frame-makers called,
At the foot of the stairs, for the master she bawled;
She no sooner beheld him, before she began,
To call him a shuffling, indolent man,
Said, the child had been framing these nine months or more;
A friend who was waiting for Ma'am at the door,
Had a mind to be witty, so made for reply,
With an air of conceit, and significant eye,
If the child has been framing these nine months, I vow,
It is time the poor thing was delivered now.
EPIGRAM,
ON An affected and supercilious Poetaster, who seldom spoke in company.
ARE you a Bard, cried Doll? I thought to see,
A man like you, much better company;
Spinrhime replied, I seldom talk; but think;
My pen I dip in gall, and talk in ink!
Your thoughts you talk away, they are dull and cold,
My thoughts are rich and warm, and turn to gold.
Doll now retorted somewhat in a rage,
Ah, that reflects upon our tasteless age.
THE END.

