VERSES HUMBLY ADDRESSED TO Sir THOMAS HANMER. On his EDITION of Shakespeare's
WORKS.

By a GENTLEMAN of OXFORD.

LONDON: Printed for M. COOPER, in Paternoster Row. 1743. [Price Six Pence.]

TO Sir Thomas Hanmer.
SIR,
WHILE, owned by You, with Smiles the Muse surveys,
The expected Triumph of her sweetest Lays:
While, stretched at Ease, she boasts your Guardian Aid,
Secure, and happy in her sylvan Shade:
Excuse her Fears, who scarce a Verse bestows,
In just Remembrance of the Debt she owes;
With conscious Awe she hears the Critic's Fame,
And blushing hides her Wreath at Shakespeare's Name.
Long slighted Fancy, with a Mother's Care,
Wept over his Works, and felt the last Despair.
Torn from her Head, she saw the Roses fall,
By all deserted, though admired by all.
" And oh! she cried, shall Science still resign
" Whatever is Nature's, and whatever is mine?
" Shall Taste and Art, but show a cold Regard,
" And scornful Pride reject the unlettered Bard?
" Ye myrtled Nymphs, who own my gentle Reign,
" Tune the sweet Lyre, and grace my airy Train!
" If, where ye rove, your searching Eyes have known
" One perfect Mind, which Judgment calls its own:
" There every Breast its fondest Hopes must bond,
" And every Muse with Tears await her Friend.
'Twas then fair Isis from her Stream arose,
In kind Compassion of her Sister's Woes.
'Twas then she promised to the mourning Maid
The immortal Honors, which thy Hands have paid:
" My best-lov'd Son (she said) shall yet restore
" Thy ruined Sweets, and Fancy weep no more.
Each rising Art by slow Gradation moves,
Toil builds on Toil, and Age on Age improves.
The Muse alone unequal dealt her Rage,
And graced with noblest Pomp her earliest Stage.
Preserved through Time, the speaking Scenes impart
Each changeful Wish of Phaedra's tortured Heart:
Or paint the Curse, that marked the The Oedipus of Sophocles.
Theban's Reign,
A Bed incestuous, and a Father slain.
Line after Line, our pitying Eyes overflow,
Trace the sad Tale, and own another's Woe.
To Rome removed, with equal Power to please,
The Comic Sisters kept their native Ease.
With jealous Fear declining Greece beheld
Her own Menander's Art almost excelled!
But every Muse essayed to raise in vain.
Some labored Rival of her Tragic Strain;
Ilissus' Laurels, though transferred with Toil,
Drooped their fair Leaves, nor knew the unfriendly Soil.
When Rome herself, her envied Glories dead,
No more Imperial, stooped her conquered Head:
Luxuriant Florence chose a softer Theme,
While all was Peace, by Arno's silver Stream.
With sweeter Notes the Etrurian Vales complained,
And Arts reviving told -- a Cosmo reigned.
Their wanton Lyres the Bards of Provence strung,
Sweet flowed the Lays, but Love was all they sung.
The gay Description could not fail to move,
For, led by Nature, all are Friends to Love.
But Heaven, still rising in its Works, decreed
The perfect Boast of Time should last succeed.
The beauteous Union must appear at length,
Of Tuscan Fancy, and Athenian Strength:
One greater Muse Eliza's Reign adorn,
And even a Shakespeare to her Fame be born!
Yet ah! so bright her Morning's opening Ray,
In vain our Britain hoped an equal Day!
No second Growth the Western Isle could bear,
At once exhausted with too rich a Year.
Too nicely Johnson knew the Critic's Part;
Nature in him was almost lost in Art.
Of softer Mold the gentle Fletcher came,
The next in Order, as the next in Name.
With pleased Attention 'midst his Scenes we find
Each glowing Thought, that warms the Female Mind;
Each melting Sigh, and every tender Tear,
The Lover's Wishes and the Virgin's Fear.
His Their Characters are thus distinguished by Mr. Dryden.
every Strain the Loves and Graces own;
But stronger Shakespeare felt for Man alone:
Drawn by his Pen, our ruder Passions stand
The unrivaled Picture of his early Hand.
With gradual Steps, and slow, exacter France
Saw Art's fair Empire over her Shores advance:
By length of Toil, a bright Perfection knew,
Correctly bold, and just in all she drew.
Till late Corneille from Epick The favorite Author of the Elder Corneille.
Lucan brought
The full Expression, and the Roman Thought;
And classic Judgment gained to sweet Racine
The temperate Strength of Maro's chaster Line.
But wilder far the British Laurel spread,
And Wreaths less artful crown our Poet's Head.
Yet He alone to every Scene could give
The Historian's Truth, and bid the Manners live.
Waked at his Call I view, with glad Surprise,
Majestic Forms of mighty Monarchs rise.
There Henry's Trumpets spread their loud Alarms,
And laureled Conquest waits her Hero's Arms.
Here gentler Edward claims a pitying Sigh,
Scarce born to Honors, and so soon to die!
Yet shall thy Throne, unhappy Infant, bring
No Beam of Comfort to the guilty King?
The Tempus erit Turno, magno cum optaverit emptum Intactum Pallanta, etc.
Time shall come, when Glo'ster's Heart shall bleed
In Life's last Hours, with Horror of the Deed:
When dreary Visions shall at last present
Thy vengeful Image, in the midnight Tent:
Thy Hand unseen the secret Death shall bear,
Blunt the weak Sword, and break the oppressive Spear.
Wherever we turn, by Fancy charmed, we find
Some sweet Illusion of the cheated Mind.
Often, wild of Wing, she calls the Soul to rove
With humbler Nature, in the rural Grove;
Where Swains contented own the quiet Scene,
And twilight Fairies tread the circled Green:
Dressed by her Hand, the Woods and Valleys smile,
And Spring diffusive decks the enchanted Isle.
O blessed in all that Genius gives to charm,
Whose Morals mend us, and whose Passions warm!
Often let my Youth attend thy various Page,
Where rich Invention rules the unbounded Stage.
There every Scene the Poet's Warmth may raise,
And melting Music find the softest Lays.
O might the Muse with equal Ease persuade,
Expressive Picture, to adopt thine Aid!
Some powerful Raphael should again appear,
And Arts consenting fix their Empire here.
Methinks even now I view some fair Design,
Where breathing Nature lives in every Line:
Chaste, and subdued, the modest Colors lie,
In fair Proportion to the approving Eye --
And see, where See the Tragedy of Julius Caesar.
Antony lamenting stands
In fixed Distress, and spreads his pleading Hands!
Over the pale Corse the Warrior seems to bend,
Deep sunk in Grief, and mourns his murdered Friend!
Still as they press, he calls on all around,
Lifts the torn Robe, and points the bleeding Wound.
But Coriolanus. See Mr. Spence's Dialogues on the Odyssey.
who is he, whose Brows exalted bear
A Rage impatient, and a fiercer Air?
Even now, his Thoughts with eager Vengeance doom
The last sad Ruin of ungrateful Rome.
Till, slow-advancing over the tented Plain,
In sable Weeds, appear the Kindred-train:
The frantic Mother leads their wild Despair,
Beats her swollen Breast, and rends her silver Hair.
And see he yields! -- the Tears unbidden start,
And conscious Nature claims the unwilling Heart!
Over all the Man conflicting Passions rise,
Rage grasps the Sword, while Pity melts the Eyes.
Thus, generous Critic, as thy Bard inspires,
The Sister Arts shall nurse their drooping Fires;
Each from his Scenes her Stores alternate bring,
Spread the fair Tints, or wake the vocal String:
Those Sibyl-Leaves, the Sport of every Wind,
(For Poets ever were a careless Kind)
By thee disposed, no farther Toil demand,
But, just to Nature, own thy forming Hand.
So spread over Greece, the harmonious Whole unknown,
Even Homer's Numbers charmed by Parts alone.
Their own Ulysses scarce had wandered more,
By Winds and Waters cast on every Shore:
When, raised by Fate, some former Hanmer joined
Each beauteous Image of the tuneful Mind:
And bad, like Thee, his Athens ever claim,
A fond Alliance, with the Poet's Name.
Oxford, Dec. 3. 1743.
FINIS.

