OBSERVATIONS ON THE FAERIE QUEEN OF SPENSER.

By THOMAS WARTON, A. M. FELLOW of Trinity-College, OXFORD.

LONDON: Printed for R. and J. DODSLEY; And J. FLETCHER, in the Turl, Oxford.
MDCCLIV.

CONTENTS.
SECT. I. OF the plan and conduct of the FAERIE QUEEN Page 1 SECT. II. Of
Spenser's imitations from old Romances 13 SECT. III. Of Spenser's use and abuse
of ancient history and mythology 44 SECT. IV. Of Spenser's stanza,
versification, and language 81 SECT. V. Of Spenser's imitations from Chaucer 99
SECT. VI. Of Spenser's imitations from Ariosto 142 SECT. VII. Of Spenser's
inaccuracies 159 SECT. VIII. Of Spenser's imitations of himself 180 SECT. IX.
Mr. Upton's opinion, concerning several passages in Spenser, examined 205 SECT.
X. Of Spenser's allegorical character 217 SECT. XI. Containing miscellaneous
remarks 239
ERRATA.
BEfore this quotation, insert, "a passage preceding." p. 10. l. 31. before
age, insert, "that." p. 221. l. 2. after mentions, insert, "is." p. 46. l. ult.
for placet, read, "places." p. 245. l. 3. for smiles, read, "smites." p. 240.
l. 21. for adopted, read, "adapted." p. 224. l. 16. for Handorst, read,
"Hundorst." p. 231. l. 8. The rest are such as cannot mislead the reader;
which, however, he is desired to pardon.

OF THE PLAN and CONDUCT OF THE FAERIE QUEEN. SECT. I.
WHEN the works of Homer and of Aristotle began to be restored and studied in
Italy, when the pure and uncorrupted sources of ancient poesy and ancient
criticism were opened, and literature in general seemed emerging from the
depths of Gothic ignorance and barbarity, it might have been expected, that,
instead of the romantic species of poetical composition introduced by the
provencal bards, a new and more legitimate taste of writing would have
succeeded; that unnatural events, the machinations of imaginary beings, and
adventures entertaining only as they were improbable, would have given place to
justness of thought and design, and to that decorum which nature dictated, and
which the example and the precept of antiquity had authorized. But it was a
long time before such a change as this was effected; and we find Ariosto, many
years after the revival of letters, rejecting truth for magic, and choosing
rather to follow the irregular and ridiculous excursions of Boiardo, than the
propriety and uniformity of the great Grecian and Roman Epic models. Nor was
the state of criticism less generally and effectually influenced than that of
poesy by the restoration of ancient learning: Beni, one of the most celebrated
critics of the sixteenth century, was still so infatuated with a love of the
old provencal vein, that he ventured to write a regular dissertation, in which
he compares Ariosto with Homer. Trissino, indeed, who was nearly contemporary
with Ariosto, had taste and boldness enough to publish a poem written in
professed imitation of the Iliad; but this attempt met with little regard or
applause, for that very reason on which its real merit was founded; it was
rejected as an insipid and unentertaining performance, having few devils or
enchantments to recommend it. To Trissino succeeded Tasso, who, in his
Gierusaleme Liberata, took the ancients for his guides; but was, at the same
time, too sensible of the prevailing taste for ideal beings, and romantic
description, to omit them entirely; though he was well acquainted with, and
fully convinced of the excellencies of Homer and Virgil, yet he still kept the
old provencal poets in his eye; like his own Rinaldo, who after he had gazed on
the diamond shield of truth, and while he was departing from Armida, and her
enchanted gardens, could not help looking back upon them with some remains of
fondness. Nor did Tasso's poem, though composed, in some measure, on a
classical and uniform plan, gain its author (in his own country at least) any
higher share of praise and reputation upon that account: Ariosto, with all his
extravagancies, was still preferred; and the superiority of the Orlando Furioso
to the Gierusaleme Liberata was at length established by a formal decree of the
Academicians della Crusca, who held a solemn court of enquiry concerning the
merit of both poems.

In the midst of this bad taste, Spenser began to write his FAERIE QUEEN;
which, after the practice of Ariosto, was to consist of allegories,
enchantments, and romantic adventures, carried on by fairy knights, giants,
magicians, and fictitious beings. It may indeed be urged, as an instance of
Spenser's weak and undiscerning judgment, that he chose to follow Ariosto
rather than Tasso, the plan and conduct of whose poem was much more regular and
legitimate than that of his rival. To this objection it may be answered, in
defense of our author, that he was reasonably induced to follow that poem which
was most celebrated and popular: for though the French critics in general gave
the preference to Tasso, yet in Italy the partisans, on the side of Ariosto,
were by far the most numerous, and consequently in England; for Italy, in the
age of queen Elizabeth, gave laws to our island in all matters of taste, as
France has done ever since. It must, however, be confessed at the same time,
that Spenser was in some measure influenced, from the natural biass of his
mind, to prefer that plan, which would admit of the most extensive range for
his unbounded imagination. What this plan is, and how it is conducted, we shall
now proceed to examine.

See Spenser's letter to Sir W. Raleigh, etc.
The poet supposes, that the FAERIE QUEEN held a magnificent feast, (according
to annual custom) which lasted twelve days; on each of which respectively,
twelve several complaints are preferred before her: accordingly, in order to
redress the injuries which were the occasion of these several complaints, she
sends out twelve different knights, each of which, in the particular adventure
allotted to him, proves an example of some particular virtue, as of Holiness,
Temperance, Justice, Chastity, etc. and has one complete book assigned to him,
of which he is the hero. But, besides these twelve knights, severally
exemplifying twelve moral virtues, there is one principal knight, or general
hero, viz. PRINCE ARTHUR; who represents Magnificence; a virtue which is
supposed to be the perfection of all the rest; who assists in every book, the
end of whose actions is to find out GLORIANA, or Glory, and in whose person the
poet intends to pourtray, "THE IMAGE OF A BRAVE KNIGHT PERFECTED IN THE TWELVE
PRIVATE MORAL VIRTUES."

It is evident, that our author, in establishing one hero, who seeking and
attaining one grand end, viz. GLORIANA, or Glory, should exemplify one grand
character, viz. that of a brave knight perfected in the twelve private moral
virtues, had the practice of Virgil and Homer in his eye. But though he was
sensible of the importance and expediency of a unity of the hero and of his
design, yet he does not, at the same time, seem convinced of the necessity of
that unity of action, by which this design should be properly accomplished; nor
sufficiently acquainted with the method of proceeding made use of by the two
great originals abovementioned, in conducting their respective heroes to the
one grand end proposed. It may be asked, with great propriety, how does ARTHUR
execute this one grand ultimate design? It may be answered, with no less
plausibility, that by assisting each patron of the twelve virtues respectively,
in his allotted defense or patronage of each, ARTHUR approaches still nearer
and nearer to Glory, 'till at last he obtains it, and so consummates the
intended grand design. But surely to assist only is not sufficient to gain this
end, or complete the proposed character. The poet ought to have made his ARTHUR
the principal agent in the redress of each particular wrong, which arose from
the various violation of Holiness, Temperance, Justice, Chastity, etc. If the
hero had thus, in his own person, exerted himself in the service of all the
twelve virtues, he might have been deservedly styled the perfect pattern of
them all, and consequently would then have completed the proposed grand end,
viz. the attainment of Glory. At present he is only a subordinate, or rather
accessory character; the difficulties and obstacles which he should have
surmounted in order to gain the proposed end, are done to his hand, and removed
by others; it is not he who conquers the dragon in the first book, (to instance
in no other) or who quells the magician Busirane in the third; these are
achievements executed by St. George and by Britomart. In short, the twelve
several knights, or patrons, do too much for ARTHUR to do any thing, or at
least what may reasonably be expected from the plan of the poet; while we are
attending to the design of the hero of the book, we forget that of the hero of
the poem. Mr. Dryden remarks, "We must do Spenser that justice to observe, that
magnanimity [magnificence] which is the true character of PRINCE ARTHUR, shines
throughout the whole poem; and succors the rest when they are in distress."
Dedication to Juvenal.
If the magnanimity of PRINCE ARTHUR did in reality shine throughout the whole
poem with a steady and superior luster, our author would stand excused; but at
present it breaks forth but seldom, in dim and interrupted flashes; it is not
like the pervading spirit of Virgil, which -- Agitat molem, and magno se
corpore miscet. Aen. vi. ver. 727.

And to "succor the rest when they are in distress," is a circumstance of too
little importance in the hero of a poem: "to succor" is, in fact, a service to
be performed in the cause of the hero, by some dependent and inferior chief,
the business of a Gyas or a Cloanthus, a Mnestheus, or a Serestus.

Upon the whole, and in general, it must be observed, that Spenser's
adventures, which are the subject of each single book, have no mutual
dependence upon each other, and consequenly do not contribute to constitute one
legitimate poem; and Mr. Hughes, not considering this, has advanced a remark in
commendation of Spenser, which may most properly be turned to his censure. "If
we consider the first book as an entire work of itself, we shall find it to be
no irregular contrivance: there is one principal action, which is completed in
the twelfth Canto, and the several incidents are proper, as they tend either to
obstruct or promote it." Remarks on the Fairy Queen. Hughes's edit. of
Spenser's works, vol. 1.
As the heroic poem is required to be one WHOLE, compounded of many various
parts depending upon, and relative to each other; so it is expedient, that not
one of those parts should be so regularly contrived, and so completely
finished, as to become a WHOLE of itself. For the mind being thus once
satisfied in arriving at the completion of an orderly series of events,
acquiesces in that satisfaction, and its attention and curiosity are diverted
from pursuing, with due vigor, the final and general catastrophe; whereas
while each part is left imperfect, I mean, incomplete, if disjoined or
separated from the rest, the mind still desirous and eager of gratifying its
expectations, is irresistibly and imperceptibly drawn on from part to part,
till it receives a full and ultimate satisfaction from the accomplishment of
one great event, which all those parts, following and illustrating each other,
contributed to produce.

Our author was probably aware, that by constituting twelve several adventures
for twelve several knights, a want of continuity and general concatenation of
facts would be laid to his charge; and upon this account, I suppose, he
sometimes begins a story in one book, the completion of which he defers, not
without much interruption, to some future and distant book; a proceeding, which
unavoidably occasions much confusion to the reader. And it seems to be for the
same reason, that, after one of the twelve knights has fulfilled the adventure
of his book, he introduces him, in the next book; acting, perhaps, in an
inferior light, and degraded to some less dangerous adventure; a conduct which
destroys that repose which the mind feels after having accompanied a hero,
through various distresses and difficulties, to success and victory. Besides,
when we view the hero entering upon an inferior attempt, our former admiration
is diminished; having seen him once nobly and decisively conquer, we become so
warmly interested in his honor, that we look upon his engagement in any
posterior enterprise (however successfully) which is less arduous than that of
which we had just before hailed him the conqueror, as derogatory to that glory
which he had just acquired by such a conquest. Spenser, perhaps, would have
embarassed himself and the reader less, had he made every book one entire
detached poem, without any the least reference to the rest. Thus he would have
written twelve distinct poems, in all of which, he might have completed the
pattern of a particular virtue in twelve knights respectively; at present, he
has remarkably failed in endeavoring to represent all the virtues completed in
the character of one. The poet must either have established TWELVE KNIGHTS
without an ARTHUR, or an ARTHUR without TWELVE KNIGHTS. Upon supposition that
Spenser was resolved to characterise the twelve moral virtues, the former plan,
perhaps, would have been best: the latter must necessarily want simplicity, as
it is an action consisting of twelve actions, all equally great, and
unconnected between themselves; and not an action consisting of one
uninterrupted and coherent chain of incidents tending to the accomplishment of
one design.

It has been observed before, that our author endeavored to express the
character of a knight perfected in the twelve moral virtues, by representing
him as assisting in the service or defense of each, till at last he becomes
possessed of all: this plan, however, injudicious, he certainly was obliged to
observe; but in the third book, which is styled the legend of Chastity, PRINCE
ARTHUR does not so much as lend his assistance in the protection or vindication
of that virtue; he appears indeed, but not as an auxiliary in the adventure of
the book.

It must, however, be confessed, that there is something artificial in the
poet's manner of varying from historical precision; a conduct which may be best
illustrated from his own words. "But because the beginning of the whole work
seems abrupt, and as depending upon other antecedents, it needs that ye know
the occasion of these three knights several adventures. For the method of a
poet historical, is not such as of an historiographer. For an historiographer
discourses of affairs orderly, as they were done, accounting as well the times
as the action; but a poet thrusts into the midst, even where it most
concerns him, and there recoursing to the things forepast, and divining of
things to come, makes a pleasing analysis of all. The beginning therefore of
my history, were it to be told by an historiographer, should be in the twelfth
book, which is the last; where I devise, that the FAERIE QUEEN held her annual
feast twelve days; upon which twelve several days, the occasion of twelve
several adventures happened: which being undertaken by twelve several knights,
are, in these twelve books, severally handled and discoursed. Letter to Sir W.
Raleigh. It appears, from this quotation, that Spenser had finished but three
books, when this letter was written.
" Thus according to this plan the reader would have been agreeably surprised,
in the last book, when he came to discover, that all the adventures which he
had just gone through, were undertaken at the command of the FAERIE QUEEN, and
that all the knights had severally set forward to the execution of them from
her annual birthday festival; but Spenser, in most of his books, has
injudiciously forestalled the first of these particulars; which certainly
should have been concealed till the last book, not only to have prevented a
needless repetition of the same thing, but that he might likewise secure an
opportunity to himself of amusing the reader's mind with a circumstance new and
unexpected.

But notwithstanding the plan and conduct of our author, in the poem before us,
is highly exceptionable, yet I am apt to think, that the FAERIE QUEEN is not,
upon the whole, so confused and irregular as the Orlando Furioso. Though there
is no general unity in the former, yet if we consider every book or adventure
as a separate poem, we shall meet with so many distinct, however imperfect,
unities, by which means the reader is less bewildered, than by that general
indigested medley of which the former totally consists, and in which we meet
with neither partial, nor universal unity. -- Cum nec pes nec caput UNI
Reddatur FORMAE. -- Hor. art poet. v. 13.

The very idea of celebrating the MADNESS of an hero, carries with it somewhat
extravagant and absurd. Orlando does not make his appearance till b. 8. where
he is placed in a situation not very heroic; he is first discovered to us in
bed, desiring to sleep. His ultimate design is to find Angelica, but his
pursuit of her is broken off in b. 30; after which there are sixteen more books
to come, and in which Angelica disappears. Other heroes are likewise engaged in
the same pursuit. After reading the first stanza of b. 1. one would be inclined
to think, that the subject of the poem was the expedition of the Moors into
France, under their emperor Agramante, to fight against Charlemayne; but this
matter is the least part of the poem. In fact, many of the knights perform
exploits equal, if not superior to those of Orlando; and particularly Rogero,
with a grand achievement of wholn the poem is closed, viz. his killing
Rodomont; but this event is not the completion of a story carried on
principally through the whole work. The author passes from one incident to
another, and from region to region (whether it be from England to the
Hesperides, or from the earth to the moon) with such incredible swiftness and
rapidity, that one would think he was mounted upon his own winged steed
Ippogrifo. He begins a tale of a knight in Europe, and suddenly breaks it off
to resume the unfinished catastrophe of another in Asia. The imagination of the
reader is not so much involved in, as it is oppressed with the multiplicity of
stories, in the relation of each of which the poet is at the same time equally
engaged. To remedy this inconvenience, it was thought proper to affix, in some
of the editions, marginal hints, informing the reader in what book and stanza
the poet would recommence some interrupted episode; an expedient not more
inartificial than that which the first painters were obliged to make use of, in
order to assist their want of skill, who having drawn the figure of a man, a
bird, or a quadruped, found it necessary to write underneath the name of the
kind to which the thing represented belonged. However, this method has been the
means of giving the reader a clear comprehension of Ariosto's tales, which
otherwise he could not have obtained without much difficulty. This poet is
seldom read twice in order; that is, by passing from the first canto to the
second, and from the second to the rest successively; but by persuing (without
any regard to the order of the books, or the stanzas) the different stories,
which though all somewhere finished, yet are, at present, so mutually
interwoven, that the incidents of one are perpetually clashing with those of
another. The ingenious Abbe Du Bos Reflections, etc. c. 34.
observes happily enough, that "Homer is a geometrician in comparison of
Ariosto:" And, indeed, his miscellaneous matter cannot be better expressed than
by the two first verses of his Exordium. Le Done, i Cavallier, l'arme, gli
amori,
Le Cortesie, l'audaci imprese, io canto. C. i. S. 1.

Of dames, of knights, of arms, of love's delight,
Of courtesies, of high attempts, I sing.
Harrington. But, to return. Though the FAERIE QUEEN does not exhibit that
economy of plan, and exact arrangement of parts which Epic severity requires,
yet we scarcely regret the loss of these, while their place is so amply
supplied, by something which more powerfully attracts us, as it engages the
affection of the heart, rather than the applause of the head; and if there be
any poem whose graces please, because they are situated beyond the reach of
art, and where the faculties of creative imagination delight us, because they
are unassisted and unrestrained by those of deliberate judgment, it is in this
of which we are now speaking. To sum up all in a few words; though in the FAERIE
QUEEN we are not satisfied as critics, yet we are transported as readers.

SECT. II. Of Spenser's Imitations from old Romances.
ALthough Spenser formed his FAERIE QUEEN upon the fanciful plan of Ariosto,
as I remarked in the preceding section, yet it must be confessed, that the
adventures of Spenser's knights are a more exact and immediate copy of those
which we meet with in old romances, or books of chivalry, than they are of
those of which the Orlando Furioso consists. Ariosto's knights exhibit very
surprising instances of their prowess, and atchieve many heroic actions; but
our author's knights are more particularly engaged in revenging injuries, and
doing justice to the distressed; which was the proper business, and ultimate
end of the ancient knight-errantry. And thus though many of Spenser's incidents
and expedients are to be found in Ariosto, such as that of blowing a horn, at
the sound of which the gates of a castle fly open, of the vanishing of an
enchanted palace or garden, after some knight has destroyed the enchanter, and
the like, yet these are not more peculiarly the property of Ariosto, than they
are common to all ancient romances in general. Spenser's first book is, indeed,
a regular and precise imitation of such a series of action as we frequently
meet with in books of chivalry: For instance, a king's daughter applies to a
knight, that he would relieve her father and mother, who are closely confined
to their castle, upon account of a vast and terrible dragon, that had ravaged
their country, and perpetually laid in wait to destroy them. The knight sets
forward with the lady, encounters a monster in the way, is plotted against by
an enchanter, and after surmounting a variety of difficulties and obstacles,
arrives at the country which is the scene of the dragon's devastations, kills
him, and is presented to the king and queen, whom he has just delivered;
marries their daughter, but is soon obliged to leave her, on account of
fulfilling a former vow. It may be likewise observed, that the circumstance of
each of Spenser's twelve knights, setting out from one place, by a different
way, to perform a different adventure, exactly resembles that of the seven
knights proceeding forwards to their several expeditions, in the well-known
romance, entitled the Seven Champions of Christendom. In fact, these miraculous
books were highly fashionable, and that chivalry, which was the subject of
them, was still practiced, in the age of queen Elizabeth. See Hollingshead's
Chronicles, vol. iii. p. 1315.


Among others, there is one romance which Spenser seems more particularly to
have made use of: It is entitled MORTE ARTHUR, The Life of King Arthur, of his
noble Knights of the round table, and in the end the dolorous death of them all.
This was translated into English from the French, by one Sir Thomas Maleory,
Knight, and printed by W. Caxton, 1484 This Book has been reprinted twice or
thrice. The last Edition is dated 1634.
. From this fabulous history our author has borrowed many of his names, viz.
Sir Tristram, Placidas, Pelleas, Pellenore, Percivall, and others. As to Sir
Tristram, he has copied from this book the circumstances of his birth and
education with much exactness. Spenser informs us that Sir Tristram was born in
Cornwall, etc. And Tristram is my name, the only heir
Of good king Meliogras, which did reign
In Cornewaile.
6. 2. 28. And afterward. -- The country wherein I was bred
83 The which the fertile Lioness is hight.
ibid. St. 30.

Which particulars are drawn from the romance abovementioned. "There was a
knight Meliodas [Meliogras] and he was lord and king of the country of Lyones
-- and he wedded king Marks sister of Cornewale." The issue of which marriage,
as we are afterward told, was Sir Tristram Book ii. chap. i.
. Mention is then made in our romance, of Sir Tristram's banishment from Lyones
into a distant country, by the advice, and under the conduct of a wise and
learned counselor named Governale. A circumstance alluded to by Spenser in
these verses. So taking counsel of a wise man red,
She was by him adviz'd, to send me quight
Out of the country, wherein I was bred,
The which the fertile Lioness is hight.
6. 2. 30. Sir Tristram's education is thus described below. St. 31. All which
my days I have not lewdly spent,
Nor spilt the blossom of my tender years
In ydlesse, but as was convenient,
Have trained been with many noble feres
In gentle thewes, and such like semely leres;
Amongst which my most delight has always been
To hunt the savage chase among my peers
Of all that raungeth in the forest green,
Of which none is to me unknown that ever was seen.
XXXII.
Ne is there hawke that mantleth her on perch
Whether high-towring, or accoasting low,
But I the measure of her flight do search,
And all her pray, and all her diet know.


Which is agreeable to what is said in the romance. After mention being made of
Tristram's having learned the language of France, courtly behavior, and skill
in chivalry, we have the following passage. "As he growed in might and
strength, he labored ever in hunting and hawking; so that we never read of no
gentleman, more, that so used himself therein. -- And he began good measures
of blowing of blasts of venery [hunting] and chase, and of all manner of
vermeins; and all these terms haves we yet of hawking and hunting: and
therefore the book of venery, of hawking and hunting, is called THE BOOK OF
SIR TRISTRAM Book ii. chap. 3.
." And in another place King Arthur thus addresses Sir Tristram. "For of all
manner of hunting thou bear the prise; and of all measures of blowing thou
art the beginner; and of all the terms of hunting and hawking ye are the
beginner. B. ii. c. 91.
"

From this romance our author also took the hint of his BLATANT BEAST; which is
there called the QUESTING BEAST. "Therewithal the King saw coming toward him
the strangest beast that ever he saw, or heard tell off. -- And the noise was
in the beasts belly like unto the Questyn of thirty couple of hounds." The
QUESTING BEAST is afterward more particularly described. "That had in shap an
head like a serpent's head, and a body like a liberd, buttocks like a lion, and
footed like a heart; and in his body there was such a noise, as it had been the
noise of thirty couple of hounds Questyn, and such a noise that beast made
wheresoever he went." B. ii. c. 53.
Spenser has made him a much more monstrous animal than he is here represented
to be, and in general has varied from this description; though there is one
circumstance in Spenser's representation, in which there is a resemblance, viz.
-- speaking of his mouth, And therein were a thousand tongues empight,
Of sundry kinds, and sundry qualities,
Some were of dogs that barked night and day.
And some, etc. --
6. 12. 27. So dreadfully his hundred tongues did bray,
5. 12. 41. By what has been hitherto said, perhaps the reader may not be
persuaded, that Spenser, in his BLATANT BEAST, had the QUESTING BEAST of our
romance in his eye; but the poet has himself taken care to inform us of this:
for we learn, from the romance, that certain knights of the round table were
destined to pursue the QUESTING BEAST perpetually without success: which
Spenser hints at in these lines. Albe that long time after Calidore,
The good Sir Pelleas him took in hand,
And after him Sir Lamoracke of yore,
And all his brethren borne in Britain land,
Yet none of these could ever bring him into band.
6. 12. Sir Lamoracke, and Sir Pelleas are two very valourous champions of
Arthur's round table.

This romance likewise supplied our author with the story of the mantle made of
the beards of knights, and locks of ladies; which last circumstance is added by
Spenser. For may no knight or lady pass along
That way (and yet they needs must pass that way)
By reason of the straight and rocks among,
But they that ladies locks do shave away,
And that knights berd for toll, which they for passage pay.
6. 1. 13. Afterward, His name is Crudor, who through high disdain,
And proud despyght of his selfe-pleasing mind,
Refused has to yeald her love again,
Until a mantle she for him do find,
With berds of knights, and locks of ladies lynd.
6. 3. 15. Thus in MORTE ARTHUR. "Came a messenger -- saying, that king Ryence
had discomfited, and overcomen eleaven knights, and everiche of them did him
homage; and that was this; they gave him their beards clean flayne of as much
as there was: wherefore the messenger came for king Arthur's berd: for king
Ryence had purfeled a mantell with king's beards, and there lacked for one
place of the mantell. Wherefore he sent for his berd; or else he would enter
into his lands, and brenn and sley, and never leave, till he have thy head and
beard." B. 1. c. 24.
After this passage we have an This is also printed in P. Enderbury's CAMBRIA
TRIUMPHANS, p. 197.
ancient ballad, the subject of which is this insolent demand of king Ryence.
Drayton, in his Polyolbion, speaks of a coat composed of the beards of kings:
he is celebrating king Arthur. As how great Rithout's self, he slew in his
repair
And ravished Howel's niece, young Helena the fair,
And for a trophie brought the giant's coat away,
Made of the beards of kings. -- Song 4.

But Drayton, in these lines, manifestly alludes to a passage in Geoffrey of
Monmouth; who informs us, that a Spanish giant, named Ritho, having forcibly
conveyed away from her guard Helena the niece of duke Hoel, possessed himself
of St. Michael's Mount in Cornwall, from whence he made frequent sallies, and
committed various outrages; that, at last, king Arthur conquered this giant,
and took from him a certain coat, which he had been composing of the beards of
kings, a vacant place being left for king Arthur's beard. Orig. and Gest. Reg.
Brit. B. 10, 13.


As Spenser has copied many other fictions from MORTE ARTHUR, I apprehend that
he drew this from thence, and not from Geoffrey of Monmouth; not to mention,
that Spenser's circumstances tally more exactly with those in the romance.

There is great reason to conclude, not only from what has already been
mentioned concerning Spenser's imitations from this romantic history of king
Arthur and his knights, but from some circumstances which I shall now produce,
that it was a favorite and reigning romance about the age of queen Elizabeth;
or at least one very well known and much read at that time. Spenser in the
Shepherd's Calendar has the following passage. And whither rennes this bevie of
ladies bright
Raunged in a row?
They been all LADIES OF THE LAKE behight,
That unto her go. April.



Upon the words LADIES OF THE LAKE, E. K. the old commentator on the pastorals
has the following remark. "LADIES OF THE LAKE be nymphs: for it was an old
opinion among the ancient Heathens, that of every spring and fountain was a
goddess the sovereign; which opinion stuck in the minds of men not many years
since by means of certain fine fablers, or loose liars; such as were the
authors of KING ARTHUR the great. -- Who tell many an unlawful leesing of the
LADIES OF THE LAKE." These fine fablers or loose liars, are the authors of the
romance abovementioned, viz. MORTE ARTHUR, where many miracles are brought
about, and much enchantment is carried on by the means and interposition of the
LADY OF THE LAKE. Now it should be observed, that the LADY OF THE LAKE was
introduced to make part of queen Elizabeth's entertainment at Kenelworth; as an
evidence of which I shall produce a passage from an ancient book entitled "A
letter, wherein part of the entertainment untoo the queens majesty at
Killingworth-castl in Warwick-sheer in this soomers progress, 1575, is
signified." The passage is this. "Her highness all along this tilt-yard rode
unto the inner gate, next the baze coourt of the castle: whear the LADY OF THE
LAKE (famous in KING ARTHUR'S BOOK) with too nymphs waiting upon her, arrayed
all in sylkes, attended her highness coming, from the midst of the pool, whear
upon a moveable island bright-blazing with torches she floting to land, met her
majesty with a well-penned meter, and matter, after this sort; first of the
auncientee of the castl; who had been owners of the same even till this day,
most allways in the hands of the earls of Leycester; how she had kept this
lake syns king Arthur's days, and now understanding of her highness hither
coming, thought it both offis and duty; to discover, in humble wise, her, and
her estate, offering up the same, her lake, and power thearin; with promis of
repair to the court. It pleased her highness to thank this lady, etc."

Gascoyne Works, London, 1576.
in a little narrative called the "Princely Pleasures of Kenelworth Castle,"
gives us some of the abovementioned meter, written by Ferrers, one of the
contributors to the mirror of magistrates, of which these may serve as a
specimen. I am the lady of this pleasant lake,
Who since the time of great king Arthur's reign,
That here with royal court aboade did make,
Have led a lowering life in restless pain;
'Till now that this your third arrival here,
Does cause me come abroad, and boldly thus appear.
For after him such storms this castle shook,
By swarming Saxons first, who scourgde this land
As forth of this my poole I near durst look, etc.


She is afterward introduced complaining to the queen, that sir Bruise had
insulted her for doing an injury to Merlin, (an incident related in MORTE
ARTHUR); and that he would have put her to death had not Neptune delivered her,
by concealing her in that lake; from which confinement the queen is afterward
supposed to deliver her, etc.

Without expatiating upon the nature of such a royal entertainment as this, I
shall observe from it that the LADY OF THE LAKE (and consequently the romance
which supplied this fiction) was a very popular character in the reign of queen
Elizabeth; and we may add, that it is not improbable that Spenser might allude
in the above cited verses to some of the circumstances in this part of the
queen's entertainment; for queen Elisabeth, the Fair Elisa, is the lady whom
the LADIES OF LAKE are represented as repairing to, in that eclogue Spenser's
pastorals were published about four years after this entertainment.
. Nor is it improbable that this lady was often exhibited upon other occasions.
Nor is it improper to remark in this place that Been. Johnson has introduced
her, together with king Arthur and Merlin, in an entertainment before the court
of James I. called PRINCE HENRY'S BARRIERS.

The above ancient letter acquaints us, that the queen was entertained with a
song from this romance, which is another proof of it is popularity at that time.
"A minstrall came forth with a sollem song warranted for story out of king
Arthur's acts the first book, 24. whereof I gat a copy, and that is this, "So
it fell out on a pentecost day
"When king Arthur, etc."


This is the song above hinted at, where mention is made of king Rience
demanding the beard of king Arthur. In the same letter a gentleman who showed
some particular feats of activity before the queen, is said to be "very cunning
in fens, and hardy as Gawen." Which Gawen was king Arthur's nephew, and whose
achievements are highly celebrated in MORTE ARTHUR.

We find Spenser in another place alluding to the fable of the lady of the lake
so much spoken of in this romance. -- A little while
Before that Merlin did, he did intend
A brazen wall in compass to compyle
About Cairmardin, and did it commend
Unto these sprights to bring to perfect end;
During which time, the LADY OF THE LAKE,
Whom long he loved, for him in haste did send,
Who therefore forced his workmen to forsake,
Them bound till his return, their labor not to slake.
3. 3. 9. X.
In the mean time through that false ladies train
He was surprised and buried under bear,
Ne ever to his work returned again.
These verses are obscure, unless we consider the following relation in MORTE
ARTHUR. "The LADY OF THE LAKE and Merlin departed; and by the way as they went,
Merlin showed to her many wonders, and came into Cornewaile. And always Merlin
lay about the lady for to have her favor; and she was ever passing weary of
him, and feign would have been delivered of him; for she was afraid of him,
because he was a devils son, and she could not put him away by no means. And
so upon a time it happened that Merlin showed to her in a roche [rock] whereas
was a great wonder, and wrought by enchauntment, which went under a stone, so
by her subtle craft and working she made Merlin to go under that stone, to let
him wit of the marvailes there. But she wrought so there for him, that he came
never out, for all the craft that he could do." B. i. c. 60.


Our author has taken notice of a superstitious tradition, which is related at
large in this romance. -- Good Lucius
That first received christianity,
The sacred pledge of Christ's evangelie:
Yet true it is that long before that day
Hither came Joseph of Arimathie,
Who brought with him the HOLY GRAYLE, they say,
And preached the truth; but since it greatly did decay.
2. 10. 53. The HOLY GRAYLE, that is the real blood of our blessed Savior.
What Spenser here writes GRALE, is often written SANGREAL, or St. grale in
MORTE ARTHUR, and is there said to have been brought into England by Joseph of
Arimathea. Many of king Arthur's knights are there represented as going in
quest, or in search of the SANGREAL, or SANGUIS REALIS. This expedition was one
of the first subjects of the old romance.

This romance seems to have extended its reputation beyond the reign of queen
Elizabeth. B. Johnson, besides his allusion to it in the LADY OF THE LAKE
mentioned above, hints at it more than once: Had I compiled from Amadis de
Gaul,
Th'Esplandians, ARTHURS, Palmerins, etc. An execration upon Vulcan, in the
Underwood.

And afterward, in the same poem, -- The whole sum
Of errant knighthood; with the dames and dwarfes,
The charmed boats, and the enchanted wharfes,
The TRISTRAMS, LANC'LOTTS, etc.
And Camden REMAINS, printed 1604. Artic. names.
refers to this history of king Arthur, as to a book familiarly known to the
readers of his age. Speaking of the name TRISTRAM, he observes, "I know not
whether the first of this name was christened by king Arthur's fabler." Again,
of LANCELOT he speaks, "Some think it to be no ancient name, but forged by the
writer of king Arthur's history, for one of his douty knights:" and of GAWEN,
"A name devised by the author of king Arthur's table."

To this we may add, that Milton manifestly hints at it in the following lines,
-- Damsels met in forests wide
By knights of Logris, or of Lyones,
Lancelot, Pelleas, or Pellenore. Par. Reg. B. ii, v. 359.

These are Sir Lancelot (or Sir Meliot) of Logris; Sir Tristram of Lyones, and
king Pellenore, who are often mentioned in MORTE ARTHUR, and represented as
meeting beautiful damsels in desolate forests: and probably he might have it
in his eye when he wrote the following, as the round table is expressly hinted
at. Siquando indigenas revocabo in carmina reges,
Arturumque etiam sub terris bella moventem,
Aut dicam INVICTAE sociali faedere MENSAE
Magnanimos Heroas. -- MANSUS.

To which we may subjoin, -- What resounds
In fable, or romance, of Uther's son,
Begirt with British, and Armoric knights. Parad. Lost, 1. v. 579.



Before I leave this romance, I must observe, that Ariosto has been indebted to
it; I do not mean, to the old translation, which Spenser made use of. He has
drawn his enchanter Merlin from it, and in these verses refers to a particular
story concerning him, quoted above. Bradamante is supposed to visit the tomb of
Merlin. Questa e l'antica, e memorabil grotta,
Ch' edifico Merlino il savio mago,
Che forse recordare odi tal'hotta,
Dove inganollo la DONNA DEL LAGO,
Il sepolcro e qui giu, dove corotta
Di satisfare a lei, che gliel suase,
Giace la carne sua, dove egli vago
Vivo corcossi, e morto ci rimase. C. 3. 10.

Thus translated by Harrington, Here is the tomb that Merlin erst did make
By force of secret skill, and hidden art,
In which sometimes the lady of the lake
(That with her beauty had bewitched his heart)
Did force him enter fondly for her sake;
And he was by a woman overreached
That unto others prophesied, and preached.
XII.
His carkas dead within this stone is bound.
This description of Merlin's tomb (says Harrington in a marginal note) is out
of the BOOK OF KING ARTHUR. Ariosto has transferred the tomb from Wales into
France. He afterward feigns, that the prophetical sculpture in Malagigi's cave
was performed by Merlin's enchantment. Merlino il savio incantator Britanno
Fe for la font, al tempo dil re Arturo,
E di cose, ch'al mondo hanno a venire
La fe da buoni artefici scolpire. C. 26. 39.

XXXV.
-- These whose names appear
In marble pure, did never live as yet,
But long time hence, after six hundred year,
To their great praise in princely throne shall sit;
Merlin the English prophet plast them here
In Arthurs time.
Harrington. He also mentions some of the names of the knights of our romance;
when Renaldo comes into Great Britain, the poet celebrates that island for its
achievements in chivalry, and as having produced many brave knights, --
Tristano
Lancillotto, Galasso, Artu, e Galuano. C. 4. S. 52.

Afterward, in b. 32. Tristram makes a great figure. From this romance is also
borrowed Ariosto's tale C. 42. 98.
of the enchanted cup; which, in Caxton's old translation, is as follows. "By
the way they met with a knight, that was sent from Morgan le Faye to king
Arthur; and this knight had a fair horn all garnished with gold; and the
horn had such a virtue, that there might no lady or gentlewoman drink of that
horn, but if she were true to her husband; and if she were false, she
should spill all the drink; and if she were true unto her lord, she might
drink peaceably, etc." B. 2. c, 34.
Afterward many trials are made with this cup. The inimitable Fontaine has
new-moulded this story from Ariosto, under the title of La coupe enchantee. As
it is manifest, from a comparison of passages, that Ariosto was very conversant
in this romance; so I think it may be granted, that he drew the idea of his
Orlando running mad with jealousy from it. In MORTE ARTHUR, Sir Lancelot, out
of a jealous fit, is driven to madness, in which state he continues for the
space of two years, performing a thousand ridiculous pranks, no less
extravagant than those of Orlando; and, like him, at length he recovers his
senses.

I had forgot to remark before, that our author has borrowed the name of
Materasta's castle from that of Lancelot in MORTE ARTHUR. -- the goodly frame
And stately port of CASTLE JOYEOUS.
3. 1. 31. Lancelot's castle is styled JOYOUS GUARD, or castle.

There is another ancient romance (for so it may be called, though it is
written in verse) which Spenser apparently copies, in prince Arthur's combat
with the dragon: it will be necessary to transcribe the whole passage. It
fortuned (as fair it then befell)
Behind his back (vnweeting) where he stood
Of ancient time there was a springing well,
From which fast trickled forth a silver flood,
Full of great virtues, and for medicine good.
Whylome, before that cursed dragon got
That happy land, and all with innocent blood,
Defiled those sacred waves, it rightly hot
The well of life: ne yet his virtues had forgot.
For, unto life the dead it could restore,
And guilt of sinful crimes clean wash away;
Those that with sickness were infected sore,
It could recure, and ages long decay
Renew, as it were borne that very day.
Both Silo this, and Jordan did excel,
And The English bath, and eke the German Spau,
Ne can Cephise, nor Hebrus match this well:
Into the same, the knight (back overthrowen) fell.
Now began the golden Phoebus for to steep
His fiery face in billows of the west,
And his faint steeds watered in Ocean deep,
Whiles from their iournall labors they did rest;
When that infernal monster, having kest
His weary foe into that living well,
Began high advaunce his broad discolored breast
Above his wonted pitch, with countenance fell,
And clapped his iron wings, as victor he did dwell.
Which when his pensive lady saw from far,
Great woe and sorrow did her soul assay;
As weening that, the sad end of the war,
And began to highest God entirely pray,
That feared chance from her to turn away;
With folded hands and knees full lowely bent
All night she watched, ne once adowne would lay
Her dainty limbs in her sad dreriment,
But praying still did wake, and waking did lament.
The morrow next began early to appear,
That Titan rose to run his daily race:
But early ere the morrow next began rear
Out of the sea fair Titans deawy face.
Up rose the gentle virgin from her place,
And looked all about, if she might spy
Her loved knight to move his manly pase:
For, she had great doubt of his safety,
Since late she saw him fall before his enemy.
At last she saw, where he vpstarted brave
Out of the well, wherein he drenched lay;
As Eagle fresh out of the Ocean wave,
Where he has left his plumes all hoary gray,
And decked himself with feathers youthly gay,
Like eyas hawk up mounts unto the skies,
His newly-budded pineons to assay,
And marvailes at himself, still as he flies:
So new, this newborn knight to battle new did rise.
Whom, when the damned fiend so fresh did spy,
No wonder if he wondered at the sight,
And doubted, whether his late enemy
It were, or other new supplied knight.
He, now to prove his late renewed might,
High brandishing his bright deaw-burning blade,
Upon his crested scalpe so sore did smite,
That to the scull a yawning wound it made:
The deadly dint his dulled senses all dismayed.
I wot not, whether the revenging steel
Were hardened with that holy water dew
Wherein he fell, or sharper edge did feel,
Or his baptized hands now greater grew;
Or other secret virtue did ensew;
Else, never could the force of fleshly arm,
Ne molten metal in his blood embrew:
For, till that stound could never wight him harm,
By subtlety, nor slight, nor might, nor mighty charm.
1. 11. 29.

This miraculous manner of healing our author drew from an old poem, entitled,
Sir Bevis of Southampton, viz. "What for weary, and what for faint
"Sir Bevis was near attaint:
"The dragon followed on Bevis so hard,
"That as he would have fled backward,
"There was a well as I ween,
"And he stumbled right therein.
"Then was Sir Bevis afraid and woe,
"Lest the dragon should him sloe:
"Or that he might away pass,
"When that he in the well was.
"Then was the well of such virtue
"Through the might of Christ Jesu,
"For sometime dwelled in that land
"A virgin full of Christ's sand,
"That had been bathed in that well,
"That ever after, as men can tell,
"Might no venomous worm come therein,
"By the virtue of that virgin,
"Nor nigh it seven foot and more:
"Then Bevis was glad therefore,
"When he saw the Dragon fell
"Had no power to come to the well.
"Then was he glad without fail,
"And rested awhile for his avail,
"And drank of the water of his fill,
"And then he leapt out of the well,
"And with Morglay, his brand
"Assailed the Dragon, I understand:
"On the Dragon he struck so fast, etc.
After which the Dragon strikes the knight with such violence, that he falls
into a swoon, and tumbles as it were lifeless into the well, by whose sovereign
virtue he is revived. "When Bevis was at the ground
"The water made him whole and sound,
"And quenched all the venim away,
"This well saved Bevis that day.


And afterward, "But ever when Bevis was hurt sore,
"He went to the well and washed him thore;
"He was as whole as any man,
"And ever as fresh as when he began. It may be observed, that this poem of Sir
Bevis is written in that short measure, which was frequently sung to the harp
in queen Elizabeth's time: a custom which descended from the ancient bards. The
author of the art of English poesy, printed 1589, thus speaks of it. "So on
the other side does the over-busie and too speedy return of one manner of
tune, too much annoy, and, as it were, glut the ear, unless it be in small and
popular musickes song by these cantabanqui upon benches and barrels heads,
where they have none other audience than boys, or country fellows, that pass
by them in the street; or else by blind harpers, or such like
taverne-minstrels, that give a fit of mirth for a groat; and their matters
being, for the most part, stories of old time; as, the tale of Sir Topas, the
Reports of Bevis of Southampton, Guy of Warwick, Adam Bell, and Clymme of the
Clough, and such other old romances or historical Rhymes, made purposely for
recreation of the common people at Christmasse diners, and brideales; and in
tavernes, and alehouses, and such other places of base resort: also they be
used in carols and rounds, and such light or lascivious poemes, which are
commonly more commodiously uttered by these buffoons and VICES in plays, than
by any other person: such were the rimes of Skeleton (usurping the name of a
poet laureate) being in deed but a rude railing rimer, and all his doings
ridiculous; he used both short distaunces and short measures, pleasing only the
popular ear; in our courtly MAKER we banish them utterly." B. ii. c. 9. Hence
it appears, that Chaucer was, at that time, sung to the harp; for the tale, or
rhyme, of Sir Thopas is a poem of Chaucer now extant: so the Italians, at
present, sing Tasso and Ariosto. Adam Bell and Clym of the Clough were two
famous archers: the former of which is, on that account, alluded to by
Shakespeare.

The same author, in another place, speaks of this kind of entertainment, by
which one would think that it was not always confined to such a vulgar
audience. "We ourselves, who compiled this treatise, have written for pleasure,
a little brief romance, or historical ditty, in the English tongue, of the isle
of Great-Britaine, in short and long meeters; and by breaches or divisions to
be more commodiously sung to the harp in places of assembly, where the company
shall be desirous to hear of old adventures, and valiaunces of noble knights in
times past; as are those of king Arthur, and his knights of the round table;
Sir Bevys of Southampton, Guy of Warwick, and such other like." B. i. c. 19.





The circumstance of the Dragon not being able to approach within seven feet of
this well, is imitated by our author St. 49. below, where another water is
mentioned, which in like manner preserves the knight. "But nigh thereto the
ever-damned beast
"Durst not approache, for he was mortal made,
"And all that life preserved did detest,
"Yet he it often adventured to invade.


Though we feel somewhat of an ill-natured pride, and a disingenuous triumph, in
having detected the latent and obscure source, from whence an admired and
original author has drawn some favorite and celebrated description; yet it must
be confessed, that this is soon overwhelmed by a generous and exalted pleasure,
which naturally flows from contemplating the chemical energy of true genius,
which can produce so wonderful a transmutation, and whose virtues are not less
potent, efficacious, and vivifying in their nature, than those of the
miraculous water here described.

It should be mentioned in this place, that Spenser, in his Dragon-encounters,
follows the incidents made use of by the romance-writers, with all the
punctuality of a close copyist.

As to Spenser's original and genealogy of the Fairy nation, I am induced to
believe, that part of it was supplied by his own inexhaustible imagination, and
part by some fabulous history. He tells us, B. ii. c. 10. S. 70. that man, as
first made by Prometheus, was called ELFE, who wandering through the world, at
last arrived at the gardens of Adonis, where he found a female, whom he called
FAY; that the issue of these two were called Fairies, who soon grew to be a
mighty people, and conquered all nations. That their eldest son Elfin governed
America, and the next to him, named Elfinan, founded the city of Cleopolis,
which was enclosed with a golden wall by Elfiline. That his son Elfine overcome
the Gobbelines; but that, of all Fairies, Elfant was most renowned, who built
Panthea of Crystal. -- To these succeeded Elfar, who killed two
brethren-giants; and to him Elfinor, who built a bridge of glass over the sea,
the sound of which was like thunder. At length Elficleos ruled the Fairy land
with much wisdom, and highly increased its honor: he left two sons, the eldest
of which, fair Elferon, died an immature death, and whose place was supplied by
the mighty Oberon, whose wide memorial (continues our author) still remains,
and who dying, left Tanaquil to succeed him by will, who is likewise called
Glorian, or GLORIANA.

In the circumstance of Elfinel, who overcame the Gobbelines, he plainly
alludes to the faction of the Guelfes and Gibbelines in Italy; and his friend
and commentator E. K. remarks, Eclogue, June.
that our Elfes and Goblins were derived from those two parties Guelfes and
Gibelines. But in the latter part of this relation, under the fictitious names
of these ideal beings, he has adumbrated some of our English princes. Elficleos
is king Henry VII, whose eldest son Arthur died at sixteen years of age; and
whose youngest son Oberon, that is, Henry VIII, succeeded to the crown,
marrying, about the same time, his brother Arthur's widow, the princess
Katherine; which is what Spenser more particularly hints at in these lines,
Whose empty place the mighty Oberon,
Doubly supplied in SPOUSALL and DOMINION.
St. 75.

The same of this king was very recent in our author's age.

It is remarkable that Spenser says nothing of Edward VI. and queen Mary, who
reigned between Henry VIII. and queen Elizabeth, but that he passes immediately
from Oberon to Tanaquill, or GLORIANA, i. e. queen Elizabeth, who was excluded
from her right by those two intermediate reigns. He dying left the fairest
Tanaquill,
Him to succeed there by his last will:
Fairer and nobler lives none this hour.
St. 75.

And the reader may observe, that there is much address and art in the poet's
manner of making this omission. There is so much confusion in Spenser's series
of this fairy people, that it is difficult to determine, whether or no he has
here allegorised any other English reign. However in Elfant who laid the
foundation of Cleopolis, he may signify king Lud, as it appears, by another
place, that Cleopolis is London, Till now, said then the knight, I weened well,
That great Cleopolis where I have been,
In which the fairest FAERIE QUEEN does dwell.


The fairest FAERIE QUEEN is queen Elizabeth: and by the lines that
immediately follow, it should seem that Panthea is the queen's palace, -- The
fairest city was that might be seen,
And that bright towr all built of crystal cleene,
PANTHEA. --
1. 10. 58.

But this idea of the crystal tower, and of the golden wall, and bridge of
glass, etc. mentioned above, seem to be some romantic tradition. As to his
FAERIE QUEEN, the notion of such a personage was very common; Chaucer in his
Rhyme of Sir Thopas speaks of her, together with a fairy land; and Shakespere
who was universally conversant in popular superstition, has introduced her in
his Midsummernight's Dream. She was supposed to have held her court in the
highest magnificence in the days of king Arthur, a circumstance by which the
happiness of that reign was originally represented in the romantic annals of it.

Thus Chaucer.

In the old dayis of the king Arthure,
(Of which the Britons speken great honor)
All was this land fulfillid of Fayry,
The Elf-QUENE with her jolly company
Daunsid full often in many a grene mede,
This was the old opinion as I read. The wife of Bath's tale, 857. The reader
is desired to take notice, that in numbering any passage from Chaucer's Cant.
Tales, we have followed Urry's scheme.

Thus Spenser followed the popular tradition in supposing his It appears from
John Marston's Satires, entitled, The SCOURGE OF VILLAINY, Three Books of
Satyrs, and printed in the year 1598, that our author's FAERIE QUEEN,
occasioned many publications in which Fairies were the principal actors, viz.
Go buy some ballad of the FAERY KING.
In Lectores.

And in another Place. -- At length some wonted sleep does crown
His new-falne lids; dreams, straight ten pound to one
Out-steps some FAERY with quick motion,
And tells him wonders of some flowrie vale --
Awakes, strait, rubs his eyes, and prints his tale.
B. 3. sat. 6.

And I have seen a romance which seems to have been written soon after
Spenser's poem, entitled, The RED-ROSE KNIGHT; where the knight, after the
example of prince Arthur, goes in search of the Fairy Queen.

The satires abovementioned contain many well-drawn characters, and several
good strokes of a satirical genius, but are not upon the whole so finished and
classical as bishop Hall's, the first part of which were published about a year
before these. Among other passages the following struck me, as being a good
deal in the strain of the beginning of Milton's L'Allegro. Sleep, grim
reproof; my jocond muse does sing
In other keys to nimble fingering;
Dull sprighted melancholy leave my brain,
To hell, Cimmerian night! in lively vain
I strive to paint; then hence all dark intent,
And sullen frowns; come sporting merriment,
Cheeke-dimpling laughter, etc.
B. 3. Sat. 10.

From these satires we may learn also how popular a play Romeo and Juliet was
in those days.

He is speaking to a wit of the town. Luscus, what is played to day? -- faith now
I know
I set thy lips abroach, from whence does flow
Naught but pure JULIET, and ROMEO.
Ibid.

Langbaine (Dram. Poets page 351.) informs us, that these satires (now
forgotten) rendered Marston more eminent than his dramatic poetry. Two years
after these, viz. 1600, another collection of satires appeared written by W.
Rowlands, which are by no means contemptible. These are entitled, The Letting
of Humors Blood in the Head-vaine. So that bishop Hall was not without some
followers in the species of poetry which he had newly revived.


FAERIE QUEEN to exist in the age of Arthur. In Chaucer we find that fairy
land, and Fairies were used in a more general sense for an ideal place and
people. Thus in the merchants tale. Pluto that is king of FAYRIE.


And above, Proserpine, and all her FAYRIE.


This fiction of the Fairies was undoubtedly brought with many other fantastic
extravagancies of the like nature from the Eastern nations, by the European
Christians, who had been at the holy war; and those expeditions were some of
the first subjects of romance; as an admirable judge of this matter observes;
who farther informs us; "Nor were the monstrous embellishments of enchantments,
etc. the invention of the romancers, but formed upon Eastern tales, brought
thence by travelers from their crusades and pilgrimages; which indeed have a
cast peculiar to the wild imagination of the Eastern people." Supplement to the
translator's preface, before Jarvis's Don Quixote.


The Persians call the Fairies Peri; and the Arabs Ginn; and they feign, that
there is a certain country inhabited by them, called Ginnistian, which
corresponds to our Fairy-land. Our old romantic history supposes that Arthur
still reigns in Fairy-land, from whence he will one day return to Britain, and
re-establish the round table, etc. Thus Lydgate, He is a king ycrounid in
Fairie;
With scepter, and sword, and with his regally,
Shall resort as lord and sovereign
Out of Fairie and reign in Britain;
And repair again the old round table,
By prophecy Merlin set the date, etc. Fall of Princes. B. 8. Chapter 24.



Many other instances might be alleged, from which it would be more abundantly
manifested, that the imagination of our author was deeply tinctured with that
species of writing with which his age was so intimately acquainted, and so
generally delighted: but we have, perhaps, been already sufficiently prolix in
a disquisition, which to the lovers of Spenser, cannot appear altogether
unentertaining; a disquisition, affording that kind of information, which,
though it does not improve the judgment, will gratify the curiosity. And if
there should be any readers, who, disgusted with the ideas of knights, dragons,
and enchanters, should, after perusing the FAERIE QUEEN, address the author of
it, as cardinal d'Este did Ariosto, after reading his Orlando, " Dove, Diavolo,
Messer Lodovico, avete pigliate tante coglionerie? Where the Devil, and did you
pick up all these lies?" I beg those gentlemen will look upon this section as a
sufficient answer to that question.

SECT. III. Of Spenser's use and abuse of ancient history and mythology.
AS Spenser sought to produce surprise by extravagant incidents, and fantastic
descriptions, the mythology of the ancients afforded matter no less copious
than suitable for such a design. He has accordingly adopted some of their most
romantic fictions, in many of which he has departed from the received
tradition, as his purpose and subject required. And, indeed, with regard to our
author's misrepresentation of the fables of antiquity, it may be observed, that
from those arguments which are produced against his fidelity, new ones may be
drawn in favor of his fancy. Spenser's native force of invention would not
permit him to pursue the letter of prescribed fiction with tame regularity and
scrupulous exactness. In many particulars he varies from antiquity merely that
he may introduce new beauties, and frequently mentions one or two circumstances
of ancient fable, not so much with a design of adorning his poem with them, as
of taking an opportunity from them, of raising a new fiction of his own. He
sometimes, indeed, misrepresents these matters through haste; his allusions to
ancient history are likewise very frequent, which in many instances he has not
scrupled to violate, with equal freedom, and for the same reasons. B. i. c. i.
S. xxxvii. A bold bad man that dared to call by name
Great Gorgon. --


Mr. Jortin has cited many instances, by which it appears, that the ancients
were most superstitiously fearful of uttering the name of Gorgon, or
Daemogorgon. It may not be impertinent to remark, that they were no less afraid
of calling the furies by their names.

Electra, in Euripides, says of the furies that tormented her brother. -- (...)
(...). Orestes, v. 37.

-- Vereor enim nominare
Deas Eumenidas, quae eum certatim perterrent.
And in another scene Orestes says, (...).
Visus surn mihi videre tres puellas nocti similes.
Whom Menelaus answers, (...). Ibid. v. 480.

Novi quas dixisti; nominare autem nolo.


Below we have the same superstition concerning Hecate; for which it would be
difficult, perhaps, to bring any ancient testimony, And threatened unto him the
dreaded name
Of Hecate --
St. 43. Either that her name was feared in general, or that Morpheus was
particularly afraid of uttering, or of hearing it. Our author, with great
strength of fancy, has feigned such a circumstance as this of Merlin. The
fiends do quake, when any him to them does name.
3. 3. 11. Though perhaps this is not more expressive of Merlin's diabolical
power than what Olaus Magnus mentions of that of a Swedish enchanter, viz. That
he could blunt the edge of the weapons of his enemies only by looking at them;
and that he could make hell a light place. B. i. C. iv. S. 30. He is describing
Envy, -- still did chaw
Between his cankred teeth a venomous toad,
That all the poison ran about his jaw.


Ovid Met. ii. v. 760.
tells us, that Envy was found eating the flesh of vipers, which is not much
unlike Spenser's picture. But our author has heightened this circumstance to a
most disgusting degree; for he adds, that the poison ran about her jaw. This
is, perhaps, one of the most loathsome ideas that Spenser has given us, though
he paints very strongly (as Jortin observes) B. i. i. 20. -- She spewd out of
her filthy maw
A flood of poison horrible and black;
Full of great lumps of flesh and gobbets raw,
Which stunk so vilely that it forced him slack
His grasping hold. --
As also in the discovery of Duessa, 1. 8. 47. 48. He is also very indelicate
where he speaks of Serena's wounds. For now her wounds corruption 'gan to breed.
6. 5. 31. See also 7. 7. 31. and 7. 7. 40. In reality, the strength of our
author's imagination could not be suppressed or kept in on any subject, and in
some measure it is owing to the fullness of his stanza, and the frequency of
his rhymes, that he has described these disagreeable objects so minutely. But
to return to his Envy. This personage is again introduced, 5. 12. 29. chawing a
snake, of which circumstance a most beautiful use is there made, St. 39. Then
from her mouth the gobbet she does take
The which whyleare she was so greedily
Devouring; even that half-gnawen snake
And at him throws it most despitefully:
The cursed serpent, though she hungrily
Erst chaw'd thereon, yet was not all so dead,
But that some life remained secretly,
And as he past before withouten dread,
Bit him behind, that long the mark was to be read.


It may be urged, that Spenser drew the thought of her throwing the Snake at
him, from Alecto's attack upon Amata. Huic Dea caeruleis unum de crinibus anguem
Conjicit, inque sinus praecordia ad intima condit. Aen. vii.v.346.



But Spenser's application of this thought, is surely a much greater effort of
invention than the thought itself. The malignity both of Envy, and of her
Snake, could not have been expressed is more significant strokes; though the snake
was her constant food, yet she was tempted to deprive herself of sustenance,
that she might cast it at him; and though the snake by being thus constantly fed
upon was almost dead, yet it is natural malignity enabled it to bite him
violently. B. i. C. v. S. xxxix. -- His rash sire began to rend
His hair, and hasty tongue that did offend.


Theseus did not rend his tongue upon this occasion. Mr. Jortin would excuse
our author for his false representation of this matter, by supposing an
elleipsis, viz. he began to rend his hair, and (to blame or curse) his tongue.
Though Spenser is full of elleipses, yet he seldom has been guilty of such a one
as this; I should therefore think this passage ought not to be referred to
Spenser's Elleipses, but to that fault which he so frequently commits, the
fal^ication of ancient story. Besides the words that did offend joined to
hasty tongue, seem to be given by the poet as an express reason why he rent
it. B. i. C. vi. S. xiv. Sylvanus is here introduced, -- His weak steps
governing
And aged limbs on cypress stadle stout.


I do not remember that Sylvanus is any where described as infirm with old age;
neither did he use a cypress-tree for the purpose here mentioned, which was a
young plant torn up by the roots, and carried in his hand. Virgil addresses
him, -- Teneram ab radice ferens, Sylvane, cupressum. Georg. i.v.20.

B. i. C. vii. S. xvii. -- That renowned Snake
Which great Alcides in STREMONA slew,
Long-fostred in the filth of LERNA lake.


Hercules slew the Hydra in the lake of Lerna, between Mycenae and Argos.
Stremona is no where to be met with, which probably he put for Strymon, a river
of Macedonia in the confines of Thrace. But to read Strymon here, would no more
help out the sense, than it would the measure. B. ii. C. iv. S. xli. -- Son
of Erebus and Night.
Spenser is just to mythology in representing Erebus and Night as married. In
another place this address is made to Night. -- Black Erebus thy husband is --
3. 4. 55. In these lines of Milton, Hence loathed melancholy
Of CERBERUS and blackest midnight born.
Mr. Upton would read EREBUS for Cerberus: the alteration is indeed ingenious;
and to his defense of it he might have added, that Milton, in one of his
juvenile Latin poems, has shown his knowledge of this mythological point, viz.
Nox senis amplexus EREBI taciturna petivit.


After all, it is not improbable but that Milton might write CERBERUS: full of
the idea of the loathsomness of melancholy, he seems to have chosen out the
most detestable parents for her that his imagination could suggest, CERBERUS
and MIDNIGHT; and it should be observed, that he does not say Midnight simply,
but blackest Midnight, an epithet by which he strongly marks out his abhorrence
of the offspring of so foul a pair, and the consistency and propriety of her
being leagued with Cerberus.

Our author is likewise true to mythology in what he says of Night, in the
following verses, O thou most ancient grandmother of old,
More old than Jove, whom thou at first did breed.
1. 5. 22. Thus Orpheus, in his hymn to Night, (...),
(...). --
Noctem deorum genitricem cantabo, atque hominum,
Nox genetrix omnium. --
He afterward says of her, Which wast begot in Daemogorgon's hall,
That is in Chaos, who is the parent of Night, according to Hesiod. (...).
Theog. 123.

A Chao autem Erebus, atraque nox gignebantur.
Spenser makes Night the mother of Falsehood, which is agreeable to Hesiod. --
Though I the mother be
Of Falsehood. --
S. 27. below. (...). -- Ibid. 224.

Nox perniciosa post illam fraudem peperit.


Spenser gives Night a chariot, for which he has the authority of many ancient
poets. Theocritus, -- (...)
(...). Aen. 5, 721.

Virgil, Jam bigis subvecta polum nox atra tenebat. (...) b. 3.

Apollonius mentions the horses of Night, (...). -- Idyll. 2. 165.

As does Tibullus, Ludite, jam nox jungit Equos. -- 2. 1.



I have often thought, that what Spenser says of the horses of night, tempted
Milton to go farther, and give them names.

Thus Spenser, And cole-black steeds yborne of hellish brood
That on their rustie bits did champ as they were wood.
1. 5. 20. And afterward, Her twyfold teme, of which two black as pitch,
And two were brown, yet each to each unlich.
1. 5. 28. Milton's lines are these, Nox senis amplexus Erebi taciturna
reliquit,
Praecipitesque impellit equos, stimulante flagello;
Captum oculis Typhlonta, Melanchaetemque ferocem,
Atque Acherontaeo prognatam patre Siopem
Torpidam, and hirsutis horrentem Phrica capillis. In Quintum Novembris, v. 151.

Though at the same time it is probable, that he thought of the horses of the
Sun, which are named in Ovid. Milton, in the same poem, had an eye to another
passage in our author; who having described the personages, that sat by the
highway leading to hell, adds this fine image, And over them sad Horror with
grim hew
Did always sore, beating his iron wings.
2. 7. 2.

Milton, after describing some of the same personages, adds, -- Exanguisque
locum circumvolat horror. Ibid. v.148.



Among these personages, Milton's description of Phonos, or murder (whom he
couples with Prodotes, or treason) is remarkably beautiful. Ipsi etiam pavidi
latitant penetralibus antri
Et Phonos and Prodotes, nulloque sequente per antrum,
Antrum horrent, scopulosum, atrum feralibus umbris
Diffugiunt sontes, and retro lumina vertunt.
But I think is equaled by Fletcher's figure of Phonos, in his forgotten poem,
called the Purple Island. Last of this rout the savage PHONOS went,
Whom his dire mother nursed with human blood,
And when more age and strength more fierceness lent,
She taught him in a dark and desert wood,
With force and guile poor passengers to slay,
And on their flesh his barking stomach stay,
And with their wretched blood his fiery thirst allay.
Ten thousand furies on his steps awaited,
Some seared his hardened soul with Stygian brand,
Some with black terrors his faint conscience baited,
That wide he star'd, and starched hair did stand;
The firstborn man still in his mind he bore,
Foully arrayed in guiltless brother's gore,
Which for revenge to heaven from earth did loudly roar. Cant. 7. St. 69, 71.



It is observable, that this little poem of Milton, as containing a council,
conspiracy, and attempt of Satan, may looked upon as an early prelusion of his
genius to the subject of the paradise lost. B. ii. C. vii. S. 53. The garden of
Proserpina this hight;
And in the midst thereof a silver seat
With a thick arbor, etc.
Next thereunto did grow a goodly tree.


On this tree, he adds, grew golden apples; and that from this likewise sprung
the tree of the Hesperides; but these circumstances, as also that of
Proserpina's garden, etc. is, I think, not to be justified from ancient
writers. He afterward informs us, that the golden apples by which Acontius won
Cydippe, and that which Ate threw among the Gods, were gathered from this tree:
but these, as we learn from many passages in the Classics, were the produce of
the Hesperian tree abovementioned. He then tells us, that the branches of this
tree overspread the river Cocytus, in which Tantalus was plunged up to the
chin, who was perpetually catching at its fruit, in which he copies Homer, in
some measure; who acquaints us, that many trees of delicious fruit waved over
the lake in which Tantalus was placed; but it does not appear, from him, that
Tantalus was fixed in Cocytus, but in some lake peculiarly appropriated to his
punishment. (...). --


Spenser has also made another use of Cocytus, viz. that the shores of Cocytus
perpetually resounded with the shrieks of damned ghosts, who underwent an
everlasting punishment by being dipped in its waters. Cocytus, indeed, says
ancient fable, must be past, before there is any possibility of arriving at the
infernal regions; but we do not find, that it was a punishment allotted to any
of the ghosts, to be thus plunged into its waves; nor that this circumstance
was the cause of the cries which echoed around its banks.

What he has invented of Cocytus, exhibits a fine image: he supposes, that when
Sir Guyon came to this river, -- He clomb up to the bank
And looking down saw many damned wights
In those sad waves; which direful deadly stanke,
Plonged continually of cruel sprights,
That with their pittious cries, and yelling shrights,
They made the further shore resounden wide.
St. 57.

The ancients tell us, that the golden apple, for which the goddesses strove on
mount Ida, was plucked in the garden of the Hesperides; but Spenser's
allegorising imagination feigns, that it grew in hell. He might probably
receive the hint of this tree with the golden apples from Homer's mention of
various trees which grew in hell, near the lake of Tantalus, hinted at above;
but the silver stool beneath it is entirely his own, which Mammon persuades the
knight to seat himself upon, and is A NEW CIRCUMSTANCE of TEMPTATION. -- Thou
fearful fool,
Why take not of that same fruit of gold;
Ne sit down on that same silver stool,
To rest thy weary person in the shadow cool?
St. 63. After all, as the mythology of the Pagans was their religion, the
violation of it is hardly excusable. B. ii. C. xii. S. xlvii. They in that
place him GENIUS do call:
Not that celestial power, to whom the care
Of life and generation over all
That lives, pertaines in charge particular,
Who wondrous things concerning our welfare,
And strange phantomes does let us often foresee.
XLVIII.
Therefore a God him sage antiquity
Did wisely make, and good Agdistes call,
But this same was to that quite contrary,
The foe of life, that good envies to all,
That secretly does us procure to fall
Through guilefull semblaunts which he makes us see.


These lines may be farther illustrated from the following passage in Natalis
Comes.

"Dictus est autem GENIUS, ut placuit latinis, a gignendo, vel quia nobiscum
gignatur, vel quia illi procreandorum cura divinitus commissa putaretur. Hic
creditur nobis clam nunc suadens, nunc dissuadens, universam vitam nostram
gubernare. -- Nam existimantur Genii Daemones rerum, quas voluerint nobis
persuadere, spectra and imagines sibi tanquam in speculo imprimere, quodcunque
illis facillimum sit. In quae spectra cum anima nostra clam respexerit, illa
sibi veniunt in mentem, quae si ratione perpendantur, tum recta fit animi
deliberatio: at si quis posthabibita ratione, malorum spectrorum and visorum
ductu feratur, ille in multos errores incurrat necesse est, si spectra fuerint
praecipue a malignis daemonibus oblata. 4. 3.
" That the first Genius here mentioned was likewise called Agdistes, we learn
from the same author. "Quem postea Agdistem appellarunt." ibid.


The ceremony of offering flowers and wine to the Genius expressed in these
lines, With diverse flowers he daintily was decked,
And strowed round about, and by his side
A mighty mazer bowl of wine was set,
As if it had to him been sacrifide.
S. 49. Is found in Horace, -- piabant
Floribus and Vino GENIUM memorem brevis aevi. Epist. 2. B. 2. v. 143.



The Genius spoken of in the following stanzas, seems to be that which is
represented in the PICTURE of Cebes. And double gates it had, which opened wide,
By which both in and out men moten pass;
The one fair and fresh, the other old and dride:
OLD GENIUS the Porter of them was,
OLD GENIUS, the which a double nature has.
3. 6. 31. XXXII.
He lets in, he lets out to wend,
All that to come into the world desire:
A thousand thousand naked babes attend
About him day and night, which do require,
That he with fleshly weeds would them attire.


(...), etc. Cernitis, inquit, septum hoc? Cernimus. Hoc primum Vobis tenendum
est, locum hanc appellari Vitam; and magnam multitudinem, quae portae assistit,
eos esse qui in Vitam venturi sunt. Senex is qui superne stat, chartam quamdam
una manu tenens, altera vero quiddam quasi monstrans, Genius dicitur. Mandat
autem ingredientibus, quid eis ubi in vitam venerint, faciendum sit. The Third
Book of the FAERIE QUEEN; containing the legend of BRITOMARTIS, or of
CHASTITY.

Britomartis, among the Cretans, was another name for Diana, the goddess of
Chastity; and in this book Spenser's Britomartis is represented as the
patroness of Chastity. It is not improbable, as our author has copied the
greatest part of the second Canto of this book from the Ceiris of Virgil, that
he learned, from the same poem, that Britomartis was a name for Diana, viz.
Dictynnam dixere tuo de nomine Lunam.
v. 305. She was a Cretan nymph, and the daughter of Jupiter and Charm, whom
Virgil has introduced, in his Ceiris, as the nurse of Scylla, and from whom our
author has copied his Glauce, Britomart's nurse, in the Canto mentioned above.
She was called Dictynna, because she invented nets for hunting, which being
also one of Diana's names, Britomartis and Diana were looked upon as the same.
Callimachus speaks of her as one of the nymphs of Diana's train, but observes,
that she was called by the Cydonians, Dictynna. He has left us the history of
Britomartis in his hymn to Diana. (...)
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...). -- (...) v. 189.

Praecipue autem inter alias omnes Gortynida amasti Nympham,
Cervarum Venatricem, Britomartin, Jaculatricem; cujus olim Minos
Amore perculsus, pervagatus est montes Cretae.
Illa vero alias quidem hirtis sub quercubus latitabat Nympha,
Alias autem in locis uliginosis. At ipse novem menses percurrebat
Loca praerupta, and pendentes scopulos: nec intermisit insectationem,
Donec apprebensa ferme Nympha insiliit mare
Ab alto Vertice: insiliit autem in piscatorum
Retia quae ipsam conservarunt: hinc deinceps Cydones
Nympham ipsam, Dictynnam; montem vero unde desiliit Nympha
Dictaeum appellitant: excitatisque ibi sacris
Sacra etiam faciunt. --


Upon the word (...), says the scholiast, (...). And Solinus speaks to the same
effect. "Cretes Dianam religiosissime venerantur (...) gentiliter nominantes,
quod sermon nostro sonat virginem dulcem." Polstyhi. C. 17.
But though Spenser in Britomartis had some reference to Diana, yet at the same
time he intended to denote by that name the martial BRITONESSE.

The reader is desired to take notice, that the passage which Spenser has
copied from the Ceiris of Virgil begins at this verse of that poem. Quam simul
Ogygii Phoenicis Filia Charm. Ver. 223.

And ends at, Despue ter Virgo, numero deus impare gaudet. Ver. 373.

B. iii. C. vi. S. 30. Speaking of the garden of Adonis, In that same garden
all the goodly flowers,
Wherewith dame nature does her beautify,
Are fetched; there is the first seminary,
Of all things that are born to live and die.


In his description of this garden he might probably have an eye to the notion
of the ancients concerning Adonis, that he represented the sun which quickens
the growth of all things. Thus Orpheus, in his Hymn to Adonis, (...),
(...),
(...).
Others represent him as the seed of wheat. Thus the scholiast of Theocritus,
after having informed us, that Adonis after his death remained six months in
the embraces of Venus, and six months with Proserpine. (...) (...). Apud Idyll.
3. v. 48.
"Hoc re vera ita se habet: scilicet, quod Adonis frumentum est satium: quod
sex menses sub terra degit; and sex menses eum habet Venus; nimirum Aeris
temperies; and postea a messoribus colligitur." Orpheus, in the same hymn,
calls the body of Adonis, -- (...).
Corpus frugiferum.


He has placed Cupid and Psyche in this garden, where they live together in --
steadfast love and happy state.
St. 50. But Apuleius represents this happy state of Cupid and Psyche to have
commenced after their reception into Heaven. However, their offspring,
Pleasure, is agreeable to what Apuleius relates, "Sic ecce Psyche venit in
manum Cupidinis; and nascitur illis maturo partu filia, quam VOLUPTATEM
nominamus." Metam. b. 6.
He has made Pleasure the daughter of Cupid in another place; speaking to Love,
There with thy daughter Pleasure they do play
Their hurtlesse sports. -- Hymn of love.



B. iii. C. xi. S. xlvii.Of the statue of Cupid. -- Wings it had with sundry
colors bright
More sundry colors than the proud Pavone
Bears in his boasted fan, or Iris bright,
When her discolored bow she spreads through heaven bright.


Cupid was represented by the ancients with part colored wings, as we learn
(among others) from this passage quoted by Mr. Jortin, from an epigram ascribed
to Virgil, Marmoreusque tibi DIVERSICOLORIBUS alis
In morem picta stabit Amor pharetra.
But this picturesque circumstance was probably supplied by our author's fancy.
In the Pastorals, March, he draws Cupid after the same manner, With that sprung
forth a naked swain
With spotted wings like Peacocke's train.
Thus also of love, in the next Canto, St. 23. And clapped on hie his colored
wings twain.
In the comparison of the Peacock and the Rainbow, (as they occur together) he
probably imitated Tasso. Ne'l superbo PAVON si vago in monstra
Spiega la pompa de l'occhiute piume,
Ne l' IRIDE si bella indora, e inostra
Il curvo grembo, e rugiadoso al lume. Gier. Lib. B. 16. S. 24.

The jolly Peacock speads not half so fair
The eyed feathers of his pompous train;
Nor so bends golden Iris in the air,
Her twenty colored bow through clouds of rain.
Fairfax. Spenser's proud Pavone is literally Tasso's superbo Pavon. He has
again joined these two comparisons; Speaking of a Butterfly's wings. Not half
so many sundry colors arre
In Iris bow --
Nor Juno's bird in her eye-spotted train,
So many goodly colors does contain. Muipotmos.

Where eye-spotted train is plainly the occhiute piume of the Italian poet.

Chaucer, in one of his figures of Cupid, supposes that his wings were adorned
with rich plumage.

And ANGELIKE his wingis saw I sprede. Leg. of G. Wom. v.236.

B. iii. C. xii. S. vii. And every wood and every valley wide
He filled with Hylas name; the nymphs eke Hylas cride.
Most of the ancient writers who relate the story of Hylas, mention the
circumstance of Hylas's name being often re-echo'd by the hills, etc. when it
was so loudly and frequently called upon by Hercules; but I do not recollect
that any of them speak of the nymphs as repeating his name. With regard to the
former particular, Antonius has given us an explication of it, not generally
known, from the (...) of Nicander. "Hercules (says he) having made the hills
and forests tremble, by calling so mightily on the name Hylas; the nymphs who
had snatched him away, fearing lest the enraged lover should at last discover
Hylas in their fountain, transformed him into Echo, which answered Hylas to
every call of Hercules." This solution throws a new light on the circumstance
of Hylas's name being so often echoed back, and which is particularly insisted
on by Virgil, Eclog. 6. v. 44. by Propertius, in his Elegy De Raptu Hylae, 1.
20. and by Valerius Flaccus, b. 7. v. 593. On account of the many invocations
of his name, said to be made by Hercules, and of its being so often re-eccho'd,
I suppose a custom, mentioned by Solinus, was every year celebrated on the
banks of the lake Hylas. In cujus [Hylae] memoriam usque adhuc solenni
cursitatione lacum populus circuit, and Hylam Voce clamat. Polyhist. cap. 44.
The distress of Hercules, after he had lost Hylas, is finely described by
Valerius Flaccus, 3. 565. and seq. and the manner by which Hylas is decoyed to
the fountain is a pretty poetical fiction. v. 545. Upon the whole, I am induced
to think, that Apollonius has much more beautifully described this story than
Theocritus. It is remarkable, that Scaliger, who, in general, prefers Flaccus
to his original Apollonius, should thus express himself of the comparison
concerning the anguish felt by Hercules on the occasion of losing Hylas, which
occurs in both poets, (after quoting the Latin of Flaccus) Haec quidem sonora
magis; plus tamen arrident Graeca. Poet. B. 5. C. 6.
B. iv. C. x. S. xlvii. The poet is addressing Venus, Great GOD of men and
women --


Mr. Jortin observes, that Venus is called GOD in Virgil. Descendo, ac ducente
DEO flammam inter and hosts
Expedior. -- Aen. 2. v. 632.

Where Servius: DEO, secundum eos, qui dicunt utriusque sexus participationem
habere numina; nam ait Calvus. Pollentemque DEUM Venerem --
To this it may be added, that the poet prepares the reader for the appellation
GOD, applied to Venus, St. 41. above, in his description of the statue of that
goddess. But, for they say she has both kinds in one,
Both male and female, both under one name:
She sire and mother is herself alone,
Begets and eke conceives, ne needs other none.
He has also followed the same notion, in Colin Clouts Come Home Again. For
Venus self does solely couples seem,
Both male and female through commixture joined.
B. v. C. i. S. xii. But when she parted thence she left her groom
An iron man which did on her attend,
Always to execute her steadfast doom,
And willed him with Arthegall to wend,
And do whatever things he did intend:
His name was TALUS, made of iron mould,
Immovable, resistless, without end;
Who in his hand an iron flail did hold,
With which he thresht out falsehood, and did truth unfold.


The character of executing justice, here attributed to Talus, is exactly
agreeable to that which he bears in ancient story; nor has Spenser greatly
varied from antiquity in the make of this wonderful man; for he is there said
to be formed of brass, and by our author of iron. Plato gives the following
account of him. (...) (...). In Minoe. Plat. Op. Edit. Serran. page 320. vol. 1.
Utebatur autem Minos hoc legum suarum custode apud urbem; in caeteris vero
Cretae partibus Talo. Et profecto Talus ter in anno vicos circuibat legibus
tuendis intentus in illis; quas habebat in aeneis tabulis inscriptas; unde
nuncupatus est Talus. As to the circumstance of Talus's traversing the isle of
Crete, it exactly corresponds with what Spenser says afterward of his iron
man, who did the same in Ierne. And that same iron man, which could reveal
All hidden crimes, through all that realm he sent,
To search out those that used to rob and steal,
Or did rebel against lawful government.
6. 12. 26.

Plato has told us, that Talus was called brazen, on account of his carrying
the laws about with him, written in brazen tables; but Apollonius informs us,
that he was actually made of brass, and invulnerable. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...). (...). B. 4. v. 1645.

Sed is cum caetero corpore and membris esset
Aeneus, and invulnerabilis, tamen sub tenonte habebat
In malleolo turgentem sanguine venam, quam tenuis
Continebat tunicula, and vitae praestabat mortisque confinium.
Apollonius likewise takes notice of his circuiting Crete three times a year.
(...). Ibid. v. 1646.

Ter in anno Cretam aeneis obeuntem pedibus.


Apollodorus will further illustrate this matter. (...). Bibliothec. b. 1. c.
26.
Exinde navigantes prohibentur quo minus Cretae appellerent a Talo; hunc quidam
aenei generis hominum esse dicunt; illi a Vulcano Minoi traditum fuisse: erat
autem Homo aheneus: sunt autem qui eum Taurum nominant. Habebat vero venam unam
a cervice usque ad crura protensam: in tunicula vero venae aeneus infigebatur
clavus. Talus iste ter. unoquoque Die insulam percurrens eam contuebatur. This
mavelous swiftness of Talus is likewise referred to by our author, His iron
page, who him pursew'd so light,
As that it seemed above the ground he went,
For he was swift as swallow in her flight.
5. 1. 20. And is alluded to by Catullus, in his Ode to Camerius, where he
tells him that he should not be able to pursue him, Non CUSTOS si ego fingar
ille CRETUM. Car. 56.

Orpheus (or rather Who lived in the time of the Pisistratic tyranny, about
Olymp. 60. For a proof that the Agonautics, attributed to Orpheus, are the work
of Onomacritus, see Voss. de Poet. Graec. c. 2. and c. 4. and Olai Borrichii
Dissert. de Poet. Graec. Dissert. 1. Par. 17.
Onomacritus) calls TALUS, in his Argonautics, (...). -- (...). v. 1348.

"The brazen-triple giant." The circumstance of the iron flail is added from
our author's imagination. B. v. C. viii. S. xlvii. Like raging Ino when with
knife in hand
She threw her husband's murdered infant out.
Ovid reports, Met. 4, that Ino threw herself, with her son Melicerta, from the
top of a rock into the sea. Others say that she murdered Melicerta, and after
that leapt into the sea. It is difficult to fix upon Spenser's precise meaning
in these verses. Ibid. Or as that madding mother, amongst the rout
Of Bacchus' priests her own dear flesh did tear.
The madding mother is Agave. Her son Pentheus being of a very temperate
disposition, and consequently averse to the rites of Bacchus, she, together
with the rest of the Maenades, tore him in pieces in the midst of the
Bacchanalia. Mr. Upton, instead of, -- Her own dear flesh did tear,
would read, her SON'S dear flesh. But surely the poet (and that with no great
impropriety of expression) might mean her Son's flesh, by her own flesh. B. v.
C. x. S. x. Orthrus begotten by great Typhaon,
And foul Echidna --
who guarded the purple oxen of Geryon. I wonder that Spenser should in this
place omit the mention of a seven-headed dragon, who, together with Orthrus,
was placed to guard these oxen, and was likewise the offspring of Typhaon and
Echidna.

B. iv. C. xi. S. xiii.He is giving a catalogue of the Sea Gods; among the rest
is Astraeus, -- that did shame
Himself with incest of his kin unkend.


Natalis Comes thus relates the story of Astraeus. "Astraeus qui per inscitiam
congressus cum Alcippe sorore, sequenti die cognita affinitate ex annulo,
maerore captus se in fluvium praecipitavit, qui prius dictus est Astraeus ab
ipso, etc." 2. 8.
Of these afterward, S. 17. But why do I their names seek to rehearse,
Which all the world have with their issue filled?
How can they all in this so narrow verse
Contained be, etc.


Natalis Comes having finished his catalogue of these divinities, adds, Ut
alios infinitos prope praetermittam; nam plures quam octoginta me legisse
memini. Spenser probably took his catalogue from this mythologist; I think he
has given us no names (Albion excepted) but what are found in that author; and
besides the account of Astraeus abovementioned, we find Spenser's Euphemus
copied from him. And fair Euphemus that upon them goth,
As on the ground without dismay or dread.
S. 14. N. Comes. -- Euphemus -- cui Munus dedit ut super undis tanquam super
terra proficisceretur. Ibid.
B. iv. C. xi. S. xix. -- So wise is Nereus old
And so well skilled: nathlesse he takes great joy,
Oft-times among the wanton nymphs to sport and toy.
Of the justice and prophetical power of Nereus, Mr. Jortin has produced
ancient testimonies. This last part of his character may be illustrated from
these lines in Orpheus, (...),
(...). --
Quinquaginta puellis laetate, in fluctibus,
Elegantibus choris, Nereu.
B. vi. C. x. S. 22. Speaking of the Graces, They are the daughters of
sky-ruling Jove,
By him begot of fair Eurynome.
Milton, in his L'Allegro, represents the Graces as the offspring of Venus and
Bacchus. This mythology (as an ingenious critic on that passage observes)
without doubt suits the nature of Milton's subject better; but I can hardly
think that such a liberty is allowable upon any occasion. The mention of
Eurynome, in this stanza of our author, puts me in mind of another passage in
Milton, where this Goddess is likewise mentioned. And fabled how the serpent
whom they called
Ophion with Eurynome, the wide
Encroaching Eve perhaps, had first the rule
Of high Olympus, etc. Par. L. B. 10. v. 580.

Which, as the learned Dr. Newton and others observe, is copied from these
verses of Apollonius, (...)
(...). (...). B. 1. v. 496.

What I have to observe here, is, that Apollonius, as well as Milton, has
hinted, that Ophion was of the serpent-race: which will appear from considering
what goes before these lines. Spenser alludes to this song of Orpheus, and the
occasion upon which it was sung, more than once. Such one was Orpheus, that
when strife was grown
Amongst those famous impes of Greece, did take
His silver harp in hand, and shortly friends them make.
4. 2. 1. And in SONNET 44. When those renowned noble peers of Greece,
Through stubborn pride among themselves did jar,
Forgetful of the famous golden fleece,
Then Orpheus with his harp their strife did bar.


Scaliger finds great fault with the subject of this song, and prefers to it
the subject of Orpheus's song in Valerius Flaccus. "Long enim aptius [Orpheus]
canit, apud Flaccum, Minyas, and Phryxum and Athamantem, quam, apud Apollonium,
terrae caelique creationem. Quid enim Viris militaribus cum Philosophorum
umbris?" Poet. B. 5. c. 6. But by this piece of criticism, Scaliger has greatly
betrayed his ignorance of the nature of ancient Poesy, and of the character of
Orpheus. "In the early ages of the Grecian state (says the admirable author of
the Enquiry into the life and writings of Homer) the wild and barbarous
inhabitants wanted the assistance of the Muses to soften and tame them. They
stood in need of being impressed with an awe of superior and irresistible
powers, and a liking to social life. They wanted a mythology to lead them by
fear and dread (the only holds to be taken of a rude multitude) into a feeling
of natural causes, and their influence upon our lives and actions. The wise and
good among the ancients saw this necessity, and supplied it; the oldest of the
inspired train were the -- PII VATES, and Phaebo digna locuti.
They had religion for their theme, and the service of mankind for their song".
Sect. 6. And in another place, the same author acquaints us, that all the poems
of Orpheus were "philosophical, prophetical, and religious." Sect. 7. Thus the
conduct of Apollonius was highly consistent, in attributing a song to Orpheus,
whose subject was philosophy and religion. And it was for the same reason that
Onomacritus, in his Argonautics, v. 419. many years before Apollonius,
represented Orpheus singing the origin of the Gods, and the creation of things,
in his contest with Chiron.

But the propriety of the subject of this song is easily to be defended without
considering the character of Orpheus. The occasion of this song was a quarrel
among the Argonauts, whom Orpheus endeavors to pacify with the united powers
of music and verse. Upon which account says the Scholiast, (...). To this it
may be added, that a song whose subject is likewise religious, and which
asserts the right of Jupiter to the possession of Olympus, was even expedient,
as one of the chiefs had but just before spoken blasphemy against him. (...)
(...)
(...), etc. --
v. 466. Testor nunc penetrabilem hastam, quicum lemniscatam
E bellis palmam reporto, non enim Jovi rescripsero victorias
Justius quam hastae meae, etc.
Nor were the auditors of this song of so mean a rank as Scaliger would
represent them; he terms them VIRI MILITARES; but it should be considered, that
they were PRINCES and DEMIGODS.

But whether the subject of Orpheus's song in Apollonius be good or bad, there
is one circumstance belonging to it, which gives it a manifest superiority to
that of Orpheus in Valerius Flaccus, I mean the design of it, which was to
repress the vehemence of the passions, at once so agreeable to the well-known
character of Orpheus, and so expressive of the irresistible influence of music.
In the Latin poet Orpheus sings upon no occasion, and to no end, unless it be
to make the night pass away more pleasantly. Thracius hic NOCTEM dulci
testudine Vates
EXTRAHIT --


I cannot close this note without remarking, that Milton, in these lines, had a
reference both to Apollonius and Onomacritus in their respective songs of
Orpheus. Tunc de more sedens festa ad convivia Vates
Aesculea intonsos redimitus ab arbore crines
Heroumque actus, imitandaque gesta canebat.
Et Chaos, and positi late fundamina mundi,
Reptantesque deos, and alentes numina glandes,
Et nondum Aetneo quaesitum fulmen ab antro:
Denique quid vocis modulamen inane juvabit
Verborum sensusque vacans, numerique loquacis?
Silvestres decet iste choros, non ORPHEA, cantus;
Qui tenuit fluvios, and quercubus addidit aures,
Carmine non cithara. --
Ad Patrem. v. 44.

Silius Italicus, B. 11. v. 467. alludes to the contest of Chiron with Orpheus,
as related by Onomacritus; and it is remarkable, that in describing the
miraculous power of the music of Orpheus, he has plainly translated from the
Greek poet; particularly in this circumstance. (...)
(...).
v. 436. Avesque circumdederunt stabula Centauri,
Pennis defessis, suique oblitae erant Nidi.
The verses of Sil. Italicus are these, Inmemor and dulcis Nidi, positoque
volatu
Non mota volucris captiva pependit in aethra.


The Latin poet has, however, omitted to describe the manner in which Chiron
was affected at seeing the wonderful effect of Orpheus's music on the trees,
mountains, rivers, beasts, etc. His astonishment on that occasion is thus
beautifully painted by the Greek poet, (...)
(...).
v. 438. Sed videns haec Centaurus obstupuit; manum super volam
Valde feriens, terramque pulsavit unguibus.



Orpheus begins his song with the creation of things; after mentioning the sun
and moon, mountains and rivers, he speaks of the creation of serpents. (...)
(...). Ibid. 501.

Quemadmodum exorti sint Montes, and resonantes fluvii
Cum ipsis Nymphis, and quomodo omnia reptilia concreverint.
And in the next line, from these EPITETA, or Serpents, he passes on to Ophion,
(...), etc.
Thus here is a close connection, and an easy transition in the context of
Apollonius, which does not appear at first sight.

As an instance of an imitation of Milton from Apollonius has been just
produced, I hope the reader will excuse my taking this opportunity of producing
another. The English poet thus describes Adam's hair, -- Hyacinthin locks,
Round from his parted forelock manly hung
CLUSTRING. -- P. L. 4. 301.



The circumstance of the hair hanging like bunches of grapes, has been justly
admired; but it is literally translated, from this description of Apollo's
hair, in the Greek poet. -- (...)
(...). (...). B. 2. v. 678.

-- Aurei ab utraque gena
Cincinni racemantes assultabant eunti.
The word (...) could hardly be rendered into English by any other word than by
clustring.

B. vii. C. vi. S. iii.Spenser here makes Hecate the daughter of the Titans.
Authors differ concerning the parents of Hecate; Orpheus calls her, (...). --
(...). v. 975.

Tartari Filia Hecate.
The Titans were indeed thrown into Tartarus, but it could not be said, from
thence, that the Titans were her parents; though this, I presume, was the best
argument that our author had for his genealogy. In this stanza Bellona is
likewise feigned to be the offspring of the Titans; but Bellona was the sister
of Mars, who was the son of Jupiter and Juno; or, as Ovid reports, of Juno
alone.

A classical reader of the FAERIE QUEEN may discover many other examples which
properly belong to this Section; but those which are here omitted, he may find
See REMARKS ON SPENSER'S POEMS.
collected with equal learning and sagacity, by one, whose excellent writings
as a critic, are only surpassed by those in which he has distinguished himself
as a christian.

SECT. IV. Of Spenser's Stanza, Versification, and Language.
ALthough Spenser's favorite Chaucer had made use of the ottave Rhyme Chaucer's
Stanza is not STRICTLY so.
or Stanza of eight lines, yet it is most probable, that our author was induced
to make choice of it (with the addition of one line) from the example of Tasso
and Ariosto, who were the most fashionable poets of his age. But Spenser, in
making this choice of his stanza, seems not sufficiently to have considered the
genius of the English language, which will not easily admit of that more
frequent repetition of the same termination, which this stanza requires; a
circumstance not difficult in the Italian, which deals largely in identical
cadences. I am obliged to the admirable author of the Rambler for this
observation.
This constraint led our author into many absurdities. For example, I. It
necessitated him to dilate the thing to be expressed, however unimportant, with
trifling and insipid circumlocutions, viz. Now has fair Phaebe with her
silver face,
Thrice seen the shadows of the nether world,
Since last I left that honorable place,
In which her royal presence is enrolled.
2. 3. 44. That is, "it is three months since I left her palace." II. It
obliged him, when matter failed him toward the close of his Stanza, to run
into a ridiculous redundancy and repetition of words, viz. In which was nothing
pourtrahed nor wrought,
Nor wrought, nor pourtrahed, but easy to be thought.
2. 9. 33. III. It forced him, in order to make out his complement of rhymes to
introduce a puerile or impertinent idea, viz. Not that proud tower of Troy though
richly GILT,
2. 9. 45. In this line, being laid under a necessity of producing somewhat
consonant to spilt and built, which went before, he has given us an image at
once little and improper. And to the difficulty of his stanza, I think we may
impute the great number of his Ellipses, some of which will be pointed out in
another place.


Notwithstanding these absurdities flow from Spenser's stanza, yet it must be
owned that some advantages arise from it; and we may venture to affirm, that
the fullness and significancy of Spenser's descriptions is often owing to the
prolixity of his stanza, and the multitude of his rhymes. The discerning reader
is desired to consider the following stanza as an instance of what is here
advanced. Guyon is binding Furor. With hundred iron chains he did him bind
And hundred knots, which did him sore constrain;
Yet his great iron teeth he still did grind,
And grimly gnash, threatening revenge in vain:
His burning eyes, whom bloody strakes did stain,
Stared full wide, and threw forth sparks of fire;
And more for rank despite, than for great pain,
Shakt his long locks colored like copper wire,
And bit his tawny beard, to show his raging ire.
2. 4. 15. In this stanza there are some images which are, perhaps, the
consequence of a multiplicity of rhymes. He all that night, that too long night
did pass,
And now the day out of the ocean-maine
Began to peep above this earthly mass,
With pearly dew sprinkling the morning grass;
Then up he rose like heavy lump of lead,
That in his face, as in a looking glass,
The signs of anguish one might plainly read.
3. 5. 26.

Dryden, I think, somewhere remarks, that rhyme often helped him to a thought;
an observation, which, probably, Spenser's experience had likewise supplied him
with: Spenser, however, must have found more convenience, in this respect, from
writing in rhyme, than Dryden, in proportion as the stanza of the former
obliged him to a more repeated use of it.

In speaking of Spenser's rhyme, it ought to be remarked, that he often
new-spells a word to make it rhyme more precisely. Take these specimens. And of
her own foul entrails makes her meat,
Meat fit for such a monster's monsterous DIEAT.
6. 12. 31. Timely to joy, and carry comely cheer
For though this clowd have now me overcast,
Yet do I not of better times DESPEARE.
5. 5. 38. Though when the term is full ACCOMPLISHID
Then shall a spark of fire which has long while,
Been in his ashes raked up, and hid.
3. 3. 47. Then all the rest into their coches CLIM,
And through, etc.
Upon great Neptune's neck they softly swim.
3. 4. 42. -- Mightily amate,
As fast as forward erst, now backward to RETRATE.
4. 3. 26. Shall have that golden girdle for reward,
And of, etc.
Shall to the fairest lady be PREFAR'D.
4. 2. 27. -- Into the hardest stone,
Such as behind their backs, etc.
Were thrown by Pyrrha, and DEUCALIONE.
5. 8. 2. and to be short, we meet with ycled for yclad, darre for dare,
prejudize for prejudice, sam for same, lam for lamb, denay for deny, pervart
for pervert, hear for hair, and numberless other instances of the orthography
being destroyed for the rhyme-sake. This was a liberty which Chaucer, Gower,
and Lydgate frequently made use of; and it may not be improper in this place to
exhibit the sentiments of a The author of the Art of English poesy.
critic in Q. Elizabeth's age upon it. "Now there cannot be in a maker a fowler
fault than to falsify his accent to serve his cadence; or by untrue
orthography to wrench his words to help his rhyme; for it is a sign that such a
maker is not copious is his own language". -- However he seems afterward to
allow the deviation from true spelling, in some measure. "It is somewhat more
tolerable to help the rhyme by false orthographie, than to leave an unpleasant
dissonance to the ear, by keeping true orthographie and losing the rhyme; as
for example, it is better to rhyme door with restore, than in his true
orthographie which is door. -- Such men were in effect the most part of all
your old rimers, and 'specially Gower, who to make up his rhyme would for the
most part write his terminant syllable with false orthographie; and many times
not stick to put in a plain French word for an English; and so by your leave
do many of our common rymers at this day." B. 2. c. 8.
We find in many passages of our author the orthography violated, when the
rhyme without such an expedient would be very exact; thus BITE when made to
rhyme with DELIGHT is sometimes spelt BIGHT, as if the eye could be satisfied
in this case as well as the ear. Instances of this sort occur often in
Harrington's Ariosto, and more particularly of the word said, which is often
occasionally written SED. This practice was continued as far down as the age of
Milton. Besides what the grim wolf with privy paw
Daily devours apace, and nothing SED.
Said is thus printed SED in the edition of 1645, that it might appear to
rhyme, with greater propriety, to the preceding spread: later editors, not
knowing the fashion of writing said, upon some occasions, SED, altered it to
fed, which utterly destroyed the sense. The same spelling is met with again in
the same edition, and for the same reason, in L'Allegro. She was pincht and
pulled she SED,
And he by friars lantern led.


Hughes, not considering our author's custom of misspelling a word for the
convenience of rhyme, makes him frequently guilty of some very bad rhymes; for
that editor (among other examples of his correctness) has reduced Spenser's
text to modern orthography with great accuracy.

It is indeed surprising, upon the whole, that our author should have been able
to execute a poem of such a length as the FAERIE QUEEN with so much spirit,
laden with so many shackles, and oppressed with so grievous a BONDAGE OF RIMING.
I do not remember that he has been so inaccurate, as to make the same word
rhyme to itself in more than four or five instances; a fault, which if he had
committed very frequently, his many beauties of versification would have
obliged us to overlook; and which Harrington should more frequently have
avoided, to compensate, in some measure, for the tameness and prosaic
mediocrity of his numbers.

Notwithstanding our author's affectation The author of the Art of English
poesy, seems to have censured this practice of Spencer, "Our maker therefore,
at these days, shall not follow Piers Plowman, nor Gower, nor Lydgate, nor yet
Chaucer; for their language is now out of use with us." B. 3. C. 1. The Faerie
Queen was not published when this critic wrote, so that this censure is
levelled at the Pastorals, which, however, in another place he has commended.
"For Eglogue and pastoral poesy, Sir Ph. Sydney, and Master Challener, and
that other gentleman who wrote the late Shepherd's Calendar." B. 1. C. 31.
Spenser had published the Pastorals about ten years before; to which he did not
prefix his name.
of obsolete phrases and words, yet it may be affirmed, that his style is, in
general, perspicuous, flowing, and exuberant. His Pastorals are written in a
professed imitation of the style of Chaucer, of which he has taken care to
acquaint us, in the beginning of Colin Clouts Come Home Again. The shepherd's
boy best known by that name,
That after Tityrus first sung his lay. Milton, in imitation of our author,
styles Chaucer Tityrus, where he hints at Chaucer's having traveled into
Italy. MANSUS. 34. Quin and in has quondam pervenit TYTIRUS oras.


And the tale of the Oak and Briar, in the Pastoral of February, is more
particularly modelled after Chaucer's manner, and is accordingly ushered in
with this preparatory introduction. -- A Tale of Truth
Which I cond of Tityrus in my youth.
And in another Pastoral he hints at his having copied Chaucer. That Colin
hight which well could pipe and sing,
For he of Tityrus his songs did lere.
He even seems, in the Pastorals, to have attempted an imitation of the visions
The author of the Visions of PIERCE PLOWMAN is Roberte Longelande, or
Langelande, according to Bale, Script. Brit. Cent. 6. 37. and Wood, Hist. and
Antiq. Univ. Oxon. B. 2. page 106. who likewise calls him Malverne. It is plain
that his poem, called the VISIONS of P. PLOWMAN, was published after the Year
1350, from this passage in it, In Date of our bryghte, in a dry Apriell
A thousand and three hundred twyse twentye and ten
My wafers there were geisen, when Chichester was Mair.
Pass. 13. So that several of Gower's and Chaucer's pieces made their
appearance before it. It is divided into twenty parts (PASSUS, as he styles
them;) and consists of many distinct visions, which have no mutual dependence
upon each other; so that the poem is not a regular and uniform whole,
consisting of one action or design. The author seems to have intended it as a
satire on almost every occupation of life, but more particularly on the clergy;
in censuring whom, Wickliff had led the way not many years before. This piece
abounds with humor, spirit, and imagination; all which are dressed to great
disadvantage in a very uncouth versification, and obsolete language. It seems
to be written without rhyme, an ornament which the poet has endeavored to
supply, by making every verse to consist of words beginning with the same
letter. This practice has contributed not a little to render his poem obscure
and perplexed, exclusive of its obsolete style; for to introduce his
alliteration, he must have been often necessarily compelled to depart from the
natural and more obvious way of expressing himself. The learned Dr. Hickes
observes, that this alliterative versification was drawn by Langland from the
practice of the Saxon poets, and that these visions abound with many Saxonisms.
Haec obiter ex satyrographo nostro, [Langelande] cui Anglo-Saxonum poet^ adeo
familiares fuerunt, ut non solum eorum verbis versus scripsit, sed tinnitum
illum consonantem initia^um apud eos literarum imitatus est, and nonnunquam
etiam versus tantum non Saxonice condidit. Linguar. Vett. Septentrien.
Thesaurus. cap. 21. page 107. And afterward, speaking of the Anglo-Saxon
poems, he adds this of their alliteration. "Quorum in primis se observandum
offert dictionum ab eadem initiali litera incipientium usus non infrequens."
cap. 23. page 195. From this it appears, that the example of Gower and Chaucer,
who sought to reform the roughness of their native tongue, by naturalizing many
new words from the Latin, French, and Italian, and who introduced the
seven-lin'd stanza, from Petrarch and Dante, into our poetry, had little
influence upon Longland, who chose rather to go back to the Saxon models, both
for language and form of verse.

The curious reader may not, perhaps, be displeased with a specimen of the
introduction to the first vision. "The poet (shadowed by the name and character
of Peter, or Piers, a plowman) represents himself as weary with wandering, on a
May-morning, and at last laid down to sleep by the side of a brook; where, in a
vision, he sees a stately tower upon a hill, with a dungeon, and dark dismal
ditches belonging to it, and a very deep dale under the hill. Before the tower
a large field or plain is supposed, filled with men of every rank and
occupation, all being respectively engaged in their several pursuits; when
suddenly a beautiful lady appears to him, and unravels to him the mystery of
what he had seen."

As a specimen of his manner, the reader is desired to accept some of the
verses of which I have just given an analysis. In a summer season, when set
was the sun,
I shoupe me into the shroubes as I a sheep were;
In habit as a hermet, unholie of works,
Went wide into the world wonders to hear,
And on a May-morning, on Malverne-hylles,
Me befell a ferly, a fairy methought
I was weary a wandering, etc.
Pass. 1. v. 1. etc. In these verses there is a manifest contradiction; for the
poet says, that the SUN was SET, and that it was a MAY-MORNING. However, it is
plain, that in the first line, instead of SET was the sun, we should read, --
When HOT was the Sun.
For Bale [ubi supra] speaking of this work, thus translates the first line of
it, In aestivo tempore cum Sol CALERET.
And it should be remembered, that Bale had an opportunity of quoting from the
most original editions.

Before every vision the manner of circumstances of his falling asleep, are
distinctly described; before one of them in particular, P. Plowman is supposed,
with equal humor and satire, to fall asleep while he is bidding his beads. In
the course of the poem, the satire is carried on by means of several allegoric
personages, such as MEDE, SIMONY, CONSCIENCE, SLOTH, etc. The learned Seldom
(notes on Polyolb. S. 11.) mentions this author with honor; and by Hickes he
is frequently styled, Celeberrimus ille satyrographus, morum vindex acerrimus,
etc. Leland seems to have confounded this poem with Chaucer's PLOWMAN'S TALE.
Speaking of two editions of Chaucer, he adds, "Sed PETRI ARATORIS FABULA, quae
communi doctorum consensu Chaucero, tanquam, vero parenti, attribuitur, in
utraque editione, quia malos sacerdotum mores vehementer increpavit, suppressa
est." Comment. de Script. Brit. cap. 55. Chaucer, indeed, in the PLOWMAN'S
TALE, seems to have copied from our author.

I shall conclude this note with a short extract from Bale; [ ubi supra.]
"Illud veruntamen liquido constat, eum [Langelande] fuisse ex primis Joannis
Vuiclefi discipulis unum, atque in spiritus fervore, contra apertas Papistarum
blasphemias, adversus Deum and ejus Christum; sub amaenis coloribus and typis
edidisse in sermon Anglico pium opus, ac bonorum virorum lectione dignum, quod
vocabat VISIONEM PETRI ARATORIS. -- In hoc opere erudito, prater similitudines
varias and jucundas, prophetice plura praedixit, quae nostris diebus impleri
vidimus. Complevit suum opus A. D. 1369. dum Joannes Cicestrius Londini Praetor
esset,"


of Pierce Plowman; for after exhorting his muse not to contend with Chaucer,
he adds, Nor with the Plowman that the pilgrim playde awhile. Epilogue to SHEP.
KAL.

And besides, that his Pastorals might appear a more complete specimen of a
work in old English, he has given them the title of an old book called the
SHEPHEARD'S CALENDAR, first printed by Wynkin a Word, and reprinted about
twenty years before our author published his Pastorals, viz. 1559. Hence, says
E. K. in his Epistle prefixed, "He terms it the SHEPHERD's CALENDAR,
applying an old name to a new work." One of Spenser's reasons for using so much
ancient phraseology in these Pastorals, was undoubtedly with a design to stamp
a Doric, or rather rustic simplicity upon them; but the principal one was that
which is delivered by his friend and commentator Ibid.
, "who was privy to all his designs", E. K. "In mine opinion, says he, it is
one especial praise of many which are due to this poet, that he has labored
to restore, as to their rightful heritage, such good and natural English
words, as have been long time out of use, and almost clean disherited; which
is the only cause that our mother tongue, which truly of itself is both full
enough for prose, and stately enough for verse, has long time been counted
most bare and barren of both; which default, when as some have endeavored to
salve and recure, they patched up the holes with pieces and rags of other
languages; borrowing here of the French, there of the Italian, and every where
of the Latin; not weighing how ill those tongues accord with themselves, but
much worse with ours; so now they have made our English tongue a gallimaufrey,
or hodge-podge of all other speeches." Thus that which induced Spenser to adopt
so much obsolete language in the Pastorals, induced him likewise to do the same
in the FAERIE QUEEN. Hence it is manifest, that he was disgusted with the
practice of his cotemporary writers, who had adulterated, according to his
judgment, the purity of the British tongue by various innovations from the
Spanish, French, Latin, and Italian. And that this was the case in the age of
Queen Elizabeth will appear from the following passages. Thus Marston in his
satires. I cannot quote a motte Italianate
Or brand my satires with a Spanish term. Proem. B. 2.



And Camden having given us a specimen of the Lord's Prayer in old English has
these words. "Hitherto will our sparkfull youth laugh at their great
grandfathers English, who had more care to do well, than to speak minion-like;
and left more glory to us by their exploiting great acts, than we shall by our
forging new words, and uncouth phrases." Remains. Artic. Languages.
A learned gentleman one R. C. who has inserted a letter to Camden in his
remains, thus speaks. "So have our Italian travelers brought us acquainted of
their sweet-relished phrases; even we seek to make our good of our late
Spanish enemy, and fear as little the hurt of his tongue, as the dint of his
sword." again, "We within these sixty years have incorporated so many Latin and
French words, as the third part of our tongue consists now in them." And
Ascham in his Schole-Master informs us, that not only the language but the
manners of Italy had totally infected his countrymen, where he is describing
the ITALIANIZ'D ENGLISHMAN. The same author acquains us, that about this time
an infinite number of Italian books were translated into English: among the
rest, were many Italian novels, the translations of which, Shakespere
manifestly made use of for some of his plots. Those who have undertaken to
point out the books from whence Shakespere borrowed his plots, have not, I
think, been able to discover the source from whence he drew the story of his
MERCHANT of VENICE; which, in all probability, is founded upon the following
ancient ballad, which I met with in a large collection.

A SONG, showing the cruelty of Gernutus a JEWE, who lending to a merchant an
hundred crowns, would have a pound of his flesh, because he could not pay him
at the time appointed. In Venice town not long ago,
A cruel Jewe did dwell;
Which lived all on usurie,
As Italian writers tell.
GERNUTUS called was the Jewe, etc.
The whole song would be too prolix for this place; I shall transcribe only the
close of the story; having premised, that the cunning and rapacious Jew is
represented, in our ballad, to have lent an eminent merchant of Venice an
hundred crowns, upon a bond, in which promise of payment is made within a year
and a day; under the forfeiture of a pound of the merchant's flesh, in case of
non-payment; that the merchant, on account of his ships being detained by
adverse winds, was unable to perform his contract at the time appointed; that
the affair was referred to a judge; that the friends of the merchant offered
ten thousand crowns to absolve him, but that the Jew obstinately persisted in
his demand of the forfeited pound of flesh. Then said the judge, Yet good, my
friend,
Let me of you desire,
To take the flesh from such a place
As yet you let him live;
Do so, and lo an hundred crowns
To thee here I will give.
No, no, quoth he, etc.
* * * * * *
For I will have my pound of flesh,
From under his right side.
* * * * * * *
The bloody Jewe now ready is,
With whetted blade in hand,
To spoil the blood of innocent,
By forfeit of his bond.
And as he was about to strike
In him the deadly blow,
Stay (quoth the judge) thy cruelty,
I charge thee to do so.
Since needs thou will thy forfeit have
Which is of flesh a pound;
See that thou shed no drop of blood,
Nor yet the man confound.
For if thou do, like murderer
Thou here shall hanged be,
Likewise of flesh see that thou cut
No more than longs to thee;
For if thou take or more or less
To value of a mite,
Thou shall be hanged presently,
As is both law and right.
Gernutus now waxt frantic mad,
And wot not what to say;
Quoth he at last, ten thousand crowns
I will that he shall pay;
And so I grant to set him free,
The judge does answer make,
You shall not have a penny given,
Your forfeiture now take.
At the last he does demand
But for to have his own;
No (quoth the judge) do as you li^,
Thy judgment shall be shown;
Either take your pound of flesh, quoth he,
Or cancel me your bond;
O cruel judge! then quoth the Jewe,
That does against me stand.
And so with griped grieved mind,
He bids them farewell,
All the people prayed the Lord,
That ever this heard tell.
After which follows a moral exhortation, resulting from the subject.

It may be objected, that this ballad might have been written after, and copied
from, Shakespere's play. But if that had been the case, it is most likely that
the author would have preserved Shakespere's name of Shylock for the Jew; and
nothing is more likely, than that Shakespere in copying from this ballad,
should alter the name from Gernutus to one more Jewish; and by the alteration
of the name his imitation was the better disguised. Another argument (which
would have appeared much more convincing, had the whole song been transcribed,
but which perhaps will be allowed from this extract) is, that our ballad has
the air of a narrative written before Shakespere's play; I mean, that, if it
had been written after the play, it would have been much more full and
circumstantial: At present, it has too much the nakedness of an original.
Besides, the first stanza informs us, that the story was taken from some
Italian novel. Thus much therefore is certain, that is, Shakespere either
copied from that Italian novel, or from this ballad: Now we have no
translation, I presume, of such a novel into English; if then it be granted
that Shakespere generally took his Italian stories from their English
translations, and that the arguments above, concerning the prior antiquity of
this ballad are true, it will follow that Shakespere copied from this ballad.

I shall only add, that it appears from S. Gosson's School of Abuse, printed
1579; that the character of a cruel and covetous Jewe had been exhibited with
good applause before Shakespere's Shylock appeared. The author is commending
some plays, and among the rest, "The JEWE and Ptolome shown at the bull; the
one representing the greediness of wordly chusers, and bloody minds of
usurers, the other, etc.".




Our author's disapprobation of this practice may be made to appear more fully
from his own words, where he hints that Chaucer's language (which he so closely
copied) was the pure English. -- Dan Chaucer WELL of ENGLISH UNDEFILDE.
4. 2. 32. A learned Lexicographer gives a very different account of the purity
of Chaucer's style. "Chaucerus, pessimo exemplo integris vocum plaustris ex
eadem Gallia in nostram Linguam invectis; eam, nimis antea a Normannorum
victoria adulteratam, omni fere nativa gratia and nitore spoliavit, pro
genuinis coloribus sucum illinens, pro vera facie larvam induens." Skinner
Praefat. ad Etymolog. Ling. Anglic. page 5.
But though Spenser disapproved of this corrupt adulteration of style, so
fashionable in is age, yet we find him notwithstanding, frequently introducing
words from a foreign tongue such, as, visnomie, amenance, arret, mespise,
sovenance, afrap, aguise, amenage, abase, and the like; but these words the
frequent return of his rhyme obliged him to introduce, and accordingly they
will generally be found at the end of his lines. Thus the poverty of our tongue
(or rather the unfrequency of identical terminations in it) often compelled him
for the sake of rhyme, to coin new English words, such as damnify'd,
unmercify'd, wonderment, warriment, unruliment, habitaunce, hazardrie, etc.
etc. To this cause his many latinisms may likewise be attributed, which, like
the rest, are substituted to make out the necessary jingle.

The censure of B. Johnson, upon our author's style, is perhaps unreasonable,
"Spenser, in affecting the ancients, writ no language." Discoveries.
The groundwork and substance of his style, is the language of the age in
which he lived; this indeed is seasoned with various expressions deduced from a
remote age, but in such a manner, that the language of his age was rather
strengthened and dignified, than debased or disguised by such a practice. In
truth, the affectation of Spenser in this point, is by no means so striking and
visible as Johnson has insinuated; nor is our author so obsolete in his style,
as he is generally thought, or represented to be. For many stanzas together we
may frequently read him with as much facility, as we can the same number of
lines in Shakespere. But though I cannot subscribe to the opinion of the
last-quoted critic, concerning our author's recourse to the ancients, yet I
must confess, that the following sentiments, relating to the same subject, are
admirable. "Words borrowed of antiquity do lend a kind of majesty to style, and
are not without their delight sometimes. For they have the authority of years,
and out of their intermission do lend a kind of grace-like newness. BUT THE
ELDEST OF THE PRESENT, AND NEWNESS OF THE PAST LANGUAGE IS THE BEST." Ibid.


SECT. V. Of Spenser's Imitations from Chaucer.
IT has been before observed in general, that Spenser copied the language of
Chaucer; it may with equal truth be affirmed, that he has likewise in many
passages imitated the sentiment of Chaucer; and I shall now proceed to give
some specimens of his imitation in both these particulars. B. i. C. i. S. viii.
Much can they praise the trees so straight and hie,
The sailing pine, the cedar proud and tall,
The vine-prop elm, the poplar never dry,
The builder oak, sole king of forests all,
The aspine good for staves, the cypress funeral.
ix.
The Laurel, meed of mighty conquerours,
And poets sage; the fur that weepeth still,
The willow, worn of forlorn paramours,
The eugh, obedient to the benders will,
The birch for shafts, the sallow for the mill,
The myrrh sweet-bleeding in the bitter wound,
The warlike beech, the ash for nothing ill,
The fruitful olive, and the platane round,
The carver holme, the maple sildom inward sound.
Met. 10. 90,
Ovid, Oedip. 532.
Seneca, 3. 440.
Lucan, Theb. 6. 98.
Statius, and R. Proserp. 2. 107. The passages are alleged by Mr. Jortin,
remarks on Spenser's poems, p. 4, 5.
Claudian, have all left us a description of trees; but Spenser, in this before
us, seems more immediately to have had his favorite Chaucer in his eye; he
has, however, much improved upon the brevity and simplicity of our ancient
bard. The bilder oak, and eke the hardy asshe,
The pillar elm, the coffir unto caraine,
The box pipe-tree, holme to whips lasshe,
The sailing fur, the cipres death to plain,
The shooter ewe, the aspe for shaftes plain,
The olive of peace, and eke the dronken vine
The victor palm, the laurer to divine. The assemble of fowls, v. 176.

In Chaucer's Complaint of the black knight, we meet with another description
of trees, from which Spenser seems also to have drawn one or two circumstances.
The mirre also that wepith ever' of kind
The cedris hie, as upright as a line. V. 66.

Spenser, perhaps, in having given us this minute and particular enumeration of
various trees, has incurred a smaller share of censure than some of the Roman
authors mentioned above. In some of them, indeed, such a description will be
found superfluous and impertinent; but, upon this occasion, it is highly
consistent, and, indeed, expedient, that the poet should dwell, for some time,
on the beauty of this grove, in describing its variety of trees, as that
circumstance tends to draw the red-cross knight and his companion farther and
farther into the shade, 'till at length they are imperceptibly invited to the
cave of error, which stood in the thickest part of it: in short, this
description is so far from being puerile, or ill-placed, that it serves to
improve, and help out the allegory. But notwithstanding this may be affirmed,
in commendation of Spenser, yet I am apt to think, that the impropriety of
introducing such a description, would not have appeared a sufficient reason to
our poet, why he should not have admitted it; for his judgment was so greatly
overwhelmed by his imagination, that he could never neglect the opportunity of
a good description, whenever it presented itself. The reader will excuse my
producing another passage from Chaucer, in which he ridicules, with no less
humor than judgment, the particular detail of trees, and of the circumstances
which followed upon their being felled, given us by one of the abovementioned
ancient poets. He is speaking of Arcite's funeral. But how the fire was maken
up on height,
And eke the names, how all the trees hight,
As oak, fur, beech, aspe, elder, elm, popelere,
Willow, holme, plane, box, chesten, and laurere,
Maple, thorn, beech, ewe, hasell, whipultree,
How they were feld, shall not be told for me:
Ne how the gods runnen up and down,
Disherited of her habitatioun,
In which they wonned in rest and pees,
Nymphs, Faunies, Amadriades.
Ne how the beasts, ne how the birds all
Fledden for fear, when the trees was fall.
Ne how the groun aghast was of the light,
That was not wont to see the son bright;
Ne how the fire, etc. Knight's tale, v. 2922.



B. i. C. xii. S. xiv.The poet is speaking of the magnificent feasting, after
the red-crosse knight had conquered the dragon. What needs me tell their feast,
and goodly guise,
In which was nothing riotous, nor vain?
What needs of dainty dishes to devise,
Of comely services, or courtly train?
My narrow leaves cannot in them contain,
The large discourse of royal princes state.
To this I shall beg leave to subjoin another passage of the same kind; in
which he is describing the wedding of Florimel. To tell the glory of the feast
that day,
The goodly service, the devisefull sights,
The bridegroomes state, the brides most rich array,
The pride of ladies, and the worth of knights,
The royal banquetts, and the rare delights,
Were work fit for an herald, not for me.
5. 3. 3. After this indirect and comprehensive manner, Chaucer expresses the
pomp of Cambuscan's feast. Of which shall I tell all the array,
Then would it occupy a sommer's day;
And eke it needs not to devise
At every course the order of service.
I wol not tellen as now, of her strange sewes,
Ne of her swans, ne of her heronsewes.
Eke in that land, as tellen knights old,
There is some meat that is fully dainty hold,
That in this land men retch of it but small:
There is no man that may reporten all. Squire's tale. v. 83.

Thus also when lady Custance is married to the Sowdan of Surrie. What should I
tellen of the rialte
Of that wedding? or which course goth beforn?
Who blowith in a trompe, or in a horn? The man of lawe's tale. v. 704.

In these passages it is very evident, that Chaucer intended a burlesque upon
the tedious and elaborate descriptions of such unimportant circumstances, to be
met with in books of chivalry. In the last verse the burlesque is very strong.
B. i. C. xii. S. xxiv. He is speaking of a grand assembly, which is held in the
hall of the palace of Una's father. With flying speed, and seeming great
pretense,
Came running in, much like a man dismayed,
A messenger with letters, which his message said.
xxv.
All in the open hall amazed stood,
At suddenness of that unwarie sight,
And wondered at his breathless hasty mood;
But he for naught would stay his passage right,
Till fast before the king he did alight,
Where falling flat, great humblesse he did make,
And kissed the ground whereon his foot was pight.
He seems to have copied this surprise, occasioned in the hall by the sudden
and unexpected entrance of this messenger, (together with some of the attending
circumstances) from a similar but more noble surprise in Chaucer, which
happened at Cambuscan's annual birthday festival. And so befell, that aftir
the third course,
While that the king sat thus in his noblay,
Herk'ning his minstrelis their thingis play,
Beforn him at his board deliciously;
In at the halle door full sodeinly
There came a knight upon a stead of brass;
And in his hond, etc. etc.
* * * * * * * * * * *
And up he rides to the hie board;
In all the hall ne was there spoke a word,
For marveile of this knight, him to behold
Full besily they waiten young, and old.
This strange knight, etc.
* * * * * * *
Salved the king and queen, and lordis all,
By ordir, as they sittin in the hall,
With so hie reverence and obeisaunce
As well in speech, as in countinaunce,
That, etc. etc.
* * * *
And aftir this, beforn the hie board,
He with a manly voice said his message. Squier's tale. v. 96.

B. ii. C. xii. S. li. Thereto the heavens always joviall
Looked on them lovely, still in steadfast state,
Ne suffered storm, nor frost on them to fall,
Their tender buds or leaves to violate,
Nor scorching heat, nor cold intemperate,
TO afflict the creatures which therein did dwell;
But the mild air with season moderate,
Gently attempred and disposed so well,
That still it breathed forth sweet spirit, and wholesome smell.
Chaucer in the Assemble of fowls. The air of the place so attempre was,
That never was there grevance of hot ne cold,
There was eke every wholesome spice and gras,
Ne no man may there wax sick ne old. V. 204.

As a proof of this imitation, it may be observed, that Spenser has not only
here borrowed some of Chaucer's thoughts, but some of his words. He might,
nevertheless, have some passages from the Claudian. N. Hon. and Mar. v. 51.
Lucret. 3. v. 18. Hom. Odyss. 6. v. 42. Sidon. Car. 2. v. 407.
classics in his eye, cited by Mr. Jortin. Remarks, p. 74, 75.


B. iii. C. ii. S. xix.The poet, among other rare qualities of Merlin's
wondrous mirror, mentions the following, Whatever foe had wrought, or friend
had fayn'd
Therein discovered was --
And afterward, St. 21. Such was the glassie globe that Merlin made,
And gave unto king Ryence for his guard,
That never foes his kingdom might invade,
But he it knew at home, before he hard
Tidings thereof, and so them still debard.
It was a famous present for a prince,
And worthy work of infinite reward,
That treasons could bewray, and foes convince.
From whence it is plain, that Spenser drew the idea of this mirror, from that
which is presented by the strange knight to Cambuscan, in Chaucer. This mirror
eke, which I have in my hond,
Has soche a might, that men may in it se
When there shall fall any adversite
Unto your reign, or to yourself also,
And opin se who is your friend or fo.
And ovir all, if any lady bright
Has set her heart on any manir wight,
If he be false she shall the tresoun se,
His new love, and all his subtilte,
So opinly, that there shall nothing hide. Squier's tale, v. 153.

Spenser likewise feigns, that his mirror was of service in the purposes of
love, and as such it is consulted by Britomartis, but upon an occasion
different from that which is here mentioned by Chaucer. She looks in it to
discover, who was destined to be her husband. Whom fortune for her husband
would allott.
St. 23. As the uses of this mirror were of so important a nature, Spenser
ought not to have first mentioned it to us by that light appellation, Venus'
looking glass; where he is speaking of Britomart's love for Arthegall, Whose
image she had seen in Venus' looking-glass.
3. 1. 8. B. iii. C. ix. S. xxviii. She sent at him one fiery dart, whose head
Empoysned was with privy lust, and jelous dred.
xxix.
He from that deadly throw made no defense,
But to the wound his weak heart opened wide,
The wicked engine through false influence
Past through his eyes, and secretly did glyde,
Into his heart, which it did sorely gryde.
Which seem to resemble these of Chaucer. He is speaking of Cupid. He took an
arrow full sharply whet,
And in his bow when it was set,
He straight up to his ear drough
The strong bow that was so tough,
And shot at me so wonder smert,
That through mine eye unto mine heart
The takell smote, and deep it went. Romans of Rosc. v. 1723.

The thought of the heart being wounded through the eye occurs again in Chaucer.
So that this arrow anon right
Throughout eye, as it was found,
Into mine heart has made a wound. Ibid. v. 1778.

Thus also Palamon speaks, after he had seen Emely. But I was hurt right now
through mine eye
Into mine heart. -- Knight's tale, v, 1098.

The thought likewise occurrs again, in our poet's Hymn in honor of Beauty.
Has white and red in it such wondrous power
That it can pierce through the eyes unto the heart?
B. iv. C. ii. S. xxxii. Whylome, as antique stories tellen us,
Those two, etc.
* * * * * *
Though now their acts be no where to be found,
As that renowned poet them compiled,
With warlike numbers, and heroic sound,
Dan Chaucer, well of English undefiled,
On fame's eternal bead-roll worthy to be filed.
The Squiers tale of Chaucer being imperfect, Not unfinished, for a very good
reason offered by the judicious Mr. Upton, who says, "I hardly think that a
story promising so fair in the beginning, should be left half-told." Letter to
G. West, Esquire p. 10.
our poet thus introduces his story of the battle of the three brethren for
Canace; which he builds upon the following hint of Chaucer. And after woll I
speak of Camballo,
That fought in listis with the brethren two,
For Canace, er that they might her winn.
But with these lines the story breaks off.

Mr. Upton Ubi supra, p. 10.
calls this addition of Spenser to Chaucer's fragment a completion of the
squier's tale; but it is certainly nothing more than a completion of one part
or division of Chaucer's poem; for, besides what Chaucer proposed to speak of
in the verses above-quoted concerning the contest for Canace, he intended
likewise to tell us, How that this Falcon got her love again
Repentant, as the story tellith us,
By mediation of Camballus. Squier's tale, v. 674.

Also, First woll I tell you of king Cambuscan
That in his time many a cite wan,
How that he wan Thedora to his wife;
And after woll I speak of Algarsife,
For whom full often in great peril he was,
Ne had been holpin, but by the horse of bras. ibid. v. 681.

It is no less amusing to the imagination to bewilder itself in various
conjectures concerning the expedients by which the particular events here
hinted at were severally brought about, and to wander into a romantic
disquisition concerning the miracles wrought by the means of this wonderful
steed, than it is matter of concern, to reflect, that Chaucer's description of
them is utterly lost; especially as we may reasonably conclude, from the
remaining parts of this tale, that those which are perished, must have
discovered no less striking efforts of the imagination. It appears, that Milton
was particularly fond of this poem, and that he was not a little desirous of
knowing the end of a story which promised so many beauties; in his Il
Penseroso, he invokes Melancholy to -- call up HIM that left HALF-TOLD
The story of Cambuscan bold. Il. Pens. v. 109.

But for what reason are we to suppose that he desired him to be CALLED UP? Was
it not for this reason, that he might tell that part of the HALF-TOLD tale
which remained untold? as before he requests that Orpheus might be raised, to
sing Such notes, as warbled to the string,
Drew iron tears down Pluto's cheek, Ibid. v. 105.

so he does not desire that Chaucer should be called up for nothing; but that
this author of the imperfect tale of Cambuscan should likewise tell Of Camball
and of Algarsife,
And who had Canace to wife,
That owned the virtuous ring and glass,
And of the wondrous horse of brass,
On which the Tartar king did ride -- Ibid. v. 111.

circumstances and events, which are not in the half-told story which Chaucer
has left us, but which are only proposed to be told in the verses above cited,
and are the subject of the sequel. Lydgate, in his TEMPLE OF GLASS, seems to
speak as if he had seen a completed copy of this Tale. And uppermore men
depeinten might see,
How, with her RING, goodly CANACE,
Of every foul the leden and the song
Could understand, as she hem walked among:
And how her brother so often helped was
In his mischefe, by the STEAD OF BRAS.
That part of the story which is hinted at in the two last lines, is lost;
which, however, might have been remaining in the age of Lydgate.

In the Ashmolean Musaeum at Oxford, there is a completion of this tale, by
John Lane, in MS. It is numbered in the catalogue and in the first leaf 6937,
but on the back, 53. quarto. The title of this MS. is as follows, "CHAUCER'S
PILLAR; being his masterpiece, called the SQUIER'S TALE; which has binn
given for lost for almost these three hundred years, but now found out, and
brought to light, by JOHN LANE, 1630." I conceived great expectations of this
manuscript, on reading the following passage in Philips. "JOHN LANE, a fine old
Queen Elizabeth's gentleman, who was living within my remembrance, and whose
several poems, had they not had the ill luck to remain unpublish'd, when much
better meriting than many that are in print, might possibly have gained him a
name not inferior (if not equal) to Drayton, and others of the next rank to
SPENSER; but they are all to be produced in MSS. namely, his POETICAL VISION,
his ALARM TO POETS, his TWELVE MONTHS, his GUY OF WARWICK, (an heroic poem, at
least as much as many others that are so entitled) and lastly, his Supplement
to Chaucer's SQUIRE'S TALE." Theat. Poet. Mod. Poets, page 112. But I was
greatly disappointed; for Lane's performance, upon perusal, appeared to be, not
only a very inartificial imitation of Chaucer, but a very weak effort of
imagination.




I cannot omit this opportunity of lamenting, with equal regret, the loss of
great part of a noble old Scottish poem, entitled, HARDYKNUTE; which exhibits a
striking representation of our ancient martial manners, that prevailed before
the convenience and civilities of refined life had yet rendered all men
fashionably uniform; and lulled them into that tranquil security, which
naturally excludes all those hazardous incidents, and glorious dangers, so
suitable to the character and genius of the heroic muse. B. iv. C. ii. S.
xxxiii. But wicked Time, that all good thoughts does waste,
And works of noblest wits to naught outweare,
That famous moniment has quite defaced;
* * * * * * * * * *
O cursed Elde! the canker-worme of writs;
How may these rimes (so rude, as does appear)
Hope to endure, since works of heavenly wits
Are quite devoured, and brought to naught by little bits!
Thus Chaucer. This old story in latin, which I find
Of queen Annelida, and false Arcite,
That Elde, which all thingis can frete and bite,
(And it has freten many a noble story)
Has nigh devourid out of her memory. February.

B. vi. C. ix. S. v. He chaunc't to spy a sort of shepherd grooms
Playing on pipes, and caroling apace,
The whiles their beasts, there in the budded broomes,
Beside them fed --
These verses are a distant imitation of Chaucer. They are more immediately an
imitation of himself in the Eclogues. So loytering live you little-heard-groomes
Keeping your beasts in the budded broomes:
* * * * * * * * * *
And crowing in pipes made of grene corn. Of Q. Annelid. and false Arcite. v.
10.

which are apparently an immediate imitation of these in Chaucer. And many a
floite, and litlyng horn,
And pipis made of grene corn,
As have these little herdegromes,
That kepin bestis in the bromes. House of Fame. v. 133.

The word heard-groomes occurs again, -- That they were poor heard-groomes.
6. 11. 39. B. vii. C. vii. S. v. Then forth issew'd (great goddess) dame
NATURE,
With goodly port, and gracious majesty,
Being far greater, and more tall of stature
Than any of the gods, or powers on hie.
Afterward, speaking of her face. St. 6.

-- It so beauteous was,
And round about such beams of splendour threw,
That it the sun a thousand times did pass,
Ne could be seen, but like an image in a glass.
vii.
That well may seemen true: for well I ween
That this same day, when she on Arlo sat,
Her garment was so bright, and wondrous sheene,
That my frail wit cannot devize to what
It to compare, etc.
viii.
In a fair plain, upon an equal hill,
She placed was in a pavilion;
Not such as craftes-men by their idle skill,
Are wont for princes state to fashion;
But the earth herself of her own motion,
Out of her fruitful bosom made to grow
Most dainty trees, that shooting up anon
Did seem to bow their blos'ming heads full low
Fit homage unto her, and like a throne did show.
ix.
So hard it is for any living wight,
All her array, and vestiments to tell
That old Dan Geffrey (in whose gentle spirght
The pure wellhead of poesy did dwell)
In his fowls parley durst not with it mel,
But it transferred to Alane, who, he thought,
Had in his plaint of kinds described it well.
The last-quoted stanza is no obscure hint, that our poet had been consulting
Chaucer's Assembly of fowls for this description of NATURE. But Spenser has
given many new and delicate touches to Chaucer's rough sketch, as will appear
upon comparison. Tho was I ware, where there ysate a queen,
That as of light the summer son shene
Passith the sterre, right so ovir mesure,
She fairir was than any other creture.
And in a launde, upon a hill of flowers,
Was set this queen, this noble goddess NATURE,
Of braunchis were her hallis and her boures,
I wrought aftir her craft and her mesure.
* * * * * * * * * *
And right as Alaine in the plaint of kind
Devises Nature of soche araie and face,
In such araie men mightin her there find. Assemble of fowls. v. 298.

B. xvii. C. viii. S. xlvi. But Life was like a fair young lusty boy,
Such as they feign Dan Cupid to have been,
Full of delightful health, and lively joy,
Decked all with flowers, and wings of gold fit to employ.
Chaucer thus represents Cupid. But of his robe to devise
I dread encombred for to be;
For not yclad in silk was he
But all in flowers, and flourettes. Romaunt of the Rose. v. 890.



But the ancients have left us no authority for such a representation of Cupid.
Our author, St. 34. above, gives him a green vest. And Cupid-selfe about her
fluttred all in green.
Which is equally unwarrantable. Though Catullus has given him a yellow vest.
Quam circumcursans huc illuc saepe Cupido,
Fulgebat CROCINA candidus in tunica. Ad Manlium.

Where Scaliger remarks, that Sappho attributes a purple vest to this deity. B.
vii. C. viii. S. xl. Next was November; he full gross and fat,
As fed with lard, and that right well might seem,
For he had been a satting hogs of late.
* * * * * * * * *
xli.
And after him came next the chill December;
Yet he through merry feasting which he made,
And great bonfires, did not the cold remember,
His Savior's birth his mind so much did glad.
* * * * * * * * * *
And in his hand a broad deep boawle he bears,
Of which he freely drinks an health to all his peers.
In describing these figures, Spenser seems to have remembered some
circumstances in Chaucer's picture of Janus, or January. Janus sit by the fire
with double berde,
And drinks of his bugle horn the wine;
Before him stant brawn of the tuskid swine,
And i. e. Christmas.
nowil sings every lusty man. Frankelein's tale. v. 2808.



I shall now lay before the reader some instances of phrases and words, which
Spenser has adopted from Chaucer. B. i. Introduction, St. iii. -- With you
bring triumphant MART.
We have no reason to imagine, that Spenser here arbitrarily uses Mart instead
of Mars, for the convenience of rhyme, since he had the authority of Chaucer
for it. All esily now for the love of MART. Tr. and Cr. B. 2. v. 988.

Again, O cruil god of death, dispiteous MART. Ibid. B. 2. v. 435.

We find it likewise in other places. Chaucer sometimes uses MART for war. B.
i. C. i. S. xxxiv. And well could FILE his tongue as smooth as glass.
So Chaucer. For well he wiste when the song was song,
He must preche, and well AFILE his tongue. Prol. 713.

Again, This Pandarus began new his tongue AFILE. Tr. and Cr. B. 1. v. 1681.

The same metaphor occurrs more than once again in our author. His practick
wit, and his fair FILED tongue.
2. 1. 3. -- However, Sir, ye FILE
Your courteous tongue, his praises to compile.
3. 2. 12. B. i. C. iv. S. xl. Redoubted battle ready to DARRAINE.
Darraine is often used by Chaucer. The everich should an hundred knights bring
The battle to DARRAIN.
Knight's tale, v. 2098.
Full privily two harneis had he dight
Both sufficient and mete to DARRAINE
The battle in the field, betwixt them twain. Ibid. v. 1632.

The word seems to be de derived from the French arranger; so that to darraine
battle is, to set the battle in array. Our poet has used arrang'd (from
arranger) and applied it to battle more than once. So both to battle fierce
ARRANGED are.
1. 2. 36. -- ARRANG'D in battle new.
1. 6. 38. Chaucer, in another place, uses darraine in a sense not agreeable to
its genuine signification. Everich of you shall bring an hundred knights
* * * * * * * * * *
Already to DARRAIN here by battle. Ibid. 1853.

Where it should imply, TO DETERMINE. This word being a Chaucerism, our author
has very remarkably affected the use of it, viz. -- sad battle to DARRAINE.
1. 7. 11. -- to DARRAINE
A triple war. --
2. 2. 26. -- six knights that did DARRAINE
Fierce battle against one. --
3. 1. 20. -- new battle to DARRAINE.
4. 4. 26. -- new battle to DARRAINE.
4. 5. 24. And dreadful battle 'twixt them do DARRAINE.
5. 2. 15. In which they two the combat might DARRAINE.
6. 12. 9. -- Those giants, which did war DARRAINE
Against the heavens. --
6. 7. 41. We have here an instance in which the word is used in a more vague
sense, -- How best he mote DARRAINE
That enterprise. --
4. 9. 4. But we are told, in the glossary to Chaucer, (Urry's edit.) that this
word, among other senses, signifies, to dare, to attempt. Thus, by a gradual
detortion, and by an imperceptible progression from one kindred sense to
another, a word, at length, attains a meaning entirely foreign to its original
etymology.

Spenser's frequent use of DARRAINE seems to have somewhat familiaris'd it in
Queen Elizabeth's age. We meet with it in Shakespere, who probably drew it from
our author. DARRAIGN your battle; they are near at hand. Third Part of Hen. VI.
Act 2. S. 3.

B. i. C. vii. S. xxix. His GLITTERAND armor shined far away.
Spenser thus affectedly spells the participle glittering, in imitation of
Chaucer. So in the Plowman's tale, That high on horse wills ride
In GLITTERANDE gold, of great array V. 2073.

And in the same poem. With GLITTERANDE gold as grene as gall. V. 2103.

Glitterand is very frequently used by our author. Soon as those GLITTERAND
arms he did espy.
2. 7. 42. Eftsoons himself in GLITTERANDE arms he dight.
2. 11. 17. Her glorious GLITTERAND light does all men's eyes amaze.
1. 4. 16. We meet with it likewise in the Eclogues. Ygirt with bells of
GLITTERAND GOLD. July.

Many of Chaucer's active participles are thus terminated, viz. sittande,
smertande, laughande, etc. for sitting, smarting, laughing. We meet with this
termination of the active participle very frequently in the ancient Scotch
poets. B. i. C. vii. S. xiv. -- Do him not to die.
Chaucer, -- and done to die
These losengeours, with her flattery. Romans Rose. v. 1061.

The instances of this expression are innumerable, both in Chaucer, and in our
author. B. ii. C. ii. S. xxii. And suffered not their blows to BITE him nere.
That is, to pierce him to the quick. The word is frequently used, in the
sense, to pierce or wound, in Chaucer. Ne short sword to stick with point BITING
No man ne draw. -- Knight's tale. 2548.

And made his sword deep in his flesh YBITE. Ibid. 2642.

The jealous strokes on their helmes BITE. Ibid. 2636.

Speaking of a sword, afterward, Throughout his armure it will kerve and BITE.
Also, But in his sleve he began to thring
A rasour sharp and well-BITING. Romans Rose. v. 7319.

Nor are instances of this word less frequent in Spenser, viz. The cruel
steel so greedily does BITE
In tender flesh --
1. 5. 9. His BITING sword, and his devouring spear.
1. 7. 48. That first did teach the cursed steel to BITE
In his own flesh --
2. 6. 32. The pointed steel --
His harder hide would neither pearce nor BITE.
1. 11. 16. -- The sharp steel arriving forcibly
On his broad shield, BIT not --
2. 5. 4. A stroke, And glauncing down, would not his owner BITE.
2. 8. 38. And pierced to the skin, but BIT not more.
2. 8. 44. A dart, And had not power in his soft flesh to BITE.
3. 5. 19. Till on her horses hinder parts it fell,
Where BITING deep, so deadly it impressed.
4. 6. 13. That glauncing on her shoulder-plate it BIT
Unto the bone. --
5. 7. 33. But BITING deep therein. --
6. 12. 21.i. e. into his shield. The tempred steel did not into his
braine-pan BITE.
6. 6. 30. And we find another instance of biting near, for piercing to the
quick: Much was the lady in her gentle mind
Abasht at his rebuke, that BIT her near.
6. 11. 64. And in this manner we find it used by Shakespere, Freeze, freeze,
thou bitter sky,
Thou do not BITE SO NIGH
As benefits forgot. As You Like it. Act. 2. 8. 10.

B. ii. C. iv. S. xxiv. Saying, he now had boulted all the flower.
That is, he had searched the matter to the bottom. This form is founded upon
an old proverb in Chaucer, But I ne cannot boult it to the brenne
As can that holy doctor Saint Austen. Nonne's Priest's Tale. 1355.

B. ii. C. vi. S. xliii. HARROW now out, and weal-away, he cryde:
So Chaucer, And began to cry HARROW and weal-away. Reve's Tale. 964.

HARO is a form of exclamation anciently used in Normandy, to call for help, or
to raise the Hue and Cry. Glossary to Urry's edit.
We find it again in our author, HARROW the flames which me consume, --
2. 6. 49. Again, -- HARROW, and weal-away!
After so wicked deed, etc. --
2. 8. 46. It occurs often in Chaucer, and is, I think, always used as an
exclamation of GRIEF; but there are some passages in an old MYSTERY printed at
Paris, 1541, where it is applied as a term of ALARM, according to its original
usage. Lucifer is introduced summoning the devils. Dyables meschans, etc.
* * * *
Viendrez vous point a mes cris, and aboys,
* * * * * * *
HARO, HARO, null de vous je ne veoys?
And in another place, where he particularly addresses Belial. HARO, HARO,
approach toy grant Dyable,
Approach toy notayre mal fiable,
Fire Belial, etc.
It is observable, that the permission of the CLAMEUR DE HARO is to this day
specified, amongst that of other officers, in the instrument of License
prefixed to books printed in France. B. iii. C. i. S. lxiv. To stir up strife,
and troublous CONTECK broche.
Spenser here, when he might have used contest, chooses rather Chaucer's
obsolete term CONTECK. Thus in the Knight's tale, CONTEKE with bloody knyves,
and shape menace. V. 2006.

Again, Of CONTEKE, and of whelpis great and light. Nonne's Priest's tale. v.
10047.

Our poet had used it before in the Eclogues. But kindle coals of CONTECKE and
ire,
Wherewith they set all the world on fire. September.

B. iii. C. ii. S. v. -- Like a PYNED ghost --
So likewise, That like a PYNED ghost he soon appears.
4. 7. 41.

We find FORPYNED ghost in Chaucer, which is the same as PYNED ghost. He was
not pale as a FORPYNED ghost. Prolog. v. 205.

B. iii. C. vi. S. vi. But wondrously they were begott and bred,
Through influence of the heavens cheerful ray;
As it in antique books is mentioned.
These introductions give authority to a fictitious story. Thus the tale of
Canace is ushered in, Whylom as antique stories tellen us.
And in another place he refers to history for a sanction to his invention, As
ye may elsewhere read that ruefull history.
3. 6. 53. Chaucer frequently makes use of these forms. He thus begins the
Knight's tale. Whylom as old storis tellin us.
And again, in the same tale. -- As old books us saine,
That all this story tellen more plain. Knight's tale. v. 1466.

And afterward, -- As men may behold
In Stace of Thebes, and these books old. Ibid. 2295.

B. i. C. vii. S. xlvii. -- The mighty OLLYPHANT that wrought
Great wreake to many errant knights of yore.
The giant OLLYPHANT here mentioned, is probably that which Sir Thopas meets,
in his expedition to the land of Fairy. Till him there came a great giaunt,
His name was called Sir OLIPHAUNT. Rhyme of Sir Thopas. v. 3315.

B. iii. C. vii. S. lvii. Because I could not give her many a JANE.
So Chaucer. Of Bruges were his hosin broun,
His robe was of Chekelatoun,
That cost many a JANE. Rhyme of Sir Thopas, v. 3242.

Many a jane, that is, much money. Skinner informs us, that JANE is a coin of
Genoa; and Speght Gl. to Chaucer, interprets JANE, halfpence of Janua, or galy
halfpence. Chaucer sometimes uses it as a coin of little value. As, -- Dear
enough, a JANE. Cl. of Oxenford's tale. v. 2020.

And in other places. B. iii. C. ix. S. iii. Then listen lordinges --
Chaucer often applies this introductory form in his Canterbury tales. Thus too
the old poem of Sir Bevis of South-hampton begins. Listen lordinges, and hold
you still,
Of doughty men, tell you I will.
B. iii. C. ix. S. 20. Her golden locks, that were in tramels gay
Up-bounden, did themselves adoune display,
And raught unto her heels. --
So Chaucer. Her tresses yellow, and long straughten
Unto her heels down they raughten. Romans Rose, v. 1021.

And in the same poem, Her hair down to her heels went. Ibid. 1218.

Our author again expresses himself in the same manner, speaking of a robe. --
When she list, it raught
Down to her lowest heel. --
5. 5. 2. Also, -- Her golden locks that were upbound
Still in a knott, unto her heels down traced.
4. 1. 13. This mention of golden hair puts me in mind of a correction which
Mr. Upton has made in the following verse of Chaucer. Her GILDED heris with a
GOLDEN thread
Iboundin were. Assemble of Fowls, v. 267.



Mr. Letter to G. West, Esquire p. 35.
Upton thinks that here is a transposition occasioned by the transcriber's
haste, and that we should apply gilded to threde, and goldin to heris, viz. Her
goldin heris with a gilded threde
Iboundin were --
The alteration appears at first sight to be very just; But it is perhaps
unnecessary if we consider that gilte or gilded, is often used by Chaucer, and
applied to hair. Thus, His GILT here was ycrounid with a son. Leg. of G. Women,
v. 230.

And in the same poem, Hide Absolon thy GILTE tressis clear. Ibid. v. 249.

We have here gildid hair, Dischevilid with her bright GILDID here. Ibid. v.
390.

B. iii. C. ix. S. xxxi. -- Thus was the ape
By their fair handling put into Malbecco's cape.
A proverb from Chaucer. This cursed Chanon put in his hode an ape. Host's
words, chan. Y. v. 1510.

Again, The Monk put in the merchants hode an ape. Host's words, ship. 2948.

B. iii. C. x. S. xix. To seek her ENDLONG both by sea and land.
I do not rembmber that endlong occurs in any poet before Spenser, Chaucer
excepted; nor in any of Spenser's contemporaries; so that probably our author
drew it from his favorite bard, viz. -- The reed blood
Ran ENDLONG the tree. Squire's Tale, v. 435.
--
Also, Look what Day that ENDLONG to Britain
Ye remeve all the rockis stone by stone. Fran. Tale, v. 2538.

And in other places. Mr. Pope has revived this word with great propriety. B.
iii. C. x. S. xxxi. Big looking, like a doughty DOUZEPERE.
In the glossary to Urry's Chaucer we are told that doseperis is from the
French les douze pairs; the twelve peers of France. Some legendary governors of
Rome are so called in allusion to those of France, in these lines of the
Merchant's second tale, or the History of Beryn, When it [Rome] was governed by
the DOSEPERIS. V. 44.

And below, Then Constantyne the third after these DOSIPERIS. v. 51.

It may be doubted whether or no our author borrowed this word DOUZEPERE from
Chaucer; for Chaucer's tale in which the word occurrs was first printed by Mr.
Urry, who informs us that he could meet with only one MSS. copy of it. B. iii.
C. xii. S. xi. With him went DANGER. --
Spenser seems to have personified danger after the example of Chaucer, who has
made him a very significant character in the Romaunt of the rose; but I do not
remember that any circumstances in Spenser's description of him are borrowed
from thence. He is again introduced as the guardian of the gate of good desert
in the temple of Venus, 4. 10. 18. and afterward, as an advocate for Duessa,
5. 9. 45. B. iv. C. i. S. xxxii. His name was BLANDAMOUR. --
There was an old romance which celebrated the atchievments of Blandamour;
which Spenser might have seen. If not, he probably drew the name from this hint
of Chaucer, Men speken of romances of pris,
Of Horne-child, and of Ipotis,
Of Bevis, and Sir Gie,
Of Sir Libeaux, and BLANDAMOURE. R. of Sir Thopas. v. 3402.

B. iv. C. iv. S. xxiii. -- Fiercely forth he rode,
Like spark of fire, that from the anvil GLODE.


The compiler of the Glossary to Spenser informs us, that GLODE signifies
glanced, or that it is written, by poetical license, for glowed. As to the
latter of these explanations, I do not think, that glow had acquired so vague a
sense in our author's age; and where is the authority for the former? Spenser
undoubtedly borrowed it from the following passage of Chaucer. His good steed
he bestrode
And forth upon his way GLODE
As spark out of the bronde. Ibid. v. 3408.

Our author has here plainly borrowed the thought, as well as the particular
word in question, which, however, he has differently applied. May not GLODE be
the preter-imperfect tense of glide? B. v. C. i. S. xxv. -- This doubtful
causes right
Can hardly but by sacrament be tried,
Or else by Ordele. -- Tr. and Cr. B. 3. v. 1048.

So Chaucer, Where so you list by Ordal, or by oath. Tr. and Cr. B. 3. v. 1048.

B. vi. C. vi. S. xii. Against all both good and bad, both MOST and LEAST.
MOST here signifies greatest; and in the following instances; as, MORE implies
greater. I do possess the world's MOST regiment.
7. 7. 17. That is, I am possessed of the greatest sway over the world. -- All
other weapons less or MORE,
Which warlike uses had devised of yore,
5. 8. 34. For ere thou limit what is less or MORE.
5. 2. 34. In Sonnet 20. In his MOST pride disdaineth, etc.
Again, What though the sea with waves continual
Do eat the earth, it is no MORE at all,
Ne is the earth the less. --
5. 2. 39. In Sonnet 55. Thus for to be the world's MOST ornament.
This is the language of Chaucer; viz. I say, that she ne had not MOST
fairness. Monk. Tale. 367.

That is, I do not affirm that she had the greatest share of beauty. The great
geftes also to the MOST and LEST. Knight's tale. v. 2200.

Again, From Boloigne is the earl of Pavie come,
Of which the fame yspronge to MOST and LEST. Frank. tale. v. 2600.

Thus we have also MORE or LESS for greater and smaller. -- The goddess
Both of the sea, and rivers MORE and LESS. Cl. of Ox. tale. 1900.

Thus also MUCH or LITE is great and small. But he ne left, neither for rain
ne thonder,
In sikeness, ne in mischief to visit
The farthist in his parish MUCH or lite. Prol. 494.

And to this day MUCH is prefixed to some villages in England, as a mark of
greatness. The ingenious author of Miscellaneous Observations on Macbeth,
remarks, that in the interpolated Mandeville, a book printed in the age of
queen Elizabeth, there is a chapter of India THE MORE AND THE LESS, note 43.

I had almost past over some of the subsequent instances. B. ii. C. 6. S. xxix.
That a large purple stream adowne their GIAMBEUX falls.
He probably drew GIAMBEUX, i. e. boots, from this passage in the Rhyme of Sir
Thopas. His JAMBEUX were of cure buly. V. 3380.

B. vi. C. vii. S. xliii. But in a jacket quilted richly rare
Upon CHECKLATON, he was strangely dight.
Checklaton likewise occurs in the last-mention'd poem of Chaucer. His robe was
of CHEKELATOUN. V. 3243.

Speght Glossary to Chaucer.
interprets this word, a stuff of checkerwork made of cloth of gold; and
Skinner, a stuff like motley.

To PRICK is very frequently used by Spenser, as well as by Chaucer, for, to
ride; as is MANY for retinue, multitude, or company. Dryden, in his inimitable
Music-ode, has thus used MANY. The MANY rend the skies with loud applause.
Many also is to be found in this sense in Harrington and Shakespere.

It should not be omitted, that LAD for led, often occurs in Chaucer, as it
does likewise in Spenser, viz. a milk-white lamb she LAD. 1. 1. 4 whom they
LAD. 2. 12. 84. a wretched life they LAD. 3. 12. 16. life which afterward he
LAD. 4. 8. 2. to their purpose LAD. 5. 12. 37. The virgin LAD. 4. 12. 33. he
him LAD. 5. 1. 22. away was LAD. 6. 10. 39.

Our author seems to have used, never none, for, there never was one, from an
affectation of Chaucer's manner; although it must be confessed, that most of our
old English writers frequently join two negatives, when no affirmation is
intended. Hickes, after observing, that a negation is often expressed in the
Anglo-Saxonic by two negatives, has these words, -- Editor Chauceri nihil
antiqui sapiens, dicit "It is his manner likewise, imitating the Greeks, by
two negatives, to cause a greater negation; as, I ne said none ill." Speght's
ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READERS; prefixed to his second edition of Chaucer's
works; London printed by Adam Islip, 1602. But the labors of this editor ought
by no means to be slighted in general, as he is the first that ever gave to the
public a tolerably complete edition of Chaucer; and though he is censured as
one Antiqui nihil sapiens, yet it must be confessed, that his glossary to
Chaucer, as being the first of that kind, was a very laudable undertaking; and
though it was the first, that it is, notwithstanding, so well executed, as to
have supplied very valuable materials to some more modern glossographers upon
our ancient bard.
ipsum imitatum fuisse Graecos in vehementius negando per DUO NEGATIVA; tametsi
Chaucerus (Literarum Graecarum ignarus) more sui temporis, in quo Saxonismus
non penicus exoleverat, DUOBUS NEGATIVIS est usus Linguarum Vett.
Septentrional. Thesaurus. cap. 12. page 58.
. After which he produces some instances in the Saxon, where not only two, but
three, and four negatives are put together, with a negative signification.

It is not pretended, that all the obsolete words and phrases, to be met in our
author, are here set down, but those only which carry with them a more certain
and undoubted evidence of their being immediately derived from Chaucer. Thus
here are several old old words unnoticed, which appear likewise in Chaucer; but
which are no more the property of him, than they are of Lidgate, of Gower, and
of the author of Piers Plowman; so that it would be difficult in some cases to
ascertain and mark out the particular source from which our author drew;
however it is manifest that he had the most frequent recourse to, and drew the
largest draughts from Chaucer, -- The well of English undefilde.


I cannot dismiss this section without a wish, that this neglected author whom
Spenser proposed in some measure, as the pattern of his language, and to whom
he is not a little indebted for many noble strokes of poetry should be more
universally and attentively studied. Chaucer seems to be regarded rather as an
old poet, than as a good one, and that he wrote English verses four hundred
years ago seems more frequently to be urged in his commendation, than that he
wrote four hundred years ago with taste and judgment. We look upon his poems
rather as venerable relics, than as finished patterns; as pieces calculated
rather to gratify the antiquarian than the critic. When I sat down to read
Chaucer with the curiosity of knowing how the first English poet wrote, I left
him with the satisfaction of having found what later and more refined ages
could hardly equal in true humor, pathos, or sublimity. It must be confessed
that his uncouth or rather unfamiliar language has deterred many from perusing
him; but at the same time it must be allowed, that nothing has more contributed
to his being little looked into, than the convenient opportunity of reading him
with facility in modern imitations. Thus when translation (for such may
imitations from Chaucer be called) becomes substituted as the means of
attaining the knowledge of any difficult and ancient author, the original not
only begins to be neglected and excluded as less easy, but also to be despised
as less ornamental and elegant. And thus though Mr. Pope's translation of Homer
is perhaps the best that ever was made of any author, yet it has so far
indulged the laziness or illiteracy of many readers, as to tempt them to
acquiesce in the knowledge of Homer acquired by it, as sufficient; and thus
many have preferred that translation to the Grecian text, in proportion as the
former contains more frequent and more shining metaphors, more lively
descriptions, and in general appears to be more full, elaborate, and various.

SECT. VI. Of Spenser's imitations from Ariosto.
B. i. C. i. S. xxix. THIS circumstance of the Red-cross knight and Una meeting
with Archimago disguised like a hermit, who tells them a feigned tale, and
after that raises two spirits with an intent to deceive the Redcross Knight,
seems to be copied from Ariosto, who introduces Angelica meeting with an
hypocritical hermit who raises a false spirit with a design to deceive
Sacrapant and Renaldo, and to exasperate them against Orlando, etc. Che scontro
un' eremita, etc. C. 2. S. 12.



But Spenser has greatly improved the hint. Archimago is again introduced after
the same manner, B. i. C. vi. S. xxxiv. and B. ii. C. i. S. viii.

B. i. C. ii. This illusion effected by Archimago, who discovers a fictitious
Una to the Red-cross Knight in the embraces of a young 'squire, seems to be
imitated from the deceptions carried on in the enchanted castle of Atlanta,
where many of the guests are imposed upon by false representations of the
persons of their friends or mistresses; and more particularly from that passage
where Orlando, after having been cheated with the appearance of a fictitious
Angelica, is made to hear her cry out for his assistance, as if some villain
was ravishing her, etc. Dum que in presentia del mio caro Orlando
Da questo ladro mi sara rapita? C. 12. S. 15.

Piu, etc. etc.
Help now or never help; alas shall I,
In mine Orlando's sight loose my virginity?
Harrington. B. i. C. vii. S. xxxiii. His warlike shield all closely covered was
Ne might of mortal eye be ever seen,
* * * * * * * * * *
xxxiv.
The same to wight he never would disclose,
But when as monsters huge he would dismay,
Or daunt unequal armies, etc.
* * * * * * * * * *
xli.
And when he list the prouder looks subdew
He would them gazing blind, etc.
This is the shield of Atlanta. D'un bello drappo di seta havea coperto
Lo SCUDO in braccio il Cavalier celestie,
Come avesse, non so, tanto sofferto
Di tenerlo nascosto in quella vest;
Ch' immantinente, che lo mostra aperto,
Forza e chi' l mira abbarbagliato resto,
E cada, come corpo morto cade. C. 2. S. 55.

This heavenly hellish warrior bare a shield
On his left arm, that had a silken case,
I cannot any cause or reason yield,
Why he should keep it coverd so long space:
It had such force that whosoever it beheld,
Such shining light it strikes in their face,
That down they fall, etc. --
Harrington. B. i. C. viii. S. iii. -- Wide wonders of all
Of that same horns great virtues weren told.
* * * * * * *
iv.
Was never wight that heard that shrilling sound
But trembling fear did feel in every vain.
This horn, with its miraculous effects, is borrowed from that which
Logestylla presents to Astolfo. Dico che' l'corno di si orribil suono,
Ch' ovunque s' ode fa fuggir la gente. C. 15. S. 15.

Non puo, etc.
An horn in which if he do once but blow
The noise thereof shall trouble men so sore,
That all both stout and faint shall fly therefro.
Harrington. I wonder Spenser should have made so little use of this horn. He
has not scrupled to introduce the shield abovementioned (though as manifestly
borrowed from Ariosto) upon various occasions.

B. i. C. viii. S. xlvi. Duessa who before appeared young and beautiful, stripped
of her rich apparel is discovered to be a lothsom old woman. She is a copy of
Ariosto's Alcina, who after having long engaged the affections of Rogero by her
youth and beauty, is at last, by the virtue of his ring, discovered to be old
and ugly. These circumstances of Duessa's discovery are literally drawn from
Ariosto. A loathly wrinkled hag ill-favourd old.
* * * * * * * * * * *
xlvii.
Her crafty head was altogether bald,
And --
Was overgrowne with scurfe, and filthy scalde,
Her teeth out of her rotten gums were feld.
Pallido, crespo, e macilento avea
Alcina il viso, il crin raro, e canuto,
* * * * * * * * * *
Ogni dente di bocca era caduto. C. 7. S. 53.

Her face, was wan, a lean and writheld skin,
* * * * * * * * * *
Her hair was gray of hue, and very thin,
Her teeth were gone, etc. --
Harrington. B. ii. C. iv. S. xix. It was my fortune, etc.
This tale, is borrowed from the tale of Geneura in Orlando Furioso, C. iv. S.
l. etc.

B. ii. C. xi. S. xxxvii. The difficulty which prince Arthur finds in killing
Maleger, seems to be copied from the encounter of Griffin and Aquilant with
Orillo, who (like Maleger) receives no hurt from all the wounds that are given
him: And the circumstances by which Maleger's death is effected, partake much
of the fantastic extravagance of those by which Orillo is at last killed. See
Orlando Fur. C. xv. S. lxvii. etc. etc. B. iii. C. iv. S. lix. -- A mighty
spear,
Which Bladud made my magic art of yore.
* * * * * * *
For never wight so fast in sell could sit,
But him perforce unto the ground it bore.
This enchanted spear of Britomartis is the lame d'oro which Astolfo presents
to Bradamante. La Lancia, che di quanti ne percote
Fa le selle restar subito vote. C. 23. S. 15.

The spear --
With head thereof if any touched were
Straight ways to fall to ground they must be feign.
Harrington. Spenser sometimes calls it Goldelaunce. B. iii. C. iv. S. i. Where
is the antique glory now become
That whilome wont in women to appear?
Where, etc.
This introduction in praise of women, seems to be enlarged from that of
Ariosto to C. 20. Le Done antiche hanno mirabil cose,
Fatto ne l'arme, e ne le sacre muse,
E de lor' opre belle, e gloriose
Gran lume in tutto il mondo si diffuse.
Arpalice, e Camilla son famous,
Perch in battaglia erano esperte, etc.
Mavelous deeds by diverse dames were done
In times of old, as well by sword as pen;
So as their glory shined like the sun,
And famous was both far and near, as then
The fame Harpalice in battle won,
Camilla's worth, etc.
Harrington. And, B. 3. C. 2. S. 1. he touches upon the same argument again.
Here have I cause in men just blame to find
That in their proper praise too partial be,
And not indifferent to womankind,
To whom no share in arms and chivalrie
They do impart, ne maken memory
Of their brave gests, and prowess martial;
Scarce do they spare to one, or two, or three,
Room in their writs; yet the same writing small
Does all their deeds deface, and dims their glories all.
Where he seems to copy the close of the above introduction of Ariosto. E forse
ascosi han lor debiti onori
L'invidia; o il non saper de gli scrittori. S. 2.

Doubtless the fault is either in back-biters,
Or want of skill, and judgment in the writers.
Harrington.

B. iii. C. iii. S. xx. Merlin here discovers to Britomart her future progeny;
which he does likewise to Bradamante in Ariosto. C. 3. B. iii. C. vii. S. lii.
But read thou squire of Dames, etc.
The tale of the squire of Dames is a copy of the Hosts tale in Ariosto. c. 28.

B. iii. C. x. S. xlvii. Malbecco mixes with the flock of goats, and passes for
one. He might have here the escape of Ulysses from Polypheme in his eye; but
more immediately, perhaps, the like expedient made use of by Norandin, who
mixes among the goats, as a goat, that he may gain access to Lucina. C. 17. S.
35. etc. Norandin, indeed, is dressed up in goat skins, but Malbecco's similitude
is made out by his horns, which he wears as a cuckold; a fiction, the meanness
of which nothing but the beautiful transformation, at the end of the Canto,
could have made amends for. B. iv. C. i. S. xiii. With that her glistring
helmet she unlaced,
Which doft, her golden locks that were upbound,
Still in a knott unto her heels down traced.
Marsifa thus discovers herself, Al trar de gli elmi tutti vider come
Havea lor dato ajuto una donzella.
Fa conosciuta a l'auree crespe chiome
Ed a l'faccia delicata, etc. C. 26. S. 28.

Now when Marsisa had put off her bever,
To be a woman every one perceive her.
xxv.
Her golden hair trust up with careless grace
Her forehead fair, etc.
Harrington. A few stanzas above she is compared to Bellona; Stimato egli
hauria lei forse Bellona.
S. 24. So our author, St. 14. Some, that Bellona in that warlike guise
To them appeared --
See a like discovery, B. 3. C. 9. S. 20, 21. Spenser's Britomart is a manifest
copy of Ariosto's Bradamante and Marsisa. B. iv. C. ii. S. iv. -- The bold Sir
FERRAUGH hight.
Sir Ferraugh is one of Ariosto's knights. B. iv. C. iii. S. xlv. Much more of
price, and of more gracious power
Is this, then that same water of Ardenne;
The which Renaldo drunk in happy hour,
Described by that famous Tuscane pen;
For that had might to change the hearts of men
From love to hate. --
That famous Tuscan pen Ariosto describes two fountains in Ardenna, from one of
which Renaldo drinks, and from the other Angelica. E questo hanno causato duo
fontane,
Che di diverso effetto hanno liquore;
Ambe in Ardenna, e non sono lontane.
D' amoroso disio l' una empie il core,
Che be dell' altra, senza amor rimane,
E volge tutto in ghiaccio il primo ardore.
Rinaldo gusto d' una, e amor lo strugge;
Angelica de l' altra, e l' odia, e fugge. C. 1. S. 78.

The cause of this first from two fountains grew,
Like in the taste, but in the effects unlike,
Plaste in Ardenna, each in others view,
Who tastes the one loves dart his heart does strike;
Contrary of the other does ensew,
Who drink thereof their lovers shall mislike;
Renaldo drank of one, and love much pained him,
The other drank this damsel, and disdained him.
Harrington. By Spenser's account of this WATER of ARDENNE it might be
concluded that Rinaldo drank of that fountain which turned love into hate; but
it appears from this passage in Ariosto, that he drank of that fountain which
produced the contrary effect. However it is manifest, that our author alludes
to another place in Ariosto, where Renaldo drinks of that fountain which
produced the effect here described by Spenser. C. 42. S. 63. B. v. C. ii. S.
iv. -- Here beyond,
A cursed cruel Sarazin does won
That keeps a bridges passage by strong hand;
And many errant knights has there foredonne.
Thus the pagan in Ariosto 29. 35. keeps a bridge, which no man can pass over
unless he fight with him; and which occasions many combats in the water, one of
which sort is here described between Sir Arthegall and the Saracen, S. 11.

In MORTE ARTHUR we find an account of a knight who kept a bridge B. 1. C. 111.
, in which a circumstance is mentioned, (not in Ariosto) which Spenser seems to
have copied from thence, in the passage under consideration. "On the third day
he rode over a long bridge; and there start upon him suddenly a passing foul
chorle, and he smote his horse, and asked him why he rode over that bridge
without his license." So Spenser, Who as they to the passage began to draw,
A villain came to them with scull all raw,
That passage-money did of them require.
St. 11. B. v. C. iii. S. xxxiv. And called Brigadore. --
The name of his horse. Brigliadoro is the name of Orlando's horse: From
Briglia d' oro, a golden bridle. B. v. C. ix. S. xi.He is describing GUILE. Als
at his back a great wide net he bore,
With which he seldom fished at the brook,
But used to fish for fools on the dry shore.
This net seems to be borrowed from the like expedient made use of by
Caligorant. Piacer fra tanta crudelta si prende
D' una RETE, etc. C. 15. S. 44. etc.

And in this cruelty he has great sport,
To use the service of a certain net.
Harrington. B. vi. C. xi. S. ii. etc. Like as is now befalne to this fair
maid,
Fair Pastorell, etc.
The distress of Pastorella is something similar to that of Isabel, who is
seized by certain outlaws or pirates, and imprisoned in a cave in order to be
sold for a slave. C. 12. S. 91. etc.

It has been before remarked, that Spenser in his BLATANT BEAST had some
reference to the story of the questing beast mentioned in the romance of MORTE
ARTHUR. Yet, notwithstanding, I am apt to think, that Spenser in representing
scandal under the shape of a monstrous and unnatural beast, imitated, or rather
vyed with Ariosto, who has represented avarice and jealousy under the picture
of two hideous beasts; the first of which, like the BLATANT BEAST attacks all
estates alike, enters the palace as well the cottage, but vents his rage in a
more particular manner against the clergy, sparing not even the pope himself.
She is at last supposed to be bound by Leo the tenth, as Jealousy is supposed
to be driven to her den by Renaldo. It is not improbable, that Ariosto, in
adumbrating these violent passions under the figure of beasts, formed of many
unnatural combinations, might have an eye to the beast in the REVELATIONS,
which "rose out of the sea, having seven heads, and ten horns, and upon his
horns ten crowns, and upon his heads the name of blasphemy; and the beast which
I saw was like unto a leopard, and his feet were as the feet of a bear, and his
mouth as the mouth of a lion." Revel. c. 13. v. 1, 2, etc.
See F. Q. 6, 12, 23, etc. and Orl. Furios. c. 26. S. 27. and c. 42. S. 44, etc.

The reader will excuse my adding, in this place, a passage which Spenser has
drawn from his favorite Italian poet, in the Mourning Muse of Thestylis. The
blinded archer-boy,
Like Lark in shower of rain,
Sat bathing of his wings,
And glad the time did spend
Under those crystal drops,
Which fall from her fair eyes,
And at their brightest beams,
Him proynd in lovely wise.
Cosi a le belle lagrime le piume
Si bagna Amore, e good al chiaro lume. C. 11. S. 65.

So the blind god, whose force no man can shun,
Sits in her eyes, and thence his darts does fling;
Bathing his wings in her clear crystal streams,
And sunning them in her rare beauties beams.
Harrington. Though it must be confessed that Spenser's verses bear a stronger
resemblance to these of Nic. Archias, of a Lady weeping. Tam suavi in pluvia
nitens Cupido
Insidebat, uti solet volucris
Ramo, vere novo, ad novos tepores
Post solemn accipere aetheris liquores,
Gestire and pluviae ore blandiendo.


I had almost forget to take notice, that our author, in his Radegunde with her
city of females, probably had an eye upon Ariosto's land of Amazons.

But although Spenser appears to have imitated, and consequently to have
admired Ariosto, from a survey of the preceding instances; and to have been
ambitious of rivalling the Orlando Furioso, in composing a poem upon a kindred
and similar plan; yet it may be affirmed, that they were both of a genius
entirely different. Spenser, amidst all his absurdities, abounds with beautiful
and sublime representations; while Ariosto's strokes of true poetry bear a very
signal disproportion, in their number, to his sallies of romantic imagination:
he gives us the grotesque for the graceful, and extravagance for majesty: he
frequently moves our laughter and surprise by the whimsical figures of a
Callot, but seldom awakens our admiration by the just portraits of a Raphael.
To confess the truth, Ariosto's vein is so far different from Spenser's, that
it is absolutely comic, and infinitely better suited to scenes of humor, than
to serious and solemn description; he so greatly excels in painting the
familiar manners, that what are called his tales, are, by far, the most shining
passages in his poem. Many of his similes are likewise the strongest
indications of his turn for burlesque. Thus the magician disclosing his
enchanted shield, to dazzle the fight of Bradamante, is compared to a cat
wantonly playing with a mouse, and at last killing it. C. 4. S. 22. Rogero
fighting with the orc, a sea monster, is compared to a fly attacking a mastiff,
and attempting to sting him in various parts of his body. C. 10. S. 105.
Alzirdo being slain by Orlando, his soldiers are said to make a noise like that
of a herd of swine, when a wolf has seized one of their little pigs, un tener
porco. C. 12. S. 78. Zerbino having first insulted Gabrina, and afterward
addressing her in a gentle manner, is compared to a dog, who at first furiously
assaults a stranger, but afterward, a crust being thrown to him, fawns upon
him. C. 20. S. 139. Orlando and Mandricard fighting together, their weapons
being broke to pieces, are compared to two peasants who are drubbing each
other, having quarreled about a watercourse, or boundary of land. C. 23. S.
83. Other examples of this sort are obvious to a reader of Ariosto.


But if there should be any readers, who, from some of the fictions in Orlando,
would prove that its author was possessed of an extensive and magnificent
invention, let them remember, that these are commonly borrowed from romances,
and adapted occasionally by the poet to the tenor of his allegory; and if it
should be granted, that some, or the greatest part of these were derived from
his own fancy, yet these, as they so enormously transgress the bounds of nature
and probability, ought by no means to be admitted as genuine marks of the TRUE
POET.

SECT. VII. Of Spenser's Inaccuracies.
FEW poets will appear to have written with greater rapidity than Spenser.
Hurried on by the vehemence of imagination he frequently cannot find time to
attend to the niceties of construction, or to stand still and revise what he
has before written, in order to prevent contradiction, inconsistency, or
repetition. Hence it is, that he not only fails in the connection of single
words, but of circumstances, and not only violates the rules of grammar, but
those of truth, probability and propriety. He was more sollicitous about giving
bold than exact touches to his figures, and was so earnestly intent of forming
what was great, that he forgot to produce that which was correct. So that if,
with these inaccuracies, we consider the irregularity of Spenser's plan in
general, we may venture to conclude, that no poet ever showed more
imagigination with less judgment, than the author of the FAERIE QUEEN. It may
be looked upon as a very officious piece of ill nature to draw together these
inferior and subordinate faults, and -- Seek slight faults to find,
Where nature moves, and rapture warms the mind.


But a review of them will tend to explain many passages in particular in our
author, and to bring us acquainted with his manner in general.

I shall begin with his Elleipses, in which the reader will find his omission
of the Relative to be frequent. B. i. C. vi. S. x. As when a greedy wolf
through hunger fell,
A silly lamb far from the flock does take,
Of whom he means his bloody feast to make,
A lion spies fast running toward him.
He should have said a greedy wolf WHO through hunger fell. B. i. C. vii. S.
xxxvii. A gentle youth, his dearly loved squire,
His spear of heben wood behind him bare,
A goodly person, and could menage fair,
His stubborn steed, etc.
WHO is omitted before could menage fair.
B. i. C. x. S. xlii. Whose face he made all beasts, to fear and gave
All in his hand. --
That is, into WHOSE hand he gave all. B. i. C. xi. S. xxi. He cryde as raging
seas are wont to roar,
When wintry storm his wrathful wreck does threat,
The roaring billows beat the rugged shore,
As they the earth would shoulder from her seat
And greedy gulf devour --
Some such word as WHILE is to be understood before the roaring billows, etc.
B. i. C. x. S. li. Whose staggering steps thy steadie hand does lead
And shows the way, his sinful soul to save.
He should have said, and to WHICH IT shows the way. B. iii. C. ii. S. xlv.
Which lovst the shadow of a warlike knight
No shadow, but a body has in power.
No shadow, but WHICH a body, etc. B. ii. C. viii. S. xxxviii. With that he
struck, and the other struck withal,
That nothing seemd mote bear so monstrous might,
The one upon his covered shield did fall
And glauncing down did not his owner bite,
But the other did upon his troncheon smite.
The one upon his, etc.
That is the STROKE, or SWORD of the one, etc.
And afterward, But the other, i. e. the STROKE of the other, etc.
So again, 4. 6. 13. So sorely he her struck that thence it glaunct
Adowne her back. --
That is, the WEAPON glaunct, etc. B. iv. C. vi. S. xxxvii. Ne in his face, nor
blood or life appeared,
But senseless stood, etc.
That is, HE senseless stood. B. iv. C. vii. S. vii. But certes was with milk
of wolves and tigers fed.
But certes HE was, etc. B. i. Introduct. S. ii. Whom that most noble Briton
prince so long
Sought through the world, and suffered so much ill.
He should have said, and FOR WHOM he suffered, etc. B. i. C. x. S. xii. The
eldest --
Like sunny beams threw from her crystal face
That could have daz'd the rash beholders sight
And round about her head did shine like heavens light.


That could have daz'd, i. e. That WHICH, etc. THAT put for that which occurs
in other places, and may mislead a reader not acquainted with Spenser's manner.

Thus again, THAT erst him goodly armed, now most of all him harmed
1. 11. 27. THAT one did reach, the other pusht away.
4. 1. 29. He should not have omitted WHICH in the last verse, and WHICH round
about her, etc. B. i. C. x. S. xliii. Had charge the tender orphans of the
dead,
And widows aid --
That is, widows TO aid. B. i. C. xii. S. ix. The sight with idle fear did
them dismay,
Ne durst approach him nigh --
Ne durst THEY approach him nigh, etc. B. ii. C. ii. S. xxxviii. As gentle
hind, whose sides with cruel steel
Through lanced, forth her bleeding life does rain,
Whiles the sad pang approaching she does feel,
Brayes out her latest breath --
SHE should have been inserted before brayes out, etc. B. ii. C. ii. S. xvii.
Stern melancholy did his courage pass,
And was (for terror more) all armed in shining brass.
He means, and HE was for, etc. B. ii. C. iv. S. ix. And eke that hag with many
a bitter threat
Still called upon to kill him in the place.
That is, still called upon HIM to, etc. B. v. C. iii. S. xiii. Which when he
had performed, then back again
To Bragadocchio did his shield restore.
To Bragadocchio HE did, etc. B. i. C. iii. S. v. Soon as the royal virgin he
did spy,
With gaping mouth at her ran greedily.
That is, HE ran, etc. B. i. C. i. S. iv. Seemed in heart some hidden care she
had,
For IT seemed, etc. So St. 32. Now said the lady draws toward night.
That is, IT draws. So again, So easy was to quench his flamed mind.
2. 8. 4.For, so easy IT was, etc. B. i. C. x. S. lxii. As for loose loves are
vain, and vanish into naught.
As for loose loves THEY are vain, etc. In these lines, Was underneath
enveloped with gold,
Whose glistring gloss DARKENED with filthy dust.
2. 8. 4. says Mr. Jortin, DARKENED is put for was darkened; and among other
instances of Spenser's elleipses, produces the following, in the Tears of the
Muses. And all the sisters rent their golden hairs,
And their fair faces with salt humor steep.
steep for did steep. -- Of this sort there is an elleipsis in these lines of
Milton's EPITAPH ON THE MARCHIONESS OF WINCHESTER. Her high birth, and graces
sweet,
Quickly found a lover meet;
The virgin-quire for her request
The God that sits at marriage feast.
The poet when he wrote request had forgot that his former preter-imperfect
tense, found, was formed without the sign did. It may not be impertinent to
remark, that the Marchioness lamented in this Epitaph of Milton, is probably
the same with that celebrated by B. Johnson, in an Elegy on the Lady ANNE
PAWLETT, Marchioness of WINTON; the Beginning of which Pope seems to have
thought of, when he wrote his Verses to the Memory of an Unfortunate LADY.
Johnson begins his Elegy, What gentle ghost, besprent with April dew
Hayles me so solemnly to yonder yew?
And beck'ning wooes me, etc.
In the Underwood. In which strain Mr. Pope beautifully breaks out, What
beck'ning ghost along the moonlight shade,
Invites my steps, and points to yonder glade?
It Is she --
Warb. edit. vol. 1.

As Johnson now lies before me, I may perhaps be pardoned for pointing out
another passage in him, which Mr. Pope probably remembered when he wrote the
following. From shelves to shelves see greedy Vulcan roll,
And lick up all their physic of the soul.
Dunciad. B. 3. v. 81. Thus Johnson, speaking of a parcel of books, These,
had thou pleased either to dine or sup,
Had made a meal, for VULCAN TO LICK UP.
An execration upon Vulcane. In the Underwood.




I shall now produce some instances of his confused construction. B. i. C. iii.
S. xii. Till seeing by her side the Lion stand
With sudden fearee her pitcher down she threw,
And fled away; for never in that land
Face of fair lady did she ever view,
And that dread Lions look her cast in deadly hew.


After having told us, that seeing the Lion stand by her, she fled away for
fear, he adds, that this was because he never had seen a lady before, which
certainly was no reason why she should fly from the lion. What our author
intended to express here, was, that "at seeing the lion, and so beautiful a
lady, an object never seen before in that country, she was affrighted, and
fled." B. i. C. vi. S. v. -- He began the fort assail,
Whereof he weend possessed soon to be,
And with rich spoil of ransackt chastity.
Of which he weend soon to be possessed, is not improper; but, to be
possessed with rich spoil, etc. is very inaccurate. Here seems to be likewise
somewhat of an elleipsis, and I think he should have said, rich spoil of ITS
ransackt chastity. B. i. C. x. S. xl. The fourth appointed by his office was
Poor prisoners to relieve with gracious aid,
And captives to redeem with price of brass,
From Turks and Sarazins which them had staid;
And though they faulty were, yet well he waid
That God to us forgiveth every hour,
Much more than that why they in bands were laid.


The poet says, that his office was to relieve PRISONERS, and to redeem
CAPTIVES with money from Turkish slavery; who though guilty of crimes, yet he
considered that God every hour pardons crimes much greater than those for which
they were imprisoned. -- By this it should seem, that those enslaved by the
Turks were guilty of crimes, etc. but the poet would signify by they faulty
were, the prisoners first mentioned, who were deservedly imprisoned on account
of their crimes.

Another instance of our author's inaccuracy, is, his tautology, or repetition
of the same circumstances. B. iv. C. xii. S. i. For much more eath to tell the
stars on hy,
Albe they endless seem, etc.
Then to recount the seas posterity.
The difficulty of numbering the deities present at the marriage of Thames and
Medway, he expresses in the same manner, in the stanza immediately preceding.
The which more eath it were for mortal wight,
To tell the sands, or count the stars on hye.
B. vi. C. vi. S. iv. For whylome he had been a doughty knight,
As any one that lived in his days,
And proved often in many a perilous fight,
In which he grace and glory won always;
And in all battles bore away the bays;
But being now attackt with timely age
And weary of this world's unquiet ways,
He took himself unto this hermitage.
All this we were told a few lines before. And soothly it was said by common
fame,
So long as age enabled him thereto,
That he had been a man of mickle name,
Renouned much in arms, and derring do;
But being aged now, and weary too
Of wars delights, and worlds contentious toil,
The name of knighthood he did disavow,
And hanging up his arms, and warlike spoil,
From all the worlds encumbrance did himself assoile.
C. v. S. 37. To this head we may refer the redundancies of a word. B. iii. C.
vi. S. xi. It fortuned fair Venus having lost
Her little son, the winged god of love,
* * * * * * * *
xii.
Him for to seek SHE left her heavenly house.
SHE is unnecessary in the last line, as FAIR VENUS is the nominative case.
Other instances of this fault might be produced.

I shall now cite some instances in which he contradicts himself, and runs into
other absurdities, on account of his forgetting, or not reviewing what he had
before written, and, in general, from an hasty manner of composition. B. i. C.
iv. S. viii.Speaking of Pride, he says, she -- shone as Titan's ray.
And in the following stanza he compares her to Phaeton, where he says, she
Exceeding shone, like Phoebus fairest child.
S. 9. This is a very striking Anti-climax. B. i. C. xi. S. xlvii. Another
fair like tree eke grew thereby,
Whereof whosoever did eat, eftsoons did know
Both good and evil: O mournful memory,
That tree through one man's fault has done us all to die.
Here he tells us, that the tree of knowledge occacasion'd the fall of man; in
the stanza before, he affirms the same of the tree of life.

The tree of life the crime of our first father's fall.
S. 46. B. ii. C. i. S. xxvi, xxvii. In these stanzas Sir Guyon suddenly abases
his spear, and begs pardon of the red-crosse knight, for having attacked him;
as if he had just now discovered him to be the red-crosse knight: whereas he
knew him to be so, St. 19. and after that resolves to fight with him. B. iv. C.
v. S. xxxvii.Speaking of CARE, He like a monstrous giant seemd in sight,
Far passing Brontes, and Pyracmon great.


If CARE was so monstrous a giant, how could he dwell, with his six servants,
in the little cottage abovementioned? They spide a little cottage, like some
poor man's nest.
S. 32. B. iv. C. i. S. live. The aged dame him seeing so enraged,
Was dead with fear, etc.


The aged dame Glauce might have easily pacified Sir Scudamore, in this place,
by telling him, that Britomartis was a woman; and as she was so much terrified,
it was highly natural, that she should assure him of it; though this would have
prevented an entertaining surprise, which the poet reserved for. 4. 6. 28. B.
i. C. ix. S. vi. Aread, prince Arthur --


Arthur and Una have been hitherto represented as entire strangers to each
other; and it does not appear how Una became acquainted with the name of this
new knight.

B. i. C. viii. S. xliii, etc. It is unnatural, that the red-crosse knight
should be so suddenly reconciled to Una, after he had forsaken her for her
supposed infidelity and impurity. The poet should certainly have expressed an
eclaircissement between them.

B. vi. C. xi. S. li. It was an instance of Sir Calidore's courage, to restore
to Coridon his flocks; but not of his courtesy, to carry away his love
Pastorella. The poet should have managed the character of his PATRON OF
COURTESY with more art.

As Spenser has drawn the character of his hero prince Arthur from history, he
has limited himself to a particular period of time, in which all the events of
his poem, however fictitious or imaginary, are supposed to have happened: upon
this account all discoveries made since that particular period of time, are
improperly specified; and the mention of them may be justly termed an
anachronism. Our author has been guilty of one or two faults of this kind,
which we shall lay before the reader. And evermore their hideous ordinance,
Upon the bulwarks cruelly did play.
2. 11. 14.

Spenser should have spared this circumstance of firearms. Ariosto was more
cautious in this matter; for though he has supposed the use of them upon a
particular occasion in the age of Charlemagne; yet, notwithstanding, he hints,
that they were soon afterward destroyed, and that the use of them was not
revived till many years after; and as the invention, so the revival of them is
attributed to the devil. C. 11. S. 22. It has been observed, that Milton copied
the invention of firearms from Ariosto; and it may further be observed, that
Milton, in the speech which one of the evil angels makes upon them, -- They
shall fear we have disarmed
The thunderer of his only dreaded bolt, Par. L. 6. 490.

has copied from himself, in one of his latin epigrams. There are other strokes
likewise in Milton's lesser poems, which he has transferred into his GREAT
WORK. Thus in SAMSON Agonistes, THRICE SHE ASSAYED with flattering prayers and
sighs,
And amorous reproaches, to win from me
My capital secret, etc.
THRICE I deluded her. --
v. 392. This form he has exactly repeated in PARADISE LOST. THRICE HE ASSAYED,
and THRICE, in spite of scorn,
Tears, such as angels weep, burst forth. --
1. 619. In COMUS, -- A perpetual feast of nectar'd sweets
Where no CRUDE SURFEIT REIGNS.
In PARADISE LOST, Quaff immortality and joy, SECURE
OF SURFEIT. --
5. 638. In COMUS, A thousand LIVERIED ANGELS LACKEY her.
The following, in PARADISE LOST, is a kindred image, About her as a GUARD
ANGELIC placed.
8. 559. Among Milton's IMITATIONS OF HIMSELF, I think the following have been
unobserved. In Il PENSEROSO, Sometimes let gorgeous TRAGEDY
In sceptered pall come sweeping by,
Presenting THEBES, or PELOPS' line,
Or the Tale of TROY divine.
It appears, that the Greek Tragedies, founded upon these stories made an
early, and consequently a lasting impression upon Milton. In his first elegy to
Diodatus, written before he was arrived at his twentieth year, he
particularises them, where (as in the lines just cited) he is speaking of
tragedy in general. Seu maeret PELOPEA DOMUS, sen nobilis ILI,
Seu luit incestos aula CREONTIS avos.
B. 1. El. 1. In L' ALLEGRO, -- Lydian Aires
MARRIED to immortal verse.
Thus, at a SOLEMN MUSIC, -- Voice and verse
WED your divine sounds. --
In COMUS, Plucking ripe clusters from the TENDER SHOOTS.
Of a vine, in the TRANSLATION of PSALM, 80. -- make their food
Her grapes and TENDER SHOOTS.
In PARADISE REGAINED, Tall stripling youths rich-clad, of fairer hue
Than GANYMED or HYLAS.
2. 352. It singles out these as two very beautiful youths in one of his latin
elegies. Talis, in aeterno, JUVENIS SIGEIUS, olympo,
Miscet amatori pocula plena Jovi:
Aut qui formosas pellexit ad oscula nymphas,
Thiodomanteus naiade raptus HYLAS.
B. 1. El. 7, In the first of which verses he had eye to this of Tibullus,
TALIS IN AETERNO faelix Vertumnus OLYMPO.
B. 4. 2.

It has been before remarked, that Milton takes all opportunities of
illustrating the power of music, and of expressing his extreme fondness for it:
These verses, in COMUS, relating to that subject, -- SYLLA wept,
And chid her BARKING waves into ATTENTION,
And FELL CHARYBDIS murmurd hoarse applause,
strongly resemble what Silius Italicus describes of a Sicilian Shepherd
playing on his reed, Scyllaei tacuere canes, stetit atra charybdis.
14. 476. But shall we suspect Milton of plagiarism because the Roman poet
wrote FIRST? was it not NATURAL for either poet in expressing the force of
music in the ISLE OF SICILY, to mention it is influence on two most implacable
objects, which the SITUATION of the Musician, in both cases, suggested?

The fable of the garden of the Hesperides seems to have affected the
imagination of Milton in a very particular manner, as his allusions to it are
most remarkably frequent, viz. And LADIES of the HESPERIDES --
PAR. REG. 2. 357. But Beauty, like the fair HESPERIAN TREE,
Laden with blooming gold --
COMUS. All amidst the GARDENS FAIR
Of HESPERUS, and his daughters three,
That sing about the golden tree.
ibid. Like those HESPERIAN GARDENS famed of old.
PAR. LOST, 3. 568. -- HESPERIAN FABLES true,
If true, here only, etc.
ibid. 4. 520. -- And VERDANT ISLES
HESPERIAN.
ibid. 8. 631. And in the original draught of the Spirit's prologue to COMUS,
he has painted these delicious islands with the utmost luxuriancy of fancy. In
LYCIDAS, WEEP NO MORE, woeful shepherds, WEEP NO MORE,
For Lycidas your sorrow is not dead,
* * * * * * * *
-- Lycidas sunk low, but mounted high,
* * * * * * * *
Where other groves, and other streams along,
With nectar pure his oozy locks he laves,
And hears the UNEXPRESSIVE NUPTIAL SONG,
In the BLESSED KINGDOMS meek of joy and love,
There entertain him all the SAINTS above,
In solemn troops, and sweet societies,
Who SING, and singing in their glory move.
* * * * * * * * * *
Henceforth thou art the GENIUS OF THE SHORE.
The same genius dictated similar sentiments on a similar occasion. Nec te
Lethaeo fas quaesivisse sub orco,
Nec tibi convenient lacrymae, NEC FLEBIMUS ULTRA,
Ite procul lacrymae, PURUM COLIT AETHERA Damon,
HEROUMQUE ANIMAS inter, DIVOSQUE perennes,
Aethereos haurit latices. --
-- Quin tu caeli post jura recepta
DEXTER ades, PLACIDUSQUE FAVE QUICUNQUE VOCARIS,
Seu tu noster eris Damon, sive AEQUIOR AUDIS
Diodotus, quo te divino nomine cuncti
Caelitolae norint, SYLVISQUE VOCABERE DAMON.
* * * * * * * * *
En etiam tibi VIRGINEI servantur HONORES;
Ipse caput nitidum cinctus rutilante corona,
Laetaque frondentis gestans umbracula palmae,
Aeternum perages IMMORTALES HYMENAEOS;
CANTUS ubi, choreisque furit lyra mista beatis.
Epitaphium DAMONIS.

I shall conclude this tedious note with observing, that Milton's genius for
describing DIVINE things, which shines with so distinguished a luster in the
PARADISE LOST, discovered itself in some of his most early productions. In the
juvenile poems we meet with frequent descriptions of the bliss and splendour of
heaven, of the glory of celestial beings, of angelic music, and of other
objects placed Beyond the visible diurnal sphere.
of this, a passage cited above, as is the ode on the NATIVITY, on the
CIRCUMCISION, at a SOLEMN MUSIC, etc. etc. are testimonies. Even at the age of
seventeen, we find that a disposition to conceive images of this sort began to
dawn in his imagination, Donec NITENTES ad FORES
Ventum est olympi, and REGIAM CRYSTALLINAM, et
STRATUM SMARAGDIS ATRIUM.
In OB. PRAESUL. ELIENSIS.


At mihi major erit, qui lurida creditur arma,
Et trifidum fulmen surripuisse Jovi. In Inventorem Bombardae.

Chaucer in his account of the battle of Anthony and Cleopatra with Octavius,
mentions guns. With grisly soune, outgoith the great gonne. Leg. of Cleopatra,
v. 58:

B. vi. C. ii. S. v. All in a woodman's jackett he was clad
Of Lincoln green. --
It would be difficult to prove that a manufacture of green cloth subsisted at
Lincoln in the age of king Arthur; and indeed if it could, we should not
readily dispense with the poet's mention of it. To these may be added some of
his ambiguities.

B. i. C. vii. S. xlvi. Bred in the loathly lakes of Tartary.
The poet should not have used Tartary here for Tartarus, as the reader might
mistake it for the country of that name. He has committed the same fault in
Virgil's Gnat. Lastly the squalid lakes of TARTARIE.
B. ii. C. x. S. xv. Did head against them make, and strong MUNIFICENCE.
By MUNIFICENCE our author signifies defense or fortification; from munio and
facio. This is a word very injudiciously coined by Spenser, as the same word in
our language signifies quite another thing. Milton perhaps is more blameable
for a fault of this kind. Now had they brought the work, by wondrous art
PONTIFICAL. Par. Lost, 10. 313.

As the ambiguous term pontifical may be so easily construed into a pun, and
may be interpreted popish, as well as bridge-making. B. iii. C. i. S. xxxvi.
And whilst he bathd with her two crafty spies
She secretly would search each dainty lim.
crafty spies is here a periphrasis for eyes, but a very inartificial one; as
it may so easily be mistaken for two persons whom she employed, with herself,
to search, etc.

SECT. VIII. Of Spenser's imitations of himself.
COmmentators of less taste than learning, of less judgment than ostentation,
have taken infinite pains to point out those passages which their respective
authors have imitated from others. The curious reader is more particularly
referred to that extensive and elaborate series of quotation, entitled,
"VIRGILIUS COLLATIONE SCRIPTORUM GRAECORUM ILLUSTRATUS OPERA and INDUSTRIA
FULVII URSINI.
This enquiry is executed with a modest reserve, and extended no farther than
to those passages which are distinguished with more indubitable evidences of
transcription or imitation, might (it should seem) prove equally instructive
and entertaining: as it would the better enable us to regulate our idea of the
merit and character of an author, by ascertaining what degree of genuine
invention is to be allowed him, and by showing how far he has improved the
materials of another by his own art and manner of application; at the same time
that it must necessarily gratify the inquisitive disposition of every reader.
But where there are even the most apparent traces of likeness, how very seldom
can it be affirmed, with any truth, as a late very sagacious critic See, A
DISCOURSE on POETICAL IMITATION.
has amply proved, that an imitation was intended? and how few of the
commentators abovementioned are there, who do not (to use his own words)
mistake RESEMBLANCES for THEFTS? It is true, in general, that parallellists
mistake resemblances for thefts; but this assertion by no means affects the
instances which I have given, in two former sections, of Spenser's imitations
from Chaucer and Ariosto. Spenser is universally acknowledged to have been an
attentive reader, and professed admirer of both those poets; his imitations
from the former are most commonly LITERAL; and what he has copied from the
latter, are ARTIFICIAL FICTIONS, which consisting of UNNATURAL COMBINATIONS,
could not, on account of their SINGULARITY, be fallen upon by both poets
accidentally; as NATURAL APPEARANCES might be, which lie exposed and obvious to
all, at all times: so that we may safely pronounce the resemblances produced in
the sections abovementioned, to have been INTENDED.
As this then is a business which proceeds upon an uncertain foundation,
affording the amusement of conjecture rather than the satisfaction of truth; it
may perhaps be a more serviceable undertaking, to produce an author's
IMITATIONS OF HIMSELF: and this will be more particularly useful in the three
following respects, viz. It will discover the FAVORITE IMAGES of an author; it
will teach us how VARIOUSLY he expresses the same thought; and it will often
EXPLAIN DIFFICULT passages, and words. B. i. Introduct. S. 3. Fair Venus son
that with thy cruel dart,
At that good knight so cunningly did rove,
* * * * * * * * * *
Lay now thy deadly heben bow apart.
Again, Like as Cupido on Idaean hill,
When having laid his cruel bow aside,
And mortal arrows, wherewith he does fill
The world with murderous spoils, and bloody pray,
With his fair mother he him dights to play,
And with his goodly sisters, etc.
2. 8. 6. And in the following, speaking of Cupid in the garden of Adonis, Who
when he has with spoils and cruelty
Ransackt the world, and in the woeful hearts
Of many wretches set his triumphs hie,
Thither resorts, and laying his sad darts
Aside, with fair Adonis plays his wanton parts.
3. 6. 49 Thus again, And eke amongst them little Cupid played
His wanton sports, being returned late
From his fierce wars, and having from him laid
His cruel bow, wherewith he thousands has dismayed.
2. 9. 34. B. i. C. viii. S. xxix.Prince Arthur enters Orgoglio's castle. Then
began he loudly through the house to call,
But no man cared to answer to his cry,
There reigned a solemn silence over all,
Nor voice was heard, nor wight was seen in bower or hall.


This affecting image of silence and solitude is again to be met with, after
Britomart had surveyed the rich furniture of Busirane's house. But more she
marvail'd, that no footings trace,
Nor wight appeared, but wasteful emptiness,
And solemn silence over that place
3. 11. 53. B. i. C. xii. S. xxxix. -- Many an angels voice,
Singing before the eternal majesty
In their trinall triplicities on hie.
Thus in an HYMN of heavenly love; of angels, There they in their trinal
triplicities,
About him wait. --


The image of the angels singing in their trinall triplicities, puts me in mind
of a passage in Milton's LYCIDAS, where the pointing seems to be wrong.

There entertain him all the saints above,
In solemn troops, and sweet societies,
Who sing, and singing in their glory move.
According to the present pointing, the sense is, "The saints who are in solemn
troops, and sweet societies, entertain him;" or, entertain him in [among] their
solemn troops, and sweet societies: but if the comma was struck off after
Societies, another and more beautiful meaning would be introduced, viz. "The
saints who SING IN solemn troops and sweet societies, entertain him, etc." B.
ii. C. iii. S. xxiv.Of Belphaebe speaking, And twixt the pearls and rubies
softly brake
A silver sound --
Thus in Sonnet 81. But fairest she, when so she does display
The gate with pearls, and rubies richly dight,
Through which her words so wise do make their way.
Ariosto gives us pearls and coral for the lips and teeth. Che da i coralli, e
da le pretiose
Perle uscir fanno i dolci accenti mozzi. C. 12. S. ult.

The coral and the perle by nature wrought.
Harrington. B. ii. C. iii. S. xxv. Upon her eyelids many graces sat
Under the shadow of her even brows.
In Sonnet 40. When on each eyelid sweetly do appear
An HUNDRED GRACES as in shade to sit.
And in a verse of his The following passage from Sir T. More's English works,
London, 1557, may perhaps give the reader some idea of the nature of our poet's
PAGEANTS.

Master Thomas More in his youth devysed in his fathers house in London, a
goodly hangyng of fine painted clothe, with nine pageauntes, and verses over
every of those pageauntes: which verses expressed and declared, what the images
in those pageauntes represented: and also in those pageauntes were painted, the
things that the verses over them did (in effect) declare; which verses here
follow.

In the first pageaunt was painted a boy playing at the top and squyrge, and
over this pageaunt was written as follows. CHILDHODE.
I am called CHILDHODE, in play (...) all my mind,
To cast a coyte, a cokstele, and a ball;
A top can I set, and dryve it in his kind;
But would to God these hateful books all,
Were in a fire brent to powder small.
Then might I led my life always in play,
Which life God send me to mine endyng day.


In the second pageaunt was painted a goodly fresh young man, ryding upon a
goodly horse, havynge a hawke on his fyste, and a brase of grayhowndes following
him, and under the horse fete, was painted the same boy, that in the first
pageaunt was playing at the top and squyrge; and over this second pageaunt the
writing was thus. MANHOD.
MANHOD I am, therefore I me delyght
To hunte and hawke, to nourish up and feed
The grayhownde to the course, the hawke to the flight,
And to bestryde a good, and lusty stead;
These things become a very man in deed,
Yet thinks this boy his peevish game sweeter,
But what? no force, -- his reason is no better."


After which the aforesaid young man is introduced on the ground as a victim to
Venus and Cupid, who stand over him; and afterward is represented sitting on
Venus and Cupid, etc. etc. but thus much by way of specimen.


PAGEANTS preserved by E. K. Notes on JUNE.
An hundred graces on her eyelids sat.
Which he drew from a modern Greek poem ascribed to Musaeus, -- (...)
(...)
(...). V. 63.

In the Hymn of heavenly love we find a thousand graces. Sometimes upon her
forehead they behold
A thousand graces masking in delight.


Our author, in the FAERIE QUEEN, has also copied from the same poem ascribed
to Musaeus. Scudamore, in the Temple of Venus, is much in the same
circumstances with Leander. Tho shaking off all doubt, and shamefast fear,
Which ladies love I heard had never won
Amongst men of worth, I to her stepped near,
And by the lilly hand her labored up to rear.
4. 10. 53. (...), V. 99. and seq.

And afterward, (...),
* * * * * * *
(...).
Audacter autem ob amorem impudentiam affectans,
* * * * * * *
Sed ipse audacter adibat prope puellam
* * * * * * *
Tacit quidem stringens roseos digitos puellae.
WOOMANHOOD rebukes Scudamore for this insult, whom Scudamore answers, Saying,
it was to knight unseemly shame,
Upon a recluse virgin to lay hold;
That unto Venus' services was sold.
To whom I thus: nay, but it fitteth best,
For Cupids man with Venus' maid to hold;
For ill your goddess services are dressed
By virgins, and your sacrifices let to rest.
S. 54. In the same manner Hero rebukes, and Leander answers. -- (...);
* * * * * *
(...).
-- Quid me, infelix, Virginem trahis?
Veneris non te decet Deae sacerdotem sollicitare.
* * * * * *
Leander answers, (...)
(...)
(...),
(...). --
Veneris ut sacerdos exerce Veneris opera;
Huc ades, initiare nuptialibus Legibus Deae;
Virginem non decet administrare Veneri;
Virginibus Venus non gaudet. --
But, to return to the subject. B. ii. C. xii. S. lxvii. And the Ivorie in
golden mantle gownd.
Thus in the Epithalamion. Her long loose yellow locks --
* * * * *
Do like a golden mantle her attire.


It is remarkable, that Spenser's females, both in the FAERIE QUEEN, and in
his other poems, are all described with yellow hair. And in his general
description of the influence of beauty over the strongest men, he
particularizes golden tresses. And mighty hands forgett their manliness,
Drawn with the power of an hart-robbing eye,
And wrapped in fetters of a GOLDEN TRESSE.
5. 8. 1. Whether this was done in compliment to Q. Elizabeth, who had yellow
hair, or in imitation of the Italian poets, who give most of their women
tresses of this color, I leave to the determination of the reader. B. iii. C.
i. S. xxxvi.Speaking of Venus, while Adonis was bathing. And throw into the
well sweet rosemaries,
And fragrant violets, and pancies trim,
And ever with sweet nectar she did sprinkle him.
Thus in the Prothalamion. Then forth they all out of their baskets drew
Great store of flowers, the honor of the field,
That to the sense did fragrant odours yield,
All which upon those goodly birds they threw,
And all the waves did strew,
That like old Peneus waters they did seem,
When down along by pleasant Tempes shore,
Scattred with flowers through Thessaly they streeme.
To these we may add, -- And ever as the crew
About her daunct, sweet flowers that far did smell,
And fragrant odours they upon her threw.
6. 10. 14. The circumstance of throwing flowers into the water, is not unlike
what Milton says of Sabrina's stream.

-- The shepherds, at their festivals,
Carol her goodness loud in rustic lays,
And throw sweet garland-wreaths into her stream,
Of pancies, pinks, and gaudy daffadils. Comus, v. 848.

Statius introduces Love and the Graces sprinkling Stella and Violantilla, on
their wedding-night, with flowers and odours. -- Nec blandus Amor nec Gratia
cessat
Amplexum virides optatae conjugis artus
Floribus innumeris, and olenti spargere thymbra. Epithalam. Sylv. B. 1, 2. v.
19.

And in another place he speaks of Venus pouring the fragrance of Amomum over
Earinus in great abundance; a circumstance not much unlike that just mentioned
concerning Venus and Adonis. -- Hunc multo Paphie saturabat amomo. Com. Earin.
Sylv. B. 3. 4. v. 82.

B. iii. C. vii. S. xvi. Of the witches son, who falls in love with Florimel.
Often from the forest wildings he did bring,
Whose sides empurpled were with smiling red;
And often young birds, which he had taught to sing
His mistress praises sweetly caroled:
Girlands of flowers sometimes for her fair head
He fine would dight; sometimes the squirrel wild
He brought to her in bands, etc.


Such presents as these are made by Coridon to Pastorell. And often when Coridon
unto her brought,
Or little sparrows stolen from their nest,
Or wanton squirrels in the woods far sought.
6. 9. 40. B. i. C. ix. S. 24. -- staring wide
With stony eyes, and hartless hollow hew,
Astonished stood, as one that had espide
Infernal furies with their chains untide.
Spenser often expresses fear, or surprise, in this manner, -- As one affright
With hellish fiends, or furies mad uprore.
2. 5. 37. -- The stony fear
Ran to his heart, and all his sense dismayed,
Ne thenceforth life, ne courage did appear,
But as a man whom hellish fiends have frayd,
Trembling long time he stood.
2. 8. 46. -- Often out of her bed she did astart,
As one with view of ghastly fiends affright.
3. 2. 29. Ne wist he what to think, or to devise.
But like as one whom fiends have made afraid,
He long astonished stood; ne ought he said,
Ne ought he did; but with fast-fixed eyes
He gazed still upon that snowy maid.
5. 3. 18.

From the passages already alleged, and from some some others which I shall
produce, it will appear, that Spenser particularly excells in painting
affright, confusion, and astonishment. Abessa's affright at seeing the Lion and
Una.
1. 3. 12. Full fast she fled, ne ever looked behind,
* * * * * * *
And home she came, where as her mother blind
Sat in eternal night; naught could she say,
But sudden catching hold, did her dismay,
With quaking hands, and other signs of fear;
Who full of ghastly fright, and cold dismay,
Began shut the door. --
1. 3. 12. The behavior of Abessa and Corecca, when Kirkrapine was torn in
pieces by the Lion.

His fearful friends wear out the woeful night,
Ne dare to weep, nor seem to understande
The heavy hap, which on them is alight,
Afraid lest to themselves the like mishappen might.
1. 3. 20. DESPAIR has just persuaded the red-crosse knight to kill himself.
1. 9. 48. The knight was much enmoved with his speech,
That as a swords point through his heart did pearce,
And in his conscience made a secret breach,
Well-knowing true all that he did rehearse,
And to his fresh remembrance did reverse
The uglie hue of his deformed crimes,
That all his manly powers it did disperse,
As he were charmed with enchanted rimes,
That oftentimes he quakt, and fainted oftentimes.
xlix.
In which amazement when the miscreant
Perceived him to waver weak and frail,
Whiles trembling horror did his conscience dart,
And hellish anguish did his soul assail;
To drive him to despair and quite to quail,
He showed him painted in a table plain
The damned ghosts that do in torments wail,
And thousand fiends that do them endless pain
With fire and brimstone, which for ever shall remain.
l.
The sight whereof so thoroughly him dismayed,
That naught but death before his eyes he saw,
And ever-burning wrath before him laid,
By righteous sentence of the Almighties law;
Then 'gan the villain him to overawe,
And brought unto him swords, ropes, poison, fire,
And all that might him to perdition draw,
And bade him choose what death he would desire,
For death was due to him, that had provokt Gods ire.
li.
But when as none of them he saw him take,
He to him raught a dagger sharp and keen,
And gave it him in hand; his hand did quake,
And tremble like a leaf of aspine green;
And troubled blood through his pale face was seen
To come and go, with tidings from the heart,
As it a running messenger had been;
At last, resolved to work his final smart
He lifted up his hand, that back again did start.


It is a trite observation, that we paint that best, which we have felt most.
Spenser's whole life seems to have consisted of disappointments and distress;
so that he, probably, was not unacquainted with the bitter agonies of a
despairing mind, which the warmth of his imagination, and, what was its
consequence, his sensibility of temper contributed to render doubly severe.
Unmerited and unpitied indigence ever struggles hardest with true genius; and a
good taste, for the same reasons that it enhances the pleasures of life,
sustains with uncommon torture the miseries of that state, "in which (says an
incomparable moralist) every virtue is obscured, and in which no conduct can
avoid reproach; a state in which cheerfulness is insensibility, and dejection
fullenness, of which the hardships are without honor, and the labors without
reward." To these may be added his personage FEAR. Next him was FEAR all armed
from top to toe,
Yet thought himself not safe enough thereby;
But feared each shadow moving to and fro;
And his own arms when glittering he did spy,
Or clashing heard, he fast away did fly,
As ashes pale of hew, and wingy-heel'd;
And evermore on Danger fixed his eye,
Against whom he always bent a brazen shield,
Which his right hand unarmed fearfully did wield.
3. 12. 12. Again, When Scudamour those heavy tidings heard
His heart was thrild with point of deadly fear,
Ne in his face, or blood or life appeared,
But senseless stood, like to amazed steare
That yet of mortal stroke the stound does bear.
4. 6. 37. A priest of Isis after having heard the dream of Britomart. Like to
a weak faint-harted man he fared,
Through great astonishment of that strange sight;
And with long locks upstanding stiffly stared,
Like one adawed with some dreadful spright.
5. 7. 20.

Other instances of this sort might be cited; but these are the most striking.

It is proper to remark, in this place, that Spenser has given three large
descriptions, much of the same nature, viz. The Bower of Bliss, 2. 12. The
Gardens of Adonis, 3. 5. And the Gardens of the Temple of Venus, 4. 10. all
which, though, in general, the same, his invention has diversified with many
new circumstances; as it has likewise his Mornings: and perhaps we meet with no
poet who has more requently, or more minutely, at the same time, delineated the
Morning, than Spenser. He has introduced two historical genealogies of future
kings and princes of England, 3. 3. and, 2. 10. beside two or three other
shorter sketches of English history. He often repeatedly introduces his
allegorical figures, which he sometimes describes with very little variation
from his first representation; particularly, DISDAIN, FEAR, ENVY, and DANGER.
In this poem we likewise meet with two hells, 1. 5. 31. and 2. 7. 21.

It may not be foreign to the purpose of this Section, to lay before the reader
some uncommon words and expressions, of which Spenser, by his frequent use,
seems particularly fond. B. ii. C. v. S. xxxii. That round about him dissolute
did PLAY
Their wanton follies, and light merriment.


Spenser often uses the verb PLAY, in this sense, with an accusative case. A
multitude of babes about her hong,
PLAYING their sports. --
1. 10. 31. -- The fry of children young
Their wanton sports, and childish mirth did PLAY.
1. 12. 7. Then do the salvage beasts begin to PLAY
Their pleasant friskes. --
4. 10. 46. But like to angels PLAYING heavenly toys.
5. 10. 42. -- PLAYING his childish sport.
5. 16. How Mutability in them does PLAY
Her cruel sports --
7. 6. 1. And in an Hymn of Love. There, with thy daughter Pleasure, they do
PLAY
Their hurtlesse sports. --
To these we may add, -- did SPORT
Their spotless pleasure, and sweet love's content.
4. 10. 26. We find PLAY used after this manner in Milton. -- For Nature here
Wantoned as in her prime, and PLAYED at will
Her virgin fancies. -- Par. Lost, 5. v. 295.

B. i. C. ii. S. xliii. -- In this MISFORMED house.


Spenser often arbitrarily prefixes MIS to a word, viz. misfeigning, 1. 3. 40.
misdiet, 1. 4. 23. misaymed, 1. 8. 8. misborne, 1. 5. 42. misdoubted, 4. 2. 23.
mischallenge, 4. 3. 11. misconceit, and misfare, 4. 6. 2. misregard, 4. 8. 29.
misthought, 4. 8. 58. mistrained, 5. 11. 54. misfell, 5. 5. 10. misdoubtfull,
5. 6. 3. misdight, 5, 7. 37. misdesert, 6. 1. 12. misgotten, 6. 1. 18.
miscreated, 2. 7. 42. I have been the more prolix in collecting these
instances, in order to justify a very happy conjecture of Mr. Jortin Remarks,
page 69.
, without which it will be difficult to make sense of a passage in our author,
viz. Some like to hounds, some like to apes DISMAYED.
2. 11. 11. Mr. Jortin proposes to read MISMADE, i. e. ill-shaped; an
alteration which we cannot reject, when we consider the liberties Spenser took
in adding MIS to a word. He probably sent it to the press mismayd, that it
might rhyme more exactly (and that Spenser was very exact in this point, I have
before endeavored to prove) with assayd, and arrayd; but the compositors were
better acquainted with dismayed, which they accordingly adopted. B. ii. C. iv.
S. xliv. -- When Rancour rife
Kindles revenge, and threats his RUSTIE knife.
So, [armd] -- some with long spears,
Some RUSTIE knives. --
2. 9. 13. Bitter despite, with Rancour's RUSTIE knife.
1. 4. 35. [a wound] In which a RUSTIE knife long time had fixed stood.
1. 9. 36. And of DANGER, A net in the one hand, and a RUSTIE blade
In the other was. --
3. 12. 11. The steeds of Night are thus described, Their RUSTIE bits did
champ. --
1. 5. 20.

The word RUSTIE seems to have conveyed the idea of somewhat very loathsome and
horrible to our author. In Virgil's Gnat he applies it to horror. Nor those
same mournful kingdoms compassed
With RUSTIE horror. --


I will hence take occasion to correct a passage in Chaucer, in the character
of the Reve. And by his side he bare a RUSTIE blade. Prolog. v. 620.



I do not perceive the consistency of the Reves wearing a rustie sword; I
should rather be inclined to think that the poet wrote trusty blade. And by
his side he bare a TRUSTY blade.
B. iii. C. i. S. lxii. And to her weapon ran; in mind to GRIDE
The loathed leachour --
Spenser frequently uses GRIDE, which signifies to pierce. This word, as E. K.
remarks in the Pastoral of February, is often used by Lidgate, but never once
by Chaucer. Spenser was very well versed in all our ancient English bards, but
I do not remember that he pays a compliment to any of them, Chaucer excepted
Passim.
, and the Epilogue to the Aeglogues.
author of Pierce Plowman. GRIDE is found in the following passages. -- Whose
love has GRYDE
My feeble breast. --
3. 2. 37. -- An arrow --
-- Secretly did glide
Into his heart, which it did sorely GRIDE.
3. 9. 29. Such was the wound that Scudamour did GRIDE.
4. 6. 1. All as I were through the body GRIDE. February.

Therewith my soul was sharply GRIDE. August.

-- A serpent --
With brandisht tongue the empty air did GRIDE. Virg. Gnat.

And again, in F. Q. -- Through his thigh the mortal steel did GRIDE.
2. 8. 36. Milton probably adopted this old word from our author. The GRIDING
sword with discontinuous wound
Passed through him. -- Par. Lost, 6. 329.

6. 329. B. ii. C. iii. S. xxv. That was ambition, rash desire to STIE.
To the earl of Essex.
Mr. Jortin informs us, that STIE signifies to soar, to ascend; so that the
sense of the verse before us, is, "that was ambition, which is a rash desire of
still ascending upwards." STIE occurs again often. Thought with his wings to
STIE above the ground.
1. 11. 25. -- A storm --
Long here and there, and round about does STIE.
4. 9. 33. -- Love can higher STIE
Than reason's reach. --
3. 2. 36. That from this lower tract he dared to STIE
Up to the clouds. Muipotmos.

Whilst in the smoke she unto heaven did STIE. V. of Bellay. St. 11.

With bolder wing shall dare aloft to STY
To the last praises of the Faerie Queen. Par. Lost, 6. 329.

P. 480, Urry's edit.
This word occurs in Chaucer's Testament of Love. "Ne steyrs to STEY one is
none." Par. Lost, 6. 329.
Where it is used actively, "to lift one up." Gower has used this word in the
preter-imperfect tense, but neutrally. And or Christ went out of this earth
here,
And STICHED to heven. -- John Gower unto the noble K. Henry IV. v. 177.

B. i. C. ii. S. iii. -- Death is an equal doom
To good and bad the common INN of rest.
INN for Habitation, Seat, or Recess, is much used by Spenser. In his age this
word had not acquired the vulgar cast which it would carry with it in modern
poesy. The bower of bliss, The worlds sweet INN from pain and wearisom
turmoyle.
2. 12. 32. He shall his days with peace bring to his earthly INN.
3. 3. 29. And where the chanting birds lulled me asleep,
The ghastly owl her grievous INN does keep. December.

INNHOLDERS is likewise used for inhabitants. I do possess the worlds most
regiment,
And if ye please it into parts divide,
And every parts INHOLDERS to convent.
7. 7. 17. B. i. C. xii. S. xxxix. Driven by FATAL error. --
That is, driven by an error ordained by the fates. Again, At last by FATAL
course they driven were.
3. 9. 4. Nor less she feared that same FATAL read.
4. 12. 27. That is, that same decree of the Fates. Or did his life her FATAL
date expire.
2. 8. 24. That is, her date assigned by the Fates. Either FATAL end,
Or other mighty cause, us to did hither send.
That is, some end which the Fates intend to accomplish. 3. 3. 14.FATALIS has
sometimes the same signification as Spenser's FATAL. So Virgil, FATALEM Aeneam
manifesto manifesto numine ferri. Aen. 11. v. 232.

B. vi. C. vii. S. xix. The whiles his salvage page that wont be PRESSED.


PRESSED is very frequently used by Spenser; in some places it signifies ready or
quick; in others it seems to be used adverbially, for quickly, immediately. It
is plainly the old French word, Priest, quick, or nimble, which sometimes is
used adverbially. Mr. Jortin derives it from praesto adesse. -- For what art
thou
That makst thyself his dayes-man to prolong
The vengeance PRESSED? --
2. 8. 28. That is, instant or present vengeance. Who him affronting, soon to
fight was ready PRESSED.
4. 3. 22. That is, ready quickly. In which his work he had six servants
PRESSED.
4. 5. 36. That is, six ready, or nimble, servants; or perhaps, present. So
hard behind his back his foe was PRESSED.
4. 8. 41. That is, His foe was very near him behind. To warn her foe to
battle soon be PRESSED.
5. 7. 27. That is, be soon ready to fight with her. -- Finding there ready
PRESSED
Sir ARTHEGALL. --
5. 8. 8. That is, ready and present, ready at hand. He watched in close await
with weapons PRESSED.
6. 6. 44. That is, with his weapons ready, prepared. It is used in many of
these senses by Chaucer. -- Fame --
Was throughout Troy ifled with pressed wings. Troil. and Cr. 4. v. 661.

That is, with nimble or ready wings. Also these wickid tonguis ben so PRESSED
Ibid. 9. v. 785.

To speak us harm.
That is, so ready to speak, etc. Neither was foul, that comes of engendrure,
That there ne was PRESSED in her presence. Assemble of fowls.

That is, that was not present before her.

This word is to be met with in most of our old English poets, particularly
Lord Surrey, Wyat, Tuberville, etc. Harrington much uses it in his Ariosto. B.
vii. C. vi. S. xxviii. Like a SORT of Steeres. --
SORT occurs perpetually in Spenser, for flock, troop, company, etc. And like a
SORT of bees in clusters swarmed.
5. 4. 36. That is, a swarm. But like a SORT of sheep. --
5. 4. 44. That is, a flock. And all about her altar scattered lay
Great SORTS of lovers. --
4. 10. 43. That is, a great number, a large assembly of, etc. A SORT of
shepherd-groomes. --
6. 9. 5. That is, a company of shepherds. A SORT of shepherds sewing of the
chase.
That is, a company of shepherds hunting.

It is not unfrequent in Harrington. We find it in the Psalms, where few
perhaps assign the proper meaning to it. "How long will ye imagine mischief
against every man? Ye shall be slain all the SORT of you." Psalm. 62. 3.
i. e. your whole company, or multitude, shall be slain. The Septuagint render
it, (...).

But it is time to relinquish a disquisition, which will be discussed with so
much superior learning and penetration, by one who intends shortly to oblige
his country with a dictionary of its language; a work for which its author is
admirably qualified, as he has already given us a specimen of his abilities
regarding such a subject, if we may judge from a series of essays, in which not
only criticism and morality have appeared with new luster, but from which the
English language has received new grace and dignity.

SECT. IX. Mr. Upton's opinion, concerning several passages in Spenser,
examined.
AS that part of criticism which consists in rectifying the doubtful readings,
and explaining the more obscure passages of an ancient author, necessarily
deals much in conjecture, and from its nature can seldom afford demonstration,
and as those who are employed in this province, are too frequently compelled to
deduce their positions, not from what is, but from that which seems to be the
truth, no science, perhaps, produces a greater diversity of opinions concerning
the same point, than this. That which appears a lucky correction or alteration
to one commentator, is rejected by another, as absolutely improbable and
absurd; and, indeed, the difference of sentiment in this case, is dictated by
the different manner of conceiving things, which nature has implanted in the
minds of different persons. At the same time it must be acknowledged, that the
pride of appearing more sagacious than our predecessors, often occasions the
variation here insisted upon; and sometimes mere caprice and obstinacy. Though
in examining some of the ensuing passages, I may be deceived (as the rest of my
brethren have been) by the appearance of truth, which I have assigned above, as
one of the causes of difference of opinion among the critics; I can promise the
reader, that I will not suffer myself to be voluntarily misled by any of the
last-mention'd corrupt principles and prejudices; and, upon this account, I
shall be ready to give up any point, which, in this Section, I shall be proved
to have mistaken; hoping to find Mr. Upton a no less candid man, than an
ingenious critic.

B. i. C. i. S. xliii. A fit false dream that can delude the sleepers SENT.
Mr. Upton proposes to read sleepers SHENT, i. e. sleepers ill-treated or
abused. But I rather think, that we should preserve the common reading, SENT,
which is the proper and original spelling of scent: Sent, says Skinner (which
we falsely write scent) is derived a sentiendo. Thus the meaning of this verse,
is, "A false dream that could deceive or impose upon the sleeper's perception."
So that sent, if we consider its radix, sentio, is here plainly made to signify
perception in general. Scent is often thus spelt in our author. -- At SENT of
stranger-guest.
4. 6. 41. -- Through his perfect SENT.
3. 7. 22. -- Of sundry SENT and hew.
7. 7. 10. Scent is often thus written by Milton, and, as Dr. Newton observes,
with great propriety. The season prime for sweetest SENTS and airs. 9. 200.

-- the SENT
Of that alluring fruit. 9. 587.

-- such a SENT I drew
Of carnage. -- 10. 267.

-- With SENT of living carcasses. 10. 277.

I confess that SENT is somewhat harsh in this sense: but what will not rhyme
oblige the poet to say? B. i. C. ii. S. xix. And at his haughty helmet making
mark,
So hugely struck, that it the steel did rive,
And rent his head; he tumbling down ALIVE,
With bloody mouth his mother earth did kiss,
Greeting his grave; his grudging ghost did strive
With the frail flesh; at last it flitted is,
Whither the souls, etc.
Mr. Upton would alter alive, in the third verse, to bilive, i. e. immediately:
For, says he, did he tumble down alive after his head was cleft asunder? Such a
disquisition would remind one of Burmannus's note on the GEMITU of the dying
Turnus, in the last verse of the Aeneid. " Illustrat hunc GEMITUM R. Titius;
and de illo sono, and RAUCO MURMR quod ex occlusa vocali arteria editur,
explicat."
Without entering into an anatomical disquisition concerning the possibility of
living after such a blow; we may remark, that the poet himself intimates to us,
that he fell down alive, and did not die till after his fall, in these lines,
-- His grudging ghost did strive
With the frail flesh; at last it flitted is.
Mr. Upton would enforce and confirm the justness of his correction, by
remarking, that the poet, in these verses, copied from Virgil, Procubuit
MORIENS, and HUMUM semel ore MOMORDIT.
Where the word moriens does not imply, that the man who fell down, was dead. I
must confess that alive is superfluous, but Spenser has run into many other
superfluities on account of the frequency of his rhyme. Mr. Upton proposes
likewise to write Earth [ His Mother Earth] with an initial capital, supposing
it a PERSON; however, we had, perhaps, better suppose it a THING: for if we
understand it to be a Person, what an absurd mixture arises? -- His Mother
EARTH did kiss,
Greeting his GRAVE. --
Grave cannot be referred to Earth as a Person, but it may be to Earth as a
Thing. However, it must be confessed, that this is such an absurd mixture as
Spenser was very likely to have fallen into; and we have numberless instances
of this fault, in his account of the rivers which attended the marriage of
Thames and Medway, 4. 11. Where God and River (that is, Person and Thing) are
often indiscriminately put, the one for the other. B. xxiii. C. iv. S. i. And a
DRY DROPSY through his flesh did flow.
How can a Dropsy flow, (says Mr. Upton) if it be dry? He proposes to remove
this contradiction by reading dire Dropsy, the dirus Hydrops of Horace. But it
is plain, that dry Dropsy is the species of the Dropsy so called, the dry
Dropsy or Tympanites; which Spenser has inaccurately confounded with the other
species of the Dropsy, which may not improperly be said to flow through the
flesh; not considering the inconsistency of making a dry thing flow. As to Mr.
Upton's correction dire, I cannot perceive how DIRE could ever be mistaken by
the printers for DRY. Mr. Upton might, with equal propriety, have objected to
the following words, DRY Drops. And with DRY DROPS congealed in her eye.
2. 1. 49. By the way, it will be difficult also to determine what Spenser
means by congealed, which occurs again in the same sense, and on the same
occasion, -- In whose fair eye
The crystal humor stood congealed round.
3. 5. 29. But, upon supposition that the tears were actually frozen in her
eye, we should think dry a very odd epithet for ice.

To return: By DRY Dropsy, may not the poet, also mean, a Dropsy, which is
the CAUSE of thirst? B. i. C. iv. S. xlii. Him little answered the angry Elfin
knight.
Mr. Upton reads, Him angry --
Him angry, says Mr. Upton, means the Paynim, who is said to be enraged above,
Pardon the error of enraged wight.
S. 41. But because the Paynim is angry, does it necessarily follow, that the
Elfin knight should not be so too? He certainly has reason to be enraged and
angry after that bitter taunt, which provokes him to throw down his gauntlet,
as a challenge. It is surely wrong to alter the text, when there is neither
necessity to require, nor authority to support the correction. B. i. C. v. S.
v. On the other side in all men's open view
Duessa placed is, and on a tree
Sans foy his shield is hanged with bloody hew,
Both those the laurel garlands to the victor dew.
Mr. Upton thus reads the last line, Both those AND THE laurel garlands to the
victor due.
But surely Duessa, and Sans foy his shield, are the laurel garlands, that is,
the rewards to be given to the conqueror. Laurel garlands are metaphorically
used, and put in apposition with Duessa, and Sans foy his shield. It may be
urged, as another objection to Mr. Upton's alteration, that Spenser never cuts
off the vowel in THE before a consonant; upon which account I would reject
Hughes's reading of the following line, The Nemaean forest 'till the
Amphitryonide --
7. 7. 36. That editor reads, THE Nemaean --
Hughes's reading, indeed, restores the true accent to Nemaean, but Spenser
frequently violates the accent of names of ancient places, etc. B. ii. C. v. S.
xxii. -- a flaming fier-brond,
Which she in Stygian lake, AYE BURNING bright,
Had kindled. --
Mr. Upton, upon supposition that we refer aye burning to Fier-brond, does not
approve of reading aye-burning, but y-burning. He is unwilling to join ay- (or
y) burning to Stygian Lake; for, says he, the lake of brimstone burnt not
bright, but only served to make darkness visible. I allow, that Milton's idea
of this lake was, that it served to make darkness visible. Par. Lost, 1. v. 63.
But might not Spenser's idea of the Stygian lake be different from Milton's?
Besides, why was the weapon carried to this Lake to be kindled, unless the Lake
was BURNING?

The poet has given us the same image and allegory in another place, Firebrand
of hell, first tind in Phlegethon
By thousand furies. --
4. 2. 1. B. iii. C. ii. S. iii. But ah! my rimes too rude and rugged are,
When in so high an object they do light,
And striving fit to MAKE, I fear do MAR.
Mr. Upton remarks, that MAKE, in this passage, signifies to verfify, POIEIN,
versus facere. But there is reason to think, that make is here opposed to
mar, in the same sense as it is in the following lines. Likewise unequal were
her hands twain,
That one did reach, the other pusht away,
That one did make, the other mard again.
4. 1. 29. Make and Mar were thus used together, as it were proverbially, in
our author's age. Thus Harrington, in his Ariosto, In vain I seek my Duke's
love to expound,
The more I seek to make, the more I mard. 5. 19.

Yes, answered Guidon, be I made or mard. 20. 52.

Ten years will hardly make that he would mar. 30. 9.

Thus also G. Tuberville to the Countess of Warwick, Ann. 1570. Should make or
mar as she saw cause.
And in these lines from an old translation of Ovid, quoted by the author of
the Art of English Poesy. Medea of her children. Was I able to make them I
pray you tell,
And am I not able to mar them as well? 3. c. 19.

Again, in an old bombast play ridiculed by Shakespere, "And make and mar the
foolish fates." Midn. Dr. 1. 4.


Thus then the meaning of the lines before us is, "My verses are quite
unpolished for so sublime a subject, so that I spoil or destroy, instead of
producing or executing any thing good or perfect."

In the pastoral JUNE, make is manifestly used in the sense versify; and for
this we have moreover the testimony of E. K. The god of shepherds Tityrus is
dead,
Who taught me homely as I can to MAKE.
Again, in Colin Clouts come home again. Besides her peerlesse skill in MAKING
well,
And all the ornaments of wondrous wit.
That is, Q. Elizabeth, whom in another place he calls, Colin Clout, etc.
a PEERLESSE POETESSE. Again, And has he skill to MAKE so excellent,
Yet has so little skill to bridle Love? April.



The author of the Art of English poesy generally uses MAKER for POET, POITS;
and if we believe Sir J. Harrington, it was that author who first brought this
expression (the significancy of which is much commended by Sir P. Sydney, and
B. Johnson) into fashion about the age of Q. Elizabeth. "Nor to dispute how
high and supernatural the name of a MAKER is, so christened in English, by that
unknown godfather, that this last year save one, viz. 1589, set forth a book
called the Art of English Poesy." Apology for Poesy, before Ariosto.
B. i. C. vii. S. xxxiii. But all of diamond perfect pure and cleene.
Mr. Upton proposes to read sheene instead of CLEENE. But if this alteration is
necessary here, is it not likewise equally so in the following verses? And that
bright tower all built of crystal CLEENE.
1. 1. 58. Again in sonnet, 45. Leave lady in your glass of crystal CLEENE.
Harrington, in a translation of an epigram of James I. on Sir Philip Sidney's
death uses CLEAN as an epithet to Venus's carknet, i. e. a necklace. She threw
away her rings, and carknet CLEENE. Notes on B. 37. of Orl. Fur.

B. v. C. vii. S. xiv. And swearing faith to either on his blade.
Mr. Upton observes, that we have here an instance of Spenser's learning, and
that he makes his knights swear by their swords agreeable to that custom among
the Goths and Hunns, as related by Jornandes, and Amm. Marcellinus. But I am
inclined to believe, that our author drew this circumstance from books that he
was probably much better acquainted with, old romances. In MORTE ARTHUR we have
frequent instances of knights swearing in this manner. The same ceremony occurs
again, -- He made him swear
By his own sword. --
6. 2. 43. In another place one of the knights swears by his knighthood, an
oath which we likewise frequently meet with in Romance. -- As he did on his
knighthood swear.
6. 3. 18. B. ii. C. vi. S. v. More swift than swallow SHERES the liquid sky.
Mr. Upton * produces the expression of sheres the liquid sky, as one of
Spenser's Latinisms, from RADIT iter liquidum; and adds, that Milton has
likewise used the same Latin metaphor; I suppose the passage hinted at by Mr.
Upton is, where, Satan -- SHAVES with level wings the deep. Par. Lost, 2. B. 34.

But shave and shear are perhaps as different as rado and tondeo. And TONDET
iter liquidum would, I believe, be hardly allowed as synonymous to RADIT iter
liquidum. My opinion is therefore, that Spenser here intended no metaphor, but
that he used SHERE for share, to cut or divide, as he has manifestly in these
instances. Cymochles sword on Guyons shield yglaunst
And thereof nigh one quarter SHEARD away.
2. 6. 31. "cut away nigh one quarter." In the following instances, for the
reason above assigned, we ought to interpret SHEARE [shere] to cut, or divide.
Which with their finny oars the swelling sea did SHEARE.
3. 4. 33. And through the brackish waves their passage SHEARE.
3. 4. 42. i. e. cut their way or passage. Thus likewise, An eagle that with
plumy wings does SHEARE
The subtle air. --
3. 7. 38. In another place we have share, of Arthegall's sword, But
wheresoever it did light it thoroughly SHARD.
5. 1. 10. So Milton, of Michael's sword.

-- Deep-entring SHARED
All his right side Par. Lost, 6. 326.
. --
SECT. X. Of Spenser's Allegorical Character.
IN reading the works of an author who lived in a remote age, it is necessary,
that we should look back upon the customs and manners which prevailed in his
age; that we should place ourselves in his situation, and circumstances; that
so we may be the better enabled to judge and discern how his turn of thinking,
and manner of composing were biased, influenced, and, as it were, tinctured,
by very familiar and reigning appearances, which are utterly different from
those with which we are at present surrounded. For want of this caution, too
many readers view the knights and damsels, the tournaments and enchantments of
Spenser with modern eyes, never considering that the encounters of Chivalry
subsisted in our author's age, as has been before hinted Sect. ii.
; that romances were then most eagerly and universally read; and that thus,
Spenser from the fashion of his age, was naturally disposed to undertake a
recital of chivalrous achievements, and to become, in short, a ROMANTIC POET.

Nor is it sufficiently considered, that a prevalent practice of Spenser's age
contributed in a very considerable degree to make him an ALLEGORICAL POET. It
should be remembered that, in the age of which we are speaking, allegory was
the subject and foundation of public shows and spectacles, which were then
exhibited with a magnificence superior to that of former times; that the vices
and virtues personify'd, and represented by living actors, distinguished with
their respective emblematical types, were generally introduced to constitute
PAGEANTRIES, which were then the principal entertainments, and shown not only
in private, and upon the stage, but very frequently in the open streets, for
solemnising any public occasion. As a proof of what is here advanced, I would
refer the reader to Hollinshed's "And to keep that show company, (but yet
far off) stood the SHOW OF MANHOOD and DESERT; as first to be presented:
and that show was as well furnished as the other: men all, saving one boy
called BEAUTY, for the which MANHOOD, FAVOR, and DESERT, did strive, (or
should have contended;) but GOOD FORTUNE (as victor of all conquests) was to
come in and overthrow MANHOOD, etc." Hollingshed's Chron. v. 3. p. 1297.
description of the SHOW OF MANHOOD AND DESERT exhibited at Norwich, before
queen Elizabeth; and more particularly to his account of a Exhibited before the
queen at Westminster. ibid. page 1317. and seq. See also many other
descriptions of this sort in the same author.

It is not improbable, that Milton, in IL PENSEROSO, took his thought of
hearing music from the earth, produced by some SPIRIT or GENIUS, And as I wake,
sweet music BREATH,
Above, about, or UNDERNEATH. --
From some machinery of Inigo Jones, in his Masks. Hollinshed mentions
something like this, in a very curious DEVISE presented before Queen Elizabeth;
speaking of the music of some fictitious nymphs; he adds, "which sure had been
a noble hearing, and the more melodious for the variety thereof, because it
should come secretly and strangely out of the earth." Ubi supr. p. 1297.

It may perhaps be readily admitted, that Milton drew the whole, from what had
been represented in a masque.


TURNEY performed by Fulke Grevile, the lords Arundell, and Windsor, and sir
Philip Sydney; who are feigned to be the children of DESIRE attempting to win
the fortress of BEAUTY; in which last spectacle much poetical invention is
discovered.

In the mean time, I do not deny that our author, was in great measure,
induced, from the practice of Ariosto, to write a poem partaking much of
allegory: yet it must still be granted, that Spenser's manner of allegorizing
seems to have rather resulted from some of the spectacles just mentioned, than
from what he had red in Ariosto. In fact, Ariosto's allegory does not so much
consist in personifying the virtues, vices, and affections of the mind, as it
does in adumbrating moral doctrine It is affirmed by Plutarch, that "Allegory
is that, in which one thing is related and another understood." Thus Ariosto
RELATES the adventures of Orlando, Rogero, Bradamante, etc. by which is
UNDERSTOOD the conquest of the passions, the excellence of virtue, and other
moral doctrines; on which account we may term the ORLANDO a MORAL poem; but can
we term the FAERIE QUEEN upon the whole, a MORAL POEM? is it not equally an
HISTORICAL or POLITICAL poem? for though it be (according to its author's words)
an ALLEGORY or DARK CONCEIT, yet that which is couched or understood under this
allegory is the history, and intrigues of Queen Elizabeth's courtiers; which
however are introduced with a moral design.
under the actions of men and women. In such an adumbration, Spenser's allegory
sometimes consists; as in the first book, where The Red-crosse Knight, or a
TRUE CHRISTIAN, attended by Una, or TRUTH, defeats the wiles of Archimago, or
the DEVIL, etc. etc. yet he has shown himself a much more ingenious allegorist,
where his IMAGINATION BODIES forth unsubstantial things, TURNS THEM TO SHAPE,
and marks out the nature, powers, and effects of that which is ideal and
abstracted, by visible and external symbols; as in his delineations of FEAR,
ENVY, FANCY, DESPAIR, and the like. Ariosto gives us but few of these
symbolical beings, in comparison of Spenser; and those which he has given us,
are by no means drawn with that fullness and distinctness with which they are
painted by the latter. And that Spenser painted these figures so fully and
distinctly, may we not reasonably attribute it, to his being frequently
habituated to the sight of these symbolical beings, distinguished with their
proper emblems, and actually endued with speech, motion, and life?

As a more convincing argument in confirmation of what has been asserted upon
this head, it may be remarked, that Spenser denominates his most exquisite
groupe of allegorical figures, the MASK OF CUPID; thus, without recurring to
conjecture, his own words indubitably demonstrate, that he had sometimes
representations of this sort in his eye: he tells us, that these figures were
-- a jolly company
In MANNER of a MASK enranged orderly.
3. 12. 5. And in his introduction to this groupe, it is manifest that he drew
from another allegoric spectacle of age, called the DUMB SHOW This consisted of
dumb actors, who by their dress and action prepared the spectators for the
matter and substance of each ensuing act respectively; as also of much
hieroglyphical scenery calculated for the same purpose. See GORDOBUCKE, a
tragedy, written by T. Sackville, 1561. lately reprinted by Mr. Spence:
JOCASTA, a tragedy, written by G. Gascoyne and F. Kinwelmarshe, and acted at
Graies Inn, 1566: and the introduction to S. 7. Act. 3. of Shakespere's HAMLET.
, which was wont to be exhibited before every act of a tragedy. St. 3. And
forth issewd, as on the ready flore
Of some theater, a grave personage,
That in his hand a branch of laurel bore,
With comely haveour, and countnance sage,
Yclad in costly garments, fit for tragic stage.
IV.
Proceeding to the midst he still did stand,
As if in mind he somewhat had to say;
And to the vulgar becking with his hand,
In sign of silence, as to hear a play.
By lively actions he began bewray
Some argument of matter passioned;
Which done, he back retired soft away;
And passing by, his name discovered,
EASE, on his robe in golden letters cyphered.
He afterward styles these figures MASKERS. St. 6. The whiles the MASKERS
marched forth in trim array.
VII.
The first was FANCY, like a lovely boy,
Of rare aspect, etc.


From what has been said, I would not have it objected, that I have intended to
arraign the natural fertility of our author's invention; and to prove, that he
minutely copied after these representations; all that I have endeavored to
inculcate, is, that Spenser was not only better qualified to delineate fictions
of this sort, because they were -- OCULIS subjecta fidelibus -- Hor. Art. Poet.
182.

Because they were the real objects of his sight, but that (as all men are
influenced by what they see) he was prompted and induced to delineate them,
because he saw them, especially as they were so much the delight of his age.

Instead of entering into an examination of Spenser's manner of allegorising,
and of the conduct of his allegories in particular, which has been done with an
equally judicious and ingenious discernment by Mr. Spense; Polymet. B. 10. D.
4. To Mr. Spense's examination it may be added, that our author frequently
introduces an allegory, under which no meaning is couched; viz. 2. 9. 21. ALMA
is the mind, and her CASTLE the body. The tongue is the porter of this castle,
the nose the Portcullis, and the mouth the porch, about the inside of which are
placed twice sixteen warders clad in white, which are the teeth; these ALMA
passes by, who rise up, and do obeisance to her. St. 26. But how can the teeth
be said to rise up and bow to the mind? Spenser here forgot that he was
allegorising, and speaks as if he was describing (without any latent meaning) a
real queen, with twice sixteen real warders, who, as such, might, with no
impropriety, be said to rise and bow to their queen. Many instances of his
confounding allegory with reality, occur through this whole Canto, and the two
next; particularly, where he is describing the kitchen of this castle, which is
the belly, he gives us a formal description of such a kitchen, as was to be
seen in his time in castles, and great houses, by no means expressive of the
thing intended. Again, the occult meaning of his bringing Scudamore to the
house of CARE, 4. 5. 32. clashes with what he had before told us. By this
allegory of Scudamore coming to CARE's house, it should be UNDERSTOOD, that
"Scudamore, from a happy, passed into a miserable state." For we may reasonable
suppose, that before he came to CARE's house, he was unacquainted with CARE;
whereas the poet had before represented him as involved in extreme misery. It
would be tedious, by an allegation of particular examples, to demonstrate, how
frequently his allegories are mere descriptions; and that, taken in their
literal sense, they have an improper, or no signification, veiled under them. I
shall, however, mention one. The BLATANT BEAST is said to break into the
monasteries, to rob their chancels, cast down the desks of the monks, deface
the altars, and destroy the images found in their churches. By the BLATANT
BEAST is understood Scandal, and by the havoc just mentioned as effected by
it, is implied the suppression of religious houses and popish superstition. But
how can this be properly said to have been brought about by scandal? and how
could Spenser, in partilar, say this, who was, as it appears by his pastorals,
a friend to the reformation, as was his heroine Queen Elizabeth?
I shall mention one capital fault committed by the poet in this point, which
does not immediately fall under the rules of criticism.

"Painters, says a French writer, ought to employ their allegories in religious
pictures, with much greater reserve than in profane pieces. They may, indeed,
in such subjects as do not represent the mysteries and miracles of our
religion, make use of an allegorical composition, the action whereof shall be
expressive of some truth, that cannot be represented otherwise, either in
painting or sculpture. I agree therefore to let them draw FAITH and HOPE
supporting a dying person, and RELIGION in deep affliction at the feet of a
deceased prelate. But I am of opinion, that artists who treat of the miracles
and dogmas of our religion, are allowed no kind of allegorical composition. --
The facts whereon our religion is built, and the doctrine it delivers us, are
subjects in which the painter's imagination has no liberty to sport. Abbe du
Bos, Reflections, etc. Tom. i. c. xxiv.
" The conduct which this author condemns, is practiced by Spenser, with this
difference only; that the painters here condemned are supposed to adapt human
allegory to divine mystery, whereas Spenser has adopted divine mystery to human
allegory. Such a practice as this, is not only to confound sacred and profane
matters, but to place the licentious sallies of imagination upon a level with
the dictates of divine inspiration; to debase the truth and dignity of heavenly
things, by making Christian allegory subservient to the purposes of Romantic
fiction.

This fault our author has most glaringly committed throughout his whole first
book, where the imaginary instruments and expedients of romance, are
perpetually interwoven with the mysteries contained in the BOOK of REVELATIONS.
Duessa, who is formed upon the idea of a romantic enchantress, is gorgeously
arrayed in gold and purple, and presented with a By the triple crown he plainly
glances at popery.
triple crown by the giant Orgoglio, and seated by him on a monstrous
seven-headed dragon, (i. 7. 16.) whose tail reaches to the skies, and throws
down the stars, (St. 18.) she bearing a golden cup in her hand. (1. 8. 25.)
This is the SCARLET WHORE, and the RED DRAGON in the REVELATIONS. "Behold a
great red dragon, having seven heads, and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his
heads; and his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and did cast
them to earth C. 12. V. 3, 4.
." Again, "I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet-colour'd beast, full of names of
blasphemy, having seven heads, and ten horns; and the woman was arrayed in
purple and scarlet color, and decked with gold, and precious stones and
pearls, having a golden cup in her hands, full of abomination, and filthiness
of her fornication C. 17. V. 3, 4.
."

In Orgoglio's castle, which is described as very magnificent, Prince Arthur
discovers An altar carved with cunning imagery,
On which true Christians blood was often spilt,
And holy martyrs often done to die,
With cruel malice and strong tyranny;
Whose blessed sprites, from underneath the stone,
To God for vengeance cride continually.
1. 8. 36. The inspired author of the above-named sacred book mentions the same
of what he saw in heaven. "I saw under the altar the souls of them that were
slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they held; and they
cried with a loud voice, how long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge,
and avenge our blood on them that dwell on earth C. 6. V. 9, 10.
?"

A hermit points out to the RED-CROSSE knight the New Jerusalem, (1. 10. 53.)
which an angel discovers to St. John, (c. 21. 10, etc.) This prospect is taken,
says the poet, from a mountain more lofty then either the mount of Olives or
Parnassus; these two comparisons thus impertinently linked together, strongly
remind us of the absurdity we are now speaking of, the mixture of divine truth,
with profane invention; and naturally lead us to reflect on the difference
between the oracles frequently uttered from the former, and the fictions of
those who dreamt on the latter.

Spenser in the visionary dominions of Una's father has planted the TREE of
LIFE, and KNOWLEDGE: from the first of the trees, he says, a well flowed, whose
waters contained a most salutary virtue, and which the dragon could not
approach. Thus in the same scripture, "He showed me a pure river of water of
life, clear as crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God, and of the lamb.
In the midst of the street of it, and on either side of the river was there the
TREE of LIFE C. 22. V. 1, 2.
". The circumstance, in particular, of the dragon not being able to approach
this water is literally adopted from Romance, as has been before observed Sect.
ii.
. Thus also by the steps and expedients of romance, we are led to the death of
the dragon who besieged the parents of Una, by which is figured the destruction
of the old serpent mentioned in the Apocalypse.

The extravagancies of Pagan Mythology are not improperly introduced into a
poem of this sort, as they are acknowledged falsities, or at best, if
expressive of any moral truth, no more than the inventions of men. But he that
applies the VISIONS OF GOD in such a manner, is guilty of an impropriety,
which, I fear, amounts to an impiety.

If we look back from Spenser's age through the state of poesy in this kingdom,
we shall find that it principally consisted in the allegoric species; but that
this species never received its absolute consummation till it appeared with new
luster in the FAERIE QUEEN. There are indeed the works of some English poets
now remaining, who wrote before Gower and Chaucer; but these are chiefly
chroniclers in rhyme, and seem to have left us the last dregs of that kind of
composition which was practiced by the British bards: as for instance, the That
laborious Antiquary Thomas Hearne, first printed this author, at Oxford, 1724.
In his preface, he tells us, p. 10. how he was first tempted to publish this
rare piece. "When I first saw a MS. of this author (which was even when I was a
young under-graduate) in the Bodleian Library, being one of the first MSS. I
had ever perused there, I was WONDERFULLY DELIGHTED with it." He afterward
informs us, with no small degree of triumph, p. 84. "As the Acts of the
Apostles, that I published from Archbishop Laud's MSS. is the first entire
book that was ever printed in England, in capital Letters; so this Chronicle of
Robert of Gloucester is the first entire book, that was ever printed in this
kingdom, (it may be in the whole world) in the manner I have done it, that is,
in the black letter, with a mixture of some Saxon characters." In the next page
he proceeds to enter into a warm defense of the old black letter. "As it is a
reproach to us, that the Saxon language should be so forgot, as to have but few
(comparatively speaking) that are able to read it; so it is a greater reproach
that the black letter, which was the character so much in use in our
grandfather's days, should be now, as it were, disused and rejected;
especially, when we know the best editions of our English bibles and common
prayer (to say nothing of other books) are printed in it." I shall cite one
more instance of our Antiquary's extreme thirst after ancient things, p. 19.
"But though I have taken so much pleasure in perusing the English bible of the
year 1541, yet it is nothing equal to that I should take, in turning over that
of the year 1539."
chronicle of Robert of Gloucester, who wrote according to his own account about
the year 1280. And hence we may observe, that Gower and Chaucer were reputed
the first English poets, because they first introduced INVENTION into our
poetry; they MORALIZED THEIR SONG, and strove to render virtue more amiable, by
clothing her in the veil of fiction. Chaucer, it must be acknowledged,
deserves to be ranked as one of the first English poets, on another account;
his admirable artifice in painting the manners, which none before him had ever
attempted even in the most imperfect degree; and it should be remembered to his
honor, that he was the first who gave the English nation, in its own language,
an idea of HUMOR. With these flourished the author of PIERCE PLOWMAN'S
VISIONS, of which I have given an occasional sketch, above. To these succeeded
Lydgate, who from his principal performances the FALL OF PRINCES, and STORY of
Thebes, might more properly be styled a legendary than allegorical poet;
although the first of these, is in great measure, a series of visions The book
on which it is founded, viz. Boccace de CASIBUS VIRORUM ILLUSTRIUM, is a plain
historical narrative.
, and the latter contains a groupe of imaginary personages which his master
Chaucer cannot surpass. He is describing the company present at the marriage of
Oedipus and Jocasta. But at this wedding plainly for to tell,
Was CERBERUS, chief porter of hell,
And HEREBUS, father to HATRED,
Was there present with his holle kindred,
His wife also with her brows black,
And her daughters, sorrow for to make,
Hidiously chered, and ugly for to see,
MEGERA, and THESIPHONEE,
ALECTO eke; with LABOR, and ENVY,
DREAD, FRAWDE, and false TREACHERY;
TREASON, POVERT, INDIGENCE, and NEED,
And cruel DEATH in his rent wede.
WRETCHEDNESS, COMPLEINT, and eke RAGE,
Fearful, pale, DRONKENESSE, and AGE,
Cruel MARS, and many a tigre wood,
Brenning IRE, and unkind blood,
FRATERNALL HATE, etc. The first part, Speght's Chaucer, edit. 2. fol. 357.



We have of this author two poems, viz. the This was never printed.
TEMPLE of GLASS, and the DANCE of DEATH, or dance of MACHABREE, One Machabree,
a French poet, wrote a description, in verse, of a procession painted on the
walls of St. Innocent's cloister at Paris, called the DANCE OF DEATH. This
piece was translated by Lydgate, who tells us in the Prologue, St. 5. The which
Dance at St. Innocent's
Portraied is. --
Stow mentions this DANCE OF DEATH, in his Survey of London, speaking of the
cloisters which anciently belonged to St. Paul's church, "About this cloister
was artificially and richly painted the Dance of Machabray, or DANCE of DEATH,
commonly called the Dance of Paul's: the like whereof was painted about St.
Innocent's cloister at Paris; the metres or poesy of this Dance were
translated out of French into English by John Lidgate, Monk of Bury, and with
the picture of Death leading all estates, painted round the cloister." page
264. This picture is a woodcut, and prefixed to the poem we are speaking of, in
Tottell's edition of Lydgate, 1555; and is, I suppose, an exact representation
of what was painted in St. Paul's cloisters. It was afterward engraved by
Hollar, in Dugdale's Monast. vol, 3. p. 368. In all probability, this painting
at St. Paul's, or that (which was the same) at St. Innocent's, gave Hans
Holbein the hint for composing his famous piece, called the DANCE OF DEATH, now
to be seen in the townhouse at Basil.

It is commonly supposed, that the wood-cuts, from whence Hollar engraved his
exquisite set of prints, entitled the DANCE OF DEATH, were executed by
Holbein: but I am apt to think this a mistake, which arose from confounding
Holbein's picture, abovementioned, with these wood-cuts. For it will appear,
that Holbein's manner of cutting in wood, is entirely different from that in
which these are finished, by comparing them with Holbein's scriptural wood-cuts
(in one of which his name is engraved at full length) inserted in archbishop
Cranmer's catechism, an. 1548. In the cuts of this catechism there is a
delicacy of handling, by no means to be found in those of the DANCE OF DEATH;
which, however, have an inimitable expression, and are most probably the work
of Albert Durer. I am not ignorant, that Rubens, who had copied this DANCE OF
DEATH, recommended them to Sandrart, as the performance of Holbein: of which
Sandrart himself informs us. " Sic memini, etc. -- I also well remember, that,
in the year 1627, when Paul Rubens came to Utrecht to visit Handorst, being
escorted, both coming from, and returning to Amsterdam, by several artists, as
we were in the boat, the conversation fell upon Holbein's book of cuts,
representing the DANCE OF DEATH; that Rubens gave them the highest encomiums,
advising me, who was then a young man, to set the highest value upon them,
informing me, at the same time, that he, in his youth, had copied them." Joach.
Sandrart, Academ. Pict. part 2. lib. 3. cap. 7. p. 241. But if Rubens styled
these prints Holbein's, in familiar conversation, it was but calling them by
the name which the world had given them, and which they generally went by. In
another place Sandrart evidently confounds these wood-cuts with Holbein's
picture at Basil. " Sed in foro, etc. But in the fish-market there [at Basil]
may be seen his [Holbein's] admirable DANCE OF PEASANTS; where also, in the
same public manner, is shown his DANCE OF DEATH, where, by a variety of
figures, it is demonstrated, that Death spares neither popes, emperors,
princes, etc. as may be seen in his most elegant wooden-cuts of the same work."
ibid. page 238. Now the cuts of which, at present, I am treating, are
fifty-three in number, every one of which has an unity, and is entirely
detached from the rest; so that, how could they be representations of one
picture? But if it be granted, that they were engraved from this picture,
(which, moreover, from their dissimilitude, they could not be) how does it
follow they were done by Holbein?

The book from which Hollar copied these cuts, is printed at Basil, 1554, and
is thus entitled, "ICONES MORTIS, duodecim imaginibus, praeter priores,
totidemque inscriptionibus, praeter epigrammata, e gallicis a Georgio Aemylio
in latinum versa, cumulatae." The earliest edition I could meet with, is one in
which the inscriptions, etc. are in Italian, printed at Lions, 1549, with this
title, " Simolachri, History, e Figure de la Morte, etc." In this there are
not so many cuts, by twelve, as in the last-mention'd edition, and in the
preface of this, it is said, that this book had been before printed with French
and Latin inscriptions, etc. and from the French edition, I suppose, Aemylius
spoken of before, translated. Spurious editions of these cuts soon afterward
appeared, particularly one at Cologn, dated 1566, in which the forgery is
pretty discernible. It may not be improper to take leave of this subject, by
remarking, that Spenser alludes to some of these representations, which, in his
age, were fashionable and familiar.

All Music sleeps, where DEATH DOES LEAD THE DANCE.

NOVEMBER.
which are both professedly written in the species of which I am at present
speaking. Lidgate has received numberless encomiums from our old English poets,
to which his language entitled him, rather than his imagination; for though he
is a very unaminated writer, yet he made very considerable improvements in the
original state of our English versification, by writing in so polite a style;
and it ought not to be denied, that Lydgate is the first English poet, who can
be red without hesitation and difficulty. To Lydgate succeeded John Harding,
who wrote a Chronicle, in verse, of all our English kings, from Brutus to the
reign of king Edward IV. in which he lived. This piece is often commended, and
quoted by some of our best antiquaries. But his merit, as an historian,
naturally excludes him from that which he should arrogate as a poet: accuracy
in collecting, and fidelity in relating events, may be, perhaps, justly allowed
him, but not the least effort of invention. So that, from the specimen produced
by Harding at this time, there was some reason to presage, that poesy was
relapsing into its primaeval barbarism; and that the rudeness of Robert of
Gloucester, would be reinstated in the place of Chaucer's taste, judgment, and
imagination.

However in the reign of Henry VII. ample amends were made for this interval of
darkness by Stephen Hawes, a name generally unknown, and not mentioned by any
English compiler of the lives of English poets, but by the accurate Wood Fast.
Oxon.
. This author I look upon to be the restorer of invention in our poetry, whose
streams had flowed in a current still more polluted and sluggish, ever since
the time of Chaucer. He not only revived, but highly improved the ancient
allegoric vein, which the rhyming chronicle of the last mentioned poet had (as
I before hinted) now totally expelled. Instead of that dryness and harshness of
description which are so remarkably disgusting in his predecessors, we are by
this author often entertained with the fullness and luxuriancy of Spenser-Hawes
refined Lydgate's versification, and gave it, what it wanted, sentiment and
invention; added new graces to the seven-lined stanza, which Gower and Chaucer
first introduced into our tongue from the Italian; and, to sum up all, was the
first of our poets, who taught fertile fancy, and high-wrought fiction to wear
the garb of perspicuous and harmonious numbers. The title of his poem is almost
as universally unknown as his name, and is as follows. "The history of GRAUNDE
AMOURE and LA BELL PUCEL, called the PASTIME OF PLEASURE; containing the
knowledge of the seven sciences, and the course of man's life in this world.
Invented by Stephen Hawes, grome of King Henry the seventh his chamber." In a
note after the contents, it is said to be written in the twenty-first year of
Henry VII. which is in the year, 1505.

In the reign of king Henry VIII. learning appeared with new luster in this
island; and this age is perhaps the first which England ever saw, that may with
propriety be styled classical; as it was dignified with the great names of Sir
Thomas More, Colet, dean of St. Paul's, Cheke, Ascham, together with many more
illustrious rivals in genius and erudition Nor is it the most inconsiderable
honor of this age, that Erasmus was now entertained and patronized in England;
and that the Greek language, in which are reposited the treasures of true
learning now began to be taught and admired. In this age flourished John
Skeleton, who notwithstanding the great and new lights with which he was
surrounded, contributed not the least share of improvement to what his
ancestors had left him; nor do I perceive that his versification is in any
degree more polished than that of his immediate predecessor, Hawes. His best
pieces are written in the allegorical manner, and are, his CROWN of LAUREL,
and BOWGE OF COURT. But the genius of this author seems little better qualified
for picturesque, than for satirical poetry; in the former, he wants invention,
grace, and dignity; in the latter, wit, and good manners.

I should be guilty of injustice to merit in particular, and to a nation in
general, which amidst a variety of disadvantages has kept a constant pace with
England in the progress of literature, were I here to omit the mention of two
Scottish poets, who flourished about this time, Sir David Lyndesay, and William
Dunbar; the former of which, in his DREAM, and other pieces, and the latter in
his GOLDEN TERCE, or SHIELD, and in THE THISTLE AND ROSE, has discovered a
genuine spirit of allegorising. Soon afterward, appeared a series of poems,
entitled the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES, formed upon a Every person is introduced
speaking. Richard II. is thus introduced: "Suppose you see the corpse of this
Prince, all to be mangled with blewe wounds, lying pale and wan, all naked,
upon the stones, in St. Paul's Church, the people standing round about him, and
making his complaynt, in manner as follows, etc."

Lydgates's FALL of PRINCES gave rise to the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES. In the
year 1559, R. Baldwin was requested to continue Lydgate's series of the great
Unfortunate; but he chose rather to confine himself entirely to our English
story, and began with Robert Tresilian, 1388. and ended with Lord Hastings,
1483. In this work he was assisted by others; and particularly by John
Sackville, who wrote the life of the Duke of Buckingham, together with this
INDUCTION; intending at the same time to write all those remarkable lives which
occurred from the Conquest to Tresilian, with whom Baldwin originally began,
and to have printed his additional part, together with all that Baldwine, and
his friends, had already done, in one volume, and to have prefixed this
INDUCTION as a general preface to the whole. But this was never executed.
Afterward another collection was published under the same title by W. Higgins,
1587.


dramatic plan, and capable of admitting some of the most affecting pathetical
strokes; but these, however honored with the commendation of Sir Philip
Sydney, are little better than a biographical detail. There is one piece indeed
among the rest, which exhibits a train of imaginary personages so beautifully
drawn, that in all probability they contributed to stimulate and awaken the
imagination of Spenser, in forming the like descriptions. This however may be
affirmed from demonstration, that SACKVILLE'S INDUCTION approaches nearer to
the FAERIE QUEEN in allegoric representation than any previous or succeeding
poem.

After the FAERIE QUEEN, allegory began to decline, and by degrees gave place
to a See Donne's works, and Davies on the IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL; Lord
Brooke's TREATISE OF HUMAN LEARNING, etc. etc.
species of composition in which the perplexed subtilities of metaphysical
disquisition strongly prevailed; and which perhaps took it is rise from the
taste and influence of that pacific prince, and profound scholastic James I.
Then Una fair 'gan drop her princely mien Mr. Mason's MUSAEUS.
.


Allegory notwithstanding abruptly discovered itself once more with somewhat of
it native splendour in the Printed in the year 1633. The principal fault of this
poem is, that the author has discovered too much of the anatomist. The Purple
Island is the Isle of Man, whose parts and construction the poet has described
in an allegorical manner, viz. the bones are the foundation of it, the veins
it is brooks, etc. Afterward the intellectual faculties are represented as
persons: but he principally shines where he personifies the passions or evil
concupiscencies of the heart, who attack the good qualities of the heart alike
personified, which under the conduct of their leader INTELLECT, rout the
former. In this poem there is too somewhat of a metaphysical turn. As the whole
is supposed to be sung by two shepherds, the poet has found an opportunity of
adorning the beginnings and endings of his cantos with some very pleasing
pastoral touches.
PURPLE ISLAND of Fletcher, with whom it almost as soon disappeared; when a
poetry succeeded in which imagination gave way to correctness; sublimity of
description to delicacy of sentiment, and striking imagery to conceit and
epigram. Poets began now to be more attentive to words, than things and
objects; and a manner of expressing a thought prettily, was more regarded than
that of conceiving one nobly. The Muses This seems to have been the the case in
France, when Voltaire read his HENRIADE to M. Malezieux: that learned man
assured him, his work would not be tasted, for, says he, " Les Francois n' ont
pas la tete epique." That is, in a more extensive interpretation, the present
age is too fond of MANNER'D poetry to relish FICTION and FABLE. The satires of
Boileau will be preferred to an epic poem. May we not say the same of the taste
of the present age? and that it is too much the consequence of that which began
to prevail in the reign of Charles II? That we now sacrifice to reason more
frequently than to fancy? On this occasion another question, put by Brumoy,
might not improperly be asked, "SI LA RAISON A DEAUCOUP GAGNE, NE PEUT-ON PAS
DIRE QUE LE GOUT A UN PEU PERDU?" Tom. 5. 268.
were debauched at court, and life and manners became their themes; insomuch
that the simplicity and true Sublime of the PARADISE LOST, was by these
triflers either totally disregarded, or else mistaken for insipidity, and
bombast Even Dryden, blinded by the beauties of versification only, seems not
to have had a just idea of Milton's greatness. It is odd that in praising
Milton, he should insist on these circumstances. "No man has so copiously
translated Homer's Graecisms, and the latin elegancies of Virgil." By what
follows it appears, that he had no notion of Milton's simple dignity. "He runs
into a FLAT THOUGHT sometimes for a hundred lines together, but it is when he is
got into a TRACK OF SCRIPTURE." He afterward strangely misrepresents Milton's
reason for writing in blank-verse, "Neither will I justify Milton for his
writing in blank-verse; for whatever causes he alleges for the abolishing of
rhyme (which I have not now the leisure to examine) his own particular reason
is plainly this, that RHYME WAS NOT HIS TALENT." Whether or no rhyme was
Milton's talent or not, I shall not determine; but shall infer from this reason
assigned by Dryden, that had Dryden composed the PARADISE LOST he would have
written it in rhyme, and that consequently he judged the want of it an
imperfection in Milton's Poem. See dedication to Dryden's Juvenal.
.

Without conducting the reader any farther through the succeeding stages and
revolutions of the poetical republic in this kingdom, I shall beg his pardon
for having proceeded thus far in an enquiry that may seem a deviation from the
subject of this section, which I shall conclude with the sentiments of the Abbe
Du Bos on allegorical action, which though applied by him to dramatic poets, are
equally applicable to the action of the FAERIE QUEEN. "It is impossible for a
piece, whose subject is an allegorical action, to interest us very much. Those
which writers of approved wit and talents have hazarded in this kind, have not
succeeded so well as others, where they have been disposed to be less
ingenious, and to treat historically their subject. -- Our heart requires truth
even in fiction itself; and when it is presented with an allegorical action, it
cannot determine itself, (if I may be allowed the expression) to enter into the
sentiments of those chimerical personages. It considers them as enigmas and
symbols, that envelop some precepts of morality, or satirical strokes, which
properly belong to the jurisdiction of the mind. Now a theatrical piece, were
it to speak only to the mind, would never be capable of engaging our attention
through the whole performance. We may therefore apply the words of Lactantius
upon this occasion. Reflections, Tom. 1. C. 25.
Poetic license has its bounds, beyond which you are not permitted to carry
your fiction. A poet's art consists in making a good representation of things
that might have really happened, and embellishing them with elegant images.
TOTUM AUTEM, QUOD REFERAS, FINGERE, ID EST INEPTUM ESSE ET MENDACEM, POTIUS
QUAM POETAM."

SECT. XI. Containing Miscellaneous Remarks.
IN reading the FAERIE QUEEN some observations necessarily occured which could
not be conveniently referred to the general heads of the foregoing sections,
which, in this, are thrown together without connection, as they occasionally
and successively offered themselves. B.i. Introduct. S.i. Fierce wars, and
faithful loves shall MORALIZE my song.
By the word moralize, Spenser declares his design of writing an allegorical
poem; though my subject, says he, consists of fierce wars and faithful loves,
yet under these shall be couched moral doctrine, and the precepts of virtue.
Our author, in another place, styles his FAERIE QUEEN A MORAL LAY, where the
shepherd addresses Colin Clout, who represents Spenser, Whether it were some
Hymn, or MORAL LAY,
Or caroll made to please thy loved last.
And bishop Hall, in his prologue to his satires where he alludes to this poem,
hints at the preceptive nature of it in these words; speaking of the swords of
Elfish Knights, -- Or sheath them new
In misty MORAL types. --
And Drayton calls our author, with reference to the morality contained in the
FAERIE QUEEN, -- Grave, MORAL Spenser. To my most dearly loved friend, Henry
Reinolds, of poets and poesy.
--
B. i. C. i. S. vii. Of a grove. Not perceable with power of any star.
It was an ancient superstition that stars had a malign influence on trees.
Hence Milton, in Arcades, Under the shady roof
Of branching elm, STAR-PROOF.
And in the same poem. And heal the harms of thwarting thunder blue;
Or what the cross dire-looking planet smiles.
Where dire-looking is drawn from the astrological term, malign aspect. B. i.
C. i. S. xv.Speaking of the young ones of error. Into her mouth they crept, and
sudden all were gone.
This circumstance is not the poet's invention; it is reported of adders by
many naturalists. B. i. C. i. S. xlv. -- Made a lady of that other spright
And framed of liquid air her tender parts.
Thus a false Florimel is made of snow, animated with a spright, 3. 8. 5. Mr.
Pope thinks that our author drew the idea of his false Florimel from that
passage in Homer where Apollo raises a phantom in the shape of Aeneas, B. 5.
Iliad. and from the fictitious Turnus of Virgil; Aen. 10. 637. But he probably
borrowed it more immediately from romance, where magicians are often feigned to
dress up some wicked spirit with a counterfeit likeness, in order to carry on
their purposes of deception. B. i. C. ii. S. xi. In mighty arms he was yclad
anon,
And silver shield; upon his coward breast
A bloody cross. --
Thus Archimago disguises himself in the accoutrements of the Red-Cross Knight,
who, as we were before told, was Yclad in mighty arms, and silver shield,
i. i i. And, -- On his breast a bloody cross he bore,
S. 2. B. i. C. v. S. ii. At last the golden oriental gate
Of greatest heaven began to open fair,
And phoebus, fresh as bridegroom to his mate,
Came dancing forth, shaking his dewy hair.
Spenser, as Mr. Jortin observes, plainly alluded to this text in the Psalms,
Psalm. 19. 5.
"In them has he set a tabernacle for the sun; which comes forth as a
bridegroom out of his chamber, and rejoices as a giant to run his course." But
our author has strangely inverted the circumstances. The psalmist alludes to
the Jewish custom of the bridegroom being conducted from his chamber at
midnight, with great pomp, and preceded by a great number of torches. This is
the illustration of the admirable Dr. Jackson, and without it the comparison is
of no force or propriety. The idea which our author would convey is, that,
Phoebus came forth fresh and vigorous as a bridegroom, when he goes to his
bride. The circumstance of Phoebus "came dancing forth" seems to have been
copied by Milton in his elegant song on May morning. Now the bright
morning star, days harbinger,
Comes dancing from the east. --
But probably Milton drew it from an old poem, called, the CUCKOO, by R.
Niccols, 1607, who speaking of the east, says, From whence the days bright
king came dancing out.
especially as Milton has two thoughts in that song, which are likewise in the
CUCKOO. Milton calls the morning star -- Day's harbinger.
Niccols calls the cock -- Days harbinger.
Milton says of May, -- Who from her green lap throws
The yellow cowslip, etc.
Niccols of May, And from her fruitful lap each day she threw
The choicest flowers --
Milton, I suppose, had been reading this poem of the CUCKOO just before he
wrote his song, and so imperceptibly adopted some of its thoughts and
expressions. And here it may be observed, that in criticizing upon Milton,
Johnson, Spenser, and some other of our elder poets, not only a competent
knowledge of all ancient classical learning is requisite, but also an
acquaintance with those books, which, though now forgotten and lost, were yet
in repute about the time in which each author respectively wrote, and which it
is most likely he had red. B. i. C. iii. S. v. A ramping Lion, etc.
A Lion here fawns upon Una. It is the doctrine of romance, that a Lion will do
no injury to a true virgin. B. i. C. iv. S. xiv. Some frounce their curled
hair in courtly guise,
Some pranke their ruffes --
According to the fashion of dress which prevailed in the poet's age. B. i. C.
v. S. x. At last the Paynim chaunct to cast his eye,
His sudden eye, flaming with wrathful fire,
Upon his brothers shield which hung thereby;
Therewith redoubled was his raging ire,
And said, ah wretched son of woeful sire,
Do thou sit wayling by black Stygian lake,
While here thy shield is hanged for victors hire?
In this beautiful circumstance, he, probably, received a distant hint from
Virgil. -- Infelix humero cum apparuit ingens
Baltheus, and notis fulserunt cingula bullis
Pallantis, etc.
Ille oculis postquam saevi monumenta doloris
Exuviasque hausit, furiis accensus, and ira
Terribilis, Tune hinc, etc. Aen. 12. v. 940.

B. i. C. vii. S. i. -- What earthly wit so WARE.
"So prudent." This word puts me in mind of a correction, which Mr. Upton has
made in Chaucer. Full fetise was her cloak, as I was WARE. Prol. 157.

Mr. Upton cannot make sense of this; and therefore proposes to read, Full
fetise was her cloak as was iware.
That is, "As handsome as was worn by any woman."

But the expression, I was ware, occurs again in Chaucer. Betwixt an Hulfere,
and a wode bend
As I was ware, I saw where lay a man. Black Kn. 129.

And, I presume, signifies, in both placet, as, I was AWARE, as, I perceived;
and we meet with, was I ware, after this manner, Tho was I ware of pleasance
anon right. Speght's edit. fol. 234.

very frequently; which is the same as, I WAS WARE. B. i. C. vii. S. xxiv. The
which these relics sad present unto mine eye.
That is, her knight's armor; which the Dwarf brings to her. St. 19. B. i. C.
ix. S. xix. -- A box of diamond sure
EMBOWD with gold, and gorgeous ornament.
EMBOW'D, i. e. "arched, arcuatus, bent like a BOW." A box having a vaulted
cover of gold. Spenser, in the Visions of the world's vanity, expresses the
curve of the Moon by this word. EMBOWED like the moon.
Harrington, in his Orlando Furioso, makes use of EMBOWD, to denote the concave
appearance of the clouds in the sky. Even as we see the sun obscurd sometime
By sudden rising of a mistie cloud,
Engendered by the vapor-breeding slime,
And in the middle region there EMBOWD. 32. 93.

Gascoigne in Jocasta, a tragedy, applies EMBOWD to a roof. The gilted roofes
EMBOWD with curious work. Act. 1. S. 2.

That is, vaulted with curious work: and Milton, -- The high, EMBOWED roof
With antique pillars massy-proof,
And storied windows richly dight,
Casting a dim religious light,
There let the pealing organ blow
To the full-voiced quire below, IL. PENS.

Impressions made in earliest youth, are ever afterward most strongly felt;
and I am inclined to think, that Milton was first affected with, and often
indulged the pensive pleasure, which the awful solemnity of a Gothic church
conveys to the mind, and which is here so feelingly described, while he was a
schoolboy at St. Paul's. The church was then in its original Gothic state, and
one of the noblest patterns of that kind of architecture. B. i. C. x. S. lxiv.
Since to thee is unknown the cradle of thy brood.
Thus again, Even from the cradle of his infancy.
5. 1. 5. Thus also G. Gascoigne to Lady Bridges. Lo thus was Bridges hurt
In cradel of her kind.
And in the Hymn in honor of Love, The wondrous cradle of thine infancy.
B. i. C. xi. S. live. Of the Dragon's death. So down he fell, and forth his
life did breath
That vanished into smoke, and clouds swift.
We meet with the same circumstance in Hawes's Pastime of Pleasure. But it is
usual in Romance. B. i. C. xii. S. xxxviii. To drive away the dull melancholy.
The same verse occurrs, and upon the same occasion. 1. 5. 3. B. ii. C. i. S.
vi. And knighthood took of good Sir HUON's hand.


There was an old romance, entitled, Sir HUON OF BOURDEAUX; mentioned among
other old histories of that kind, in the letter concerning Q. Elizabeth's
entertainment at Kenelworth, above quoted. Sect. ii.
B. ii. C. i. S. liii. The woods the nymphs, the bowres my midwives were,
Hard help at need. --


Heroines in Romance are often delivered in solitary forests, without
assistance; and the child, thus born, generally proves a knight of most
extraordinary puissance. B. ii. C. ii. S. iv. To show how sore
BLOUD-GUILTINESSE he hat'th.
We meet with BLOUD-GUILTINESSE again below. S. 30. -- With BLOUD-GUILTINSESE
to heap offense.
Again, Or that BLOUD-GUILTINESSE or guile them blot.
2. 7. 19. This is a word which would have been ranked among Spenser's obsolete
terms, had it not been accidently preserved to us, in the translation of the
Psalms used in our Liturgy, "Deliver me from BLOUD-GUILTINESSE, O God." Psalm.
51. v. 14.
The same may be said of BLOUD-THIRSTIE, And high advancing his BLOUD-THIRSTIE
BLADE.
B. i. C. viii. S. xvi. -- As does a hidden moth
The inner garment fret, not the utter touch.
He seems to have had his eye on that verse in the Psalms, "Like as it were a
moth fretting a garment." Psalm. 39. v. 12.
B. ii. C. iii. S. xxix. Her dainty paps which like young fruit in May
Now little began to swell, and being tide,
Through their thin weed their places only signifide.


Dryden, who had a particular fondness for our author, has copied this passage,
in Cymon and Iphigenia. Her bosom to the view was only bare;
Where two beginning paps were scarcely spied,
For yet their places were but signified.
B. ii. C. iii. S. xxxiii. O Goddess (for such I thee take to be)
For neither does thy face terrestrial show,
Nor voice sound mortal, etc. --
Drawn from Aeneas's address to his mother, and in the same manner again,
Angel, or Goddess, do I call thee right.
3. 5. 35. Milton has finely applied this manner of address (originally drawn
from Ulysses's address to Nausicaa, Odyss. 6.) in Comus. -- Hail foreign wonder!
Whom certain these rough shades did never breed,
Unless the goddess that in rural shrine
Dwellst here with Pan and Sylvan; by blessed song
Forbidding every bleak unkindly fog
To touch the prosperous growth of this tall wood.
This is highly agreeable to the character of the flattering and deceitful
Comus; and the supposition that she was the goddess or genius of the wood,
resulting from the situation of the persons, is new as well as proper. There is
another passage in Comus, whose subject is not much unlike that of the verses
just produced, which, probably, Milton copied from Euripides. Their port was
more than human, as they stood;
I took it for a faery vision
Of some gay creatures of the element,
That in the colors of the rainbow live,
And play in the plighted clouds: I was awe-strook,
And, as I past, I worshipped. --
Comus thus describes to the Lady her brothers. And thus a shepherd, in
Iphigenia in Tauris, describes Pylades and Orestes to Iphigenia. (...)
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...), etc.
(...), etc.
(...). V. 264.

Hic geminos vidit juvenes quidam
Pastor nostrum, and recessit retro
Summis [pedum] relegens vestigium,
Et dixit, non videtis? Daemones quidam
Sedent isti [hic]: quidam vero de nobis religiosior
Sustulit manus, and adoravit, intuens,
O marinae Leucotheae fili, etc.
O Domine Palaemon, etc.
Sive in littore vos sedetis Gemini.


I shall take this opportunity of pointing out one or two more of Milton's
imitations; by which it will farther appear, how well he knew to make a
borrowed thought or description his own, by the propriety of the application.
Michael thus speaks of what would happen to Paradise in the universal Deluge.
-- then shall this mount
Of Paradise, by might of waves be moved
Out of his place, pushed by the horned flood,
With all his verdure spoiled, and trees adrift,
Down the great river to the opening gulf;
And there take root, an island salt and bare,
The haunt of seals, and orcs, and seaw-mews clang. Par. Lost, 11. 829.



Delos (in Homer's hymn to Apollo) tells Latona, that he is unwilling that
Apollo should be born in his island, (...),
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
Ne cum primum videat, lumen solis
Insulam dedecoret, (quoniam asperum solum sum)
Pedibus conculcans, and impellet in maris Pelagus.
Ubi me quidem magna unda, magna vi abunde semper
Inundabit; ille autem ad aliam terram veniet, ubi placuerit ipsi,
Constructurus templum, lucosque arboribus densos.
Polypodes autem in me thalamos, Phocaeque nigrae
Domicilia facient, neglecta multitudine hominum.
In the same book, some of the circumstances in Michael's account of the Flood,
seem to be drawn from an Ode of Casimir, entitled, Noe Vaticinium. -- Sea
covered sea,
Sea without shore; and in their palaces,
Where Luxury late reigned, sea monsters whelp'd
And stabled. -- Ibid. 749.



Noah is introduced by Casimir, thus describing the effects of the Flood. Aut
ubi turrigerae potentum
Arces Gigantum? queis modo liberi
Festo choreas agmine plausimus,
Delphines insultant plateis,
Et vacuas spaciosa cete
Ludunt per aulas, ac thalamus pigrae
Pressere Phocae. -- Aen. 12. 925.

B. ii. C. v. S. vi. -- The upper marge
Of his seven-folded shield. --
This seems to be Virgil's, -- Clypei extremos septemplicis orbs. Lyricor. B.
4. Od. 27.

B. ii. C. v. S. xxxiii. The SUGARED liquor through his melting lips.
SUGARED, to express excessive sweetness, was a frequent epithet with the poets
of this age, and with those of the ages before it. It answered to the Mellitus
of the Romans. B. ii. C. vi. S. viii. But to weak wench did yield his martial
might.
Some late editors of Shakespere have endeavored to prove, that wench did not
anciently carry with it the idea of meanness or infamy. But in this place it
plainly signifies a loose woman; and in the following passages of Chaucer.
January having suspected his wife May's conjugal fidelity, May answers, I am a
gentlewoman, and no WENCH. March. Tale. 1719.

And in the House of Fame, wench is coupled with groom, Lord, and Lady, grome,
and WENCH. V. 206.

B. ii. C. vi. S. viii. -- One sweet drop of sensual delight.
Lucretius has given us this metaphor. -- Dulcedinis in cor
Stillavit Gutta. -- 4. 1054.

B. ii. C. vi. S. xxviii. Thou RECREANT knight. --
RECREANT knight, is a term of romance. Thus in MORTE ARTHUR. "Than said the
knight to the king, thou art in my danger whether me list to save thee or to
sley thee; and but thou yield thee as overcome and RECREANT, thou shall dye. As
for death said king Arthur, welcome be it when it comes; but as to yield me to
thee as RECREANT, etc." 1. 21.
B. ii. C. vii. S. iii. In smith's fire-spetting forge. --
SPETT seems anciently to have more simply signified DISPERSE, without the low
idea which we at present affix to it. Thus Milton in Comus, -- When the dragon
woom
Of stygian darkness SPETTS her thickest gloom.
And Drayton, in the barons wars, of an exhalation -- SPETTETH his lightening
forth, B. 2. St. 35.

B. ii. C. viii. S. v. A description of an angel. Beside his head there sat a
fair young man
Of wondrous beauty, and of freshest years,
Whose tender bud to blossom new began,
And flourish fair above his equal pears;
His snowy front, curled with golden hairs,
Like Phoebus face adorned with sunny rays,
Divinely shone; and two sharp-winged sheares
Decked with diverse plumes like painted jayes,
Were fixed at his back, to cut his ayerie ways.
Milton Par. Lost, 3. 636.
in his description of Satan under the form of a stripling-cherub, has highly
improved upon Spenser's angel, and Tasso's Gabriel Ibid. 5. 276,
, both which he seems to have had in his eye. And in his Raphael. C. 1. S. 13.
Many authors, before Milton, have described angels, in which they have
insisted only upon the graces of youth and beauty. But it must be granted, that
our great countryman was the first that ever attempted to give, or who, at the
same time, gave with becoming majesty, the idea of an ARMED ANGEL. He,
probably, received some hints, in this respect, from painting, swhich he had
seen in Italy; particularly from one by Raphael, where Michael, clad in
celestial panoply, triumphs over Satan chained. B. ii. C. x. S. vii. Speaking
of Albion, But far in land a salvage nation dwelt
Of hideous giants. --
This puts me in mind of Geoffry of Monmouth's account of the original state of
Albion. " Erat tunc nomen insulae Albion, quae a nemine nisi a PAUCIS
GIGANTIBUS inhabitabatur." A few giants in that historian's opinion were but of
little consideration. B. ii. C. xi. S. xviii. -- Let fly
Their fluttring arrows thick as flakes of snow.
So Virgil, -- Fundunt simul undique tela
Crebra, nivis ritu. Aen. 11. v. 610.

Thus again, -- Arrows haild so thick. --
5. 4. 38. And in the same stanza, -- A sharp shower of arrows --
And above, For on his shield as thick as stormy shower
Their strokes did rain. --
2. 8. 35. Which two last instances are more like Virgil's ferreus imber. B.
ii. C. xi. S. xxxv. -- Thereby there lay
An huge great stone which stood upon one end,
And had not had been removed many a day.
* * * * * * * * *
xxxvi.
The same he snatched, and with exceeding sway
Threw at his foe. --
Among other instances of the extraordinary strength of heroes in lifting a
huge stone, described by the ancient poets, I think the following in Apollonius
has never been alleged. Jason crushes the growing warriors with a vast stone.
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...). -- (...). B. 3. 1364.

Arripit e campo magnum and rotundum saxum,
Mirum Martis Gradivi discum; non ipsum viri
Juvenes quatuor ne paulum quidem terra elevassent,
Id sumptum in manibus valde procul in medios abjecit
Insiliens. --
But Jason was assisted in this miraculous effort by the enchantments of Medea.
B. ii. C. xii. S. lx. And in the midst of all a fountain stood.


Hardly any thing is described with greater pomp and magnificence than
artificial fountains in Romance. See a glorious one in Ariosto. 42. 91. B. ii.
C. xii. S. lxxxi. But one above the rest in special
That had an hog been late, hight Grill by name,
Repined greatly, and did him miscall,
That had from human shape him brought to natural.


Mr. Jortin Remarks, page 77.
observes, that this is taken from a Dialogue in Plutarch, inscribed, (...);
where Gryllus, one of the companions of Ulysses, transformed into a hog by
Circe, holds a discourse with Ulysses, and refuses to be restored to his human
shape.

Not many years before the FAERIE QUEEN was written, viz. 1548, Gelli
published his Circe, which is declared in the Preface to be founded upon the
Dialogue of Plutarch, mentioned by Mr. Jortin. Circe soon became a very popular
book, and was translated into English (as likewise into other languages) in the
Year 1557, by one Henry Iden; so that, probably, Spenser had red it; and might
be induced to consult that Dialogue, from its mention in the preface. B. iii.
C. i. S. xiv. Save Bears, Lions, and Bulls which romed them around.
This verse would be improved in its harmony, by reading, Save Lions, Bears,
and Bulls, etc.
As would the following also, Yet was admired much of fools, women, and boys.
5. 2. 30. If we were to read, Yet was admired much of women, fools, and boys.
But these corrections are made by the critic, upon a supposition that his
author must infallibly have written what was best. It may be laid down as a
general rule, that an Alexandrine cannot be harmonious without a full pause
after the third foot. Thus, That spear enchanted was -- which laid thee on the
green.
Consequently the sixth syllable must necessarily be a monosyllable, or the
last syllable of a word; for we cannot make a full pause in the middle of a
word, upon which account such Alexandrines as these are necessarily
inharmonious. So in his angry cour -- age fairly pacified.
That bore a Lion pass -- ant in a golden field.
But that he must do batt -- el with the sea-nymph's son.
And to her watery cham -- ber swiftly carry him.
And because a full pause must be made on the last syllable of the third foot,
the third foot should never consist of a Trochee, for then we should be obliged
to lay the greater stress upon the short syllable; as if the third foot was to
be Beauty, Courage, gre^edy, flowery, or the like.

And it may be further remarked, that an Iambus, for the third foot, will make
the verse more musical, as the pause will be more strong after a short
syllable. Thus, Fit to adorn th de^ad, -- and deck the dreary tomb.
That art thus foully fle^d -- from famous enemy.
For the same reason an Iambic foot at the end of any English verse has a good
effect.

An Alexandrine entirely consisting of Iambic feet, answers precisely to a pure
Iambic verse of the ancients. Thus, Th ge^ntl Eve^ awakes rfre^shfull airs
around.
Eque^s sonant ve^rbrabt ungula.


In reading this kind of measure, the ancients did not, probably, huddle the
syllables together, as we do: but it would be difficult to point out the places
at which they made their pauses. Why should the following pure Iambic of
Sophocles, Elect. v. 518.
(...)
Be red like mere prose, without any certain pause, or division? and this verse
of Anacreon, Od. 1. v. 1.
(...)
Be red with these rests, (...)
May we not suppose, that the Iambic of Sophocles was red with some such
divisions as these, (...)?
Which are not very unlike those which we make use of in reading the above
English Alexandrine (or Iambic) verse, The gen-tle Eve-awakes-refresh-full
airs-around.


It may be observed, that a Latin Hexameter is essentially distinguished from a
prose sentence, only by being ended with a Dactyle preceding a Spondee; upon
which account our manner of reading the endings of such Hexameters as these,
procumbit Humi Bos, Oceano Nox, amica Luto Sus, etc. is probably wrong.
According to our present manner of reading them, the whole verse does not
differ in sound from an Oration prosaica; contrary therefore to our present
practice, we should take care to express the Dactyle and Spondee thus -- Ocean
-- o Nox; and so of the rest. And that this was the practice of the ancients,
may be farther inferred from these words of Quintilian, on reading verses, "SIT
LECTIO VIRILIS, ET CUM SEVERITATE QUADAM GRAVIS; ET NON QUIDEM PROSAE SIMILIS
QUIA CARMEN EST." Instit. Orat. l. 1. c. 8.
B. iii. C. i. S. xvi. All as a blazing star does far outcast
His hairie beams, and flaming locks disspred.


Hairie seems to be an odd epithet for Beams. I once thought that Spenser
might have wrote, airie beams, i. e. beams streaming through the air. But
hairie is undoubtedly the genuine reading, as the adjective and substantive,
hairie and beams, are alternately inverted and opposed to flaming and locks.
B. iii. C. i. S. lvi. And every knight, and every gentle squire
Began choose his dame with bascio mani gay.


With bascio mani, Ital. with kissing her hands: a phrase, perhaps, common in
our author's age, when Italian manners were universally affected. B. iii. C. i.
S. lxii. -- Out of her FILED bed.
"Out of her DEFILED bed." B. iii. C. ii. S. xxv. He bore a crowned little
Ermilin,
That decked the azure field with her fair POULDRED skin.
That is, with her skin spotted, or variegated; in its primary sense,
besprinkled: this is the genuine spelling of powdered, according to the
etymology to which Skinner conjectures it to belong, viz. a pulvere, conspergo
pulvere. We find the substantive POWDER generally spelt thus in old authors.

Thus B. Johnson, And of the POULDER-plot they will talk yet. Epig. 92.

Spenser again uses the verb in its sense, besprinkle, -- A crown
POWDERED with pearl and stone. --
5. 10. 31. Thus Sir Ph. Sydney, in Astrophell and Stella, St. 6.
Some one his song in Jove, and Jove's strange tales attires,
Bordered with bulls and swans, POWDERED with golden rain.
Thus Harrington, -- A horse of dainty hew
* * * * * *
His color py'd, POWDERED with many a spot. 19. 53.

Again, where it may be interpreted, embroider, She dreamt the bases of her
loved knight,
Which she embrodred black the other day,
With spots of red were POWDERED all in sight. 43. 148.

Thus also Chaucer, Full gay was all the ground, and queint,
And POWDERED as men had it peint. Romans R. v. 115.

The ground was grene, YPOUDRED with daisye. Cuckoo and Night. v. 63.

And, in the following instance, it seems to be literally used for
embroidering. Aftir a sort the collir and the vente
Like as armine is made in purfilinge,
With great perlis full fine and orient,
They were couchid all aftir one worching,
With diamondes instede of POUDIRING. Ass. L. 526.



I had not collected all these instances, but with a design of placing an
expression of Milton in a proper light. -- The Galaxy, that milky way,
Which nightly as a circling zone thou see
POWDERED with stars. Par. Lost, 7. 579.

That is, "The milky way, which every night appears to you, like a circling
zone besprinkled or embroidered with stars." To the majority of readers, I dare
say, powdered with stars has ever appeared a very mean, or rather ridiculous,
metaphor. It occurrs in Sackville's Induction to the MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES.
Then looking upwards to the heaven's leames,
With night's bright STARS thick POWDERED every where.
That is, thick-besprinkled, or variegated. Sandys, in his notes to the
CHRISTUS PATIENS of Grotius, speaking of the Veil in Solomon's Temple, "says,
that it was POWDERED with Cherubims." Act. 4. v. 296.
B. iii. C. ii. S. xlviii. For the fair damsel from the holy HEARSE
Her love-sicke heart to other thoughts did steal.
From the holy hearse, is, I suppose, the same as if he had said, from the holy
HERSAL, which is used afterward. -- sad HERSAL of his heavy strife.
3. 11. 18. So that holy hearse is here, the rehearsal of the prayers in the
church service, at which Britomart is now described as present. HEARSE occurs,
in the Pastoral of November, as the burden of Colin's song, "O heavy HEARSE,"
and, "O happy HEARSE" where E. K. interprets HEARSE, The solemn Obsequie in
Funerals. B. iii. C. iii. S. xxvi. But sooth he is the son of Gorlois.
This is the Gorlois of whom Milton speaks, Epitaph. Damonis, 166.
Tum gravidam Arturo, fatali fraud, Iogernen,
Mendaces vultus, assumptaque Gorlois arma,
Merlini dolus.


Geoffrey of Monmouth informs us, that Uther Pendragon fell in love with
Igerne, or Iogerne, the wife of Gorlois prince of Cornwall. In the absence of
Gorlois, Merlin, by his magic, transformed Uther into the likeness of Gorlois,
and one Ulfin into the likeness of Jordan, a familiar friend of Gorlois,
himself assuming the figure of one Bricel; by means of which artifice, Uther
enjoyed Iogerne, and begot king Arthur. B. 8. c. 19.
Spenser, in his Epistle to Sir W. Raleigh, calls Iogerne, or Igerne, the Lady
IGRAYNE. B. iii. C. iii. S. liii. Bardes tell of many women valorous
Which have full many feats adventurous
Performed in paragone of proudest men:
The bold Bonduca, whose victorious
Exploits made Rome to quake, stout Guendolen,
Renowned Martia, and redoubted Emmelen.


Glauce, with the greatest propriety, is here made to allude to the bards,
whose Leland de Script. Brit. cap. 2.
business it was to sing to the harp the warlike achievements of their
countrymen, and who flourished in high perfection, at the time in which our
author has supposed the events of the FAERIE QUEEN to have fallen out. They
are introduced, with no less consistency, playing upon their harps in the hall
of the House of PRIDE. -- Many bards that to the trembling chord
Can tune their timely voices cunningly.
1. 5. 3.

The bards were usually employed upon such public occasions, in bower or hall,
as Milton terms it. B. iii. C. v. S. xxxii. There whether it divine Tobacco
were,
Or Panacea, or Polygony.


Tobacco was, at this time, but newly discovered to the English, and not an
ordinary herb, as it is at present. Probably Tobacco is here mentioned, with so
much honor, by way of paying a compliment to Sir Walter Raleigh, our author's
friend and patron, who first introduced and used Tobacco in England. B. iii. C.
vii. S. vi. There in a gloomy hollow glen she found
A little cottage built of sticks and reeds,
In homely wise, and walled with sods around,
In which a witch did dwell, in loathely weeds,
And wilful want, all careless of her needs.


Witches were thought really to exist in the age of Queen Elizabeth, and our
author had, probably, been struck with seeing such a cottage as this, in which
a witch was supposed to live. Those who have perused Mr. Blackwall's Enquiry
into the life and writings of Homer, will be best qualified to judge how much
better enabled that poet is to describe, who copies from living objects, than
he who describes, in a later age, from tradition. B. iii. C. vii. S. ix. Wiping
the tears from her SUFFUSED eyes.
So Virgil, Tristior, atque oculos lacrymis SUFFUSA nitentes. Aen. 1. v. 228.

B. iii. C. vii. S. lii. Her well beseemes that QUEST. --


QUEST is a term properly belonging to Romance, importing the expedition in
which the knight is engaged, and which he is obliged to perform. It is a very
common word with Spenser. B. iii. C. viii. S. xxxix. Sometimes he boasted, that
a God he hight
But she a mortal creature loved best;
Then he would make himself a mortal wight,
But then she said she loved none but a Faerie knight.
xl.
Then like a Faerie knight himself he dressed.
The use which the poet here makes of Proteus's power of changing his shape, is
artful enough. B. iii. C. x. S. viii. -- Ballads, As the name of G. GASCOINE
has been frequently mentioned in the course of this work, it may not be,
perhaps, improper to give the reader some further knowledge of him. His works
were printed An. 1576, with this title, "A hundredth sundry flowers, bound up
in one small poesy; gathered, partly by translation, in the fine and
outlandish gardens of Euripides, Ovid, Petrarke, Ariosto, and others; and
partly by invention, out of our own fruitful orchardes in England; yielding
sundry sweet savours of tragical, comicall, and moral discourses, both
pleasant and profitable to the well-smellyng noses of learned readers." This
was followed by another edition, An. 1587. This author was well esteemed by his
cotemporary writers, as appears by their testimonies of him; and it must be
confessed, that he has much exceeded all the poets of his age, in smoothness
and harmony of versification. Would it not extend this note too far, as a
specimen of his talent for love-verses, I would produce his Ode, "In praise of
Lady Bridges, now Lady Sands, on a scar on her forehead," in which the reader
would be surpised to discover a delicacy, rarely, if ever, to be found in that
early state of our poetry.

But the reader will, probably, be still more entertained with some passages in
JOCASTA, a Tragedy, (before mentioned) written ten years before the Poem just
quoted, and acted at Gray's Inn, 1566, in which he will not only perceive the
strength and harmony, but likewise the poetical spirit of Spenser, who did not
publish any one of his pieces till fourteen years afterward. The story is
taken, and in some measure translated, from the PHOENISSAE of Euripides; it is
written in blank verse, with chorusses (none of which are copied from those in
the PHOENISSAE); and before each Act, according to the practice of that age,
the Dumb Show is introduced. In Act 2. 2. combat is likely to ensue, between
Eteocles and Polynices; on which occasion the Chorus, consisting of four Theban
dames, sing an Ode, which thus begins. O fierce and furious God! whose
harmefull heart
Rejoices most to shed the giltlesse blood;
Whose headie will does all the world subvert,
And does envy the pleasant merry mood
Of our estate, that erst in quiet stood;
Why do thou thus our harmless town annoy
Which mighty Bacchus governed in joye?
Father of war and death! that do remove
With wrathful wrecke from woeful mothers breast
The trusty pledges of her tender love;
So grant the Gods, that for our final rest,
Dame Venus' pleasant looks may charm thee best,
Whereby when thou shall all amazed stand,
The sword may fall out of thy trembling hand:
And thou may prove some other way full well
The bloody prowess of thy mighty spear,
Wherewith thou raisest from the depths of hell,
The wrathful sprites of all the furies there,
Who, when they wake, do wander every where,
And never rest to raunge about the coasts,
TO enrich their pit with spoil of damned ghostes.
And when thou have our fields forsaken thus,
Let cruel DISCORD bear thee company,
Engirt with snakes, and serpents venomous,
Even she, that can with red vermilion dye
The gladsome green, that florish'd pleasantly,
And make the greedy ground a drinking cup
To sup the blood of murdered bodies up.
Yet thou return, O joye, etc. etc.


There are other passages equally striking, which it would be no less tedious
than impertinent to transcribe.


VIRELAYES, and verses vain.


Virelayes are often mentioned by Chaucer, and our old poets. G. Gascoigne, in
his Defense of rhyme, gives this account of Virelayes. "There is an old kind
of rhyme called VERLAYES, derived, as I have read, of the word verde which
betokens green, and lay which betokens a song, as if you would say GREEN
SONGS. But I must tell you by the way, that I never read any verse which I
saw by authority called VERLAY, but one; and that was a long discourse in
verses of ten sillabeles, whereof the four first did rhyme across; and the
fyfth did answer to the first and third, breaking off there, and so going on
to another termination. Of this I could show example of imitation, in mine own
verses written to the right honorable the Lord Gray of Wilton." E. G. A
strange conceit, a vain of new delight
Twixt weal and woe, 'twixt weal and bitter grief,
Has pricked forth my hasty pen to write
This worthless verse, in hazard of reproof,
And to mine alder-lievest Lord I must indice.
B. iii. C. x. S. xii. As Hellene when she saw aloft appear
The Trojane flames, and reach to heavens hight,
Did clap her hands, and joyed at that doleful sight.
Virgil tells us, that Helen, while Troy was burning, hid herself for fear.
Illa sibi infestos eversa ob Pergama Teucros,
Et paenas Danaum, and deserti conjugis iras
Permetuens, Trojae and patriae communis erynnis,
Abdiderat sese, atque aris invisa sedebat. Aen. 2. 571.



Spenser's lines put me in mind of a thought in one of Daniel's sonnets, which
seems to be copied by Waller. Who whilst I burn she sings at my souls wrack
Looking aloft from turret of her pride;
There my souls tyrant joys her in the sack
Of her own seat. -- 44.

Daniel here alludes to a circumstance related of Nero; and Waller seems to
have imitated Daniel's application of it. Thus Nero with his harp in hand
surveyed
His burning Rome, and as it burnt he played. On my L. Isabella playing on the
lute.

B. iii. C. x. S. xxxv. For having filcht her bells, her up he cast
To the wide world, and let her fly alone.


Here is a metaphor taken from hawking; a diversion highly fashionable in our
author's age, to which he frequently alludes, and from whence he has drawn a
very great number of comparisons. The hawk's bells are mentioned afterward,
Like as an hawke, that feeling herself freed
From bells and jesses, which did let her flight.
6. 4. 19. B. iii. C. xii. S. xli. He bound that piteous lady prisoner now
releast.


Mr. Jortin observes, that Spenser (to the best of his knowledge) never uses
verses of six feet, except in the last line of the stanza, and in this place.
But he had forgot these instances, But whilst his stony heart was touched with
tender truth.
4. 12. 13. Again, Sad death revived with her sweet inspection.
4. 12. 34.

We meet with an Alexandrine in the Samson Agonistes, which I believe was not
left so by the author. But I God's counsel have not kept, his holy secret
Presumptuously have published, etc. V. 497.

The preceding line is, The mark of fool set on his front?
Perhaps we should read, The mark of fool set on his front? but I
God's counsel have not kept, his holy secret
Presumptuously have published, etc.
B. iv. C. ii. S. ii. Such music is wise words with time CONCENTED.
CONCENTED, from the substantive concent, which we meet in our author. All
which together sung full cheerfully
A lay of loves delight with sweet CONCENT.
3. 12. 5. And in Virgil's Gnat, But the small birds in their wide boughs
embowring
Chaunted their sundry tunes with sweet CONCENT.


Probably in the Epithalamion, where Spenser is speaking of many birds singing
together, So goodly all agree with sweet consent,
Instead of consent, we should read CONCENT. Milton uses the word in his poem,
at a solemn music, That undisturbed song of pure CONCENT
Aye sung before the sapphire-colourd throne.
As it has been restored instead of content, upon the best authority, by Dr.
Newton, in his late very useful edition of Milton's poetical works. B. iv. C.
iii. S. i.Speaking of mankind, That every hour they knock at deaths gate.
This recalls to my memory a beautiful image of Sackvill, in his INDUCTION to
THE MIRROR OF MAGISTRATES concerning the figure of OLD AGE. His witherd fist
still knocking at death's door.
which perhaps is not more expressive than Chaucer's representation of ELDE, or
old age. After telling us that Distress, Sickness, etc. always abide in her
court, and are her senators, he adds, The day and night her to torment
With cruel death they her present;
And tellen her erlich and late,
That death stondeth armed at her gate.
Death's door was a common phrase, and occurs in our translation of the psalms.
"They were even hard at death's door." Ps. 108. v. 18.
B. iv. C. iii. S. iii. These warlike champions all in armour-SHINE.
SHINE is likewise used as a substantive in Harrington's Ariosto, -- The SHINE
of armor bright. 37. 15.

And in our translation of the psalms, "His lightenings gave SHINE unto the
world." Ps. 97. v. 4.
B. iv. C. iv. S. xii. Against the turneiment which is not long.
The same mode of speaking occurrs in the verse which is the burden of the song
in the Prothalamion. Against the bridale day which is not long.
i. e. "Approaching, near at hand." B. iv. C. viii. S. xxix. More hard for
hungry steed to abstain from pleasant lare.
LARE is a Saxon word for bed. It is used by Milton. -- Out of the ground uprose
As from his LAIR the wild beast where he wons
In forest wild, in thicket, etc. Par. Lost, 7. 457.

Yet it here seems to be used for pasture or grass; in which however a bed may
be made. So again below, S. 51. This giant's son that lies there on the laire
An headless heap. --
i. e. (I suppose) lies there on the grass, B. iv. C. ix. Arg. The SQUIRE OF
LOW DEGREE releast
Paeana takes to wife.


The squire of lo degree, is the title of an old romance, mentioned together
with Sir Huon of Bordeaux; which, as we remarked before, is spoken of among a
catalogue of ancient books, in the letter concerning Q. Elizabeth's
entertainment at Kenelworth. B. vi. C. ix. S. viii. -- Him compeld
To open unto him the prison door,
And forth to bring those thrals that there he held;
Thence forth to him were brought about a score,
Of knights and squires, etc.
All which he did from bitter bondage free.


The releasing of the prisoners is a ceremony constantly practiced in romance,
after the knight has killed the giant, and taken possession of his castle. B.
iv. C. x. Arg. Scudamore does his conquest tell
Of virtuous Amoret.


Scudamore is a name derived from Scudo, a shield, and Amore, Love, Ital.
because in this Canto, S. 10. he wins the SHIELD OF LOVE. B. iv. C. x. S. xxxv.
Else would the waters overflow the lands
And fire devour the air, and hell them quight.
I suppose he means "Else the waters would overflow the lands, and fire devour
the air, and hell would entirely devour both waters and lands." But this is a
most confused construction. B. iv. C. x. S. xxi. -- All that nature, by her
mother-wit
Could frame, etc.
Dryden has adopted the expression MOTHER-WIT from our author, in his Ode on
Caecilia's day, With nature's MOTHER-WIT, and arts unknown before.
I think it occurrs likewise in Done. B. iv. C. x. S. l. And next to her sat
goodly SHAMEFASTNESS.
Shamefastness, if I remember right, is introduced as a person in Lidgate's
story of Thebes. B. vi C. xi. S. xxxviii. And after them the fatal Welland went,
That if old sawes prove true (which God forbid)
Shall drown all Holland with his excrement,
And shall see Stamford, though now homely hid,
Then shine in learning, more than ever did
Cambridge or Oxford, England's goodly beams.


Holland (says Seldom, in his notes on Drayton's Polyolb. S. 8.) is the
maritime part of Lincolnshire, where the river Welland flows. By the old Sawes
the poet hints at a prophesy of Merlin, Doctrinae studium quod nunc viget ad
VADA BOUM,
Ante finem saecli, celebrabitur ad VADA SAXI.


VADA BOUM, i. e. Oxenford or Oxford; VADA SAXI, i. e. Staneford, or Stamford.
B. iv. C. x. S. xxxii. And Mole that like a nousling mole does make
His way --
So, in Colin Clouts come home again, In which like Moldwarps, nousling still
they lurk.
B. iv. C. xii. S. xvii. In this sad plight he walked here and there,
And romed round about the rock in vain,
As he had lost himself, he wist not where;
Often listening if he mote her hear again,
And still bemoaning his unworthy pain;
Like as an hynde whose calfe is fallen unawares
Into some pit, where she him hears complain,
An hundred times about the pit-side fares
Right sorrowfully mourning her beareaved cares.
This comparison has great propriety. There is one not much unlike it in
Lucretius. At matter virides saltus orbata peragrans,
Linquit humi pedibus vestigia pressa bisulcis,
Omnia convisens late loca; si queat unquam
Conspicere amissum faetum: completque querelis
Frondiferum nemus adsistens, and crebra revisit
Ad stabulum, desiderio perfixa juvenci. 2. 355.



The circumstance of the calf fallen into the pit, from whence the mother can
only hear him complain, finely heightens this parental distress, and that of
her walking round the pit so often, I think exceeds the crebra revisit ad
stabulum; and it may be observed, upon the whole, that the tenderness of
Spenser's temper remarkably betrays itself on this occasion.

B. v. C. i. S. ix. Chrysaor is the name of Sir Arthegall's sword. Swords are
often named in Romance; and in Ariosto's Orlando Furioso; as, Orlando's
Durindana, Renaldo's Fusberta, Rogero's Balisarda, etc. B. v. C. i. S. xv. That
I mote drink the cup whereof she drank.
That is, "That I might suffer what she did." These words seem to be a very
improper imitation of a passage in the New Testament, which every serious
reader cannot but remember with the greatest reverence. B. v. C. ii. S. xxvii.
The which her sire had scrapt by HOOK AND CROOK.
So again, In hopes her to attain BY HOOK OR CROOK.
3. 1. 17.

The proverb of getting any thing by hook or by crook is said to have arisen
in the time of Charles I. when there were two learned Judges, named HOOK and
CROOK; and a difficult cause was to be gotten either by HOOK or by CROOK.
But here is a proof that this proverb is much older than that time.

B. v. C. iii. S. xxiv, xxv. When the false Florimel is placed by the side of
the true Florimel, the former vanishes into nothing; and as suddenly, says the
poet, as all the glorious colors of the rainbow fade and perish. With regard
to the circumstance of the sudden evanescence in each, the comparison is just
and elegant: but if we consider, that a rainbow exists by the presence of the
sun, the similitude by no means is made out: however, it is the former of these
circumstances only which the poet insists upon, so that a partial
correspondence only is expected. B. v. C. iii. S. xxxiv.Of Brigadore, -- And
louted low on knee.
This is related of Alexander's horse Bucephalus. B. v. C. iv. S. xlii.Of an
Eagle, To weather his broad sails --
Sails are often used by our author for wings, and after him by Milton. And by
Fletcher, So up he rose upon his stretched sails. Purple Island, C. 12. S. 59.

Again, by our author, His flaggy wings when forth he did display,
Were like two sails. --
1. 11. 10.

Thus Bayardo, in Ariosto, fights with a monstrous bird, whose wings are like
two fails. L'Ale havea grande che parean DUO VELE. C. 33. S. 84.

Her wings so huge, they seemed like a sail.
Harrington. B. v. C. v. S. iii. And on her shoulder hung her shield bedeckt,
Upon the bosse, with stones that shined wide,
As the fair moon in her most full aspect.
Satan's shield is compared to the moon. Par. Lost, 287.
But to the moon as seen through a telescope. B. v. C. v. S. xi. -- Her
sunshiny helmet soon unlaced,
Thinking, at once, both head and helmet to have raced.
xii.
But when as he discovered had her face,
He saw his senses strange astonishment, etc.
This is such a picture as Propertius gives us, Ausa ferox ab equo quondam
oppugnare sagittis
Maeotis Danaum Penthesilea rates;
Aurea cui postquam nudavit cassida frontem,
Vicit victorem candida forma virum. 3. 10.

B. v. C. viii. S. xxxvii. At last from his victorious shield he drew
The veil, etc. --
And coming full before his horse's view,
As they upon him pressed, it plain to them did show.
xxxviii.
**********
So did the sight thereof their sense dismay,
That back again upon themselves they turned.
The Aegis is represented with the same effect on horses, in Val. Flaccus.
Aegida tum primum virgo, spiramque Medusae
Tercentum saevis squallentem sustulit hydris;
Quam soli vidistis EQUI; pavor occupat ingens,
Excussis in terga viris. -- 6. 396.

B. v. C. viii. S. xliii. Like as the cursed son of Theseus,
That * * * * * * *
Of his own steeds was all to pieces torn.


Why does he call Hippolitus cursed? Neither was Hippolitus torn in pieces by
his own horses, but by a monster sent by Neptune, as Euripides relates, Hipp.
Cor. 1220. and other authors. In this account of the death of Hippolitus, he
greatly varies from himself, 1. 5. 37, and seq. B. v. C. ix. S. xxiii. The
marshall of the hall to them did come,
His name hight ORDER. --


Here Spenser paints from the manners of his own age. In his age the custom of
a -- Feast
Served up in hall with sewrs and seneshalls
was not entirely dropped. one of the officers at these solemnities was styled
the marshall of the hall: An office which Chaucer tells us, his host at the
tabard was very well qualified for. A semely man our host was withal
To ben a MARSHALL IN A LORDIS HALL. Prol. 753.

As the guests at these pompous and public festivals were very numerous, and of
various conditions, I suppose the business of this office, was to place every
one according to his rank, and to keep peace and order. B. v. C. ix. S. xxix.
Whilst KINGS and KESARS at her feet did them prostrate.
Spenser frequently uses the expression Kings and Kesars. -- The captive hearts
Of KINGS and KESARS. --
4. 7. 1. This is the state of KESARS and of KINGS.
6. 3. 5. Mighty KINGS and KESARS into thraldom brought.
3. 11. 29. Ne KESAR spared he awhit nor KINGS.
6. 12. 28.

It is a very ancient form of speaking, and is found in the Visions of Pierce
Plowman. Death came driving after, and all to dust pashed
KINGS and KAYSERS, knights and popes. Passus 16.

It was not unfamiliar in B. Johnson's time; thus, Tu. I charge you in the
queen's name keep the peace.
Hill. Tell me of no QUEEN or KEYSAR. A tale of a tub. A. 2. S. 2.

It occurrs likewise in Harrington's Ariosto. For myters, states, nor crowns
may not exclude
Popes, mighty KINGS, nor KEYSARS from the same, C. 44. S. 47.

B. v. C. ix. S. xxxv. The horses of the sun, Toward the western BRIM begin to
draw.
BRIM is often used for margin or bank of a stream by our author, and the old
poets. Also by Milton in Comus, By dimpled brook, and fountain-BRIM. V. 119.



FOUNTAIN-brim seems to have been a common pression. It is used by Drayton, --
Sporting with Hebe by a fountain-BRIM. Bar. W. 6. 36.

And in Warner's Albion's England, As this same fond selfe-pleasing youth stood
at a FOUNTAYNE-BRIM. B. 9. 46.

We have ocean-BRIM in the Paradise-lost, With wheels yet hovering over the
OCEAN-BRIM. 5. 140.

B. v. C. x. S. xxix. And for more horror, and more cruelty,
Under that cursed idols altar-stone,
An hideous monster does in darkness lie,
Whose dreadful shape was never seen of none
That lives on earth. --


We are apt to conceive something very wonderful of those mysterious things
which are thus said to be unknown to us, and to be out of the reach and compass
of man's knowledge and apprehension. Thus a cave is said to be, A dreadful
depth, how deep no man can tell,
5. 9. 6. If the poet had limited the depth of this cave to a very great, but
to a certain number of fathom, the imagination could still have supposed and
added more; but now as no determinate measure of its depth is assigned, our
imagination is left at liberty to exert its utmost arbitrary stretch, to add
fathom to fathom, and depth to depth, till it is lost in it is own attempt to
grasp the idea of that which is unbounded or infinite. B. v. C. x. S. xxxiii.
-- His corse,
Which tumbling down upon the SENSELESS ground.
It should rather be "tumbling SENSELESS down." We have the same metathetical
form again, But as he lay upon the humbled grass.
6. 7. 26. Where humbled should be made to agree with he rather than with
grass. B. v. C. xi. S. v. The whilst at him so dreadfully did drive
That seemed a marble rock asunder could have rive.
Spenser undoubtedly wrote, The whilst at him so dreadfully he did drive.
The y in dreadfully being slur'd, or cut off. So. Saint George of merry'
England the sign of victory.
1. 10. 61. There are many other instances of the Caesura of this letter, in
our author, as likewise in Milton. In the following verse e in idle is sunk.
What idle' errand have thou earth's mansions to forsake?
6. 6. 25. In this verse, That seemed a marble rock asunder could have RIVE.
there is an ellipsis of IT before seemed, and of HE before could; and rive
should have been RIV'D, unless he wrote it rive for RIVEN. B. vi. Introduct. S.
iv. -- To please the eye of them that pass
Which see not perfect things, but in a glass.
St. Paul to the Corinthians, 1 Ep. 13. 12.
"For now we see through a glass; darkly." B. vi. C. ii. S. iv. -- Ah sorry boy
Is this the hope that to my hoary hear
Thou bringst? aye me is this the timely joy
Which I expected long? now turned to sad annoy!


Aladine is brought home dead upon a bier to his father Aldus, who bursts out
into these exclamations over his son's body; In like manner Evander mourns over
his son Pallas, -- Feretro Pallanta repostum. Aen. 11. 149.

But these exclamations are somewhat similar to those which Aeneas in the same
book utters over Pallas, Hi nostri reditus, expectatique triumphi,
Haec mea magna fides, etc. 11. 54.

B. vi. C. iii. S. xxviii. -- With careful hands
Did her sustain, softing foot her beside.


Softing-foot is a typographical blunder which, I think, runs through all the
editions for SOFT-FOOTING; William Ponsonby's edition in quarto, 1596, not
excepted. B. vi. C. vi. S. iv. For whylome he had been a doughty knight.


That is the hermit had been, etc. Many of the hermits in romance are
represented to have been very valorous knights in their youth. Hence it is that
Don Quixote is introduced gravely debating with Sancho, whether he shall turn
saint or archbishop. B. vi. C. vii. S. i. -- A vile dunghill mind.
So, The dearest to his dunghill mind.
3. 10. 15. So in an hymn of love, His dunghill thoughts which do themselves
enure
To durtie dross. --
And Chaucer, Now fie churl (quoth the gentle Tercelet)
Out of the dunghill came that word aright. Ass. F.

B. vi. C. viii. S. xxi. And sitting careless on the Scorner's stool.
We meet with something like this in our old metrical version of the first
psalm. Nor sat in Scorners chair.
B. vi. C. x. S. vi. And in their tops the soaring hawke did tower,
Sitting like king of fowls in majesty and power.


This is said in honor of hawking, which (as I before hinted) was a very
fashionable and courtly diversion in Spenser's time. And for the same reason,
and somewhat after the same manner, he particularizes the falcon, in the speech
of the Genius of Verulam. Where my high steeples whilome used to stand,
On which the lordly falcon wont to tower.
B. vi. C. xii. S. xvii. A little maid the which ye CHILDED tho.
CHILDING is used in Chaucer for conceiving, viz. Unknowing him, CHYLDING by
miracle. Ball. Lady, v. 133.

B. vi. C. xii. S. xxiii. etc.

His description of the Blatant Beast (under which is shadowed scandal or
calumny) attacking all ranks of life, and making havoc in courts, monasteries,
and cottages, is exactly like this passage in the Lingua of Erasmus, "
Circumferat quisque oculos suos, per domos privatas, per collegia, per
monasteria, per aulas principum, per civitates, per regna; and compendio
discet, quantam ubique pestem ingerat LINGUA CALUMNIATRIX." Basiliae, apud
Froben. 1526. page 220.
B. vii. C. vii. S. x. That richer seems than any TAPESTRY
That princes bowres adorn with painted imagery.


In the age of the poet, tapestry was the most fashionable furniture of halls
and state-rooms; as it was when Milton wrote his Comus, who mentions tapestry
as a circumstance of grandeur. -- Courtesy,
Which often is sooner found in lowly sheds,
With smoaky rafters, than in TAP'STRY HALLS
And courts of princes. --


As the general fashion of furnishing halls, etc. is at present entirely
different from this, the reader passes over the expression, TAPESTRY-HALLS,
without feeling any idea conveyed to him by it, because the object from whence
it is drawn, does not at present exist: and we may observe, from this passage,
how much of their force and propriety both expressions and descriptions must
necessarily lose, when the objects, or customs, or manners, to which they
allude, are out of use, and forgotten. There is another reference to tapestry
in Milton, which is equally unmeaning to a modern reader, Auditurque chelys
SUSPENSA TAPETIA circum,
Virgineos tremula quae regat art pedes. B. 1. El. 6.

B. vii. C. vii. S. xxxv. Like that ungracious crew which faines demurest grace.


He seems here to have intended a satirical stroke against the Puritans, who
were a prevailing party in the age of Queen Elizabeth; and, indeed, our author,
from his profession, had some reason to declare himself their enemy, as poetry
was what they particularly stigmatized, and bitterly inveighed against. In the
year 1579, one Stephen Gosson wrote a pamphlet, with this title, "The School
of Abuse, containing a pleasant invective against poets, pipers, plaiers,
jesters, and suchlike caterpillars of a commonwealth." This was soon followed
by many others of the same kind.

But the most ridiculous treatise of this sort was that written many years
afterward by W. Prynne; as a specimen of which, I shall beg leave to entertain
the reader with its title page. "HISTRIOMASTIX, the Players Scourge, or Actors
Tragedy, divided into two parts; wherein it is largely evidenced by diverse
arguments, by the concurring authorities, and resolutions of sundry texts of
Scripture; of the whole primitive Church, both under the law and gospel; of
fifty-five Synods and Councils, of seventy-one Fathers, and Christian writers,
before the year of our Lord 1200; of above one hundred and fifty foraigne and
domestic protestant and popish authors since; of forty heathen philosophers,
historians, poets; of many heathen, many christian nations, republics,
emperors, princes, magistrates; of sundry apostolical, canonical, imperial
constitutions, and of our own English statutes, magistrates, universities,
writers, preachers. -- That popular stage plays (the very pompes of the devil,
which we renounce in baptism, if we believe the Fathers) are sinful,
heathenish, lewd, ungodly spectacles, and most pernicious corruptions;
condemned in all ages as intolerable mischiefs, to churches, to republics,
the manners, minds, and souls of men: and that the profession of play-poets,
of stage players, together with the penning, acting, and frequenting of
stage plays, are unlawful, infamous, and misbeseeming christians: all
pretenses to the contrary are here likewise fully answered; and the
unlawfullness of acting, of beholding academical enterludes briefly discussed;
besides sundry other particulars concerning dancing, dicing, health-drinking,
etc. London, 1633.

This extravagant and absurd spirit of puritanical enthusiasm, proved at last,
in its effects, as pernicious to polite learning, and the fine arts, as to the
liberties and constitution of our country: while every species of elegance was
represented, by these austere and melancholy zealots, as damnable luxury, and
every degree of decent adoration, as popish idolatry. In short, it is not
sufficiently considered, what a rapid and national progress we were, at that
time, making in knowledge, and how sudden a stop was put to it, by the
inundation of presbyterianism and ignorance; which circumstance alone,
exclusive of its other attendant evils, gives us ample cause to detest the
promoters of that malignant (I wish I could add, unprovoked) rebellion, which
no good man can remember without horror.

It may not, perhaps, be impertinent to remark here, that Milton, who was
inclined to puritanism, had good reason to think, that the publication of his
Samson Agonistes, would be very offensive to his brethren, who held poetry, and
particularly that of the dramatic kind, in such abhorrence. And, upon this
account, it is probable, that, in order to excuse himself for having engaged in
this proscribed and forbidden species of writing, he thought it expedient to
prefix to his play a formal DEFENSE OF TRAGEDY, in which he endeavors to
prove, that some of the gravest writers did not scruple to illustrate their
discourses from the works of tragic poets, and that many of the wisest
philosophers, and of the primitive fathers, were not ashamed to write Tragedies.

The subsequent remarks are thrown together without order, which the reader is
desired to look upon as a SUPPLEMENT to this concluding SECTION.

B. i. C. vi. S. xvi. Far off he wonders what them makes so glad,
Of Bacchus merry fruits they did INVENT,
Or Cybel's frantic rights have made them mad.
Hughes reads, IF Bacchus', etc. but even then there is an obscurity. The
meaning of the passage is this. "He wonders what makes them so glad; he doubts
with himself, whether or no their mirth was not occasioned by wine which they
had discovered, or whether or no they might not be driven to madness by Cybel's
rites." INVENT is here one of Spenser's latinisms for discover; as it is also
in this verse, Ay me, that ever guile in women was invented.
5. 11. 50. That is, found out. B. v. C. ix. S. xiii. Like as the fowler on his
guilefull pipe,
CHARMS to the birds full many a pleasant lay.


Charm is thus used again, as Mr. Jortin observes, in Colin Clouts come home
again. The shepheard's boy --
Sat as his custom was --
CHARMING his oaten pipe unto his peers.


It seems to be used somewhat in the same sense, St. 39. below. That well could
CHARM his tongue, and time his speech.
Again, Here we our slender pipes may safely CHARM. October.

B. v. C. vii. S. xxxiv. The wicked shaft guided through the ayrie WIDE.
Ayrie WIDE seems to be used for ayrie VOID. B. vii. C. vi. S. lv.Speaking of
Diana's departure from Ireland. -- parting from the place
Thereon a heavy hapless curse did lay,
To weet, that wolves, where she was wont to space
Should harbored be, and all those woods deface,
And thieves should rob, and spoil that coast around;
Since which those woods, and all that goodly chase,
Does to this day with wolves and thieves abound.


In Colin Clouts come home again, where he is praising England, he does it by
an enumeration of some of the miseries of Ireland. No wayling there, nor
wretchedness is heard,
No bloody issues, nor no leprosies;
No griesly famine, nor no raging sweard:
No nightly bodrags, nor no hues and cries,
The shepherds there abroad may safely lie
On hills and downs, withouten dread or danger:
No ravenous wolves the good man's hope destroy,
Nor outlawes fell affray the forest ranger.
Space is a latinism, spatiari. B. ii. C. xii. Arg. Does overthrow the bower of
bliss.


Sir Guyon's temptation is, in great measure, made to consist in the
gratifications of sense afforded by a delicious garden. This circumstance puts
me in mind of an instance related by Olaus Magnus, B. 3. C. 20.
concerning the severity of manners among the ancient Visigoths. This author
informs us, that on the top of the mountain Kindaberg, near the castle of the
same name, there was a beautiful garden, the most delicious spot of ground in
all the Northern climate. Into this garden none but old men were permitted to
enter. The admission of young men to a survey of so delightful a scene, it was
feared, might prove too great a relaxation from their unintermitted daily
discipline, and make such impressions on their susceptible dispositions, as
might be the beginnings of an effeminate and luxurious life. B. vi. C. vi. S.
xx. To whom the prince, HIM faining to embase.


HIM for HIMSELF is the language of poetry at present. The elder poets took
greater liberties in this point, so that sometimes it is difficult to determine
whether HIM is used for se or illum. Of this the verse before us is an instance.

Thus again, Scudamore coming to CARE's house
Does sleep from HIM expel.
4. 5. Arg. That is, "expells sleep from HIMSELF." Thus in Sydney's VISION upon
the conceit of the FAERIE QUEEN, the most elegant of his works. At whose
approache the soul of Petrarcke wept,
And from thenceforth those graces were not seen,
For they this queen attended; in whose stead
OBLIVION laid HIM down on Lauras' hearse.
We are apt, at first, to refer HIM down, etc. to Petarcke, "OBLIVION laid
PETRARKE down," While the meaning is, "OBLIVION LAID HIMSELF DOWN, etc."

The initial line of this sonnet seems to have been thought of by Milton, viz.
Methought I saw the grave where Laura lay,
Thus Milton on his Deceased wife. Son. 23.
Methought I saw my late-espoused saint.
And he probably took the hint of writing a visionary sonnet on that occasion,
from this of Sydney. B. vi. C. iv. S. xix. His target allwaies over her
pretended.


PRETENDED, "stretched or held over her." This latinism is to be found in
Milton, but in a sense somewhat different. -- Lest that too heavenly form
PRETENDED
To hellish falsehood, snare them. -- Par. Lost, 10. 872.

B. iii. C. ii. S. xxxii. The time that mortal men their weary cares
Do lay away, and all wild beasts do rest,
And every river eke his course forbeares,
Then does this wicked evil thee infest.


These verses which, at first sight, seem to be drawn rom Dido's I cannot
forbear taking this opportunity of checking the petulance, and confuting the
weakness of the redoubted Mr. Rymer's criticism on the NIGHT of MEDEA in
Apollonius. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...). B. 3. V. 743.

"Night drew her shade over the earth: The mariners contemplated from their
ships Helice and Orion; the traveller and doorkeeper were drowsy; the sleeping
mother forgott her dead children; there was no barking of dogs heard through
the city, nor any loud sound; and silence attended upon the black darkness. --
But sweet sleep did not seize Medea." Upon the propriety of these images Mr.
Rymer thus expatiates.

"He would say that all the world is fast asleep but only Medea; and then his
mariners, who are gazing from their ships on Helice and Orion, can serve but
little for his purpose; unless they may be supposed to sleep with their eyes
open. Neither dares he say that the porter and traveller are yet taking a nap,
but only that they have a good mind to it. And after all, we find none but the
good woman who had lost her child (and she indeed is fast) asleep, unless the
dogs may likewise be supposed so, because they had left off barking. And these
methinks were scarce worthy to be taken notice of in an heroic poem, except we
may believe that in the old time, or that in Greek, they bark heroically." Our
critic here unfortunately sets on upon a supposition absolutely false, viz.
that "the poet is representing all the world as fast asleep," so that every
argument which he draws from this supposition must necessarily fall to the
ground. Apollonius ushers in his night-piece by telling us, "night covered the
earth with her shade," and afterward selects such objects and circumstances
the repose and tranquillity of which produce the most striking contrast to, and
consequently most strongly exaggerate the distraction and inquietude of Medea.
Hence he tells us that the mariner was contemplating with calm attention the
constellations of Helice and Orion; or, that now it was the time, according to
Virgil's translation, cum medio volvuntur sydera lapsu: or that it was a still,
and consequently a silent night, that even the traveller and doorkeeper (whom
he singles out, as their employment implies watching and wakefullness) were now
about to fall asleep; that even the mother (whom we might expect to find awake)
had now forgot her dead babes in slumber; that the dogs had ceased barking
through the city, a circumstance highly natural and picturesque of a still night;
that every sound, etc. but, that amidst this situation of things Medea could
not sleep. But what can we expect from a critic who confesses himself to be
struck with this choice representation of the night in Dryden's conquest of
Mexico? All things are hushed, as Nature's self lay dead;
The mountains seem to nod their drowsy head:
The little birds in dreams their songs repeat,
And sleeping flowers beneath the night-dew sweat.
Even Lust and Envy sleep. --


These lines are no bad burlesque; but it is their misfortune, that they are
written without the least intention of producing a smile. Nor are Mr. Rymer's
sentiments upon them a worse specimen of burlesque criticism, which however are
dictated with the most serious and unaffected gravity.

In this description, four lines yield greater variety of matter, and more
choice thoughts than twice the number of any other language. Here is something
more fortunate than the boldest fancy has yet reached, and something more just,
than the severest reason has observed. Here are the flights of Statius and
Marino tempered with a more discerning judgment, and the judgment of Virgil and
Tasso animated with a more sprightly wit. Nothing has been said so expressive
and so home in any other language as the first verse in this description. The
second is Statius improved. Et simulant fessos curvata cacumina somnos,


Says Statius, where simulant is a bold word in comparison of our English word
seem, being of an active signification; and cacumina may as well be taken for
the tops of Trees, as the tops of Mountains, which doubtful meaning does not so
well content the reader, as the certainty.

In the third verse, it is not said that the birds sleep, but what is more new,
and more poetical, their sleep is implied, by their dreams. Somewhat like to
the fourth we have in Marino.

-- E languidetti i fiori
Giaceano a l'herba genitrice in seno.
Adonis, Cant. 20. Which is a pretty image, but has not so near a resemblance
with truth, nor can so generally be applied to all flowers. Our author here
dares not say directly that the flowers sleep, which might sound a little
harsh, but slurs it over in the participle, as taken for granted, and affirms
only that they sweat, which the night-dew makes very easy.

In the last half-verse, we may see how far our author has outdone Apollonius.
'Twas no such strange thing in the sorrowful woman when she had spent her
tears, for sleep to close her eyes: but here we have the most raging and
watchful passions lust and envy. And these too instead of the lustful and the
envious, for the greater force and emphasis, in the abstract.

Some may object, That the third verse does contradict the first. How can all
things be hushed, if birds in dreams repeat their songs? Is not this like the
indiscretion of Marino? who says, That the winds and all things are hushed, and
the seas so fast asleep, that they snore. Cant. 20.

It may be answered, That in this place it is not the poet that speaks, but
another person; and that the poet here truly represents the nature of man,
whose first thoughts break out in bold and more general terms, which by the
second thoughts are more correct and limited. As if one should say, all things
are silent, or asleep however; if there is any noise, it is still but the effect
of sleep, as the dreams of birds, etc. This comparison might be much further
improved to our advantage, and more observations made, which are left to the
readers ingenuity. Pref. to Aristot. POET.


night in the fourth Aeneid, are translated from the Ceiris attributed to
Virgil, as it has been before in general hinted, Sect. 3. Tempore quo fessas
mortalia pectora curas,
Quo rapidos etiam requiescunt flumina cursus.
232. B. iv C. vi. S. xliv. With that the wicked Carle, the master smith,
A pair of red-hot iron tongs did take,
Out of the burning cinders, and therewith
Under the side him nipt. --


In these verses the allegory is worked up to an amazing height. What he says
of Erinnys in the RUINS of ROME, is somewhat in this strain, What fell Erinnys
with hot-burning tongs,
Did gripe your hearts? --
St. 24.

From the same stanza Milton probably drew the expression BLIND FURY, in
Lycidas; as it was not taken from the authority of ancient mythology. Comes the
BLIND FURY, with the abhorred shears
And slits the thin-spun life. --
Spenser, If the BLIND Fury, which wars breeds often,
Wonts not, etc.
B. v. C. vii. S. 21. Magnificke virgin, that in QUEINT DISGUISE
Of British arms. --


That is, "in strange disguise." In this sense the word QUEINT is used in
COMUS. -- Lest the place,
And this QUEINT habit breed astonishment.
Somewhat in this signification it is likewise applied by the shepherd Cuddy,
in our author's OCTOBER. With QUEINT Bellona. --


Where E. K. in explaining it, has discovered more learning than penetration.
Skinner seems to have wrongly interpreted QUAINT, elegans. If it ever signifies
elegant or beautiful, it implies a fantastic kind of beauty arising from an
odd variety. Thus Milton in LYCIDAS, of flowers. Throw hither all your QUEINT
enameled eyes.
And in ARCADES; where it expresses an elegance resulting from affectation
rather than nature. -- And CURL the grove
In ringlets QUAINT. --
Where Milton copies Johnson, in a MASK at Welbeck, 1633. When was old
Sherwoods head more QUEINTLY CURLD?


The same poet has likewise drawn one or two more strokes in the ARCADES, from
a mask of Johnson. In song 1. he thus breaks forth, This, this is she
To whom our vows, and wishes, etc.
So Johnson in an Entertainment at Althrope, 1603. This is she,
This is she.
Milton in Song 3. pays this compliment to the countess of Derby, Though Syrinx
your Pan's mistress were,
Yet Syrinx well might wait on her.
Thus Johnson in the same Entertainment. And the dame has Syrinx' grace.


These little traits of likeness just lead us to conclude, that Milton before
he sat down to write his ARCADES, had recourse to Johnson (who was the most
eminent masque-writer then extant) for the form and manner proper to this
species of composition, and that in the course of writing it, he naturally fell
upon some of Johnson's expressions. B. vi. C. ix. S. xxix. In vain, said then
old Melibee, do men
The heavens of their fortunes fault accuse,
Since they know best, what is the best for them;
For they to each such fortune do diffuse,
As they do know each can most aptly use.
For not that which men covet most is best,
Nor that thing worst which men do most refuse:
But fittest is, that all-contended rest
With that they hold: each has his fortune in his breast.
xxx.
It is the mind that makes good or ill.


In these lines he plainly seems to have had his eye on those exalted SOCRATES,
quasi quoddam terrestre oraculum, nihil ultra petendum a diis immortalibus
arbitrabatur, quam ut bona tribuerent, quia ii demum scirent, quid unicuique
esset utile, etc. VALERIUS MAX. l. 7. c. 2. See the second ALCIBIADES of Plato.
Socratic sentiments, which Juvenal has given us in the close of his tenth
satire. The last-cited lines, in particular, point out to us the sense in which
Spenser understood the two last controverted verses of that satire. Nullum
numen [abest] habes, si sit prudentia; sed TE
NOS FACIMUS FORTUNA DEAM, caeloque locamus.
B. iv. C. viii. S. xxxvii. With easy steps so soft as foot could STRIDE.


Probably we should read slide for STRIDE; though STRIDE occurs in the old
quarto. B. ii. C. iii. S. iv. -- his BRAND.


Concerning the word BRAND for sword, take the following explication of Hickes.
"In the second part of the EDDA Islandica, among other appellations, a sword is
denominated BRAND; and glad or glod, that is, titio, torris, pruna ignita; and
the hall of the Odin is said to be illuminated by drawn swords only. A writer
of no less learning than penetration, N. Salanus Westmannus, in his
Dissertation, entitled, GLADIUS SCYTHICUS, page 6, 7. observes, that the
ancients formed their swords in imitation of a flaming fire; and thus, from
BRAND a sword, came our English phrase, to brandish a sword, gladium strictum
vibrando coruscare facere." Ling. Vet. Sept. These, cap. 23. page 193.
B. i. C. ii. S. iv.He is speaking of the witch Duessa. Till on a day, (that
day is every prime,
When witches wont do penance for their crime)
I chaunct to see her in her proper hew,
Bathing herself in origane and thyme,
A filthy foul old woman, etc.


The penance here mentioned, I suppose, our author drew from tradition, or
romance. From one of these sources, Milton seems to have derived, and applied
his annual penance of the devils. -- Thus were they plagued,
And worn with famine, long and ceaseless hiss,
Till their lost shape, permitted, they resumed;
Yearly enjoined, they say, to undergo
This ANNUAL HUMBLING certain numbered days. Par. Lost, 10. 572.

B. iii. C. i. S. xxxv. To crown his golden locks with honor dew.
Honor dew, frequently occurs in Spenser, from whom Milton, perhaps, adopted it
in L'Allegro. If I give thee HONOR DUE.


It has been conjectured, that Milton took the hint, in some measure, for
writing on MIRTH and MELANCHOLY, from the Ode prefixed to Burton's MELANCHOLY.
In support of this supposition I shall add, that Milton had certainly been
consulting that treatise before he wrote his two poems, as this line in
L'Allegro, Nods, and becks, and wreathed smiles,
occurs almost literally in Burton, Not in the poem prefixed, but in the Book
itself, page 487. edit. 1660.
With becks, and nods, and smiles again.


Before I close this series of Observations, I will hope for the reader's
pardon once more, while I lengthen out this digression, in order to illustrate
another passage in Milton. Leviathan --
* * * *
Him happily slumbring on the Norway foam
The pilot of some small night-founder'd skiff,
Deeming some island, often, as seamen tell,
With fixed anchor in his scaly rind
Moors in his side, under the lee, etc. Par. Lost, 1. 201.

On the words, as Seamen tell, says Hume, "Words well added to obviate the
incredibility of casting anchor in this manner."

It is likely that Milton never heard this improbable circumstance, of
mistaking the Whale for an Island, from the seamen, but that he drew it from
that passage in his favorite Ariosto, where Astolpho, Dudon, and Renaldo are
said to have seen so large a Whale in the sea, near Aclyna's castle, that they
took it for an island. Veggiamo una Balena: la maggiore,
Che may per tutto il mar veduta fosse:
Undeci passi, e piu dimostra fuore
Di l' onde salse le spallaccie gross.
Caschiamo tutti insieme in uno errore:
Parch'era ferma, e che may non si scosse:
CH' ELLA SIA UNA ISOLETTA CI CREDEMO,
Cosi distante ha l' un a l' altro estremo. C. 6. S. 37.

Among the rest that were too long to count,
We saw the fish that men Balaena call;
Twelve yards above the water did amount
His mighty back, the monster is so tall:
And (for it stood so still) we made account
It had been land, but were deceived all,
We were deceived, well I may rue the while,
It was so huge, we thought it was an i will.
Harrington.

Afterward St. 41.
Astolpho, persisting in his mistake, ventures upon the back of the Whale, with
Alcyna, and is carried out many miles into the sea.

Milton's imagination, possessed with these extravagancies (for he was a great
reader of Ariosto) was easily disposed to give us this romantic fiction of his
Leviathan, the absurdity of which he has prudently enough tranferr'd to
seamen, who deal in idle reports.

He has given us somewhat of a similar idea in another place. -- there
Leviathan,
Hugest of living creatures, on the deep
Stretched like a promontory, sleeps, or swims
And seems a moving land. -- Par. Lost, 7. 413.

B. vii. C. vii. S. xvii. I do possess the worlds most REGIMENT.
Spenser very frequently makes use of REGIMENT for Rule, GOVERNMENT, DISTRICT,
etc. Against tortious power, and lawless REGIMENT.
5. 8. 30. So when he had resigned his REGIMENT.
2. 10. 30. When the full time, prefixed by destiny,
Shall be expired of Britons REGIMENT.
3. 3. 39. Then loyal love had royal REGIMENT.
4. 8. 30. -- Strive
With saturnes son for heavens REGIMENT.
7. 6. 2. In the following instance it is used for KINGDOM, An ancient book.
--
That of his lands first conquest did devise,
And old division into REGIMENTS.
2. 9. 59. B. iv. C. vi. S. xiv. Like as the lightning brond from riven sky,
Thrown out by angry Jove in his vengeance,
With dreadful force falls on some steeple hie,
Which battring, down it on the church does glaunce,
And teareth all with terrible mischaunce.


Not many years before the FAERIE QUEEN was written, viz. 1561, the steeple of
St. Paul's church was struck with lightening, by which means not only the
steeple itself, but the entire roof of the church was consumed. Stow's Survey
of London, page 357. edit. 1633.
The description in this simile was probably suggested to our author's
imagination by this remarkable accident.

POSTSCRIPT.
IN the close of this work, it may not be perhaps improper to subjoin an
apology for the manner in which I have conducted it.

And first it may be objected in general, that these observations would have
been rendered more useful and convenient had they been printed together with
Spenser's text, arrang'd in their respective places; at least it may be urged
that such a plan would have prevented much unnecessary transcription. But I was
dissuaded from such a procedure by two reasons; the first is, The observations,
(the last section excepted) as they now stand, reduced to general heads, appear
to be so many distinct essays on Spenser; and thus methodized, are intended to
form a kind of systematical critcism on the FAERIE QUEEN. The second is, that
a formal edition of this poem with notes, would have been impertinent, as such
a work is at present expected from the hands of two learned and ingenious
critics.

As to particular ejections, too many, I am sensible, must occur; one of which
will probably be, that I have been more diligent in pointing out the faults
than the beauties of this author. That I have been deficient in encomiums on
particular passages, did not proceed from a want of perceiving or acknowledging
beauties, but from a persuasion, that nothing is more absurd or useless than
the panegyrical comments of those, who criticize from the imagination, rather
than from the judgment, who exert their admiration instead of their reason,
and discover more of enthusiasm than discernment. And this must necessarily,
(it will however most commonly) be the case of those, who undertake to point
out beauties; which, as they will naturally approve themselves to the reader by
their own force, so no reason can often be given why they please. The same
cannot always be said of faults, which I have frequently displayed without
palliation; See more particularly Sect. 1.
it being my chief aim, together with that of particular illustration, to give
an impartial estimate of the merit of this original genius.

I cannot take my final leave of the reader without acknowledging that this
task has been peculiarly delightful to me; though the business of criticism is
generally laborious and dry, yet it has here more frequently amused than
fatigued my attention, in it is exercises upon an author who makes such
perpetual and powerful appeals to the fancy. The pleasure which Spenser
received in composing the FAERIE QUEEN must necessarily be shared by it is
commentator; and the critic, on this occasion, may venture to exclaim with the
poet, The ways through which my weary steps I guide
In this DELIGHTFUL LAND OF FAERY,
Are so exceeding spacious and wide,
And sprinkled with such sweet variety
Of all that pleasant is to ear or eye,
That I nigh ravished with rare thoughts delight,
My tedious travel do forgett thereby,
And when I gin to feel decay of might,
It strength to me supplies, and cheares my dulled spright.
7. 6. 1.

FINIS.
INDEX.
[ N.B. The Numbers relate to the Pages.]

A.
ABBE DU BOS, his censure upon Ariosto's Orlando Furioso, 12. condemns those
painters who introduce their own allegories into divine subjects, 223, 224.
Academicians, della Crusca, prefer Ariosto to Tasso, 3. Action, allegorical,
why faulty, 238, 239. ADONIS, his gardens, Spenser founds his fiction
concerning them on ancient mythology, 65. AGAVE her story, 73. AGDISTES, a
GENIUS, 58. Alexandrine verses, rules concerning them, 259, 260, 261.
Allegories, Spenser's manner of forming them accounted for, 218, 219, 220, 221,
222. publicly shown in Q. Elizabeth's time, 218. capital fault in Spenser's,
222, 223, 224, 225. some of them examined, 222, 223. Spenser's manner of
allegorizing different from Ariosto's, and why, 219, 220. Alliteration,
practiced by the Saxon poets, 89, 90. Ambiguous expression, instances of, in
Spenser, 177, 178, 179, in Milton, 179. Anachronism, instances of, in Spenser,
173, 174, 175, 176. APOLLONIUS, Rhodius, illustrated, 77, 78. copied by Milton,
76, 79, 80. excells Theocritus in the story of Hylas, 68. illustrated, 257. his
Night-piece of Medea vindicated, 298. ARCHIMAGO, instance of, his hypocrisy,
copied from Ariosto, 143. of his illusion, 143. ARIOSTO, imitates Boyardo, 2.
account of the plan of his poem, 10, 11, 12. his genius comic, 157, 158.
Ardenne, water of, Ariosto's mention of it alluded to by Spenser, 151, 152.
Art of English poesy, author of, condemns Spenser's obsolete style in his
Pastorals, 88. commends his Pastorals, 88. his account of singing to the harp
in Q. Elizabeth's time, 36. censures Skeleton, 36. ARTHUR, Prince, cannot
properly be called the hero of the FAERIE QUEEN, 5. ARTHUR, King, romantic
tradition concerning him, 43. ASTRAEUS, a sea-god, account of him, 73. AVARICE,
Ariosto's, how she came to be so represented, 155.
B.
Bards, introduced with propriety by Spenser, 266. BASCIO MANI, 262. BELLONA,
Spenser misrepresents her birth, 81. BENI, his false taste, in comparing
Ariosto with Homer, 2. BEVIS, Sir, of Southampton, a poem so entitled, imitated
by Spenser, 34, 35. BITE, 124, 125. BLANDAMOUR, a name, drawn from Chaucer, or
from a Romance so called, 135, 136. BLATANT BEAST, the hint of it taken from
Morte Arthur, a Romance, 17. partly occasioned by Ariosto's description of
Jealousy and Avarice, 155. BLOUD-GUILTINESSE, and BLOUD-THIRSTIE, 248. BRAND,
304. Bridge, remarkable one, copied from Ariosto, or from Morte Arthur, 153.
BRIGADORE, name of a horse, drawn from Ariosto, 154. BRITOMART, how properly
styled the patroness of Chastity, 60. her history, 61. her discovery copied
from Ariosto, 151. she is a copy of Ariosto's Marsifa, and Bradamante, 151.
BUCEPHALUS, Spenser copies a tradition concerning him, 280. BURMANNUS,
ridiculed, 208. BY HOOK OR BY CROOK, 279, 280.
C.
CHARLES II. the taste for poetry in his age, censured, 237. CHAUCER, his style
copied by Spenser, 88, 141. and many of his sentiments, 100. encomium upon him,
141, 142. corrected, 198. why styled one of the first English poets, 228.
Ceiris, of Virgil, where copied by Spenser, 63. CERBERUS, supposed to be the
proper reading in Milton's second verse of L'Allegro, and why, 51. CHARM, 294.
CHEKLATON, 130. CHILDED, 289. CHIRON, beautiful description of his
astonishment, after hearing the music of Orpheus, 80. Chivalry, practiced in Q.
Elizabeth's age, 14. Books of, descriptions in them ridiculed by Chaucer, 104.
Climate, description of a fine, copied from Chaucer, 106. COCYTUS, Spenser
misrepresents Mythology concerning it, 56. Commentators, their difference of
opinion accounted for, 205, 206. Construction, confused, instances of, in
Spenser, 166, 167, 176. CONCENT, 273, 274. CONTECK, 128, 129. CRUDOR, his
insolence and cruelty, copied from Morte Arthur, a Romance, 19. CUPID and
PSYCHE, Spenser misrepresents Apuleius's account of them, 64. CUPID, a
representation of him copied from Chaucer, 118. a false one, 118. how
represented by Catullus and Sappho, 119. a description of him copied from
Ariosto, or from N. Archias, 156, 157.
D.
Dance of Death, account of prints so called, 230, 231, 232. alluded to by
Spenser, 232. DANGER, personify'd from Chaucer, 135. DARRAINE, 121, 122.
DEATH'S DOOR, 274. Despair, why Spenser excelled in painting it, 193, 194. DONE
TO DIE, 124. DOUZEPERE, 134. Dragon-encounters, exactly copied by Spenser from
Romance, 37. DRAYTON, a romantic story borrowed by him from Geoffrey of
Monmouth, 20. DRYDEN, censured, for affirming that Prince Arthur appears in
every part of the FAERIE QUEEN, 6. and for his manner of praising the Paradise
Lost, 237. and for misrepresenting Milton's reason for choosing blank verse,
237, 238. imitates Spenser, 249. DUESSA, her discovery, copied from Ariosto,
146.
E.
E. K. the commentator on Spenser's Aeglogues, his reason why Spenser chose to
write in an obsolete style, 92. Elfes and Goblins, whence derived, 39.
Elficleos, king Henry vii. 39. Enchanted cup, story of, drawn by Ariosto, from
Morte Arthur, a Romance, 30. Elleipsis, instances of, in Spenser, 160, 161,
162, 163, 164, 165. in Milton, 165. EMBOWD, 246. ENGLISH LANGUAGE, its
corruptions about Q. Elizabeth's age, 93, 94, 95. Spenser's disapprobation of
these corruptions, proved from his own words, 96. notwithstanding he himself
contributed to add to these corruptions, and why, 97, 98. ENDLONG, 134. ENVY,
Spenser's indelicacy in describing her, 47. and excellence, 48. EUPHEMUS, a
sea-god, account of him, 74.
F.
Faeries, sometimes used for any ideal people, 42. whence the fiction of them
was derived, 43. FAERIE Nation, Spenser's original and genealogy of it partly
explained, 38, 39, 40. -- QUEEN, a popular tradition, 40. supposed to exist in
K. Arthur's time, 41. Spenser's poem, so called, occasioned many imitations, on
its publication, in which fairies were actors, 41. FATAL, 201, 202. FEAR,
Spenser excells in painting it, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194, 195. FFRRAUGH (Sir) a
name drawn from Ariosto, 151. FILE, 120. FILED, 263. FLORIMEL, false, simile
concerning her examined, 280. fiction of her, whence drawn, 240, 241. French,
more fond of manners than fiction, 237. FURIES, the ancients afraid to name
them, 45.
G.
GASCOIGNE, George, account of him, 268, 269, 270. GELLI, his Circe, afforded a
hint to Spenser, 258. GENEURA, tale of, in Ariosto, copied by Spenser, 147.
GENIUS, a particular one, drawn by Spenser from N. Comes, 58. and a
circumstance concerning him from Horace, 59. another drawn from the picture of
Cebes, 60. GIAMBEUX, 139. GLITTERAND, 123, 124. GLOUCESTER, Robert of, 227.
GLORIANA, Q. Elizabeth, 40. the attainment of her the End of the FAERIE QUEEN,
4. Prince Arthur improperly conducted to this End, 4, 5, GLODE, 136. GORLOIS,
story of, alluded to by Milton, 265, 266. GOWER, why styled one of the first
English poets, 228. GRACES, Milton misrepresents their birth, and improperly,
75. GRAYLE, Holy, a tradition concerning it borrowed from Morte Arthur, a
Romance, 26. GRIDE, 180, 199. GUILE, a circumstance belonging to, borrowed from
Ariosto, 154.
H.
Hair, long, description of, copied from Chaucer, 132. yellow, why Spenser
always attributes it to his Ladies, 187, 188. Hall, Marshall of, his Office,
283. HARDYKNUTE, a Scottish poem, commended, 114. HARDING, John, his character,
232. HARRINGTON, his versification censured in the translation of Orlando, 87.
HARROW, 127, 128. HAWKING, often, alluded to by Spenser, and why, 272, 289.
HAWKS, Stephen, his character, 233. HECATE, Spenser misrepresents Mythology
concerning her, 46, 81. HENRY viii. improvement of taste and learning in his
age, 234. HERNE, Thomas, Specimen of his Preface to Robert of Gloucester, 227,
228. Hero, unity of, necessary in the heroic poem, 4, 5. not preserved in the
FAERIE QUEEN, 5, 6, 7, 8. his business in the heroic poem, 6. HEARSE and
HERSALL, 265. HIM, for himself, 296, 297. HIPPOLITUS, his story misrepresented,
282. HISTORY, ancient, often falsify'd by Spencer, and why, 44. Historical
Regularity, how Spenser varies from it, in the plan of the FAERIE QUEEN, 9.
HOLBEIN, Hans, prints called the Dance of Death, falsely attributed to him, 230,
231, 232. HOLLAND, in Lincolnshire, what, 277. Horn, a miraculous one, copied
from Ariosto, 145. HORROR, a picture of him, copied by Milton from Spenser, 54.
HUGHES, the editor of Spenser, censured, for commending the first book of the
FAERIE QUEEN, as a regular contrivance, 6. for reducing the text of Spenser to
modern orthography, 87. a reading of him rejected, 293, 294. HUON, Sir, a
Romance so called, 247. HYLAS, a new solution concerning his fable, 67. custom
concerning him, how it arose, 67.
I.
JAMES I. Allegory began to decline in his age, 236. JANE, 131. JEALOUSY,
Ariosto's, how she came to be so represented, 156. JEW, character of a cruel
and covetous one, represented on the stage with applause, before Shakespere's
Shylock, 98. Imitations, hard to be ascertained, 181. Spenser's of himself,
181, 182, 183, 184, 188, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194, 195. JORTIN (Mr.)
supposed to have mistaken a passage, 49. conjecture of, supported, 197.
Inconsistency, instances of, in Spenser, 170, 171, 172. Indelicacy, instances
of Spenser's, 47, 48. Inaccuracies, Spenser guilty of many, and why, 159. INN,
201. INO, Spenser's confused account of her story, 72. Introduction, form of,
copied from Chaucer, 129, 130, 131. and from Bevis of Southampton, 131. INVENT,
293. JOHNSON, Ben, his opinion of Spenser's language, censured, 98, 99. his
sentiments on old words, commended, 99. IS NOT LONG, 275. Italian language,
deals largely in identical cadences, 82. much affected in Q. Elizabeth's time,
93, 94. Italian books, many of them translated into English in Q. Elizabeth's
time, 94. Judgment, Spenser's, how far overruled by his imagination, 102.
JUVENAL, copied by Spenser, 304.
K.
KINGS and KESARS, 285.
L.
LAD, 139, 140. LADY OF THE LAKE, the fiction of her, whence borrowed by
Spenser, 21, 22. introduced to make part of Q. Elizabeth's entertainment at
Kenelworth, 22. alluded to by B. Johnson, 24. LAIR, 275. LANE, John, account of
him, 114. LONGLANDE, the author of Pierce Plowman's Visions, 89. LUCRETIUS,
where exceeded by Spenser, 278, 279. LYDGATE, commended, and censured, 229,
230, 231, 232.
M.
MAKE and MAR, 212, 213, 214. MALBECCO, his escape, copied from Ariosto, 150.
MALEGER, his death, copied from Ariosto, 147. MANY, 139. MARSTON, John, his
satyrs commended, 41. inferior to Hall's, 42. Specimen of them, 42. MART,
120. MATERASTA, name of her castle, drawn from Morte Arthur, a Romance, 31.
MASKS, Milton indebted to one for a thought, 218, 219. Spenser's imitation of
them, 220, 221. Merchant of Venice, story of, drawn from an old ballad, 94, 95,
96, 97. 98. MERLIN, a story concerning him, borrowed by Spenser from Morte
Arthur, a Romance, 25. and by Ariosto, 28, 29. his enterview with Britomart
copied from Ariosto, 149. a prophesy made by him, 278. MILTON, his poem in Q.
November. a prelusion to his Paradise Lost, 55. instances of his self-imitation,
173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178. corrected, 272, 273. explained, 240. reasons for
his defense of tragedy, 293. imitates W. Niccols, 242, 243. illustrated, 246.
imitates Euripides, Homer, and Casimir, 251, 252, 253. illustrated, 255, 297.
explained, 265. corrected, 273. imitates Johnson, 303. illustrated, 301, 305,
306, 307, 308. Mirror, Britomart's, borrowed from Chaucer, 108, 109. Mirror of
magistrates, criticism upon, and account of, 235. MIS, often prefixed to a word
by Spenser, 197. MORTE ARTHUR, an old Romance, printed by Caxton, much red and
imitated by Spenser, 15. a fashionable book in Q. Elizabeth's time, 21, 24.
alluded to by B. Johnson, 24, 27. and by Camden, 27. and by Milton, 27.
imitated by Ariosto, 28. and alluded to by him, 30. MOLE, noussing, 278.
MORALIZE, 239. MORE, Sir Thomas, specimen of a pageant composed by him, 184,
185. MOST and LEAST, 137. MORE and LESS, 137. MUCH and LITE, 138. MOTHER-WIT,
copied by Dryden from Spenser, 277. MURDER, Milton's description of him,
equaled by Fletcher's, 54. MUSAEUS, copied by Spenser, 185, 186, 187.
Mythology, ancient, falsify'd by Spenser, and why, 44.
N.
NATALIS COMES, Spenser copies the Deities present at the marriage of Thames
and Medway, from him, 73, 74. NATURE, description of her, copied from Chaucer,
116, 117, 118. Negatives, two for an affirmative, used by Chaucer, after the
Saxon practice, 140. NEREUS, represented according to Mythology, by Spenser,
75. NIGHT, justly represented by Spenser, 50, 51, 52, 53. Milton supposed to
have taken a hint from Spenser's representation of her, 53. NOVEMBER, etc.
copied from Chaucer, 119, 120.
O.
OBERON, King Henry viii, 39. OLAUS, MAGNUS, his account of a Swedish
enchanter. OLD AGE, figures of, 274. OLLYPHANT, a name, borrowed from Chaucer,
130. OPHION, said to be of the serpent race, by Apollonius, as well as by
Milton, 75. Ordeal, a word applied from Chaucer, 137. ORLANDO FURIOSO, its plan
more irregular than that of the FAERIE QUEEN, 10. the faults in its plan, 11.
hint of its hero's madness, drawn from Morte Arthur, a Romance, 31. ORPHEUS,
author of the Argonautics, falsely so called, 72. ORPHEUS, his song in
Onomacritus and Apollonius, alluded to by Milton, 79. his song in Apollonius,
often alluded to by Spenser, 76. Orthography, often violated by Spenser, and
other ancient poets, for the Rhyme-sake, 84, 85, 86. ORTHRUS, 73.
P.
Pageants, Spenser's, specimen of the nature of them, 184, 185. PASTORELL, her
distress, copied from Ariosto, 155. PLAN, of the FAERIE QUEEN, what, 4. its
faults, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. its excellency, 9. POPE, imitates Johnson, 166. POWDER,
to, 263, in what sense applied by Milton, 264. Poetry, use and nature of it in
the early ages, 76. PRESSED, 202, 203, 204. PRICK, to, 139. PROSERPINE, her
garden, Spenser falsifies Mythology concerning it, 56, 57. Provencal poets,
their false taste, 1. PRETENDED, 297. Proverbs, copied from Chaucer, 127, 133.
PRYNNE, W. specimen of his Histriomastix, 291. Puritans, censured by Spenser,
291. Purple Island, of Fletcher, account of, 236. PYNED, 129.
Q.
QUEINT, 302. QUEST, 267, 268. Questyn beast, mentioned in Morte Arthur, a
Romance, the origin of Spenser's Blatant beast, 17, 18.
R.
RADEGUNDE, and her city, copied from Ariosto, 157. Rebellion, grand, its
consequences, 292. RECREANT, 254. REGIMENT, 308. Revelations, book of, Spenser
copied from it, 224, 225, 226, 227. condemned for it, 224, 227. Rhyme, the
advantages found by Spenser in the frequent repetition of it, 83, 84. he seldom
makes the same word rhyme to itself, 87. Romances, the FAERIE QUEEN (and
particularly its first book) formed upon them, 13, 14. fashionable in Q.
Elizabeth's age, ibid. particular ceremony in them, copied by Spenser, 276.
ROMEO and JULIET, much esteemed when first acted, 42. ROWLAND, W. his satires,
42. RUSTIE, 197, 198.
S.
Sails, for wings, 280, 281. SANDEART, mistaken concerning Hans Holbein, 231.
SCALIGEB, censured for preferring the song of Orpheus in Apollonius to that in
Val. Flaccus, 76. prefers a comparison in Apollonius to one in Val. Flaccus,
68. Scripture, improperly imitated by Spenser, 279. SCUDAMORE, whence derived,
276. SED, for said, 86. SENT, 207. Seven Champions of Christendom, Romance of,
a circumstance in it, imitated by Spenser, 14. Shepherd's Calendar, title of a
book printed by Wynkin a Word, 91. thence adopted by Spenser, 91, 92. Show,
dumb, in Tragedy, Spenser alludes to it, 221. account of it, 221. Shield, a
miraculous one, copied from Ariosto, 144, 145. SHINE, 274, 275. Squier's Tale,
Spenser's use of it, 110. not unfinished, 110. Milton's allusion to it
explained, 112. a complete copy of it probably seen by Lydgate, 113. completed
by John Lane, 113. Squire of Dames, Tale of, copied from Ariosto, 150. Squire
of lo dedegree, title of an old Romance, 275, 276. SILIUS ITALICUS, copies from
Onomacritus, 79. SKELETON, his character, 234. SKINNER, his censure of Chaucer's
language, 96. SORT, 204, 205. Spear, a miraculous one, copied from Ariosto,
147, 148. SPEGHT, editor of Chaucer, vindicated, 140. SPETT, 254. Stanza,
Spenser's, why chosen by him, 81. disagreeable to the nature of the English
tongue, 81, 82. productive of many absurdities, 82, 83. and of some advantages,
83. STIE, 200, 201. STREMONA, a name of a place no where found, 50. SUGARED,
253. Surprise, a fine one, copied from Chaucer, 104, 105. Swords, named, 279.
SYLVANUS, misrepresented, 49.
T.
TALUS, drawn from Talus, or Talos, an ancient guardian of Crete, 69, 70, 71,
72. TANAQUIL, Queen Elizabeth, 39. TANTALUS, Spenser misrepresents Mythology
concerning him, 56. TASSO, how far faulty, 2. why Spenser chose rather to
imitate Ariosto than him, 3. Spenser copies a comparison from him, 65, 66.
Tautology, instances of it in Spenser, 168, 169, 170. Time, sentiments
concerning it, copied from Chaucer, 115. TITYRUS, Chaucer so called by Milton,
from Spenser, 88. THOPAS, Sir, a poem of Chaucer, sung to the Harp in Q.
Elizabeth's age, 36. Tobacco, why praised by Spenser, 266, 267. Trees,
description of, copied by Spenser from Chaucer, 100, 101. Chaucer's ridicule of
such a description in Statius, 102, 103. Spenser has avoided the faults of
Statius, and others, in his description, 101, 102. TRISSINO, vindicated, 2.
TRISTRAM, Sir, his birth and education, drawn from a Romance called Morte
Arthur, 15.
V.
VALERIUS FLACCUS, finely describes the distress of Hercules, and rape of
Hylas, 67. VENUS, of both sexes, 68. Virelayes, account of, 269, 270. VIRGIL,
copied by Spenser, 244, 253, 256, 267, 287. Visions of Pierce Plowman, account
of them, 89, 90, 91. style of them imitated by Spenser, 89.
U.
Unity, of action, wanted in the FAERIE QUEEN, 4. UPTON, Mr. supposed to have
mistaken a passage in Spenser, 73. in Chaucer, 132, 133, 245.
W.
WALLER, imitates Daniel, 271, 272. WENCH, 253. Witches, why well described by
Spenser, 267. Whole, necessary to the heroic poem, 7. how violated by Spenser,
8. Winchester, Marchioness of, her death celebrated by Milton and Johnson, 165,
166. Woman, praise of, copied from Ariosto, 148, 149. Wound, copied from
Chaucer, 109, 110.

