AN ACCOUNT OF BARBAROSSA, The USURPER of ALGIERS. BEING THE STORY On which the
NEW TRAGEDY, Now in Rehearsal at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane, Is FOUNDED.

-- Foul Deeds will rise,
Though all the Earth o'erwhelmn them. --
SHAKESPEARE. LONDON: Printed and sold by W. REEVE, in Fleet Street. M. DCC. LV.

AN ACCOUNT OF BARBAROSSA, The USURPER of ALGIERS.
AS the Curiosity of the Public has been of late much engaged, in Enquiries
after the NEW TRAGEDY of BARBAROSSA, which is soon to be performed at the
Theater Royal in Drury Lane; and as several Gentlemen of Eminence in the
Republic of Letters have been mentioned as the Author, it may, perhaps, be
agreeable to the Town, to have the following short Account given of the
previous History of that famed Usurper, from whom the Tragedy takes it is Name.

While the memorable Cardinal XIMENEZ was Minister in Spain, King FERDINAND the
Fifth, of Arragon, about the Year 1505, sent PETER, Count of Navarre, with a
powerful Force; which, without Difficulty, took Oran. The Inhabitants of this
famous City in general were Moors, which had been forced out of Granada and
Valentia, about twelve Years before.

These, being a bold and active People, and being well versed in the Manners,
as well as Language of the Spaniards, did considerable Damage, both by Sea and
Land, to the Dependents of that Crown.

From Oran the Spaniards, flushed with Success, pursued their Conquest and took
Bugia, and many other Places, with heroic Valor. The Algerines, being
apprehensive their City would undergo the same Fate, sent for Assistance, by
Way of Caution, to SELIM EUTEMI, a Prince of Arabian Extraction, famous for
Skill in military Affairs. He accepted their Invitation, and came with a large
Number of valiant Followers, which he had selected from that populous Nation,
and encamped upon the Plain of Mutija, where he had Power; attended also by his
Wife ZAPHIRA, a Lady of great Worth and Virtue, and his Son SELIM, not then
twelve Years old, whom he was fond of initiating into the Exercise of War.

Notwithstanding this Succor, another Fleet and more Troops from FERDINAND,
quickly subdued the City of Algiers, and obliged it to pay Tribute; and even
suffered the Spaniards to build a Fort, and man it with some of the best
Troops, on a small Island, that lay opposite the City, to the great Injury of
the Algerine Corsairs, who could not, with Safety, go out and in the Harbor.

This, however disagreeable, they bore with Patience, 'till the Death of
FERDINAND in the Year 1516, which put them then upon an Attempt to recover
their Liberties.

They sent Deputies to ARACH BARBAROSSA, a Mohammedan Corsair, born at Mcteline
in the Archipelago, of great Fame for his Bravery and his Success in Battle. He
was upon a Cruise with his Squardron, when the Algerine Deputies met him, with
their Request to assist them to throw off the Spanish Yoke; promising him great
Dignities to his Person, and large Gratification for such Service. He gave the
Deputies a most favorable Answer, and sent them back to Algiers, to carry Joy
to their dejected Countrymen.

BARBAROSSA immediately sent eighteen Galleys, and a Number of Barks to
Algiers, while he marched by Land, collecting all the Moors and Turks, that
seemed inclined to assist his Enterprise; and was so successful in his Levies,
that the Algerines thought the Hour of Deliverance was at Hand.

SELIM EUTEMI, General of Algiers, with many of the chief Officers and
principal Citizens, went two Days Journey to meet him; and brought him, with
great Honors, in Triumph into their City, conducting him, amidst the Shouts of
the People, to the Palace of SELIM EUTEMI: Where he was nobly received, while
his Army met with great Indulgence from the rejoiced Algerines; which they soon
abused, and claimed by Force, what was first given them through Courtesy.

BARBAROSSA too, being of an ambitious Nature, formed a wicked Design of making
himself Sovereign of Algiers, and all its Provinces. His Officers applauded his
Design, promised to assist in it, and swore themselves to Secrecy, 'till a Time
happened to put it in Execution. In order to begin Commotions, BARBAROSSA
winked at the Insolence and Villainies of the Turkish Soldiers, who were
perpetually raising Disorders in the City; which he hoped might enrage the
Citizens to some desperate Act, that might favor his Design.

SELIM EUTEMI now discovered his Indiscretion, in calling BARBAROSSA in to his
Assistance: For, so insolent was this Pirate, that he treated the Prince with
Contempt, never asking his Advice in any Thing; but built Forts, attacked the
Spanish Castle, and all without his Knowledge or Consent.

The Citizens too plainly perceived his Design, and made no Scruple of
declaring their Sentiments. BARBAROSSA, finding himself suspected, gave Way to
his Fury; which was heightened by a Passion he had entertained for SELIM's
Wife, the fair ZAPHIRA. He therefore determined to make short Work of it; and,
by the Death of SELIM, satisfy at once his Ambition and his Love: For he did
not doubt but upon her Husband's Death, ZAPHIRA would listen to his Suit, and
consent to marry him; which Alliance would add Dignity to him, and his own mean
Extraction be hid by the Union with this Lady, who was related to most of the
powerful Cheques of the Arabians; who, if the Algerines should oppose, would,
for his Wife's sake, assist to establish him upon the Throne.

BARBAROSSA, having fixed his Scheme, waited an Opportunity of SELIM's being
alone in a Bath; when he rushed upon him, and slew him. He fell down in the
Bath, where the Water finished what his Hurry had imperfectly done. The Pirate
hastened out, and, collecting some of his Friends, returned to the Bath, under
Pretense of cooling himself as usual; where, with an affected Surprise, he
showed SELIM dead. This was soon spread throughout the City; and BARBAROSSA,
under Pretense of discovering any foul Play that might have been used to SELIM,
put all the Soldiers under Arms, with Orders to secure every Pass, 'till he
could consider further on this Accident.

The Citizens of Algiers, notwithstanding the Reports given out, looked upon
the Death of SELIM to be a Stroke of the inhuman BARBAROSSA's; and, dreading
the further Mischief they suspected he had plan'd, locked themselves in their
Houses, which gave the Turkish Army full Power to distress and spoil at
Pleasure. -- They immediately conducted BARBAROSSA in Pomp to SELIM's Palace,
proclaiming him King of Algiers; adding, Destruction to all Opposers of him,
that Heaven has chosen for our Deliverer and Protector.

These Menaces alarmed the Citizens with most dreadful Apprehensions.
BARBAROSSA was seated under a Canopy, surrounded with his Adherents and Guards,
while proper Officers were sent to the principal Inhabitants, requiring them,
in the Name of the new King, to attend and take the Oath of Allegiance before
him; promising great Marks of Favor and Rewards to those, who showed
themselves most ready to perform the Ceremony. In this Exigency the Citizens,
who apprehended immediate Death would follow their Refusal, suffered themselves
to be brought to the Palace; where, after the King had repeated his magnificent
Promises, they took the Oaths, and signed the Instrument for his Coronation.

BARBAROSSA, having thus far obtained his End, ordered the Inhabitants to go
quietly about their several Callings, and depend upon his Care for their
Protection. Prince SELIM's Son, with Reason, apprehending he was not long to
survive his Father's Murder, found Means to fly, with only two Servants to
Oran, and beg Protection from Spain. The Marquis DE GOMAREZ, Governor of the
Place, received him with all the Respect and Honor due to his Birth and Youth.

BARBAROSSA, being thus settled on the Throne, caused all the Fortifications of
Algiers to be repaired; and placed in them strong Garrisons of Turkish
Soldiers, whom he paid well with Money he had coined in his own Name.

The People soon felt the Grievances of BARBAROSSA's Usurpation; for, where he
had the least Suspicion, he seized upon the Effects of the Subjects: Others,
that had secreted their Money, were put to Death, while he and his Associates
revell'd in their Property.

While Affairs were in this Situation, BARBAROSSA began his Addresses to the
Princess ZAPHIRA, who rejected them with the utmost Disdain, for she looked
upon him as the Murderer of her Husband; and expecting her Contempt of him
would enrage him to attempt some Violence, she always carried a Dagger with
her; fully resolved, if she could not revenge herself on him, to save her
Virtue at the Price of her own Life.

BARBAROSSA, however furious by Nature, did not immediately resent ZAPHIRA's
Behavior; but, looking on her excessive Grief to proceed from her Husband's
Death, resolved to forbear his Visits for awhile, and let Time restore her Mind
to Temper, when he did not doubt but to persuade her to share his Crown. -- He
made her a Present of some beautiful Slaves, some of which were instructed to
let him know what passed in the Princess's Apartment.

ZAPHIRA's Grief was too violent to continue, and her Transports began to
settle into a composed and silent Sorrow. Reflection took Place, and, finding
it impossible to revenge the Death of SELIM, she resolved to request the
Usurper to let her retire into her own Country.

BARBAROSSA, hearing the Princess was grown more moderate in her Grief, sent
her a Letter, full of the highest Praises of her Beauty, and the Adoration he
paid to it; offering to share his Crown with her, and beseeching her to forget
all former Miseries, and rise to Joy upon the Throne he wished her to adorn.

One of the Slaves, that BARBAROSSA had presented the Princess with, was
entrusted to deliver this Letter to her; but what was her Surprise, when she
read these Offers made by one who was the Murderer of her Husband? All her
former Agitations were renewed; but at length, a little recollecting herself,
she consulted with her faithful Women how to behave in such a dreadful
Exigency. It was now resolved, that she should send a soothing Answer back (as
Rage would prove vain against Power) and, by flattering the Tyrant, obtain
Permission to retire to the Plains of Mutija her native Country; and urge, for
Reason of her refusing the Crown, her Detestatio^ of the Place where her Lord
was murdered.

BARBAROSSA found, by this Epistle, that she suspected him as Accessory to
SELIM's Death; but, in order to clear himself, and put an End to ZAPHIRA's
Imaginations, he summoned his chief Counselor and Instrument in the Death of
SELIM, RAMADAN CHOULAH, and told him, As the Princess suspected he was
concerned in the Prince's Murder, that, in order to acquit himself, he must
procure some Victims to turn ZAPHIRA's Thoughts.

RAMADAN easily came into this Project; and ordered it to be proclaimed, That
the King, being informed that SELIM had a violent Death, and that he himself
was suspected to be privy to it, his Orders were that any Person who knew, or
suspected the Murderers, should immediately discover them, on Pain of Death and
Tortures; promising, at the same Time, great Rewards to the Informer.

It was not long before an Informer, who had been practiced upon, made a
Discovery. He declared, That a Domestic of Prince SELIM's had told him, before
he left Algiers, the Names of the Accomplices; adding, that they were under an
Oath to suffer Death, rather than betray the Secret, if BARBAROSSA had
miscarried; but that he being at present the Sovereign, they had nothing to
fear, though it should be publicly known. This Wretch, who was in the Prince's
Service, received the Reward; but, at the same Time, the King ordered his
Tongue to be pulled out, under Pretense of his not revealing it sooner, but
indeed that he might not discover the Treachery.

The pretended Accomplices, to the Number of Thirty, were brought before the
King, who were some of the poorest Soldiers in BARBAROSSA's Army; and had been
wrought upon by RAMADAN, in order to clear the King, publicly to consess
themselves guilty, assuring them of great Rewards for the Service; and though
they should be put in Prison, yet Means should be found to convey them safe to
Egypt, to spend their Lives in Peace and Plenty.

These poor Men could not resist such Promises, but consented; and, when they
were called upon, answered to every Question, and owned their Guilt, upon which
they were immediately strangled. One of them, out of Revenge to RAMADAN, who
had so deluded them, cried out before he died, That Prince SELIM was murdered,
by the Order of RAMADAN; whom the King ordered that Instant to meet the same
Fate, the other Wretches had suffered. Thus did this wicked Man fall by his own
Contrivance, and was destroyed by that Power which he had been the chief
Instrument to establish.

BARBAROSSA had the Bodies of these Wretches dragged round the City, and their
Heads fixed upon the Battlements of the Palace; and did not doubt, but the
Confessions of these Criminals would convince ZAPHIRA, as well as all the
Citizens, that he was innocent of Prince SELIM's Death: And, indeed, many
acquitted him of being any Ways concerned in the Murder.

With this Assurance, he sent again to the Princess, again invited her to his
Throne; and pleaded, as some Merit, the Discovery he had made of SELIM's
Murderers, and the Justice he had executed upon them.

But ZAPHIRA was too penetrating to be so deceived. She again refused his
Offers; adding, His Power could not bestow any Thing worth her Acceptance,
unless it was the Liberty of retiring to her own Country.

This Intercourse of assiduous Courtship and steady Refusal, continued by Fits
for some Years; during which Time, BARBAROSSA was frequently called from
Algiers by his Ambition, in defending the Territories he had usurped, and
enlarging them by new Conquests. In the mean Time, having got Notice that young
SELIM had taken Refuge in Oran, he secretly dispatched a bold Assassin, who
should destroy the young Prince, whom he regarded as the greatest Obstacle to
his safe Possession of the Throne.

While this Design was in Agitation he returned triumphant over his Enemies to
Algiers, and, being at once tired and provoked with ZAPHIRA's repeated Delays,
he now bethought himself of using that Power he was possessed of; and resolved,
in Case of another Refusal, to compel her to a Marriage.

Somewhere about this Period, if ou^ Accounts are true, the Tragedy begins How
the Poet may conduct his Plan, or what Use he may make of these Materials, we
presume not to conjecture: Nor indeed, if we were acquainted with his Design,
would we anticipate the Spectator's Pleasure, by making it public -- But, by
the Policy of the Managers, the Conduct of this Tragedy is as much a Secret, as
either the Name of the Author, or the subsequent Part of the History itself.

FINIS.

