THE VOTARY OF WEALTH; A COMEDY, IN FIVE ACTS.

AS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, COVENT GARDEN.

BY J. G. HOLMAN, AUTHOR OF "ABROAD AND AT HOME."

Quid non mortalia pectora cogis
Auri sacra fames?
VIRG* SECOND EDITION.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. N. LONGMAN AND O. REES, NO. 39, PATERNOSTER* ROW.

1799.

[PRICE TWO SHILLINGS.]

PROLOGUE.
WRITTEN BY WILLIAM THOMAS FITZGERALD, ESQUIRE.
AND SPOKEN BY MR. MURRAY.
TO please the town is not a task severe,
Wit will command a smile, distress a tear!
And he, whose moral picture plainly shows
The tree of vice can bear no fruit but woes!
That, though successful long in fashion's reign,
The villain's wages are disgrace and pain;
But that the good, by bounty wisely given,
Can make this vale of tears resemble heaven!
With newborn comfort hush the widow's sigh,
And wipe the tear from pallid mis'ry's eye!
The Bard, who thus employs his useful pen,
Imprints his drama on the hearts of men;
Commands respect from age, applause from youth,
And makes the stage assist the CAUSE OF TRUTH.
Yet, has an author many an anxious fear,
As his probationary night draws near:
When to his friends the manuscript is read,
Each social critic nods the approving head;
Most yield him flattery -- some with jaundic'd eye
Glance at a fault, and at a beauty sigh.
But these are few -- true genius still delights
To gaze with rapture at the Muse's slights!
And scorns to triumph at a brother's fall,
When Fame's wide dome is large enough for all!
Though none shall mount where Shakspeare sits sublime*
The drama's monarch to the end of time!
Within that fane they each a wreath may wear,
Which nature's darling offspring hallowed there --
And seated at the base of Shakspeare's throne,
Feel some small portion of his fire their own!
Thus, if they knew their interest, wits would be
By friendship bound in one great family;
And, if deserving, all might reap the bays
From the rich harvest of the Public praise.
CHARACTERS.
OLD VISORLY Mr. EMERY LEONARD VISORLY Mr. POPE DROOPLY Mr. LEWIS SHARPSET Mr.
FAWCETT OAKWORTH Mr. MUNDEN CLEVELAND Mr. MURRAY HENRY MELVILLE Mr. H. JOHNSTON
MASTER OF HOTEL Mr. THOMPSON BAILIFF Mr. ABBOT SIMPSON Mr. BLURTON SERVANT Mr.
CURTIS
LADY JEMIMA VISORLY Mrs. DAVENPORT CAROLINE Miss BETTERTON Mrs. CLEVELAND Miss
CHAPMAN JULIA CLEVELAND Mrs. POPE GANGICA, a Gentoo Mrs. H. JOHNSTON
SCENE -- LONDON.

The lines marked with single inverted commas are omitted in representation.

THE VOTARY OF WEALTH.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- An Apartment in OLD VISORLY'S House. OLD VISORLY and Lady JEMIMA
at breakfast. OLD VISORLY reading Newspapers. LADY JEMIMA. A Very pleasant,
sociable companion, indeed, Mr. Visorly! can you pore over newspapers at no
other time? You compliment me most highly in letting me see that, while you are
in my company, you need other entertainment.


Old Vis. My dear, I beg your pardon. One is anxious, you know, for the good of
one's country.


Lady Jem. You are anxious, Mr. Visorly, for any thing that is to show
disrespect to me.


Old Vis. Lord how you talk -- I show disrespect to you! (still reading.)


Lady Jem. There! are you not still inattentive to me and my remonstrances? Ah!
I might have known what I had to expect. This is the consequence of losing
sight of what was due to my birth and rank, and marrying a commoner.


Old Vis. My dear Lady Jemima, why should you urge that so often? I am sensible
of the honor, and of my own unworthiness.


Lady Jem. Still you pay no attention to what I am complaining of. Any thing, I
find, is preferable to my conversation.


Old Vis. Never spoke a truer word in her life (aside.) My dear, I shall have
done in a moment -- I am among the deaths.


Lady Jem. I wish to the Lord you were.


Old Vis. Oh fie, fie, Lady Jemima!


Lady Jem. You would provoke the patience of a saint. [OLD VISORLY starts up,
he has been still reading.] What is the matter?


Old Vis. Tol lol de roll! (singing and capering.)


Lady Jem. The man is mad.


Old Vis. Tol lol de roll!


Lady Jem. What frenzy has seized you?


Old Vis. Frenzy, my dear! only the frenzy that arises from good news.


Lady Jem. Cannot you give utterance to your good news without such absurdity?


Old Vis. Well, well, I will, my dear, (reads) "On Thursday, the 14th of last
March, died at an advanced age, at Calcutta in Bengal" -- Tol lol de roll!


Lady Jem. Oh, mad, mad!


Old Vis. "John Cleveland, Esquire. -- his immense wealth devolves on his only son,
who is shortly expected in England." There is a fortune for our dear son,
Leonard!


Lady Jem. How do you mean for our Leonard?


Old Vis. Mr. Cleveland, the son and heir of the deceased, is my first cousin
-- I Am his nearest of kin -- The old fellow, who is dead, was such a capricious
sort of animal, that he might have left every shilling of it away from his own
son; but now it is come into his possession, it is in the fair road to our
family.


Lady Jem. This, indeed, is welcome news; -- and here comes our dear Leonard to
partake it.


Enter LEONARD. Old Vis. Ah, my dear boy!


Lady Jem. Ah, my dear son!


Leon. Good morning -- How do you do?


Lady Jem. Here is news!


Old Vis. Ah, my boy, we have news for you!


Leon. Well, let me have it.


Old Vis. Why then --


Lady Jem. No, no, Mr. Visorly -- I Will tell it him.


Leon. I Will save you the trouble -- Old Cleveland is dead at Calcutta -- his
son inherits all his fortune -- And the good news is, that their bulses and
lacks may eventually come to our family.


Old Vis. Ay, my boy!


Lady Jem. Yes, Leonard!


Leon. I would not give five guineas for the chance of inheritance.


Old Vis. No!


Leon. No. I know a little more of the circumstances than you do. Mr. Cleveland
has a daughter.


Old Vis. Poh, poh! some -- some -- you understand me.


Lady Jem. Mr. Visorly, I am shocked at your indelicate allusions.


Leon. I wish they were well grounded; but it is a melancholy fact, that the
daughter is legitimate, and her mother, Cleveland's wife, is living.


Old Vis. Dear me, dear me!


Lady Jem. How do you know all this?


Leon. From the most positive information. -- Cleveland's own acknowledgement.
He has written to me.


Old Vis. Really!


Leon. Yes -- Stating that as we were the nearest, and only male relations he
had, to us he has taken the liberty of consigning his remittances -- with
directions how he wishes them to be invested. Understanding that your residence
in London was only casual, and also thinking the trouble of business more
suited to my time of life, he thought it better to address his letter to me. In
it, he explains all the particulars of his marriage; and recommends his wife
and daughter to our attention.


Lady Jem. How -- are they not with him?


Leon. No. His daughter we may hourly expect -- Not being able to settle his
affairs immediately on the death of his father, he sent her before him,
unwilling to detain her from her mother.


Lady Jem. Why, is the mother in England?


Leon. Yes; -- and has been for several years. His marriage was without the
consent of his father, and, for some time, unknown to him -- Enraged when he
discovered it, he insisted on a separation, -- to avoid ruin, which would have
been the consequence of his father's resentment, he was forced to comply. The
child was suffered to remain with him -- The wife was doomed to return to
England, where, for these fifteen years she has lived in retirement.


Old Vis. Well, what is to be done?


Lady Jem. They are recommended, it seems, to our attention; but, really, I
don't well see how I can reconcile to myself, taking notice of, and introducing
to my acquaintances, people, one does not know who -- and that have been living
one does not know where,


Leon. What do you talk of? Are they not the wife and daughter of a nabob? Your
high-bred friends will worship you for the introduction. Think what will be the
magnificence of their house, the splendor of their equipage, the brilliancy of
their entertainments. Such suppers as theirs will be the fashionable world
would scramble for a seat at, even if they were given by a personage from a
hotter place than Bengal.


Old Vis. Leonard says very truly. We shall get credit by showing such gold
pheasants to our friends.


Leon. Certainly: for all will be charmed with the splendor of their plumage
-- even those who are so little fashionable as not to attempt plucking the
feathers.


Old Vis. Well, we must prepare to show them all possible civility.


Leon. Ay, ay, pray let us; for I have something in view that will pay us for
our trouble.


Lady Jem. What is that, son?


Leon. The hope of making the young lady a part of our family.


Old Vis. What an excellent thought! Ah, Leonard, Leonard, you are a cunning
rogue!


Lady Jem. You amaze me, child, that you don't extend your views -- My son, the
grandson of the earl of Castlegreat, ought to aspire to the proudest heiresses
of the noblest peers -- not stoop to a thing of mushroom growth.


Leon. Consider, mother, this mushroom is the growth of a golden soil.


Lady Jem. Well, son, pursue your own inclinations; my affection for you will
always make me yield to your wishes.


Leon. Then this glorious fortune may be mine. Invite them to your house. The
mother having long experienced a constrained seclusion from society, will,
doubtless, be gratified with attentions from a woman of your rank -- the
daughter is young -- I don't despair of success with her; and the preference
the father has shown, in the trust consigned to me, makes me hope every thing
from him. So, all seems fair for my success; and half a million at least is the
prize. Think of that -- think of that.


Enter Servant. Serve. A person below desires to speak with you, Sir. (to
Leonard.)


Leon. What is his name?


Serve. He says his own name is immaterial; but he desired me to mention the
name of Cleveland.


Leonard. Show him up directly.

[Exit Servant, and enter OAKWORTH.
Leon. You are welcome, Sir.


Oakw. Thank you, Sir; thank you. So, I be got to you at last. You great folks
take a plaguey time coming at. Ma'am, your humble servant. Mayhap, I should say
your Ladyship -- Pray excuse all faults.


Leon. Never mind, Lady Jemima does not stand on ceremony.


Oakw. Don't she? Why, then, Lady Jemima is a lady just after my own heart.


Old Vis. Well, Sir -- you come concerning Mr. Cleveland.


Oakw. Why, yes, Sir; yes. You must know, Sir, that I am an old fellow that
remember Mrs. Cleveland (Heaven bless her!) when she was not the height of my
knee. Often and often is the time that I have danced her o'top of it. Well,
that is neither here nor there. When her father died -- Ah! I shall never
forget it -- he has not left a better man behind him -- there was not a dry eye
in the village except the undertaker's, and folks do say he cried a bit. Well,
her father, good soul! had met with so many losses and crosses, that there was
little enough left for his daughter to live like a lady on; so she was
persuaded by her friends to take a voyage to India with a cousin of here is, who
had married, and was going to settle there.


Leon. Mr. Cleveland has acquainted me with the rest. There he married her, and
from thence, by the severity of his father, he was forced to send her.


Oakw. Ah, poor dear! home she came again, miserable enough, to be sure. Well,
mayhap, all for the best; now she will be as happy as the day is long. But for
this many a year she has led but a lonesome sort of a life; for you may think
my dame and I, though we love her like a child of our own, cannot have been
company good enough for her: but she was as kind to us, and made as much of us,
as though we had been the best people in the land.


Lady Jem. We shall soon, I hope, have the pleasure of receiving her in this
house. She must not think of seeing any other habitation.


Leon. Oh, certainly not. She must make this her abode.


Old Vis. Oh, to be sure; to be sure.


Oakw. Why, do you know, now, this is the very thing that came into my head,
and that I told her of -- Says I, as sure as I am a sinner, if those relations
of Mr. Cleveland's have the least bit of kind-heartedness about them, they will
never let you live in any house but their own.
Leon. Certainly! -- How right you were!
Oakw. And I am glad to find such friendly good souls in this great town of
London; -- for, do you know, I had got a notion of its being but a bad sort of
a place.
Leon. I trust you will find it otherwise.
Oakw. Why. I hope I shall.
Lady Jem. When did Mrs. Cleveland arrive?


Oakw. But last night.


Lady Jem. And where is she?


Oakw. Why, she is at a -- at a -- What the plague do you call it? It is the
like of an inn, only it goes by a finer name.


Leon. Oh, an Hotel.


Oakw. Ay, ay, an Hotel.


Leon. But what Hotel?


Oakw. Od rabbit it, I forget the name of it; but I can ask the man who showed
me the way here; for, as I never was in London before, I cannot travel without a
guide. He waits below to take me back again -- he will tell me (going.)


Lady Jem. Stay, Sir, he shall direct us both. The carriage is waiting, and I
will not lose a moment in paying my respects to Mrs. Cleveland.


Oakw. Well, now, that is kind of you, indeed, my lady. I will leave the
direction below stairs, and go on before.


Leon. By no means. Lady Jemima will take you in the carriage with her.


Oakw. Why, you are joking sure!


Lady Jem. (aside to Leon) My dear Leonard, think if I should meet any of my
friends with this Bumpkin for my Cicisbeo.


Leon. Oh, mother, to oblige me (aside.) My mother is ready to attend you, Sir.


Oakw. Psha, Psha! no tricks upon travelers. Her ladyship ride with such a
lout as me!


Lady Jem. It may well surprise you (aside.) -- Oh, Sir, I shall be proud of
the honor.


Oakw. The honor! that is a good one. Come, then, my lady. Lord, how my dame
would laugh to see me seated in a coach with a Lady Jemima!

[Exeunt OAKWORTH and Lady JEMIMA.
Leon. Will Not you accompany my mother, Sir? I have business which must detain me.


Old Vis. Yes, yes, I will go with you, Lady Jemima (calling after her.) -- I
say, Leonard, where will her Ladyship wish the rustic if she meets any of her
noble relatives? Ha! ha! it is a good joke -- Ah, Leonard, you are a droll dog!
[Exit.


Manet LEONARD. If my designs succeed, on what a pinnacle of fortune shall I be
placed! The independence bequeathed me by my grandfather I have turned to good
account. What, though it has been the means of effecting the ruin of a few
thoughtless profligates? There vices were incurable, and they would have been
as completely beggared by the skilful operations of others if all my thoughts
had been engaged in the exercise of devotion, and my guineas appropriated to
charitable donations -- Nay, to preserve my estimation with the world, I have
raised from the earth those whom others, less mindful of opinion, would have
left grovelling in misery. -- Psha! when I scrutinize my conduct with an eye
half inclined to condemnation, I find matter for praise instead of censure.
Dupes will be dupes -- Knaves will make their prey of them -- and lucky is the
dupe that becomes the prey of a knave with some conscience, and a great regard
for a good reputation. Whom have we here?


Enter SHARPSET, dressed as a Methodist Preacher. Shar. Peace be unto this
house!


Leon. Who is this? With what Hedge Divine have I the honor of an acquaintance?


Shar. Thy name is Leonard Visorly.


Leon. Well, Sir, what is your business?


Shar. To discourse with thee on the state of thy conscience.


Leon. I request you will save yourself that trouble: my conscience is a charge
of which I choose to have the sole guardianship.


Shar. But it is my duty to inquire whether thou have treated that precious
charge like unto a faithful guardian -- Whether thou have not stained with
guilt, that which was consigned to thy care spotless and pure; and which now
goads thee with complainings for thy iniquity. Therefore, I say --


Leon. You shall say no more in this house. Out with you directly (offering to
push him out).


Shar. Oh, Leonard, Leonard, is this the way you treat an old friend, after so
long an absence?


Leon. An old friend! -- What do you mean? Who are you?


Shar. And so, my reverend appearance has concealed from your recognition your
friend, and brother in iniquity, Jeremy Sharpset!


Leon. Sharpset!


Shar. The very same.


Leon. But what is the meaning of this transformation?


Shar. The restlessness of my disposition, and inclination for any pursuit in
preference to laudable exertion, and honest industry.


Leon. You always had a propensity to confess your faults.
Sharp. Yes, but not much propensity to amend them. To be sure I showed a
little disposition toward it by quitting you.
Leon. Your most humble servant.
Shar. I am afraid you felt the loss of me.


Leon. Yes, I confess it -- You were very serviceable.


Shar. Yes, I was. I did the roguery, and you received the profits.


Leon. Come, come -- You were not ill paid.


Shar. Oh, no -- I don't complain. How is poor Drooply?


Leon. Still the creature of my bounty.


Shar. Well, that is kind of you -- A generous weakness in your character --
You swindled him out of two thousand a year, and are good enough to allow him a
hundred. Ah, you are a model of philanthropy.


Leon. Come, a truce with your sarcasm.


Shar. Ah, bless your honest tender heart! He is as grateful to you as ever, I
conclude.


Leon. Yes, he esteems me his friend and preserver.


Shar. Poor fellow! "He was wont to set the table in a roar, now quite
chop-fallen." I declare I never think of him but with a heart-ache.


Leon. Well, well -- but what have you been doing since we parted?


Shar. All sorts of things I ought not to do. To confess the truth, the reason
I quitted you, was, I was tired of the work you chalked out for me -- You
wanted to push me a little farther in roguery than I liked. I am but a petty
larceny villain -- That ruin of poor Drooply, in which I was the chief engine
for you -- that hit me hard. I am foolish enough to have qualms. I know you
despise me for it; but we all have our weaknesses.


Leon. Well, well; but what became of you?


Shar. I Will tell you. I had unluckily, once in my life, dined at a Lord Mayor's
feast. -- I shall never forget it. Talk of Earls and Dukes entertaining! --
Psha! a rivulet to the ocean. Ever after I panted for City honors -- So, all
my honest earnings I was determined to deposit in trade. An opportunity soon
offered -- I was to become a sleeping partner in a great house. I paid down my
cash to the last guinea -- A docket was struck against the firm the very next
week, so the poor sleeping partner had nothing but the open air for his
slumbers; and, instead of being in the road to claim a seat at a Guildhall
dinner, I had scarcely enough to purchase one in Porridge Island.


Leon. So, all your hopes of a gold chain vanished?


Shar. Yes; and I was in a very likely way to be adorned with an iron one; --
but I was resolved to take myself out of the reach of temptation and danger, by
leaving London.


Leon. In what capacity did you travel?


Shar. Still I had a taste for partnership. I engaged with a very respectable
Gentleman to divide with him the attention and profits of --


Leon. Of what?


Sharp. A collection of wild beasts.


Leon. I guess you were not a sleeping partner here.


Sharp. No; my companions were rather hostile to repose. Not much liking such
uncivilized society, and being a little apprehensive that my fellow-travellers
might one time or other make a supper of me, I soon cut this connection; and
instead of exhibiting the merits of others, I got a taste for displaying my own.


Leon. How, pray?


Shar. I joined a party of strolling players.


Leon. Indeed!


Shar. I know you must be shocked at my descending so damned low as to turn
actor. But I did not disgrace myself long.


Leon. How happened that?


Shar. The audience would not let me.


Leon. How so?


Shar. I came out in Richard the Third. I thought it devilish fine; but the
good folks in the front thought otherwise. I ranted -- they hooted -- However,
I out-roared them, and pushed on till I got into Bosworth Field -- "A horse, a
horse! my kingdom for a horse!" When a drunken, Foxhunting squire (I shall
never lose the sound of his damned voice) bawled out of the boxes, that I
should have the best horse in his stable, if I would ride away directly, and
never come back again.


Leon. Ha! ha! ha!


Shar. The actor's warned me it would not do. I thought it envy in them, and
have some reason to think they sent in a party to hiss me. However, by way of
comfort, they told me, though I should never act tragedy, they thought I should
succeed in low comedy -- Low comedy! only think of their impudence! Is this a
face for low comedy? No, no, damn it! I could not stoop to that.


Leon. Well, your next resource?


Shar. Oh, then I got a call, and mounted the habiliments in which you see me;
this was lucrative; but my conscience would not suffer me any longer to drain
from the pockets of the poor, the earnings of their industry: nay, what is
worse, embitter their innocent minds with groundless terrors, and inspire them
with prejudice against their fellow creatures.


Leon. So then you deign at last to return to me.


Shar. Yes; for I had rather cheat the rich, than delude the poor.


Leon. Well, well, I Will endeavor to find you employment.


Shar. That I don't doubt, as long as there is a pigeon to be plucked, and as I
am disposed to be a rook at your service.


Leon. No, I have at present honester objects in view, to attain which I may
need your assistance.


Shar. Well, I Am glad of that; for, upon my soul, I am tired of being a rogue.


Leon. If I reach the point of my present aim, I may, myself, relinquish that
character. I shall then have wealth enough to gratify even my ambition. I am no
further a knave than as it forwards my grand pursuit, the attainment of wealth.
And who would not use any means to gain that, which covers vice with the garb
of respect, and without which virtue meets but pity or derision.


Shar. Well observed; and never was observation more patly illustrated. You are
a glorious instance of the first part of your sentiment, and here comes a proof
of the latter.

[SHARPSET walks up the Stage.
Enter DROOPLY. Leon. Ah, Drooply, how do you do?


Dro. How do you do, my dear fellow?


Leon. Where have you hid yourself? nobody has seen you of late?


Dro. I have been striving to follow the example of my acquaintances, and
learning to be as shy of them as they are of me.


Leon. Why, what an altered being you are! you used to be a merry fellow.


Dro. Yes, for I used to be a rich fellow.


Leon. Come, come, cheer up. Good spirits are a man's best friends.


Dro. Ay; but like the rest of his friends, when his money leaves him, they
leave him too.


Leon. Nay, nay; your friends have not all deserted you.


Dro. All but you. There is not another man in the world who would care a straw
if the devil had one.


Leon. If you are so despondent, I must recommend you a spiritual comforter.
Can your reverence administer consolation to this afflicted being? (to
Sharpset.)


Shar. No; for I cannot return him the money I won of him.


Dro. Whom have we here?


Shar. What, not remember me! If I had done you a kindness, I might expect to
be forgotten* but I thought every one remembered an ill-turn.


Leon. In this pious pastor you behold a quondam acquaintance, Mr. Sharpset.


Dro. What! Sharpset turned Methodist?


Shar. Yes; but don't wrong my understanding -- Only from necessity.


Leon. You might triumph now, if you were disposed to indulge spleen; for the
man who was the chief gainer by your losses at play, is now as low in the world
as yourself.


Shar. No, I am so completely without gratification, I have not even the
comfort a malicious disposition would afford me. It is far from a relief to me,
to see another unfortunate.


Leon. You are mutually distressed; yet, how differently you bear your
misfortunes.


Shar. That is easily accounted for. I have a thousand resources -- Drooply has
none. Born to no other inheritance, I have learned to turn to account what I
inherit from nature; so that, though my acquisitions have been squandered, I am
still in possession of my original patrimony.


Dro. Ah, you lucky dog! you have an estate in every corner of your brain, and
a pretty income at the end of every finger. Now, the whole produce of my skull
would not get me change for sixpence: and as for my hands, curse them! they are
fit for nothing but to dangle by my sides, or stuff out my coat-pockets.


Leon. Why, I am afraid they will never fill your pockets with any thing but
themselves.


Dro. Oh I wish I had been a Turk!


Leon. A Turk!


Dro. Yes, a Turk: they are the only wise people on earth: they teach all their
great men some honest employment.


Leon. Do they? I know some great men I wish they would give a lesson to.


Dro. Oh if we had that good mussulman custom among us, how many a rich man
would be of more use to society when his estate was gone, than while he
possessed it! as a good cobbler is a more valuable character than a rich man who
does not employ his wealth properly.


Leon. Why, you are turning moralist!


Dro. Yes; the loss of wealth seldom lessens a man's morality. While I am
creeping about, such a piece of moving lumber, what respect I feel for every
reputable tinker that comes in my way. This very morning how I did envy a merry
rogue of a shoeblack! With what glee he put the polish of an artist on the boot
he was blacking: how merrily he brushed and sung, and how conceitedly and
happily he looked at his work when he had done it! Oh, you jolly dog, thought
I, what a happy man had been spoiled, if you had been born to two thousand a
year! you would never have enjoyed the luxury of polishing a shoe, or the
independent exultation of existing by your own industry.


Leon. We must endeavor to dispel your melancholy. You are a martyr to ennui.
I must find you employment.


Dro. You must do something beside -- find me capacity.


Leon. That you don't want. Your talents have been only slumbering.


Dro. Hav'n't they? they have had a pretty long nap, and a sound one too. I Am
afraid it will be a hard matter to wake them.


Leon. I don't despair; especially when I shall set the loud voice of
friendship to rouse them.


Dro. If they don't wake at that call, you may take your oath their slumber is
everlasting. But though I am master of this poor tenement, I really am so
ignorant of the state of the upper story, as not to know whether the
inhabitants have perished by neglect, or are only dozing from want of
employment; but this I do know, there is a lively fellow in the first floor
(pointing to his heart) who would dance with joy to do you the slightest
service, and lose every drop of blood to prove his friendship and gratitude.
[Exeunt.


ACT II.
SCENE I. -- An Apartment in Visorly's House. Enter LEONARD, and CAROLINE. Car.
Yes, I have not been in town above half an hour.


Leon. Have you brought with you from the country house the box, which, I told
you, contains the writings of your property.


Car. Yes -- shall I give it to you?


Leon. No; I am too busy at present -- Only take care of it.


Car. Well, my dear brother, I am so glad we are to have our house full of
company -- Oh, that is delightful! How I do love a racketting, noisy scene! In
a morning the fashionable bustle of Bondstreet, the musical thunder of a
footman's rap -- the dealing out tickets to the whole ton-world -- and then at
night, driving to twenty different assemblies -- seeing the whole world in the
course of an evening -- Oh, dear, dear, what a charming age to live in! we see
more of life in one day, than our ancestors did in their whole existence.


Leon. Yes; but I doubt whether we are the happier for it.


Car. To be sure we are. What is all this but happiness? care can never reach
us, for in all this hurry nobody has time to think; and you know it is thinking
makes one unhappy.


Leon. Well, I Am not Cynic enough to attempt to reason people out of their
notions of happiness; for as it exists in imagination, the idea is the reality.
But, my dear Caroline, I have told you my wish to be thought well of by this
young East Indian. From living in the same house, and being nearly of an age,
you will most likely contract a friendship.


Car. Yes; and her taking my brother for her lover, will be the best security
for that friendship; for then, we cannot be rivals -- and nothing is so apt to
make young ladies disagree, as being both of the same mind.


Old VISORLY (without.) This way, Mrs. Cleveland.


Leon Here comes the mother.


Enter Mrs. CLEVELAND, Lady JEMIMA and old VISORLY. Old Vis. Believe me, madam,
we experience the greatest pleasure in welcoming you to this house. My
daughter, madam -- my son, Leonard.


Leon. I feel extreme happiness in the event of this moment, which makes me
known to you, madam. Suffer me to assure you, that if I can be the humble
instrument of rendering you a service, I shall esteem it the greatest bliss of
my life.


Mrs. Clev. Sir, I thank you.


Lady Jem. I hope, madam, we shall be able to make your residence here, not
entirely disagreeable to you: our friends and connections, among whom, I am
proud to say, are some of the first rank, will, I am sure, do their possible to
second our poor endeavors.


Mrs. Clev. Your kindness, madam, merits my warmest return of gratitude. The
endearing attentions with which you honor me, will tend to soothe the terrors
of a mind anxious for the safety of the dear objects on which all its future
happiness depends.


Leon. With what sincere joy, madam, I consider how short will be the
continuance of your apprehensions, and how complete the happiness you will so
soon possess.


Mrs. Clev. Heaven grant it! I have passed many a tedious year with no other
solace than the hope of what now appears so near me. Fifteen years' absence
from the husband of my affections, and from my dear child, has been a period,
you may well conceive, barren of comfort: -- and, even now, I have much to
dread -- a long and dangerous voyage. -- But I will hope the best, and not
wrong Providence, by doubting its goodness.


Enter OAKWORTH Oakw. I am out of breath -- quite out of breath -- And I am
almost out of my wits -- she is arrived! she is arrived!


Mrs. Clev. My daughter!


Oakw. Yes -- I have seen her, I have seen her!


Mrs. Clev. O good heaven!


Oakw. I have -- Ah, the sweet little dear! and not so little either -- She is
quite a woman. Ah bless her! I Have had a kiss, and I Will have another -- I beg
pardon gentlefolks -- if I Am unmannerly it is joy makes me so.


Mrs. Clev. Where is she?


Oakw. In this very house by this time. Oh here she comes! here she comes!


Enter JULIA. Mrs. Clev. My child! Oh, my sweet child!


Jul. My mother!


Mrs. Clev. How have I longed for this blessed moment! But your dear father, did
you leave him well?


Jul. Yes -- quite well -- And eager for the happiness which I feel now.


Mrs. Clev. My sweet, sweet Julia! How well am I repaid for my past years of
misery! Oh, height of bliss! The mother clasps once more in her fond arms, her
long lost, only child. -- (to the company.) Pardon these transports -- Joy like
mine will keep no limits.


Leon. We all participate too much in your felicity to wish repressed such
exquisite emotions.


Old Vis. Yes, madam, we all feel boundless joy. What a pretty little creature
it is, Leonard -- Oh, you will be a happy rogue!

[aside to Leonard.
Mrs. Clev. My Julia, to these generous friends we owe the utmost gratitude;
their kindness grants us an asylum while your father shall remain from us.


Car. It Is for us to be grateful, for your kind compliance with our wishes
(crossing to Julia.) Though we cannot rival the splendor of Calcutta, I hope
London will have some charms for you.


Jul. Oh yes, I find already it has every charm: for I Am with my mother, and
with friends who look as if they loved me.


Oakw. And who that sets eyes on you, can help loving you, you dear, pretty
creature? I beg pardon, gentlefolks.


Jul. Who is that good old gentleman? You cannot think how glad he was to see
me: he kissed me as fondly as if I had been his own daughter.


Mrs. Clev. He is one, my Julia, who has made my comfort for these fifteen
years the chief business of his life.


Jul. What, has he been so kind to my dear mother? Oh then I must kiss him
again.

(runs and kisses him.)
Oakw. I am too happy -- I am too happy!


Jul. Though my new friends are so kind to me, I must not forget those who have
loved me before. Where is Gangica?


Enter GANGICA. Gang. Here, my dear mistress.


Jul. Mother you must love Gangica for my sake; she has lest her country and
all her relations, because she would not part from me: therefore I must love
her better than ever, and every body that loves me, must love Gangica.


Mrs. Clev. Her affection for my dear child makes her certain of my love. But I
feel exhausted with excess of joy. We should not lament that there are few
incidents in life, which waken such extreme delight; for were they frequent,
how shortly would our weak frames yield to the tumults of ecstacy!


Lady Jem. Let me conduct you, madam, to your apartments.


Mrs. Clev. You are all goodness. Come, my dear child.

[Exeunt Lady JEMIMA, Mrs. CLEVELAND, JULIA, CAROLINE and GANGICA
Manent LEONARD, Old VISORLY and OAKWORTH. Oakw. (looking after them, then
wiping his eyes.) I cannot tell how it is -- I be no whimperer, gentlemen; but
somehow, my eyes do nothing but moisten today.


Old Vis. I feel the tear of sensibility bedew my cheek. Ah, Leonard, my boy,
if you can but get her. -- (aside to Leonard.)


Leon. Hush, sir, hush! (to Oakworth.) Wha delight, sir, you must feel at the
happiness of this family, to whom you have shown so much attachment! What
gratitude do they not owe you!


Oakw. Gratitude to me! That is a great mistake of yours, and it behooves me to
set you right. Mrs. Cleveland's father saved me once from ruin -- me and my
family from beggary; and I think he must have but a bad notion of the value of
a kindness done him, who, if he could live long enough, would not strive to
repay it down to the fiftieth generation.


Leon. What a noble heart!


Oakw. Noble heart! Psha, psha! sure the world is not so bad that a man need be
praised for not being a monster.


Leon. I am proud of the happiness of being known to you.


Old Vis. And so am I, most sincerely.


Oakw. Why to be sure a mighty matter to be proud of, gentlemen, being known to
an old stupid country bumpkin. Surely you be jeering a body -- but if you be, I
cannot find in my heart to be angry; for as long as you are so good and so kind
to the dear creatures I love, you may flout and jeer at me as much as you
please.


Leon. You mistake us extremely: it is the farthest from our thoughts to be
deficient in any particle of respect.


Old Vis. Oh dear! we never dreamed of such a thing.
Oakw. Well, I suppose I shall be able in time to understand your London
speechifying; but in truth your fine civil sayings are so like making game,
that, for a little while, I shall be deucedly puzzled.
Leon. You never can be at a loss for our meaning -- We feel the value of such
integrity as yours; and be assured we shall always say less of your merits,
than we think you deserve.


Old Vis. Always less than you deserve.


Oakw. Do you know I shall take that very kind of you -- for if you are so good
as to fancy I have any deserts at all, you must in conscience think they be
very little -- And if so be you keep your word, and say less than you think, I
shall be mighty happy -- because then, you will just say nothing at all. So,
gentlemen, as in duty bound, I am your most humble servant. [Exit.


Old Vis. Poor old fellow -- Age begins to make havoc -- the upper works are
giving way.
Leon. Ah, sir! how few like you, enjoy in advanced life, robustness of form,
vigor of intellect, -- in short, all the advantages of youth, without its
inexperience.
Old Vis. Very few indeed, Leonard -- I am one out of five thousand.
Leon. Years in you, sir, have only just slackened the blazing fire of youth.
Old Vis. Yes -- slackened -- not extinguished it.
Leon. This old rustic, sir, appears to stand vastly well with the mother; I
must endeavor to gain his good graces; for the sentiments of a man she has
known so long, and esteems so highly, must have great weight with her.


Old Vis. Very true -- I Will take care to pay him vast attention. I Will do your
business with him -- I Will cajole the old fool.


Leon. Yes, sir; but be cautious lest your partial affection for me should make
you too lavish in my panegyric.


Old Vis. Do you think I don't know how to get round such a silly old bumpkin?
leave me to wheedle him -- I Will do it cunningly, shrewdly, Leonard -- wisely,
my boy. [Exit OLD VISORLY.


Leon. Now the game is started, I must set my whole pack full cry for the
chase. Here comes my prime agent in knavery, Sharpset. Having used him so
essentially in the plunder of Drooply, and that business completed, I could
have dispensed with his return; for no intercourse is so grating as that which
subsists with a confederate in villainy. However, to keep him in my power, I
have still contrived to keep him in my debt; so that I need not fear him, and
he has talents to render him still useful to me.


Enter SHARPSET. I am glad to find you returned to the laity. I would rather
see knavery wear any garb than that of religion.

Shar. Your reason for which, is, that then only you are afraid of its being an
overmatch for you.


Leon. Not so; but that I have not ceased to respect, though I have dared to
violate.


Shar. Heyday! I believe you congratulate me on laying down the trade of
preaching, because you mean to take it up. But it tells well for morality, that
even some knaves can admire the cause, which honest men are risking their lives
to defend. But, a truce to this style, for it sits awkwardly upon us. Your
visitors, I find, are arrived.


Leon. Yes; and the girl is beautiful as an angel.


Shar. Oh, a divinity!


Leon. Why, have you seen her?


Shar. No.


Leon. Then, whence these raptures?


Shar. Did not you tell me she was heiress to half a million?


Leon. Oh! your servant -- but I assure you her intrinsic worth --


Shar. Can be nothing to her sterling worth.


Leon. I am convinced I feel something like love.


Shar. To be sure you do. I should adore a twentieth part of the sum, if it
were in the pocket of the ugliest old harridan that ever was ducked for a witch.


Leon. You seem to hold beauty very cheap.


Shar. Oh no -- I only value money very highly.


Leon. But when they are combined --


Shar. That is always possible -- Whoever has the money, need not be long
without the beauty.


Leon. In one object I hope to possess the ultimatum of my wishes in both. It
must now be my ^are to have all around her impressed with esteem for me -- my
eulogium wafted to her on every breath, cannot fail of infusing a favorable
prepossession. Be you mindful, that on all occasions your report of me may
swell the gale of approbation. I need not tell you that your interest will be
no sufferer by your panegyric.


Shar. And I assure you I am so good natured a fellow, that, make it equally
profitable to me, and I would rather speak in a man's praise than against him
-- So much am I unlike the greater part of my acquaintance.


Leon. The chief personage I wish to enlist in my favor, is an old rustic,
much devoted to the family, and ranking high in the mother's esteem. His name
is Oakworth.


Shar. What?


Leon. Oakworth.


Shar. Oak -- Oak -- worth. -- Where does he come from?


Leon. With Mrs Cleveland from Warwickshire. What surprises you?


Shar. Oh nothing -- Only it strikes me, I have heard that name before.


Leon. Be earnest to throw yourself in his way* and remember by discreetly
applied praise, ^o pave my passage to the esteem I desire. To merit esteem is
at best a tedious method of obtaining it -- The purchased diploma equally gives
the title, and saves the labor of deserving it. [Exit.


Manet SHARPSET. Shar. So, I am to throw myself in the way of this old rustic,
Oakworth -- You little guess, my very worthy friend, what you are directing --
To throw myself in the way of no less interesting a personage to me than my
identical dad -- my own natural father. It is now a long while since I saw the
good old boy: -- I was but fourteen, I think, when it entered my mad head to
scamper away from him -- A project well worthy of so experienced an age. That
frolic has thrown me into many a situation which would be whimsical to relate
-- Yes, and many a situation it would not be prudent to relate. I long to have
a glimpse of the old buck. I wonder whether he would know me -- Whom have we
got here? Oh! this is one of the Asiatic importations.


Enter GANGICA, looking about with curiosity; on seeing SHARPSET, she starts
back. Don't be fright'ned, my dear -- I am very tame.

Gang. You not hurt me?


Shar. Lord love you, not I. I suppose she thought I should dart at her like
one of her native tigers. I assure you, my dear, I sha'n't bite.


Gang. No, no; but you may do great deal mischief, and not bite.


Shar. But I will not do any mischief at all.


Gang. Dat's good man. You not wonder I am afraid -- I am stranger.


Shar. It Is a sign so by your being afraid; for, were you not a stranger you
would know that nobody in this country has the power of wronging another with
impunity. Beside, your being a stranger, is a sure title to protection.


Gang. O den, dis be very good country. Glad I come here.


Shar. And so am I, glad you are come here, my little marigold.


Gang. What for you glad I come here?


Shar. Because I like the look of you.


Gang. Oh, you mock -- You not like my copper face.


Shar. Why not, my dear? In my mind a lady looks better with a face of copper,
than of brass -- And that is all the fashion.


Gang. Oh, if my face were like my dear Miss Julia's! Oh she so pretty! she so
good!


Shar. And you love her very much?


Gang. Ay, dat I do -- I would die for her. -- Oh, I would do great deal more
-- I would live to bear pain in my limbs, and sorrow in my heart, to make her
happy.


Shar. Well said, my little disciple of Brama! If the hallowed waves of the
Ganges had any share in infusing this gratitude, I wish its stream lay near
enough to be resorted to as a fashionable bathing place. This little sunburned
favorite may do Leonard service -- I Will try to retain her in his cause.
(aside.) I know who loves your young lady very much.


Gang. So do I.


Shar. Ay! -- who?


Gang. Every body.


Shar. Yes, yes; -- but there is a gentleman here, in this house -- a young
handsome gentleman.


Gang. Yes. (with a little titter.)


Shar. Very handsome.


Gang. Yes, -- very handsome.


Shar. What, you have seen him?


Gang. Yes, -- I see him now.


Shar. (looking about) Who?


Gang. Why, handsome -- very handsome gentleman. (looking in his face.)


Shar. Meaning me -- This girl's simplicity has done more than all the bronze
of her sex could ever accomplish -- wonderful to relate -- made me blush. -- I
had no notion though that these natives of Indostan had so much taste. But, my
dear, I am not the only handsome gentleman in this house -- I mean another, who
has conceived a great esteem for your young lady; and your good opinion of him
will, I know, give him great satisfaction -- and so -- but I had better have
done with talking, and appeal to the rhetoric of all times, and all nations
(taking out a purse) you must know, my dear, that this gentleman is very
generous -- and I am sure he will be highly pleased at my making you a present
from him of this little purse. (gives her the purse.)


Gang. But what for you give me dis.


Shar. Why, that -- that you may speak well of this young gentleman.


Gang. How I speak well of him I not know?


Shar. Um -- But when you do know him --


Gang. Den, if he good man, I speak well of him widout dis -- if he bad man, I
not speak well of him for whole ship-full of money. (returns the purse.)


Shar. So, so, -- my friend Leonard will not be able to buy his diploma here.
There is something mighty fascinating in this dusky piece of disinterestedness.
Since I find we are not likely to come to a right understanding as agents, I Will
try how we can agree as principals. Pray, my dear, have you left your heart in
India?


Gang. No -- my heart in de right place. (pointing to it.)


Shar. I Will answer for that -- It Is in the right place I am sure. But you have
not resolved never to love any body?


Gang. No -- I love great many.


Shar. The deuce you do!


Gang. Yes; my young lady I love dearly, dearly. And I love every body dat love
her.


Shar. Oh, is that all? But all your love seems to belong to your lady. Cannot
you love a little on your own account?


Gang. What you say?


Shar. Why, you have not made a vow to die a maid.


Gang. I never make vows -- it is wicked.


Shar. Very well -- why then, if I were to be very fond of you.


Gang. Yes.


Shar. Would you be fond of me?


Gang. I not know.


Shar. Why not?


Gang. Because, though your face white and pretty, I not know if your mind so.


Shar. Why, that is true, my love -- But you may take my word for it.


Gang. No, no -- not take man's word when he praise himself.


Shar. Well, how are you to know.


Gang. Why, in great, long time -- if I find you do all good -- not one bit of
bad.


Shar. Oh Lord -- Oh Lord -- Oh Lord! here is a trial of gallantry! here is a
test for a lover!


Began. Well, good bye -- I stay too long while with you. My lady want me, may
be. I see you again sometime.


Shar. Yes, my dear, I hope so.


Began. Good bye, good bye. [Exit GANGICA.


Manet SHARPSET. Shar. I am afraid I stand but a poor chance of success here.
It is not very likely that my little Gentoo's system for choosing a lover
should come into fashion -- But if it should, Lord, Lord, what a different
class of beings the favorites of the ladies would be! no -- yes -- it is he --
my papa, by all that is miraculous! Oh the deuce -- what a business here will be!


Enter OAKWORTH. Oakw. Whew, whew, -- plague take it! I never was so tired with
riding a whole day after the Fox, as I am now with half an hours plaguey palaver
from this old master of the house. He may be a very good sort of man -- which I
don't doubt; but he be cursed tiresome. Who be this ^ine spark? servant, sir.


Shar. How do you do -- how do you do? (hiding his face with his handkerchief.)


Oakw. Pretty well; at your service. Poor gentleman, he have got the toothache,
I believe* I am afraid you feel uncomfortable, sir.


Shar. I do, upon my soul, sir.


Oakw. Are you often attacked in this way?


Shar. No, sir, I have not been attacked in this way, for a great many years.


Oakw. Dear, dear! what, you be quite taken by surprise?


Shar. Never more so in my life, sir.


Oakw. Well, sir, but I hope you will soon get rid of so troublesome a
companion.


Shar. I hope I shall, sir.


Oakw. And as you seem to be very uneasy, it will be but kind in me to keep you
company a bit.


Shar. If you stay with me, how the devil am I to get rid of my troublesome
companion? (aside) Oh Lord, Oh Lord!


Oakw. You seem to be in huge great pain. I would not be plagued in this way. I
would get somebody to lug him out.


Shar. Oh how I wish somebody would be so kind!


Oakw. If I could borrow a pair of pinchers, I would do it for you in a moment
-- I have drawn fifty so in our village.


Shar. Oh! I could not think of troubling you.


Oakw. It will be a pleasure.


Shar. No, by no means -- I think I am rather better.


Oakw. Ah! the fear of the tug always makes it leave off aching. But you would
better have him out -- he will plague you again.


Shar. I am afraid he will, but I must bear it* He does not know my voice, and
my face and person must be still more altered -- Hang it, I Will even try (takes
his handkerchief from his face by degrees) I begin to feel easier, sir.


Oakw. Heartily glad to hear it.


Shar. (Takes it quiet away.) My face is rather enlarged, sir. (feeling it as
though it were swelled).


Oakw. Um! I see no swelling at all -- Ah! you were more frightened than hurt.


Shar. So it turns out, sir -- for he has not the slightest remembrance of me
(aside). Upon my soul, it was very kind of you to offer to operate -- and for
an entire stranger too.


Oakw. One should be ready to lend every body a lift.
Shar. Yes -- and a pretty lift you would have given to my poor grinders. --
But how came you to understand drawing teeth?


Oakw. Oh, in a little village; a man that means to do good to his neighbors,
must turn his hand to every thing. Why, I have bled folks aforenow.


Shar. That has run in the family. I have bled 'em a little too, (aside). Well,
Sir, and I dare say you have a good dame at home who is as ready to assist her
neighbors as you are?


Oakw. Why, yes; my old girl don't grudge stirring her stumps when there is any
good to be done.


Shar. I Am glad to hear the good old dame is alive. Now, I Will venture to touch
on a tender subject (aside). Any -- any sons and daughters?


Oakw. No -- no; they be all gone (sighing.)


Shar. What -- none lest?


Oakw. No, no -- Yes -- one, mayhap -- one may be alive -- one ungracious boy
-- No, no; it be hardly possible, though there is a chance, a little chance --
I have always kept a watch on the Old Bailey Sessions Papers, and the County
Assize lists -- and to be sure I never found his name down in them; but there
is little certainty or comfort in that -- for you know, my poor wicked boy may
have been hanged, or sent to Botany Bay under some other name.


Shar. Hanged, or sent to Botany Bay!


Oakw. Ah! sir, it grieves my heart to think it -- but he had such little
sharping tricks about him when he was but a child, that I were forced to lash,
and lash, every day of my life. I dare say, if he be alive, he have got my
well-meant marks on his back to this day.


Shar. Really! It aches at the recollection. (aside).


Oakw. Yes -- you must suppose I had his well doing at heart -- and so I never
spared him. I did hope, by good advice, and good example, and a good horsewhip,
all together, to have made an honest man of him -- But the rogue scampered away
when he was but a younker, and so got loose into the wide wicked world, with a
bad disposition, and necessity to whet it. You must needs think as I do, about
what is become of him.


Shar. I really think, sir, you judge too severely of your son, Je -- What is
your son's name, sir?


Oakw. Jeremy.


Shar. O, sir, take comfort -- Many a lad with as bad a beginning has turned
out a great man.


Oakw. Ay, a great man, mayhap -- but I am afraid nobody with so bad a
beginning has turned out a good one.


Shar. Upon my soul, you cannot think how it shocks me that you should judge so
harshly of a child of your own. I dare swear no more harm has happend to Jerry
than there has to me.


Oakw. O dear, O dear! it be quite a different case.


Shar. Not at all -- not at all -- A case very much in point, I assure you.


Oakw. How be that? Why, were you a bit of a rogue when you were a younker?


Shar. To own the truth to you, my dear sir, (but don't mention it) I was.


Oakw. Ah! but you never ran away from your home.


Shar. I did.


Oakw. You don't say so?


Shar. Honor.


Oakw. Yes, yes; but you soon saw your error, and went back to your father?


Shar. So far from it, my good sir, that it was many years before we met.


Oakw. Indeed!


Shar. And, then, quite by accident.


Oakw. Really!


Sharp. Yes; and the best joke was, he did not know me.


Oakw. Not know you! Oh the old fool! -- Beg pardon, sir, for making so free
with your father.


Shar. No apology. Pray make as free with him as you please. Was it not droll?


Oakw. Devilish droll -- Ha, ha, ha! I cannot help laughing. So, you met him,
and he did not know you?


Shar. No -- he did not know me.


Oakw. Well, and what did he say when he did know you?


Shar. Why, that, my dear sir, I must defer telling you till another
opportunity.


Oakw. Well, Sir, whenever you please -- I long to hear the rest.


Shar. Depend upon it, sir, it will not be concealed from you. Good day to you,
sir.


Oakw. Good bye, sir. Ha, ha, ha! only think of your own father's not knowing
you, ha, ha* ha!


Shar. Ha, ha, ha!

[Exeunt on different sides*
ACT III.
SCENE I. -- OLD VISORLY'S House. Enter JULIA and CAROLINE. Car. But you surely
will not stay at home this evening too?


Jul. Yes, indeed I had rather.


Car. You have the most unaccountable domestic propensity. Has novelty no
pleasure for you?


Jul. Yes, it is novelty makes me domestic; a dear novelty, the novelty of a
mother. Now I have gained her sweet society, should I resign it for frivolous
amusements I can command at all times?


Car. Well, you are a dear, good girl.


Jul. But where are you going this evening?


Car. That I cannot tell without referring to my engagement list; but as near
as I can guess, to about a dozen assemblies, the opera, a concert, and a
masqued ball.


Jul. My dear Caroline, you will be fatigued to death.


Car. Oh, no. I am never weary with pleasure.


Jul. And do you often make these laborious exertions for your amusement?


Car. Oh, yes, all through the season -- And I don't think that half long
enough.


Jul. Well, to be equal to such efforts, a woman of fashion must be endued with
more strength than any creature in the universe.


Car. To be sure. Your elephant is nothing to her; for grovelling instinct
restrains him from exceeding the paltry limits of mere corporeal exertion; but
the elevated spirits, and glowing imagination of a woman of fashion make her a
being all essence -- She is like the wind, light, fleet, and invincible.


Jul. And is she not sometimes like the wind in my native country, which now
breathes all gentleness, yet, in a few hours will whirl a whole fortune to
destruction.


Car. Why, yes, I am afraid there have been instances of the tornado kind. I
really don't know whether many men may not be better pleased with your quiet
stay-at-home notions, than with more dash and spirit; but perhaps you never yet
examined your inclinations with an eye to how a husband would approve them. Ah,
Julia, you blush, my dear; I believe this scrutiny has not been unattended to.


Jul. How you talk!


Car. Yes. I talk, and you think; but both on the same subject. My dear girl,
have I yet claim enough on your confidence to ask, if the being I allude to has
stolen into your dreams, and been admitted into your waking reveries in the
form of a beautiful accomplished youth, whose exact likeness you have never yet
realized, or have you already assigned him "A local habitation and a name?"


Jul. Heigho!


Car. Oh, then I lay my life Mr. Heigho has a name and place of abode. Am I not
right?


Jul. Yes.


Car. And in what quarter of the globe does he exist?


Jul. Nay, where should he? I have not been long enough in this country to have
found him here. I must have met him before.


Jul. (aside). So, my poor brother, your chance is gone. What is his name?


Jul. Henry Melville.


Car. And you expect him here, no doubt.


Jul. Oh, yes, in the same vessel with my father.


Car. And does he know your partiality?


Jul. Yes, and I know his for me; and my father approves.


Car. Oh, you happy girl! Now, the man I love neither knows my partiality for
him; nor do I know whether he cares at all for me -- And if we did know that we
cared for each other, I am sure my father would let us care on till both our
hearts broke, before he would give his consent.


Jul. Why so?


Car. Because the poor dear fellow has lost all his fortune; but luckily my
father's consent is not essential, as I have a fortune independent of him.


Jul. Then you are not in a very hopeless state?


Car. Oh, yes, I am: for my lover (my love I should say) lost all
self-importance with his fortune; and I very much fear I shall never be able to
make him comprehend that a young woman with a good estate is ready to let him
be master of it.


Jul. How strange!


Car. Hints will not do -- And if I could bring myself to say to him plainly,
"Dear Sir, I adore you!" he would only think I was making a jest of him.


Enter a Servant. Serve. Mr. Drooply to wait on you, Ma'am. [Exit.

(to Caroline.)
Car. Lord, how my heart beats; Julia, my dear girl, this is the very man.


Jul. Then, my sweet Caroline, you can very well dispense with me.


Car. Oh, no -- pray don't go.


Jul. You would be very angry if I took you at your word. Adieu! [Exit JULIA.


Car. Will this provoking creature for ever give me the trouble of making love
to him without understanding me?


Enter DROOPLY. So, sir, you are come.

Dro. Yes; but I will go away again if I intrude.


Car. Nay! did not I send for you?


Dro. So I understood.


Car. And why do you give me the trouble? You made your visits formerly without
being sent for.


Dro. Did I? Yes. I dare say I was a very troublesome fellow.


Car. Nay, you found those visits always received with pleasure; therefore, it
is strange you need be reminded to continue them.


Dro. My visits received with pleasure! Ah, this is the way in which you always
used to banter me.


Car. Banter you! Stupidity!


Dro. Yes, yes. I know you are at your old tricks. You were always cutting your
jokes at me.


Car. I?


Dro. Yes, you; and I remember I used to laugh at them; but that was when my
pockets were full. Upon my soul, I cannot now. No, no, you must excuse me. I
defy a man to laugh at a joke when he has lost all his money.


Car. You strange creature! Do you know that I have been thinking of you a
great deal lately?


Dro. Yes, I don't doubt it -- to play me some trick or other.


Car. Silly animal! (aside) I have been even dreaming of you -- Do you ever
dream of me?


Dro. I could not think of taking such a liberty.


Car. Provoking! Oh, I had almost forgot -- I knew I had something particular
to tell you. It was whispered to me the other night at Lady Blab's, that you --
(now mind, if it is true, I shall not be angry) that you had told some friend in
confidence (now mind, I have promised not to be angry) that you were in love.


Dro. I told some friend?


Car. Yes; and that delicacy, occasioned by the loss of your fortune had
prevented you from declaring your passion to the object of it.


Dro. I never --


Car. Now do stop a moment; but that if you thought it would be favorably
received ( -- now remember I have promised not to be angry --) you would
overcome your diffidence, and reveal it.


Dro. I assure you that --


Car. A moment's patience pray -- At last, by great entreaty, I learnt the
lady's name.


Dro. And what was it?


Car. Need you be told -- it was -- Caroline Visorly.


Dro. Upon my soul it is a trumped-up story from beginning to end.


Car. Incorrigible stupidity!


Enter GANGICA. Began. Beg pardon -- did not know company was here (going).


Car. If you want any thing, you need not run away, child.

(Gangica goes up to a table where some work lies.) Well, sir, I have no more
to say -- Only don't entirely relinquish the society of one, to whom yours ever
was, and ever will be, a pleasure. Adieu!

[Exit.
Dro. Now who the devil can have told such a cursed pack of lies of me -- All
done to ruin me in her good opinion. That I, a poor undone dog, with not a
sixpence in the world but what I receive from her brother's friendship -- I
might say his -- charity, should presume to cherish hopes of Caroline Visorly.
No, no -- all my hopes of her vanished with my fortune. I love her -- I do love
her; and what a good-natured soul it is not to have flown into a rage at
supposing I could be guilty of such vanity -- such presumption, such folly --
Ay, that -- that saved me: -- knowing the folly, she pardoned the presumption.

[Gangica has been at the table getting her work, and comes forward with it in
her hand.
Began. You happy, very happy man.


Dro. Oh yes, my dear, very, very -- (hardly attending to her).


Began. Bless me -- but you not look, you not speak like happy man.


Dro. And pray, my little dear, what should make you suppose I am a happy man?


Began. Because pretty lady love you.


Dro. Pretty lady love me! Why, even little ^awny must cut a joke at me.


Began. Yes; pretty lady dat went out just now love you.


Dro. Oh, I am known for a butt by instinct. I have not a doubt but it would be
the same all the world over. If I were to land at Otaheite, the natives would
begin quizzing me directly in their damned gibberish. Why, you are a comical
little rogue. So, that lady loves me, does she?


Began. Yes.


Dro. You Would find it hard to make me believe that.


Began. And you find it much more great deal harder make me believe she not love
you.


Dro. Indeed!


Began. Yes; she not make me believe herself if she say she not love you.


Dro. No?


Began. No; -- because dey tell me dat always tell true.


Dro. They? Who are they?


Began. Dese -- (pointing to her eyes). Truth not always come from here (the
mouth), always from here (her eyes).


Dro. Hey!


Began. You tink, because I stranger, I not understand. Oh, language of love is
de same in my country, your country, all country. [Exit.


Dro. Hey! What! No, it cannot be. Let me think -- Um! Faith, it begins to dawn
-- now it glares! Oh what a blind dolt have I been! Ha! ha! Huzza, I hear
myself laugh again, and think I could cut a caper -- Tol lol de roll! Whew! A
fine girl loves me, and so. Fortune, go hang.

[Exit.
Scene changes to another Apartment in Visorly's house. Enter LEONARD with a
letter in his hand, followed by a Servant. Leon. Is my father at home?


Serve. Yes, sir.


Leon. Tell him I wish to see him directly [Exit Servant.] (reads.) Sir,
knowing you to have the management of Mr. Cleveland's concerns, I write to
inform you that the ship in which he came passenger from India, was wrecked off
Portland the 29th ult. and every soul perished.


Enter old VISORLY. Old Vis. Well, my dear boy, what news -- what news?


Leon. Very important, sir, Cleveland is no more.


Old Vis. Dear me -- dear me!


Leon. By this I learn that the vessel that brought him from Bengal is wrecked,
and he has perished.


Old Vis. Poor man! poor man! alack! he was a good twenty years younger than I
am -- only to think that I should outlive him! Ah, there is no knowing who is
to go to the grave first -- mayhap I may outlive you, Leonard. (weeping.)


Leon. Oh, sir, don't indulge such melancholy ideas. His death, though to be sure
very dreadful, and likely to awaken sensibility in the breasts of his
relations, yet carries with it to us a kind of consolation.


Old Vis. How do you mean, Leonard?


Leon. You know my wish to be united to his daughter; -- and, perhaps, he might
have had in his mind a different alliance for her.


Old Vis. Very true.


Leon. Now my attainment of that object is infinitely more secure, the mother
and the girl being both under our own roof, and likely now to continue so.


Old Vis. Very true. Lord, what a blockhead was I, to fall a blubbering, and
for a man too, who, though he was my first cousin, I should not have known from
Adam. But I have a very tender heart.


Leon Yes, and a very soft head. (aside.) But, now, sir, to break these dismal
tidings to his wife and daughter -- that must be my mother's business.


Old Vis. Yes, we will go and prepare her to make the melancholy discovery. You
have the way, my dear Leonard, of placing things in a right point of view. It
is really quite a weakness my being so tender hearted. [Exeunt.


SCENE -- Another Apartment. Mrs. CLEVELAND and JULIA. Mrs. Clev. My dear, dear
Julia, what happiness has heaven allotted me, to compensate for my past
wretchedness! To have my lovely child restored to me, adorned with every grace,
endowed with each perfection a mother's fondest wishes could desire -- Oh, none
but a mother can know the happiness I feel.


Jul. May increasing joy be ever my dear mother's portion -- it must --
goodness like here is must be the object of heaven's choicest blessings.


Mrs. Clev. When your dear father, and the happy youth to whom my Julia has
assigned her heart have passed the perils of the ocean, and tread secure on
English ground, then shall I have no wish on earth ungratified; but till those
joyful tidings reach me, my heart will beat with apprehension.


Jul. Nay, do not be alarmed with needless terrors. I feel confident of their
safety.


Mrs. Clev. Ah, my dear girl, yours is the age of sweet delusion, when Hope, as
yet unknown for a deceiver, promises each wish acquaintance with reality.


Jul. I have escaped the perils which you dread, and reached your arms in
safety. Why not be confident the same good fate attends on them?


Mrs. Clev. Ah, my Julia -- but winds and waves are treacherous -- besides the
Foe -- nay, that is a silly terror -- The Ocean is our own, and our extended
Fleets, rich with the commerce of the world, fail as securely to their native
Ports, as if peace universal reigned.


Jul. Then, free from apprehension let us await the speedy completion of our
happiness.


Enter GANGICA. Began. Oh, Madam! Oh, my young lady! Oh me, unhappy me!


Both. What is the matter?


Began. Oh, I cannot speak -- I cannot tell you what I know cut your dear hearts,
and make them bleed as mine do.


Mrs. Clev. Speak, Child, for heaven's sake!


Jul. Tell us, Gangica, tell us all.


Began. You will know -- you must know -- but spare poor Gangica -- don't bid her
tell you, for sear you hate her for making you so wretched.


Jul. Speak, Gangica, directly.


Began. Your dear, dear father dead -- dead -- dead.

[Mrs. Cleveland transfixed with horror, Julia sinks on the sopha.
Enter OAKWORTH. Mrs. Clev. (recovering) Where is my child?

[Oakworth points to her. Oh, Julia! Julia!

[Bursts into tears, and takes Julia in her arms, Gangica goes to the sopha,
and leans over Julia.
Enter LADY JEMIMA. Lady Jem. I find the dismal tidings are already known,
madam, be comforted.


Mrs. Clev. Alas! --


Oakw. This be a woeful day -- alack, alack, that ever I lived to see it!


Lady Jem. A letter has been just now brought, directed for Miss Cleveland
(showing the letter) It may contain something important, and I hope --


Mrs. Clev. Pray, give it me -- I grasp at any hope -- Julia, it is from Henry
Melville (reads) Snatched by Providence from a watery grave, I haste to
acquaint my dearest Julia with my safety -- As my situation was infinitely more
perilous than her dear father's, I rely on his deliverance, and conclude he
will have embraced his lovely daughter before this reaches her. No, no, he has
not embraced his lovely daughter -- he never will embrace her --


Lady Jem. Take comfort, madam. You have now strong reason to hope the best.


Jul. Yes, dearest mother, be assured the same protecting angel has preserved
my father too.


Oakw. Do, do hope it. Heaven will not forsake the good.


Mrs. Clev. Come, my child -- In Heaven I trust.

[Exeunt Mrs. CLEVELAND, JULIA, and Lady JEMIMA. [Gangica oppressed with grief,
remains leaning on the sopha.
Oakw. Oh dear, Oh dear, Oh dear! This world be full of troubles. But a little
bit ago we were so happy as nothing was ever like it -- And now it is all
weeping and misery. Oh those devildom hard blowing gales and cursed craggy
rocks, they have brought cruel sorrow to many a family. Poor little Gangica,
she takes on as dismally as any on us. It is a tenderhearted little creature.
Gangica, come, dear, don't you droop, you may see your young lady's father
again, alive and well.


Began. No, no, no -- I never see him more -- He be sunk down -- deep down --
roaring waves roll over him -- I never see him more.


Oakw. Yes, yes; heaven will let him live to comfort his wife, his child, ay,
and to reward your ^^delity.


Began. Oh, if he live -- if I see him again* (...) be my reward.


Enter SHARPSET. Shar. Sir, how do you do? Ah, my little dear* you here. Why,
you have been crying, and you look gloomy too, sir.


Oakw. Yes, sir; we have neither much cause to look cheerfully.


Shar. I am sorry for that -- I heard indeed that ^ll news had arrived which
concerns the ladies.


Oakw. Then, when you know that we belong to those ladies, you cannot expect us
to be gay when those we love are in affliction.


Shar. Very true, sir. But, poor thing (to Gangica) come, do cheer up a little
-- don't be so very dismal, -- do let me see you smile again.


Began. Smile when I full of sorrow -- Why, you wish my face mock my heart.


Oakw. Come, sir, leave her as nature made her -- don't teach her any of your
damned fashionable tricks, making the face look one thing while the heart means
another. Go, my good girl, and comfort yourself with the hope that we may soon
have reason to smile again. [Exit GANGICA. There is a creature that will make
me expect in future to find the fairest mind in a dark colored case. I hope I
may live to see her as happy as she deserves to be. If I had but a son of my
own -- but what signifies wishing?


Shar. Ah, what indeed! for have you not a son of your own, sir?


Oakw. If I have; I love her too well to wish she had him. No, no, -- if I had
a son such as I could wish --


Shar. I am afraid you are very hard to please, sir.


Oakw. I should take great pains to get him this girl for a wife.


Shar. And I am so much of your way of thinking, that if you were my father, I
should be highly grateful for your kind endeavors.


Oakw. Would you? then only let me find out that you are worthy of her, and
though you are a stranger to me, I Will do all I can for you (going.)


Shar. That is very kind of you indeed, sir.


Oakw. But, hold, hold; -- are you sure your father would approve of it?


Shar. Quite sure, Sir.


Oakw. How do you know?


Shar. He has already signified his approbation.


Oakw. Indeed! When?


Shar. Just now, sir.


Oakw. Why, has he ever seen the girl?


Shar. Oh Lord, yes, sir.


Oakw. Well, well! but I should like to have a little conversation with the old
gentleman.


Shar. Ah, sir, you have had a great deal in your time.


Oakw. What then I know him.


Shar. Nobody half so well, sir.


Oakw. Really! What, an old acquaintance?


Shar. A very old one, sir -- you knew him long before I did.


Oakw. Bless my soul! and pray, sir, what is your name?


Shar. I am called Sharpset, sir.


Oakw. Then you must be mistaken, sir -- I have no acquaintance of that name.


Shar. My dear sir, that is not the family name, that is not my father's name.


Oakw. Well, what is your father's name?


Shar. The very reason, sir, which made me adopt another name still prevents me
from just at present avowing my real one; but, depend upon it you shall know,
sir.


Oakw. Well, sir, whenever it is proper to tell me, I shall be glad to know,
(going) but give me your hand for your father's sake.


Shar. And I grasp yours with affection -- for my father's sake. [Exeunt
severally*


SCENE -- The Street. Enter HENRY MELVILLE. Henry. That, I find, is the house
of Mr. Visorly. There I shall learn my Julia's residence. This is but a sorry
garb for a lover to seek his mistress in; but if I know my Julia's heart, her
joy at finding me preserved from death, will make her little heed, or scarcely
see the poorness of my raiment. Her father's safety, though I little doubt it,
I long to be assured of. Now then, to be resolved on that important point, and
meet my Julia.

[Exit.
SCENE -- An Apartment in VISORLY'S House. Enter HENRY. Henry. To find she is
in this house is more good fortune than I could hope.


Enter JULIA. My Julia!

Julia. Oh Henry! To behold you again after such danger -- But where is my
father?


Henry. Have you not seen him yet?


Julia. Oh, no, no -- tell me, does he live?


Henry. I hope so, Julia.


Julia. Oh, is it only hope?


Henry. Be comforted -- he may be safe, he surely must. Soon as our vessel
bulged on the rock, and the impetuous torrent rushed at the dreadful chasm to
overwhelm us, the boats were instantly hauled out, and in a moment thronged. In
one, least crowded, was your father; he called to me, and earnestly conjured me
to come into it -- As I was going to comply, I saw a poor old man kneeling to
heaven to save him from the fate his feeble age denied him to contend against.
The boat could safely hold but one -- I placed him in it, seized on a friendly
coop, and with it trusted to the waves.


Julia. My generous Henry! But my father --


Henry. The sea was very boisterous, and often washed over me; yet, at
intervals I snatched a short view, and still saw his boat riding in safety. At
length the bursting billows showering so frequently their torrents on me,
deluged my senses. When I recovered them, I found myself in a small vessel,
whose crew had humanely rescued me from death.


Julia. Oh my poor father!


Henry. Nay, droop not, Julia -- This vessel was a sloop of war sailing for the
Downs. Before I recovered, it was under weigh, I was therefore forced to remain
in it till it gained its station. -- Landed at Deal, I could of course hear no
tidings of your father, whose boat, no doubt, safely reached the nearest shore.
His not being yet arrived, argues nothing against his safety.


Julia. But, would he not have written to acquaint us with it? -- News of the
wreck could reach us, but no intelligence from him -- No, he is gone! My father
is gone for ever.


Henry. My Julia's grief distracts me -- Still let me hope it is without cause;
but as no moment should be lost to prove it groundless, I will this instant fly
to know the truth* Farewell, my Julia! When next we meet, I trust all grief
will vanish.

[Exeunt severally.
ACT IV.
SCENE I. -- VISORLY'S House. Enter LEONARD and SHARPSET. Leon. Where have you
been? I never wanted your assistance more, and I have been hunting after you of
late in vain.


Shar. Whew! you seem in a blessed humor. What has produced such an amiable
tone of temper?


Leon. All my scheme is likely to be ruined. There is a lover, a favored
lover, come to light.


Shar. Oh the deuce!


Leon. Yes, saved from the wreck -- damnation! But there is still one
consolation, he brings no tidings of the father. The waves have not spared him.


Shar. Poor man!


Leon. Amiable tenderness!


Shar. Mock as you will, I cannot, like you, steel my heart against the common
feelings of humanity.


Leon. Psha! he is dead -- Will your preaching reanimate him? No. Then to the
purpose of doing service to the living, of aiding your friend.


Shar. How?


Leon. This girl, now the rightful inheritor of her father's immense fortune,
must be mine.


Shar. But you tell me of a lover.


Leon. Yes, and there is not time for endeavoring to undermine his hold on her
heart -- Measures must be adopted, sudden and forcible.


Shar. How do you mean?


Leon. To bear her away. Once in my possession, all may go smoothly: at her
age, nay, at any age, a transfer of affection is no uncommon incident.


Shar. But the difficulty -- See how she is surrounded.


Leon. Difficulty! every difficulty yields to the enterprising. Her lover is
gone, like a true hero of romance, to conjure up the dead. It Is easy to get the
rest out of the way -- First, I Will remove the main obstacle, her rustic
protector.


Shar. Remove him! how do you mean, remove him?


Leon. We must lack invention, indeed, not to effect that -- By an hundred
stratagems we can keep him out of the way long enough to answer my purpose.


Shar. But I have a trifling objection to his being put to the slightest
inconvenience.


Leon. Objection? what?


Shar. He only happens to be my father.


Leon. What do you say? your father?


Shar. My father!


Leon. You astonish me. Well, well, this may turn to account. Then you may have
influence to bring him over to my interest.


Shar. Not I, nor all the world would be able to influence him to a dishonest
action -- Beside, friend Leonard, to let you into a secret, I neither like your
scheme, nor wish to forward it. After a long absence, I have had the happiness
to meet my father, and when I behold in him what a glow of youth an honest
heart infuses into an aged face, I am determined to abandon my roguery, and try
to make the rosy honors of honesty, hereditary.


Leon. You mean, then, to defeat my purposes?


Shar. I certainly mean not to aid them.


Leon. But am I to expect your opposition?


Shar. I hope, Leonard, your own reflections will render that needless. Could
you have fairly gained the girl's affections, I should have rejoiced at your
success, and thought the society of an amiable woman the likeliest school for
forming an honest man; but force -- to use force against a lovely, helpless
female, none but a devil could inspire the thought, and none but devils could
be found to execute it.


Leon. Bravo! one might judge by your energy that you were a new-made
proselyte. Apostates are always the maddest enthusiasts -- But, fool! do you
think I am to be preached out of my intentions?


Shar. And do you think I am to be bullied out of mine?


Leon. Well, sir, take your course, but be cautious that you do not thwart me
-- Dare not to breathe a word of my designs, unless your devotion to your new
tenets is warm enough to make you welcome a prison in their defense. Mark me, a
prison. You may remember there are certain bonds of yours in my possession that
give me as entire a power over your person, as though you were my purchased
slave. Remember this, and act accordingly. [Exit.


Shar. How my blood boils at the villain! too true he has me in his power; but
I Will keep him in view -- I Will watch his motions. I Have deserved a prison before
now, and have escaped it; well, then, if I am brought to one at last for a good
deed, all is square again, and I begin the world a fresh man.


Enter DROOPLY, repeating as he enters. Come, thou goddess, fair and free,
In heaven y^lep'd Euphrosyne.
Shar. Why, Drooply -- surprising! so sprightly -- so gay!


Dro. Gay as a lark, my boy.

Haste thee, nymph, and bring with thee
Jest and youthful jollity.

Shar. What, have you found your estate again?


Dro. No; but I have found myself again. I Have regained my spirits, and they are
worth all the estates in the universe.


Shar. But what has effected this wonderful change?


Dro. What! need you ask? what can breathe animation into a clod of
despondency, but woman, dear, lovely, angelic woman.


Shar. So, you have gained your spirits by losing your heart.


Dro. Yes; and a man hardly knows he has a heart till he loses it. But, huzza!
I am in love, and what is more, I am beloved -- Damn my estate, and give me
your hand, my boy, though you won it.


Shar. I won it! yes, and won it fairly too.


Dro. Who doubts it? not I, I Am sure.


Shar. Why then may be you ought.


Dro. You are a comical dog.


Shar. I say perhaps you ought to doubt it.


Dro. Heyday -- the oddest kind of quizzing this! the man who won my estate,
wanting to make me believe I was cheated of it. You are a devilish droll dog!
but I have something else to do than to mind your waggery* (going.)


Shar. Stay! you are an honest fellow, and have been damned unlucky in your
acquaintance.


Dro. Poh, poh, poh!


Shar. Drooply, when a man assures you of his honesty, I Will give you leave to
doubt him; but when he insists on his knavery, don't be so stupidly incredulous.


Dro. What are you driving at?


Shar. Plainly to tell you, you have been duped, cheated -- robbed.


Dro. By you?


Shar. Yes; -- but I have been only second in command. Do you remember by whose
kindness you were first made happy with my acquaintance?


Dro. Hum! yes; by my friend, Leonard Visorly.


Shar. He is my commanding officer.


Dro. Leonard! my friend! my patron!


Shar. Your plunderer -- He laid plans which I only executed -- he received the
booty while I was paid but a subaltern's share.


Dro. I am petrified.


Shar. But be silent -- be prudent! for I Have but shown you your malady, without
being able to prescribe a remedy. He has played the politician so well, that
his villainy is known only to me -- the minor agents were all of my employing
-- So, remember, don't break out; for you have nothing but my testimony to
support an accusation, and he has wound his snares so well, that he has me in
his toils. Adieu! be cautious, and trust that the day of retribution will come.
[Exit SHARPSET.


Dro. Here is a damper to my gaiety! not even love can support a man's spirits
against ingratitude. I lost my fortune; but still I thought I had a friend
left. To find that friend my -- Oh damn it, I cannot bear the thought. I Will go
instantly and seek Caroline; but how to tell her of her brother's villainy? I
hope I may not meet him -- I should not know how to --


Enter LEONARD. Leo. Drooply! (holding out his hand).


Dro. How do you do? How do you do?


Leon. What, wont you shake hands with me?


Dro. Will Not I shake hands with you! that is a good joke (holding out his hand,
and then drawing it back). Not but I think shaking hands a cursed foolish habit.


Leon. Why?


Dro. Because in this damned hypocritical world one often gives the gripe of
friendship to a scoundrel.


Leon. Very true; one is often mistaken.


Dro. Yes, miserably.


Leon. But when we come to the knowledge of a friend's real worth --


Dro. It sometimes teaches us to consider him a friend no longer.


Leon. Your gloom, I find, has taken the general course, and led you to
misanthropy. When men have been unfortunate they generally grow unjust.


Dro. Yes; and for that there is some excuse -- But when men are unjust and
fortunate too, what black souls they must have.


Leon. Very true; but have you had experience of such?


Dro. Havn't I lost a fortune?


Leon. Yes -- by play, not knavery.


Dro. Why, play and knavery are so much connected, that I cannot separate them
for the soul of me.


Leon. You appear to have suspicions.


Dro. No, no suspicions at all.


Leon. You surely talk as if you had doubts.


Dro. You mistake -- I have not a doubt on the subject. Good bye! I am very
miserable, and of course very bad company for you.


Leon. When we meet again I shall be glad to see you more cheerful.


Dro. Why, when we meet again, Leonard -- Farewell. [Exit.


Leon. Um! all is not as it should be! Can that villain, Sharpset, have dared
reveal to him -- I fear it -- and if he have betrayed me to him, he will not
stop there. His malice then, must have a check -- he shall instantly be taken
care of. I have the power to secure him. The old rustic, whom he calls his
father, I have been forced to entrap somewhat illegally; but he will be safe
till my scheme is executed, and then the fellow that I have bribed to swear a
debt against him, may, by flight, secure himself from the vengeance of the
violated law. All is well arranged, and this very night shall put me securely
in possession of my Eastern beauty, and her Eastern riches. [Exit.


SCENE -- A House of Confinement. OAKWORTH and Bailiff. Oakw. But what right, I
say, have you to keep me here against my will?


Keep. Lord love your heart, I don't vant to keep any Gemman in my house
against his vill.


Oakw. Then let me out directly.


Keep. You may go farther, and fare vorse. Vhere do do you think to go?


Oakw. Why, home to be sure.


Keep. That is a devilish good one. You are a comical kind of a Gemman; but a
great many comical Gemmen wisits me -- I sees most of the vits one time or
other.


Oakw. Have done with your nonsense, and let me go home -- And dam'me but I Will
trounce you and the rascals who brought me here.


Keep. Vy, as for your trouncing, I laughs at that. I does nothing but vat I
can justify.


Oakw. What! can you justify kidnapping a man in the streets? I am too old to
go for a soldier. If I were not, and my country wanted me, I should not need be
dragged to my duty.


Keep. Vat do you talk about kidnapping for? You knows as vell as I can tell
you vy you came here.


Oakw. I Will be cursed if I do.


Keep. Vy, you know if you paid your debts, you could not be brought into
trouble.


Oakw. Pay my debts! I don't owe a farthing to mortal man.


Keep. Come, come, do behave a little genteelly. There is nothing unlike a
Gemman in not paying your debts; but it is damned shabby to deny 'em.


Oakw. Well, sir, since you insist upon it, pray, whom may I be indebted to?


Keep. (looking at the writ). "To Thomas Testify von hundred pounds."


Oakw. I never heard of such a man -- I am not the person. It is a mistake.


Keep. Come, come, old one, that is too bad.
Oakw. I tell you it is all a mistake -- Let me out, I say.
Keep. Yes, yes; to take you to Newgate, if you like.' -- (Noise without).
SHARPSET (entering). Ay, ay, it is all right. I owe the money -- That cannot be
denied.


Keep. Only mind this honest Gemman, he does not pretend to humbug people as you
do.
Shar. What! (seeing Oakworth). You here, sir!


Oakw. Bless my soul!


Keep. Oh, they know von another -- Both of a kidney, I varrant. Oh, that old
one is a deep one. [Exit.


Shar. How came you here, sir!


Oakw. Dragged here -- dragged by main force.


Shar. On what pretense?


Oakw. Because they want to persuade me I owe a hundred pounds to a Mr. Thomas
Testify.


Shar. Whom you know nothing of?


Oakw. No more than the man in the moon.


Shar. Sir, there is rank villainy going forward.


Oakw. Yes, that is pretty clear.


Shar. You must send directly for Mrs. Cleveland -- Every thing dear to herself
depends on it. Therefore send to her immediately, and tell her not to leave her
daughter --


Mrs. CLEVELAND (entering). Let me see him instantly; and, Gangica, do you stay
under the care of the servants. My good friend, do I find you in a place like
this?


Oakw. And are you so very good as to seek me in a place like this? How came
you to know of my being here?


Mrs. Clev. You sent for me, did you not?


Oakw. No.


Mrs. Clev. Amazing! A messenger came to me, acquainting me with your
situation, and directing me where to find you -- On which you may conclude I
lost no time in hastening to you.


Oakw. Dear, good creature!


Mrs. Clev. But who can have been so kind to inform me where? --


Shar. The kindness, madam, was the kindness of the devil, who often puts on
the semblance of goodness only to betray. Quit this place, and return home
instantly -- There is a villainous design against your daughter -- Your absence
and his, has been artfully caused, to effect her ruin.


Mrs. Clev. Oh, horrible!


Shar. Lose not a moment in questioning, or all is lost -- Though the debt
alleged, be a false one, give your draft for it, and take him with you. Haste,
madam, haste; and heaven prosper you.

[Exeunt.
SCENE -- The Garden belonging to Old VISORLY'S House. Enter LEONARD. Leon. The
evening is as dark as I could wish. The moon has civilly withdrawn her
intrusive rays. The mother and Oakworth are admirably disposed of. My own
family too conveniently from home; for, though I am not sure they would thwart
a design so greatly for my advantage, yet, I had rather be without needless
confidants. Simpson! Simpson!


Enter SIMPSON. Simp. Sir?


Leon. Is the carriage at the garden gate, and every thing in readiness?


Simp. Yes, sir*


Leon. Very well. Wait hereabout, or be at the garden gate. [Exit SIMPSON.

Now, then, to my young lady. [Exit.


SCENE changes to an Apartment in VISORLY'S House. JULIA alone. I wish my
mother would return, and bring me news of poor Oakworth. It Is hard, that he, so
good and friendly to others, should himself experience cruel treatment. Alas!
my spirits quite sink under the pressure of misfortune. Oh, my dear father, may
I hope ever again to be blessed with thy fond embrace?

Enter LEONARD. Jul. Ha! who is there? (finding it to be Leonard). I beg your
pardon, sir, for my childish alarm. But I am really so weak, that I am agitated
by the slightest circumstance. Indeed I beg your pardon.


Leon. Madam, my situation is a most unfortunate one. I hoped by years of
attention to your every wish, to have convinced you, that for you alone I
cherished existence.


Jul. Sir!


Leon. But I have the misery to find your hand is not unpromised, nor, I fear,
your mind uninfluenced.


Jul. Sir, my hand and heart are both most solemnly affianced.


Leon. Then all my cherished hopes are vanished. I thought to have convinced
you by every action, that my soul was yours before my lips should venture the
confession. I indulged the gay dream, that by my tender assiduity you might be
won to sympathy, and have heard me breathe the vows of love with looks that
spoke a language -- Ah! how remote from what they now convey -- Yet even those
looks, so adverse to my wishes -- those eyes, could they dart death, should not
impede me from declaring this heart to you devoted, never will forego its claim.


Jul. Sir! what mean you?


Leon. Listed under Love's banner, never to desert his cause. You must -- You
shall be mine.


Jul. Horrible!


Leon. A whole life of tenderness shall atone for what has now the look of
violence (approaches her).


Julia. Violence! Oh, heaven! help! help! Oh! (she faints, he catches her in
his arms).


Leon. She is mine! [Exit, bearing her off.


SCENE -- The Garden. Enter DROOPLY. Dro. Well, I have found no great
difficulty in scampering over the garden wall -- If any of the family should
find me here though, I should be strangely suspected of either an intrigue or a
burglary -- It was an excellent thought of Caroline's to let me know when we
should next meet, by leaving a letter for me in a sly corner of the pavilion;
for, there is no trusting servants -- I Will even get my dear little packet, and
over the wall again (going toward the Pavilion). Ha! I hear somebody coming
(in his hurry to get to the Pavilion, he s^umbles over a garden chair.)


Enter LEONARD, with JULIA in his arms. Leon. Oh, you are there, Simpson! here,
take the lady in your arms. A fortunate fainting fit has prevented outcry.
Place her in the carriage, while I return for an instant, for I have forgot to
provide myself with the most material companion for long journies. Here, take
one of my pistols, and defend your prize at the hazard of your life.

[Exit, leaving JULIA in DROOPLY'S arms.
Dro. What the devil shall I do? And what prize have I got here?

[The moon bursting by degrees from a cloud. My sweet, pretty moon, do
enlighten me a little more, that I may see who I am hugging so lovingly (it
grows lighter). Thank you kindly, my dear Lady Luna. What, the young East
Indian! Oh, that villain! -- She revives! Don't be alarmed, Madam.


Jul. Where am I? Who are you?


Dro. No agent of villainy; but one who will protect you.


Jul. Oh, where is that wretch; am I in his power?


Dro. No, madam, nor ever shall be. Ha! he is coming.


Jul. Let me fly from his sight.


Dro. There, madam, into that Pavilion.

[He goes with her, enters it, and brings out Caroline's letter in his hand.
She is safe, and I have got my dear Caroline's letter -- So, now, Mr. Leonard,
have at you!

[Leonard enters, and is crossing the stage; Drooply meets him -- Drooply has
put the pistol in his pocket.
LEONARD (starting). Drooply! What do you do here?


Dro. I am only engaged in a little affair of gallantry.


Leon. What here! Do you disgrace my father's house with your gallantries?


Dro. Do you never disgrace your father's house with your gallantries?


Leon. Insolent!


Dro. No, no; I must do you the justice to own, you carry your gallantries out
of your father's house.


Leon. What do you mean?


Dro. Mean! Sure you forget Simpson is in the secret.


Leon. What of Simpson?


Dro. An't I Simpson? You did me the honor to salute me so just now.


Leon. Damnation! Well, sir, then there is your charge?


Dro. Here, you villain (presents his pistol).


Leon. Drooply, I am in your power -- command any thing -- do but this instant
restore me Julia, and you shall again glitter in gaiety, again be the rich, the
courted Drooply.


Dro. Yes, to be pillaged again, you conclude, by the well-laid schemes of the
friendly Mr. Visorly.


Leon. Ha!


Dro. Yes, I know your baseness -- This heart, which once felt only gratitude
and friendship toward you, now despises and abhors you -- This tongue, once
lavish in your praise, and prodigal of thanks, now execrates your infamy.
Leon. This is no time to prove my innocence. I am traduced, vilely slandered
-- All this I can up, and will; but the moments are most precious to me. Where
is the lady? restore me Julia, and make your own terms.


Dro. What terms do you think would bribe me to restore a lovely innocent to a
villain's power? I am poor, I am wretchedly poor. But, would you return my
fortune, would you add your own, your father's, nay, all the wealth of this
rich city, it should not bribe me to an act of villainy.


Leon. Be prudent, and attend to what I say.


Dro. I Will attend to one thing you said most strictly. You charged me to defend
my prize at the hazard of my life -- That I do most willingly.


Leon. Drooply, urge me no further -- I am desperate -- Julia must be mine --
Be wise, accept the offers of my friendship -- don't risk my vengeance.


Dro. Your vengeance! poh! what! because you found me gentle, nay, humble, to
the man I thought my friend and patron, do you think I want spirit to oppose a
robber and a ravisher? Leonard, be assured it is a vast pleasure to me to have
a pop at you on my own account; but had I no wrongs, sooner than be your
accomplice in the ruin of an unprotected woman, dam'me, but I would march up to
you if you held a lighted match to the touchhole of a nine-pounder. (g^e^ up
close to him.)


OAKWORTH (without.) She must have been taken this way.


Enter OAKWORTH, Mrs. CLEVELAND and GANGICA. The moment OAKWORTH sees LEONARD
and DROOPLY he runs down the stage and collars them both. Oakw. Give her up,
give her up this instant, or I Will throttle you both.


Mrs. Clev. Where is my daughter?


Oakw. Ay, where is the lady? give her up directly -- Curse your pistols, I
don't mind your pistols -- Give her up, I say.


Mrs. Clev. (to LEONARD.) Heavens! is it you? you concerned in this villainy?
where is my daughter, sir?


Leon. Ask that gentleman -- He has conveyed her hence.


Mrs. Clev. You, then, that I have accused, are her defender, I ask your pardon.


Dro. May I perish if he is not making his bow for the mother's civility.


Mrs. Clev. Where is my daughter, sir? (to DROOPLY.)


Leon. There is one hope left. If he conveyed her to the carriage (and where
else could he) they have doubtless driven off with her. Where is the lady,
villain?


Dro. Dam'me, if his impudence does not petrify me.


Oakw. (rushing up to him.) Ay, where is the lady, villain?


Dro. A little patience, you shall know the whole.


Leon. No, sir, no fabrications, no fictions -- Where is the lady?


Dro. Should you be pleased to see her?


Leon. Doubtless.


Dro. Oh, I Will do any thing to oblige you. (goes to the pavilion and leads her
out.) Now, sir, why don't you appeal to the lady to proclaim your innocence?
what, dumb! ah, I know your modesty of old. Then I will speak for you. From
which of us, madam, have you experienced this outrage?


Jul. Oh, from him, from him. (pointing to LEONARD.) Mrs. CLEVELAND and
OAKWORTH express astonishment, and LEONARD rushes out.


Dro. That is right, Leonard -- move off; but run as fast as you will, the
devil must overtake you.


Mrs. Clev. Then to you I owe my daughter's preservation. Oh, sir, accept a
mother's thanks.


Dro. Offer them, madam, to Providence only, which made me the humble
instrument to preserve an angel, and expose a fiend. Where, madam, shall I have
the honor of conducting you?


Mrs. Clev. Any where so I avoid that hated habitation.


Oakw. Let us go, madam, to the hotel where we first arrived.


Mrs. Clev. And where, would to heaven, we had remained. Come, dearest Julia.
[Exeunt.


ACT V.
SCENE I. -- VISORLY'S House. Enter old VISORLY and LEONARD. Old Vis. Oh,
Leonard, Leonard, it is a bad business, a very bad business.


Leon. So is every thing unsuccessful, sir. Were I now in possession of the
girl and her fortune, you might probably not be condemning the means by which I
accomplished it.
Old Vis. Yes, I should -- I should condemn such means. Oh fie! against her
will.


Leon. Seemingly, sir, only seemingly -- The man who would deal successfully
with the sex must often force them to follow their own inclinations.


Old Vis. I don't know that; but I have found that the man who would deal
quietly with the se^ is always forced to let them follow their own inclinations.


Leon. It was a desperate effort; but the only chance left for obtaining her.
That foiled, she is lost most certainly, perhaps her fortune too.


Old Vis. Perhaps! why, to be sure it is. If she is lost, her fortune must be
lost -- You cannot contrive to marry the fortune without marrying the girl, can
you?


Leon. No, sir: but with your aid the fortune may be ours without the
encumbrance.


Old Vis. The fortune ours -- Eh, how?


Leon. Had Cleveland died unmarried you were his heir.


Old Vis. Yes -- what of that?


Leon. Are we sure he did not die unmarried?


Old Vis. We should be pretty sure, I think, when he has left a wife and child
behind to convince us.


Leon. Is she his wife? Can she prove herself such?


Old Vis. Eh!


Leon. By his own account the marriage was a private one, a private marriage in
the East Indies! Reflect first on the probability of its being no marriage, and
next consider the difficulty of proving it, if it were one.
Old Vis. Yes, yes, very true. But you surely do not doubt the marriage
therefore to claim a property, because, perhaps, legal proof cannot be obtained
--


Leon. Is, you think, not strictly within the pale of moral rectitude.


Old Vis. I cannot say but I am of that opinion.


Leon. Oh, sir, despise all abstract refinement, and be assured that you fulfill
every moral obligation when your conduct is sanctioned by the laws of your
country.


Old Vis. There is something in that; but yet justice, you know, can only be
guided by appearances, and one's conscience will not always acquiesce --


Leon. My dear sir, when your conscience opposes a legal decree, you should
consider it as acting contumaciously, and that it ought to be silenced for
contempt of the court.


Old Vis. If I could be satisfied that they were really not married.


Leon. There is strong presumption. Would Cleveland's father, think you, have
endeavored to dissolve the sacred ties of marriage? Have insisted on his son's
abruptly dismissing -- a wife? No, no, sir -- depend on it, the father, anxious
for his son's respectability, demanded only his parting with a favorite
mistress.


Old Vis. Very likely -- very likely -- I always said you had the way of
placing things in a right point of view, Oh, my scruples are gone -- should I
be robbed of my right by a mistress, and a --


Leon. Certainly not, sir. Now then you are convinced of the rectitude of your
cause, let me urge a strong motive for proceeding with vigor. I have this
morning received the unwelcome tidings of the failure of a speculation in which
I had embarked the entire amount of my own fortune, so that I am now compelled
to become a burden to you.


Old Vis. O lord, lord, dear me, how sorry I am to hear it; for, my dear boy,
to let you into the true state of my affairs -- Lady Jemima's cursed
fashionable style of living has made such a miserable hole in my property, that
it is not clear to me, but I may die in a jail.


Leon. You amaze me, sir -- then, this is our only resource, and at all hazards
we must accomplish it.


Enter a Servant Serve. Mr. Oakworth desires to see both you and my young master
directly, sir.


Old Vis. Very well. [Exit Servant.


Leon. I Will keep out of his way. He is a passionate old fellow, and I am sure
he would lose his temper with me. Do you see him, sir, and let him ^e the
bearer of your determination.

[Exeunt severally.
SCENE -- The Hotel. Mrs. CLEVELAND and JULIA. Mrs. Clev. How is my dear child
now?


Jul. Better, much better, thanks to your tender care.


Mrs. Clev. Oh the wretch that could alarm my angel thus, and aim by violence
to tear my precious treasure from her mother's arms! Heaven's vengeance will
await him.


Jul. My spirits would, I think, soon recover this rude shock, but for the
dread that overpowers me for the fate of my dear father.


Mrs. Clev. Ah, my child, I fear -- (seeing JULIA much depressed.) Yet, still,
my love, there is hope, that hope we will cherish. Come, my child, take comfort
-- take comfort, dearest Julia.


Jul. Oh, what are all the riches we possess without my father!


Mrs. Clev. Poor indeed! but we will trust he yet survives to bestow a value on
the gifts of fortune.


Enter OAKWORTH. Oakw. Oh Lord, Oh Lord, Oh Lord, what will this world come too?


Mrs. Clev. What is the matter?


Oakw. Roguery! Villainy! Infamy!


Mrs. Clev. Where? from what quarter?


Oakw. From the devil's nest, the house of the Visorlys.


Mrs. Clev. Pray, let me know the worst.


Oakw. I will -- I will -- As you desired me, I demanded that all the property
remitted by Mr. Cleveland should be consigned to you.


Mrs. Clev. Well, could they refuse it?


Oakw. They did -- they did -- I mean the old one did; for the young rascal
took care to keep out of my way. He was wise -- he was wise there.


Mrs. Clev. But on what plea, on what pretense were you refused?


Oakw. A wicked pretense, a damnable pretense -- a pretense they ought to swing
for.


Mrs. Clev. What -- what?


Oakw. That they did not believe -- they did not believe --


Mrs. Clev. What?


Oakw. Must I tell you?


Mrs. Clev. Yes, pray do.


Oakw. That you were -- Mr. Cleveland's wife --


Mrs. Clev. Gracious heaven!


Oakw. Yes; and he said that he was heir at law, and should not part with a
sixpence of what was his right.


Mrs. Clev. Oh, Julia!


Jul. Dear mother, can this man's preposterous claim give you a moment's
concern?


Mrs. Clev. My child, we are lost -- We are ruined.


Oakw What do you say?


Mrs. Clev. Never till this moment did I reflect that I have no legal testimony
in my possession to prove myself a wife. Married in India, in private too -- my
husband dead -- my child without a proof of -- Oh God, Oh God!


Oakw. Compose yourself, dear madam.


Mrs. Clev. Hard as my lot is, were I alone concerned I might feel resignation;
but my dear girl, my lovely Julia -- heiress of thousands, is -- the child of
poverty.


Jul. Dear mother, do not let me add to your affliction -- With you, with such
a mother I can bear poverty, I can indeed.


Oakw. Poverty -- no, no, not so bad as poverty. -- You know I have a home --
it is but an humble one to be sure, and I am a tough old fellow, I can work like
a horse. -- Poverty, not so bad as poverty either.


Enter HENRY. Jul. Oh Henry!


Henry. Julia -- dearest Julia, you are in tears, and you have cause -- I hoped
to dry them, but, alas --


Mrs. Clev. Then my dear husband is no more.

[HENRY holds down his head despondently, assenting in silence. My cup of
misery is full, (after a pause) sir, you were to have been united to my
daughter, her father sanctioned your affections: I am informed he loved your
merits, and thought them, though uncombined with fortune, sufficient to entitle
you to the heiress of his wealth. I now must tell you that wealth is lost to
her.


Henry. For her sake I lament it, not for my own. -- To her generous father's
bounty I owe almost existence, -- he found me only grateful, and his goodness
called mere gratitude desert; for I fear I have no merit, but an honest heart
-- yet, while that shall beat within my breast, I Will press my Julia to it, nor
would I resign my dear, my destined bride to be the husband of an Empress.


Mrs. Clev. Oh, little do the vicious know how precious are the sweets of
virtue! that alone can elevate the soul amidst calamity and poverty.

[Exeunt Mrs. CLEVELAND, JULIA, and HENRY.
[The Master of the Hotel enters as she is finishing the last speech.] Mas. of
Hot. (To OAKWORTH, as he is going out.) Sir, sir, a word with you, if you
please.


Oakw. What do you want?


Mas. of Hot. This hotel of mine, sir, stands at a very great rent.


Oakw. So I suppose.


Mas. of Hot. Taxes come very high.


Oakw. Well.


Mas. of Hot. A great many servants.


Oakw. So I see -- and what the devil is all this to me?


Mas. of Hot. It ought to make people consider.


Oakw. Don't plague me about what people ought to consider.


Mas. of Hot. To cut the matter short, sir, you know that one of the ladies, as
I came into the room, was owning her poverty.


Oakw. Eh! what?


Mas. of Hot. Yes, sir; and as I cannot afford to lose my money, I beg leave to
hint that I shall look to you to see my bill fairly discharged.


Oakw. Impudent scoundrel!


Mas. of Hot. Sir, I shall teach you to use better language to a man in his own
house.


Enter a Gentleman, followed by a Waiter. Gent. Heyday, nothing but bustle and
uproar!


Waiter. I hope you are not hurt, sir.


Gent. Not at all; but no thanks for that to the careless dog of a postilion
who overturned me. I have been quarrelling with him outside of the house, and I
find you are at the same employment within. Get me a coach directly. (To the
Waiter.)


Waiter. Yes, sir. [Exit.


Gent. Well, what is the matter here?


Oakw. Only this worthy master of the house insulting his customers.


Gent. That is an odd way of recommending himself.


Oakw. (To Landlord.) Away with you, and be careful that you let none of your
insolence break out before the ladies, or I Will be the death of you, you dog.

[Exit Master of the Hotel.
Gent. Sir, give me leave to ask, that is, if there be no offense in the
question, are the ladies you mention under any pecuniary embarrassment? for it
would be a sad thing to have ladies liable to the rudeness of this unfeeling
fellow.


Oakw. No, sir, thank heaven! Even my poor pocket could satisfy his paltry
demands. No, no, -- though they are unfortunate, they are not in the power of
such a pitiful scoundrel as that.


Gent. I am glad of it; but still you say they are unfortunate.


Oakw. Yes; misery be the lot of the villians who made them so!


Gent. Who are those villians.


Oakw. Their own relations.


Gent. Heavens, what depravity! But cannot this villiany be in any way redressed?


Oakw. Only one way, if at all; and there the remedy would be as bad as the
disease.


Gent. What is the remedy.


Oakw. Going to law.


Gent. If law can give the remedy, redress is certain; in this country the way
to justice is not through blind mazes and crooked paths -- No, it is a public
road, open to all, obvious to all.


Oakw. That is very true; but like other public roads, you would get on a very
little way, without money to pay the tolls.


Gent. The warm interest you take in the cause of your friends convinces me
that they are worthy of it. I have a fortune, an ample fortune, and I can no
way employ it so satisfactorily as in rescuing the virtuous from the
machinations of villainy.


Oakw. Sir, sir, let me rightly understand you. I beg your pardon; but do you
indeed mean to employ your fortune to relieve the distress of strangers, utter
strangers to you?


Gent. Certainly, or how should I relieve distress at all; for all that belong
to me, thank heaven, are above the power of fortune's malice.


Oakw. Bless you! bless you! the widow's blessing -- the orphan's --


Gent. Nay, nay, good old man, I were blessed enough for all that I can do, in
seeing how happy I have made you. But a widow -- an orphan, say you? Those are
sacred names. The husband gone, who is protector to the widow! -- Heaven -- The
parent lost, who is the orphan's father? Heaven. The man then, who will not
assert their rights, is not uncharitable only; for he is impious. -- Good man,
why do you tremble thus?


Oakw. I am old -- I feel now, I am an old man; and though my nerves, I think,
would bear me stoutly up, under adversity, yet, somehow this sudden turn of
good fortune has shook me, has shook me a good deal.


Gent. Compose yourself -- then tell the ladies that I shall see them very
soon; for I now must go.


Oakw. Don't go, don't go yet. Let them hear, sir, from your own lips your
goodness.


Gent. My business hence is nothing trivial; and only a case of misfortune
could have detained me here an instant; therefore assure your friends -- But
why not debar myself a few moments longer of my own gratification, to convince
them of my certain protection (aside) my good old friend, tell the ladies I
wait to see them. [Exit OAKWORTH. Ay, ay, 'twill make but a few minutes
difference, and the dear good creatures I so long to behold will forgive me
when I tell them that the cause of my delay, was to dry the tear of affliction.


Enter Mrs. CLEVELAND, led in by OAKWORTH, JULIA following with HENRY. Mrs.
Clev. Sir, your goodness --


Jul. My father!


Clev. My wife! my child! Oh, heavenly powers!

[The Scene closes upon them*
SCENE -- Another Apartment in the Hotel. Enter DROOPLY and CAROLINE, a Waiter
following with a Portmanteau, and a small iron box. Dro. Put the things
carefully into a chamber, and be sure take care of that little box.


Waiter. Yes, sir. [Exit.


Dro. And here we are, my dearest Caroline, with the parson's blessing upon us.
I hardly durst raise my hopes to this happiness, even before your worthy
brother contrived to make me an estate out of pocket; but my generous girl,
when I reflect that you take a beggar to your arms --


Car. Nay, nay, I am only doing an act of common honesty, in paying the debts
of my family; and I am to consider you a very gentle creditor to be satisfied
with less than a third of your demand, and to take charge of me into the
bargain.


Dro. My dearest girl!


Car. But, amidst our happiness, let us not forget the melancholy situation of
the dear Clevelands -- Let us instantly try to see them.


Dro. Here comes the little Gentoo full of glee. Oh, this looks well!


Enter GANGICA. Car. Gangica!


Began. Ah, you here! Oh I glad of dat -- I so happy.


Car. What has happened to make you so.


Began. (pointing to her heart.) Dis too full of joy to let me talk. I cannot tell
you -- but come -- come wid me -- you know all -- den you be too happy to talk
-- Come, come. [Exeunt*


SCENE Changes. CLEVELAND, Mrs. CLEVELAND, JULIA, and HENRY. Clev. The
villains! ample shall be their punishment.


Mrs. Clev. It will be ample, be assured; but do not you wrest vengeance from
that Power who best knows how to deal it, that Power which never withholds its
succor from the innocent, nor le^s the guilty 'scape its awful indignation.


Julia. But say, my father, by what miracle are you restored to us?
Clev. Henry, no doubt, has told you that he saw me in the boat, which his
humanity declined a place in -- We labored for the nearest shore* but ound
that an attempt to land would whelm us in the raging surf -- thus were we
compelled to trust our little skiff to the wide ocean, and for many hours were
driven at random by its fury -- At length we gained the land, but far from the
coast on which we left our wreck.
Julia. But why did you not, the instant that you landed, acquaint us with your
safety?


Clev. Alas! I had lost the power of doing so. Enfeebled by fatigue, when I
reached the shore, I scarce had sense or motion, a fever followed, from which
reason and health returned together -- So, on the instant I set out to be
myself the herald of my safety.


Henry. I sought you on the coast near Portland.


Clev. Well might you hear no tidings of me; for we made our landing at the
Isle of Wight, to the humanity of whose inhabitants myself and poor companions
owe our lives. Think you those wretches, the Visorlys will venture to you?


Mrs. Clev. Convinced that you are no longer living, I have no doubt but the
instructions we have given to Oakworth to communicate, will bring them here.


Clev. The young one has never seen me, and Old Visorly not since I was quite a
child; so it is impossible I should be known.


Mrs. Clev. But promise to preserve your temper.


Clev. Depend on me.


Oakw. (without) This way.


Mrs. Clev. I hear Oakworth's voice. We will retire.

[Exeunt Mrs. CLEVELAND, JULIA, and HENRY.
Enter OAKWORTH, OLD VISORLY, and LEONARD. Oakw. This is the stranger I told
you of. I leave you with the gentleman, begging his pardon for introducing him
to such damned bad company.

[Exit OAKWORTH.
Leon. We understand that you have volunteered to defend the cause of Mrs.
Cleveland. Are we rightly informed, sir?


Clev. You are.


Leon. I thought the days of chivalry were over.


Clev. So did I: but since monsters still exist, -- it is fit that they revive
again.


Leon. You have begun your career of enterprise, most illustrious knight, with
rather a hopeless adventure.


Clev. It may not be found so.


Leon. You seem an intelligent man. A little conversation will, I have no
doubt, bring us to the same opinion, and all errors will be rectified before we
part.


Clev. You need not doubt it, sir.


Old Vis. Now, my boy, Leonard, will talk him over in a grand style. Oh, he is
a blessing to my old age. (aside.)


Leon. This woman has the power of influencing persons very much in her favor.


Clev. Innocence always has that power.


Leon. Innocence! Sir, sir, you are duped, deceived.


Clev. How, sir!
Leon. Nay, sir, if you fly off in this way, you are not the man of sense I
take you for.
Clev. Well, sir, go on.
Leon. You are led to believe this lady to have been Mr. Cleveland's wife.
Clev. Yes, sir; I am --
Leon. Grossly imposed on. We have the most convincing reasons to believe the
contrary.
Clev. Indeed!
Leon. Sir, sir, what do you think of us? Should we be so lost to the common
feelings of human nature as to proceed as we have done, but upon just ground?
Old Vis. Oh, I assure you, sir, before I consented, Leonard thoroughly
convinced me.
Clev. He did?
Leon. Yes, and you shall be convinced. Oh, sir, let me appeal to your
respectability. You are a man who must, I am certain, rank high in the world's
estimation. How would that be injured by your present interference! How would
the world despise, abhor the man who could support the claims of mere
pretenders against a rightful heir! (pointing to Old Visorly.)
Clev. How the world will despise, will abhor such a wretch, will very soon be
known.
Leon. You, perhaps, are not aware that she has no proofs of her marriage.


Clev. Proofs may be found.


Leon. In India, you think. Will you go thither for them?


Clev. I have been.


Leon. What?


Clev. I have been.


Leon. You knew Cleveland, perhaps?


Clev. Yes.


Leon. Do you know, then, of his marriage?


Clev. I was present at it.


Leon. You surprise me.


Clev. Will this satisfy you?


Leon. A witness may be suborned. The law will scarcely be content with one
person's testimony.


Clev. With mine it clearly will.


Leon. You may be mistaken, sir. It will be rash to risk it. I will make an
offer, a handsome offer -- We will resign our claim to half the fortune, manage
the business with the ladies as you please, you may depend on our secresy. We
tender to you, mind, to yourself half the fortune.


Clev. It is a handsome offer.


Old Vis. Very indeed! may be you think a third would be enough.


Clev. No, no, far from it; for though the bribe sounds handsomely, it would be
want of policy in me to take it.


Leon. How?


Clev. For this plain reason, that, though I admit these ladies to be Cleveland's
wife and daughter, still Cleveland's fortune is the right of --


Leon. Whom?


Clev. Me.


Leon. You! by what title?


Clev. The clearest in the world -- founded on the simple principle, that while
a man can prove himself alive, his heirs are not allowed to take possession of
his property.


Leon. Alive!


Clev. Why, gentlemen, you are very hard to be convinced. Surely you should
admit a man alive, when he is able himself to tell you so.


Leon. Confusion!


Old Vis. Oh dear, oh dear, oh dear!


Clev. And, how do you now feel yourselves, my very worthy cousins? (Goes to
the door.) Come, come in, and thank your kinsmen for all their kindness.


Enter Mrs. CLEVELAND and JULIA. Old Vis. Oh, Leonard, Leonard, did I ever
think you would have brought me into such disgrace!


Clev. Sensible rebuke of age to youth! You should have led your son into the
path of honesty, not been seduced by him into the road of villainy.


Old Vis. I Will go home, and if I continue in my present mind, I think it very
likely I shall hang myself before tomorrow morning. Oh Leonard, Leonard! [Exit.


Clev. With your company, sir, (to Leonard.) I cannot dispense, till I receive
assurance that my property remitted to you is vested as I directed.


Enter DROOPLY, CAROLINE, HENRY, and OAKWORTH. Dro. My worthy brother, give me
joy.


Leon. Your brother!


Car. Even so, sir.


Leon. You are well paired. I wish you all the happiness that mutual poverty
can give you.


Car. Poverty! nay, we need not starve. My estate is surely sufficient to
prevent that.


Leon. Your estate! You must first persuade me to resign the writings of it.


Car. Thank you, dear brother; but you happen to forget you have already done
that.


Leon. I! how -- when?


Car. By your direction I brought the box to town with me, which you said,
contained the writings.


Leon. Yes, -- ay -- that box -- hey! let me see it -- I have got the key of it.


Dro. The key, my dear fellow! Do you think I do things so cursed mechanically
as to want keys? A man just come into possession of an estate, and not break
open the box that contained his claim to it.


Leon. What, broke open!


Dro. Yes, with a kitchen poker. Lord, how alarmed you are! Yes, I broke it
open, and found I had killed two birds with one stone; for, instead of only
getting the writings of one estate, I found the writings of two -- This lady's
and my own.


A person enters and converses apart with CLEVELAND, and then Exit. Leon.
Curses fall on me!


Dro. That they will, fast enough never fear. What a shrewd guesser you must
be! You had the wisdom to foresee, that some time or other, there would be a
junction of the properties, and you therefore commodiously packed up the
writings together. Ah, you are a considerate fellow!


Clev. to Leonard. Sir, we need your presence here no longer. My property I
find is vested as I appointed. Now, sir, depart, loaded not with my reproaches,
not with my malediction; for the whole world's contempt, and the heaviest
curses of the injured would add but a feather's weight to the mountain of
remorse which conscious guilt will heap upon thy wretched bosom. When I reflect
on the severity of suffering conscience can inflict, I could almost forget my
injuries, and pity thee.


Leon. To palliate my guilt I do not seek -- yet, in justice, let me declare,
the erroneous judgment of the world made me a villian. I beheld the eye of
observance and respect ever directed to the wealthy; were he fool or knave, no
matter. While all that is truly amiable or great in genius or in virtue, when
linked with poverty, was heeded with the stare of disavowal, or the scowl of
contempt. To be a golden idol for the world's worship was my aim. I have lost
my fortune, character, and happiness in the attempt, and now must meet in
penury mankind's abhorrence, and feel too, I deserve it. [Exit.


Mrs. Clev. (to Caroline.) I grieve to think how much you must be afflicted.


Car. I am indeed; for with all his unworthiness, I cannot forget he is my
brother.


Clev. Such remembrance honors you; for never should the principles of justice
absorb the feelings of nature.


Enter SHARPSET, and GANGICA. Oakw. Ah, my good friend, you at liberty!


Shar. Yes, sir, I found bail.


Oakw. I am very glad to see you.


Mrs Clev. Sir, I shall ever feel myself your debtor.


Shar. Oh, Madam!


Oakw. I know a way to repay him, Madam.


Mrs. Clev. How?


Oakw. By making him rightful possessor of the treasure he holds in his hand.


Jul. Gangica, do you consent to --


Began. I do all as you please, ma'am.


Jul. I am sure it will please me that you make yourself happy.


Oakw. Now I have performed my promise, you must renew my acquaintance with
your father.


Shar. You and my father, sir, have never been asunder.


Oakw. Hey! What do you mean?


Shar. To restore you a truant son, sir, who, till he had atoned as far as lay
in his power for his former errors, could not hope to be acknowledged by such a
father.


Oakw. What, my own boy turned out an honest man?


Shar. Yes, sir; and who, now knowing the precious value of that first of
titles, will never forfeit it.


Oakw. Now, then, I can say I am completely happy.


Mrs. Clev. Ever, ever may you remain so! -- You will; for benevolence like
yours makes the human heart a heaven.


Clev. The gratitude I owe to all who have befriended these dear objects of my
love, I hope to show by something more than words. What a prospect of happiness
opens to our view! Blessed with friends, proved such in the trying moments of
affliction -- with fortune to command profusely every luxury, and I trust, with
minds to employ it only in pursuit of one -- the luxury of doing good.


FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
WRITTEN BY JOHN TAILOR, ESQUIRE. AND SPOKEN BY MRS. POPE.
WELL, though our Bard has tried his utmost art
To show how riches will pollute the heart,
No doubt his labor has been all in vain,
And poverty will never one convert gain.
How could the man attempt a task so bold!
But what, forsooth, can authors know of gold?
An ore that rarely darts on them a beam,
Unless, perchance, in hope's delusive dream;
Hope, that misleads them through life's weary way,
And scarcely leaves at last the barren bay.
What, wean the human heart from love of pelf!
A toil, too hard for Hercules himself!
Nay, that great hero, as we learn in story,
Strove for a little gain, as well as glory,
Else why attack the dreadful scaly brute,
If not to grasp the rich Hesperian fruit?
Hence, avarice is a passion not so odd,
Since, as we find, it urged a demi-god.
'Twas also said of yore the female tribe,
Are frail as men when tempted by a bribe,
And mighty Jove, with all his boasted power
Was forced to woo amid a golden shower.
Oh! wondrous charm of all-persuasive gold,
That fires the timid, and subdues the bold.
Gold, that can give the upstart blockhead fame,
And make a fawning world his wit proclaim;
That lends deformity resistless grace,
O'erthrows the mighty, and exalts the base;
Great substitute for learning, genius, worth,
Despotic sovereign of adoring earth!
But let me check the rash injurious thought,
For, in this court, no verdict can be bought.
Here merit safely may assert her plea,
While candor regulates the mild decree;
And by that candor one who often has tried
Its generous force, his fate must now abide,
In hopes one error more will pardon find,
Since to his others you have so long been kind.
NEW PUBLICATIONS PRINTED FOR T. N. LONGMAN and O. REES, No. 39,
Paternoster-Row.
1. THE LIFE of CATHARINE II. EMPRESS of RUSSIA. The Third Edition, with
considerable Improvements. In Three Volumes, 8vo. Price 1l. 4s. in Boards.
Embellished with Seven elegant Portraits, and a correct Map of Russia.

To the concurrent testimonies of all the periodical publications of taste and
literature already adduced, we shall only add, from the European Magazine, that
the writer of their Review, after delaying his account of the Work, in order to
ascertain its authenticity, in the number for November last, says: "On the most
indisputable testimony, and the highest authority, the writer has it now in his
power to declare that these volumes, under the modest and limited title of The
Life of the late Empress of Russia, comprise a faithful and impartial History
of the Political Transactions and Public Affairs of the Northern Courts of
Europe during the Reign of Catharine II.; together with a regular narration of
the progressive aggrandisement, civilization, and general improvement, of the
Russian Empire, from the time of Peter the Great to that of the Death of the
late Empress in 1796."

2. ANECDOTES of LORD CHATHAM's LIFE. The Sixth Edition. In Three Volumes, 8vo.
Price 18s. Boards.

The author has made a valuable collection of Anecdotes, especially of the late
and most conspicuous part of Lord Chatham's Life; and of other matters
connected with it. He says he is not conscious of having advanced one
falsehood: we give credit to his declacation, having found no cause to doubt
it. Monthly Review, May 1792. A greater number of curious and interesting
Anecdotes, concerning public affairs, have not appeared since the days of Sir
William Temple, than are to be met with in this work.

We cannot dismiss this article without acknowledging, that it throws a great
and new light upon the occurrences and events of more than half a century of
our history.

Gent. Mag. Aug. 1793. 3. BIOGRAPHICAL, LITERARY, and POLITICAL ANECDOTES, of
several of the most EMINENT PERSONS of the PRESENT AGE; particularly the Dukes
of Grafton, Leeds, Dorset, and Rutland; Lords Townshend, Orford, Marchmont,
Mansfield, Camden, Temple, Nugent, and Sackville; Bishops of Hereford and
Ossory; Right Hon. George Grenville, Charles Townshend; Sir James Caldwell, Sir
Gray Cooper, Sir John Dalrymple, Sergeant Adair, Dr. Franklin, and many others;
never before printed. In Three Volumes. Price 18s.


