AN EPISTLE TO Gorges Edmond Howard, Esquire. With NOTES EXPLANATORY, CRITICAL, and
HISTORICAL, BY GEORGE FAULKNER, Esquire And ALDERMAN.

Cum tot sustineas, et tanta negotia solus. HOR. DUBLIN: Printed for PAT. WOGAN
in Church-street. 1771.

Advertisement, by the Annotator.
THIS Poem is justly ranked with the most celebrated Compositions of Doctor
Swift, Pope, Major Pack, Cowley, Prior, Mrs. Pilkington, Parnel, Addison, and
Henry Jones, whose Works may be had, bound or in Sheets, at my Shop in
Parliament-street. I have undertaken, at the Request of my Friends to add
Annotations, Remarks, Strictures, and observations, explanatory, critical, and
historical, for the Benefit of Strangers, who might otherwise be ignorant of
many Persons, Things, and Circumstances, alluded to in the Composition, after
the Manner and Form of my Notes on Dr. Jonathan Swift, D. S. P. D. that have
not a little contributed to improve, and likewise make his Works be understood.

AN EPISTLE TO Gorges Edmond Howard Esquire. Epistle to G. E. H.] -- He has
amassed a considerable fortune by yarious means, and lived in tolerable repute,
as a practicing attorney, till he quarrelled with the author hereof; who has
since exposed him in sundry witty paragraphs, pointed epigrams, stinging
repartees, facetious verses, biting epistles, humorous acrostics, sharp
railleries, keen retorts, brilliant quibbles, and anonymous stanzas.

LET F -- k -- r boast Let Faulkner boast, etc.] -- George Faulkner, printer,
bookseller, and author of the Dublin Journal. He has lived with the first wits
of the present age in great credit, and upon a footing of much intimacy and
kindness. He is well known to have been the particular friend of the Dean of
St. Patrick's, and at this moment corresponds with the Earl of Chesterfield,
whose letters will be published by him immediately after the demise of said
Earl. He was sent to Newgate by the House of Commons in the year 1738, for his
steadiness in prevaricating in the cause of liberty; and sworn an alderman of
Dublin in the year 1770: fined for not ferving the office of sheriff in the
year 1768. His Journal (to which he has lately added a fourth column) is
circulated all over Europe, and taken in at the coffee-houses in
Constantinople, besides Bath, Bristol, Boston, Tunbridge Wells,
Brighthelmstone, Virginia, and Eyre-Connaught. In his paragraphs he has always
studied the prosperity and honor of his native country, by strenuosly decrying
of whiskey, projecting cellars, holes made by digging for gravel in the high
roads, voiding of excrements in the public streets, throwing of squibs,
crackers, sky-rockets, and bonfires; by which many lives are lost, men, women,
and children maimed; sick persons disturbed out of their sleep; eyes burned
out, and horses startled; recommeding it to Archbishops, Dukes, Lords, Privy
Counselors, Generals, Colonels, Field Officers, and Captains, to fall down
precipices, tumble into cellars, be overturned by rubbish thrown in the
streets, in order to remove nuisances; dissuading all bloods, bucks, smarts,
rapparees, and other such infernal night-walkers, from committing manslaughter
upon pigs, hackney horses, watchmen's lanterns, and other enormities; profane
cursing and swearing, and breaking the Sabbath, and the commandments;
exclaiming against the importation of potatoes, and advising to grow more corn;
inciting to virue by characters in his Journal, and calling upon the
magistrates to do their duty. -- The Earl of Chesterfield compares him unto
Atticus a Roman Baronet, and sundry other compliments. -- N. B. His nephew
Todd, continues to make the best brawn, and has lately imported a large
quantity of James's Powders.
of rhymes and letters,
To praise himself, and maul his betters;
For law and wit we read your page,
Which guides the courts, and charms the stage, Which guides the courts, and
charms the stage.] -- Howard has published Pleas on the Exchequer Equity;
Rules of Chancery; Almeyda, or the Rival Kings, a Tragedy; The Siege of Tamar,
and the Female Gamestr, in manuscript.

The ermin'd sages quote your Pleas,
And children lisp your roundelays.
On Fancy's wing aloft you soar,
To praise Monroe, To praise Monroe.] -- This hinteth unto the underwritten
stanzas of said Howard, whereby he advises and encourages a painter to
proceed in painting said lady, and likewise publicly declares, that he
himself will be an adven'urer, and will dare to undertake to complete, and also
to finish the piece, by partly supplying some hints, whereby said painter may
be forwarded in his work.

To a certain nobleman, on being told he had wished for the picture of a
celebrated beauty.

Fond swain, I hear your wish is such,
Some painter should on canvass touch,
The beauties of Monroe;
But where is the adventurer will dare,
The happy mixture to prepare,
Her peerless charms to show.
Yet, by those radiant beauties fired,
And my ambitious muse inspired,
Let me some hints supply:
To Nature's stores then straight resort,
Cull every tint, the goddess court,
This pice to dignity.
-- First, let the cheek with blushes glow,
Just as when damask roses blow,
Glist'ning with morning dew;
Contrasted with the virgin white,
With which the lily glads the sight,
Blend them in lovely hue.
And truly then that cheek to grace,
Upon her flowing tresses place,
The chesnut's auburn down;
Her lips you may in sort depaint,
By cherries ripe, yet ah 'twere faint,
Should they with here is be shown.
Next, let two eyes with luster gleam,
Even as the sun's reflected beam,
Upon the glassy lake;
Tinge it with dye of brilliant jet,
Let it in milk be sweetly set,
Each wandering heart to take.
Let the transparent web of lawn,
Be over the virgin bosom drawn,
As fair -- yet cold as snow;
That love may through the veil espy,
What else were more than mortal eye,
Could view and safety know.
But O to trace the internal grace,
That beams divinely in her face,
How vain the muse would soar:
If ever celestial cherub came,
To bless thy sight, in mystic dream,
Snatch that -- the task is over.

and Letty Gore;
Their charms shall last in song divine,
Like embryos preserved in wine.
Your classic pencil finely traces,
The beauties of the SISTER GRACES; The beauties of the SISTER GRACES.] --
Three Miss Montgomeries, on whom Howard wrote the following underwritten
verses printed in these notes.

On the absence and return of THE THREE FAVORITE SISTERS.

Of late Love's Queen all in despair,
Fled through each region of the air,
Her graces were astray:
To seek them, Maia's winged son,
From Pole to Pole with speed had run,
It was a bustling day.
Cupid, who had to earth been sent,
Returned, with haste and toil near spent,
And vowed he saw them there:
That 'twas on famed Ierne's shore,
Than which with beauties none shines more,
On the terestral sphere,
Straightway a troop of little Loves,
Who tend their Queen where ever she moves,
And bask in her sweet eyes:
Flew for the nymphs, whom, when they brought,
Alack! 'twas found the urchins caught,
The three Montgomeries.
Soon as their charms shone full to view,
The Paphian Goddess jealous grew,
She feared her future reign:
Her boy she chid for his mistake,
Nor would forgive, 'till he took back,
The three to earth again.


When in an easy vein you tell us,
Of Love's mistake, and Venus jealous.
His sire, his fortune to improve,
To study law young Ovid drove, To study law young Ovid drove.] -- Ovid,
otherwise called Naso, a famous poet in the reign of Augustus. He wrote several
books of Metamorphosis, or the changing of one thing into another, Love
Epistles, and Fast Days: he was not called to the bar, nor ever practiced as an
attorney. For further particulars see his works, In Usum Delphini, printed and
sold by me in Parliament-street.

He heeded naught but verse and love.
The same thy vein; -- but happier you;
Can make estates and verses too;
In both you equally succeed,
Resistless when you sing or plead;
Thus by the force of different arts,
Men lose their lands, and maids their hearts.
Oh how each breast with rapture glowed,
At your sublime Pindaric Ode: At your sublime Pindaric Ode.] -- Howard wrote
an Ode on his Majesty's Birthday, which much resembles Dryden's on the Feast
of Alexander. I have consulted sundry of the best critics, judges, and
geniuses; Mr. Dexter, who keeps the Four-Courts Marshalsea; Mr. Kavenagh,
attorney at law; Mr. Croker, Ald. Emerson, at the Spinning-wheel,
Castle-street, and others; who all assure me they don't think Howard's Ode
superior to Dryden's. In my own opinion, Dryden's is preferable.

With your applause the Garden rings, With your applause the Garden rings.] --
The Garden, commonly called the New-Gardens, or Dr. Bartholomew Moss's Gardens.
They were opened in the year 1757, and an hospital erected for lying-in-women.
It Is an excellent charity, and a stately edifice. -- This note was sent me by
an ingenious friend, who desires his name may not be made public.

When you describe the best of Kings;
All hearts to loyalty you tune, All hearts to loyalty you tune.] -- The people
of Ireland are remarkable for a great deal of loyalty, and thick legs: as a
proof of this, the Government goes in their coaches every 4th of November round
the statue of his Majesty King George II. at Stephen's-green, in honor of King
William III. with one in College-green, of glorious and immortal memory, whom
God long preserve.

'Till Jacobites turn Whigs in June!
Well Bartlemon' Bartlemon.] A celebrated musician, who plays upon the fiddle
at the New-Gardens, or Doctor Bartholomew Moss's Gardens. He set Howard's ode
to music, on the birthday of his Majesty George III: whom God long preserve.

Vivat Rex.
you may take pride in
A bard, who soars above old Dryden; A bard who s ars above old Dryden.] --
John Dryden, a poet, who was well known in the reign of Charles II. He was born
of a gentleman's family in Northamptonshire. In order to give his countrymen of
Ireland some more intimate knowledge of him, (no author's works having a better
sale at my shop in Parliament-street) I undertook a journey to London, to
collect materials for his life; but after remaining there 3 months for this
purpose, I could only learn that he was accustomed to sit in a big chair among
the wits at Button's; and this my friends telling me not being sufficient for a
life of said poet, I acordingly discontinued it.

For who that Howard's Ode can taste,
Will relish Alexander's Feast?
Should foolish George attempt to turn all
Your works to burlesque, in his Journal,
You Will make him of your wit the butt,
And prove a deadlier foe than Foot. And prove a deadlier foe than Foot.] --
Samuel Foot, Esquire manager of the Theater Royal in the Hay-market, London. He
exposed Alderman Faulkner, under the character of Peter Paragraph, in one of
his pieces, acted upon Smock-alley stage in Dublin. He was prosecuted for said
offense by Mr. Faulkner, and tried before Mr. Justice Robinson, who inveighed
very eloquently against stage players, and said he might be considered as
rubbish or a dunghill, and brought under the head of nuisances. -- The learned
council for the prosecutor, also compared him unto Aristophanes, and the
alderman unto Socrates; adding also, that Socrates was not the worse for the
comparison. The playhouse would have run with blood on this occasion, and many
swords would have been drawn, had not Mr. Faulkner prevailed on his friends
(who were present every night of the representation) to hear the piece out, and
let him take his remedy by law; to which they very obligingly consented. -- N.
B. Said Foot has with impunity exposed upon the stage, some of the greatest
men, and greatest wits now living; such as the late Duke of Newcastse, Mr.
Glover, the late Alderman Beckford, Mr. Langford the auctioneer, Mr. Peter
Tailor, and the rev. Mr. Whitfield. He lost his leg by a providential fall from
his horse, in company with his late royal highness the Duke of York, at the
seat of the Earl of Mexborough. He was taken up much bruised, and the
amputation was performed by Surgeon Bromfield.

For though good natured all your life,
Averse to calumny and strife,
Yet Satire's sting you can impart,
Though often goodnature hides the dart:
On thistles thus soft down we spy,
Yet underneath sharp prickles lie.
In vain the Freeman aid shall bring,
"You're not a be without a sting;" "You're not a be without a sting."] --
There is a pecullar felicity (as I am told) in this comparison of Howard unto a
be, although the Epistle says that he "is not a be;" for whereas a be
never rests upon one bud or flower, but styeth about in wandering and
uncertain angles, from shrub to shrub, and from Hollyhock to poppy, and never
is content until his bags be filled: so Howard has amassed an ample fortune by
different occupations; and also has completed a volume of apothegms, from the
diverse rich spoils of learning which he has happened to encounter in his
poring over books, many of which he has had access to in my shop in
Parliament-street.

Though wisely every sweet you cull,
Of which your apothegms are full. Of which your apothegms are full.] -- Some
of the greatest geniuses of antiquity, and the moderns, have taken particular
delight in collecting all the wise sayings, and brilliant proverbs of the cute
observers upon men, manners, and things -- an exc llent collection of this sort
is to be found in one of the last pages of Boyer's French Gentleman's Grammar.
But I am informed that the Lord Bacon, Baron Verulam, Viscount St. Albins, and
Plutarch, have been more industriouin this way than any of their
contemporaries, the moderns. Howard, in imitation of these supernatural wits,
is also the author of a compilation of an octavo volume, under the title of
Howard's Apothegms, collected from Bacon, Plutarch, Sir John Fielding, Julius
Caesar, The Wit's Vade Mecum, Solon, a Christmas Box for Young Ladies, Taylor's
Holy Living and Dying, and the Buck's Companion.

You prove what riches tillage yields, You prove what riches tillage yields.]
-- Howard is the author of several letters, signed Agricola, recommending
tillage. I printed them without any expense to the author, before our quarrel,
but have since declined it. He has taken most of his hints from my paragraphs,
and endeavored to imitate my style and spirit; but my friends tell me he has
sailed therein.

And smiling plenty crowns our fields;
Sure all who read you must allow,
You write as if you held the plough.
You prove by ploughs the kingdom's fed, You prove by ploughs the kingdom's
fed.] -- Ploughs, an instrument for turning up the earth, were first invented
by Triptolemus, a near relation of the Goddess Ceres, and afterward much
improved by Mr. John Win Baker, of the Dublin Society. -- The Irish formerly
ploughed by the tail with bullocks; but upon Doctor Swift's voyage to the
Houynhams being published, and his saying so much in praise of horses, this
barbarous, horrid, attrocious, shocking, detestable, cruel, nefarious custom
was abolished by act of parliament. See an Abridgement of the Irish Statues,
sold by me in Parliament-street.

That pictures cannot serve for bread:
From whence it is plain this lazy nation,
Owes to your pen its preservation.
My muse the Architect now greets,
Whose lofty domes adorn our streets Whose lofty domes adorn our streets.] --
Howard owneth many houses in Parliament-street. I built my own house myself,
Howard having nothing to say to it, nor shall ever come within my doors, unless
it be to pay for advertisements in my Jonrnal, or to buy medicines of my nephew
Todd. -- It may be worth while to mention a very entertaining anecdote (for the
satisfaction of the curious) relating thereunto: When my house was building I
happened to be out of the way one morning, penning an advertisement for an
agreeable companion to pay half the expense of a post chaise, to see that
stupendous curiosity of nature, the Giant's Causeway, about which it is still a
doubt amongst the learned, whether it be done in the common way by giants, or
whether it be an effort of spontaneous nature, and my house was erected without
any staircase; whereby the upper stories were rendered useless, unless by the
communication of a ladder placed in the street. But upon considering my
misfortune in wanting my member, and the carelessness of hackney coachmen, who
drive furiously through the streets at all hours, in a state of drunkenness
from spirituous liquors, whereby the ladder might be shook or thrown down when
I was ascending it, I thought it better to re-build my house, and it has at
present a staircase, by which there is a convenient and elegant communication
between all parts of said tenement. -- It is somewhat remarkable that my house
in Essex-street had no staircase, whereby nature seems to point out, that
having but one leg, I ought not to attempt climbing, and should always remain
on the ground floor.

Who, Vanburgh like, claims double bays, Who Vanburgh like, etc. -- Sir John
Vanburgh. He was a great poet and architect. I was not personally acquainted
with him any farther than printing his works, because he died before my time.
Being imprisoned in the Bastile, and having no light, nor pen or ink allowed
him, he amused himself with drawing diverse plans of the Bastile, which he has
since introduced into many buildings with great success, particularly Blenheim,
which much resembles the Bastile.

For piling stones, and writing plays.
Your skill instructs Gymnastic schools, Your skill instructs Gymnastick
schools.] -- Howard wrote a treatise on fencing, and is accounted an expert
swordsman -- He declined accepting a challenge which I sent him to fight my
nephew Todd, (in the way of proxy) at the Fifteen Ac^es, with pistols. I could
not fight myself, because I am pledged to the public for my Journal, three
times a week, and have the care of the city upon me in my capacity of an
alderman. My nephew was at first unwilling to accept the combat, but upon my
promising to leave him the Journal after my death, and making him take two
spoonfuls of his own Elixir Vitae, he at last consented. This medicine is only
imported by him, and is excellent for preventing accidents by sudden death and
megrims: It also cures all mortal wounds, by gunshot and other missive
weapons.

And Carte and Tierce reduced to rules,
Prove you the first of mortal men,
To poise a sword, or point a pen.
New light on every art you strike,
And matchless shine in all alike;
For who can tell if most you're skilled in
The pen, the plough, the sword, or building?
A puny author may disclose
Some skill in rhyme, but none in prose;
In prose another shows his wit,
Who cannot a single stanza hit:
Your foes unwillingly confess,
In both you equal skill possess. In both you equal skill possess.] -- This, I
conceive, alludeth to the following underwritten letter of Mr. Howard's, from
Killarney, with the signature of POBLICOLA, with a description, and likewise a
comparison of the Giant's Causeway, whereunto he subjoineth an inscription for
the tombstone of Dr. Averel, bishop of Limerick, and uncle to the right hon.
Francis Andrews, Provost of Trinity-College, Dublin, who represents the loyal
city of Londonderry in parliament. -- N. B. That Killarney is a small village
of that name in the county of Kerry. It is a market town, but does not send two
members to parliament, as most other boroughs do. It is part of the estate of
Lord Viscount Kenmare, who has forfeited his title, he being a Catholic
nobleman, although very hospitable, and keeps a most plentiful table,
furnished with all the varieties the season affords. I also had the honor to
dine with him when I journeyed into these parts, to see the beauties of this
wondrous lake.

To the printer of the DUBLIN MERCURY.

SIR, Killarney Sept. 26th, 1771.
I have at length seen what I have long wisted to see, this wondrous lake; to
attempt to describe it would require the ablest pen of the ancient poets, or,
of modern poets, the famous painter of said lake, wherefore, I shall never
attempt it: -- yet, notwithstanding all the beauties of the lake, I cannot
think it, as a curiosity, equal to the Giant's Causeway; I have seen both, I
never saw any thing LIKE the first, nor any thing EQUAL to the latter; this
distinction is agreed to by all I have mentioned it to. But alas! this lake has
been the death of a man, for whom the whole province here is in tears, the late
bishop of Limerick, Dr. Averel, our countryman: -- To sum up all shortly as I
can, I heard the people of Limerick, (where I was shortly after his death) say,
that there has not been such a bishop since the time of the apoftles; that the
Romish clergy said, they should not wonder, had he lived any time, if they had
lost many of their flocks. -- What obligations then are due to our Lord
Lieutenant, for having appointed such a man their pastor, for though Heaven has
pleased to take him away, his successor will hear so much of him, that he
cannot but endeavor to imitate him? I heard this acknowledged by several, as
also for his concurrence in appointing that well known friend to his country,
and their city, especially, speaker: from these and many other like instances
of his impartial conduct, it is wished that we may never lose him; -- and every
day the advantage of a resident Viceroy becomes more and more manifest; that
from this new mods of government, there is far more likelihood that merit will
be rewarded, proper persons appointed to offices, and the laws supported and
executed. A gentleman of your city happening to be at Limerick, shortly after
the interment of the bishop, and hearing the prodigious great character of him
from all persons, wrote the following lines, extempore, as an inscription for a
monument.

POBLICOLA.


Beneath this marble stone weep, mankind weep,
Averel, your friend lienwrapp'd in endlefs sleep;
Who, for the poor alone, did fortune crave,
And deemed himself but rich in that he gave;
From whom, the prayer of want, or plaint of woe
Never did unpitied, nor unhappy go.
His mournful flock to their blessed pastor's paise,
With grateful heart this parting tribute pays.


On a true mirrour's polished face,
All objects thus we plainly trace,
But if in spots the MERC'RY lie,
A broken image meets the eye.
O Howard! is it not surprising,
Your wit alone should stop your rising!
Else on the bench you might be thrust,
Though flow as snail, that crawls through dust,
By self-conceit you might advance,
As quicksilver makes puddings dance. As quicksilver makes puddings dance.] --
Nothing is more entertaining to a large company, than to see a pudding
vibrating, shaking, moving, and dancing upon the dish, by means of quicksilver
inserted into the body of it.

From men of sense fools win the day,
As horses fly, when asses bray.
O sons of Dullness! blessed by fate!
Fittest for law, for church, and state;
Your parent's influence prevails,
And gives her dunces -- mitres -- seals!
A Tisdall's depth, A Tisdall's depth.] -- The right hon. Philip Tisdall,
AttorneyGeneral.
a Townshend's wit,
Is not for plodding business fit;
An Eagle's wings were formed for flight,
A Goose's furnish quills -- to write.
I Would also sing, if I were able,
Your generous wine, and festive table;
Where all those wits in crowds assemble,
Who make the vile Committee tremble:
There, Donough's humor mirth provokes, There Donough's humor mirth
provokes.] -- The rev. Doctor Dennis, chaplain to the Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland; author of many ingenious pieces.

While all admire his Attic jokes, While all admire his Attic jokes.] -- The
people of Attica were remarkable for the goodness of their jok s, and for
having the best salt for preserving meat for foreign importation; by which
means they undersold all their neighbors in the article of salt provisions. I
hope this may be a timely warning to this poor, undone, insatuated country. --
Attica wos called the Cork of Greece.

Though often to prove his taste the best,
He laughs alone at his own jest:
Then boasts how once his patron rose,
And told the story of THREE CROWS;
Which he will insert, with meet apology,
In his new System of Chronology; In his new System of Chronology.] -- Doctor
Dennis is at present engaged in digesting a new system of Chronology, under the
title of Chronological and Historical Dissertations; which I shall be glad to
print and sell at my shop in Parliament-street:

And after mending Newton's errors, And after mending Newton's errors.] -- Sir
Isaac Newton. He was made a knight by Queen Anne, and master of the mint, a
place worth 1000l. yearly. He was reckoned a good mathematician, and was very
fond of looking through telescopes.

St. Audeon's-Arch he will fill with terrors.
The Castle tribe aloud confess, The Castle tribe aloud confess.] -- This
alludeth to the Doctor's being the supposed author of all the political pieces
which appear in the Mercury.

Him great Alcides of the press
Like that immortal hero known,
For fathering labors not his own.
B -- w -- s, in epigram so smart, B -- w -- s in epigram so smart.] -- Doctor
Burrows during the administration of the Earl of Hertford, maintained the
government by many ingenious pieces, particularly witty epigrams, for which he
has a peculiar facility. I have selected one, which was the most admired by
the best judges, as a specimen of the Doctor's abilities.

What! sweet Miss Meredith of Chester,
Espoused to Alderman Trecothic!
That stupid cit -- but what possessed her,
To choose an animal so gothic:
Some demon sure her mind misted,
To make a choice so void of reason;
Else what could tempt the girl to wed,
A wretch who soon must swing for treason.
Another one.

A goose in the oven! no, sir, it is a slander,
As some, who discovered the fact can declare,
For it was not a goose, but you a poor gander.
(As fools will be peeping) who thrust your head there,


'Till griping H -- rt -- d broke his heart, 'Till griping H -- rt -- d broke
his heart.] -- Some of my most familiar and intimate critics and geniuses is of
opinion, that the poet means gripping Hertford, and that it ought therefore
to be spelled with a double p. But I heartily and totally differ from them, and
prosecute my own opinion, in maintaining that it implies, that his Excellency
the said Earl of Hertford, was grievously afflicted with various disorders of
the gripes, brought upon him by windy flatulencies, mortal dry belly-achs, and
other pinching sicknesses of the guts, during the time he presided over the
chief government of this his native country; and that this was the whole tote
of his case is notoriously known to every human creature, man, woman, or
children, whether in the Castle, in the city, or the fuburbs of Dublin.

Now deals in Hebrew roots profound,
And only treads prophetic ground;
Jerus'lem's Artichoke supplies,
Those visions that made Daniel wise,
The Doctor proves to all the nation,
No myst'rys couc 'd in Revelation.
'Till every gossip can explain,
What sage divines explore in vain,
No juggler ever played such tricks,
As he with John's seven candlesticks,
By whose mysterious lights are spied,
Wicklow's Seven Churches typified.
Next maudlin B -- ke, Next maudlin B -- ke, etc.] -- Henry Brook, Esquire an
excellent poet, philosopher, and patriot. He has for some time retired to his
country seat in the Bog of Allen, where he is carrying on great improvements,
in laying the country under water, and searching for hidden treasures in the
bottom of lakes, ponds, marshes, sloughs, and other navigable rivers. He
published a famous Novel, called, The Fool of Quality, which is sold in
separate volumes, or together, at my shop in Parliament-street. There is so
much variety in this piece, that the best judges agree, it is indifferent at
what part you begin to read it, being beautifully interspersed with stories of
beggars, trouts, foreign birds, and Indian' princesses. The Earl of
Chesterfield, as a proof of his esteem for his fine talents, made him a
barrack-master. He is a true friend to the religion of his country, and has
written many excellent tracts in defense of Popery, and the Protestant
persuasion. He wrote a ballad opera, called, Jack the Giant Queller, being a
satire upon the Lords Justices of Ireland, which was accordingly forbid to be
represented. The excellent tragedy of Gustavus was also stopped for the same
reason, by the Lord Chamberlain, being a noble incitement to sedition, in the
cause of liberty. He was at first the conductor of the Free-Press, which trust
he executed with great integrity, taking diverse sums of money from several
public officers, to prevent their being satirized in said Journal; which he did
with great integrity. This Journal is not so universally circulated and admired
as mine, because it contains not such a variety of interesting particulars,
intelligence from foreign courts, the Transit of Venus, high water at
Dublin-bar, assize of bread, sailing and return of packets, births, deaths, and
marriages; not to mention curious queries, and ingenious paragraphs.
whose novels please,
Like some old dotard's reveries,
Without beginning, middle, ending,
To utile or dulce tending.
With equal art, his genius pliant,
Can drain a bog, or quell a giant.
Whilst one hand wounds each venal brother,
He for a bribe extends the other;
Your character's worth just so much,
As you afford, and he can touch:
With every virtue he abounds,
Who tips the patriot fifty pounds;
Gold works strange wonders in his eyes,
Makes cowards brave, and dunces wise,
Like Swiss, his hireling muse engages,
On any side that pays best wages;
One while staunch friend to Martin Luther,
He finds pure light and gospel truth there;
Then through the realm makes proclamation,
For Popery, Priests, and Toleration.
He first with many a fair pretense,
To public spirit, truth, and sense,
Hatched that disgrace to law and reason,
That mass of slander, dullness, treason;
That Journal which the Arch produces,
For singeing fowl, or viler uses.
How changed from him whose noble rage,
Brought great Gustavus to the stage,
And roused the Patriot's god-like fire,
In strains which Phoebus might admire.
Now Metius' fate and his are one,
By all he is torn, that is true to none.
MACRO, with college dust besprent, Macro, with college dust besprent.] -- We
have not been able to discover whom the author intends to describe in these
verses: but some ingenious friends conjecture that it is some rev. gentleman,
who underslandeth many languages, and keeps a playhouse Miss.

There mingles to give malice vent,
With various tongues thick set as fame,
And every tongue disposed to blame,
In studious Macro may be seen,
The copious Polyglot of spleen:
He searches old and modern lore,
To learn to hate his neighbor more;
Fond of men's follies and their vices,
As beggar of his sores and lice is;
With eyes like fox, and mouth like shark,
That seems lefs formed to speak than bark.
Let others while their bowls they quaff,
Distend their lungs with heartfelt laugh;
In short shrill shrieks of fiend-like glee,
He proves his risibility.
His knowledge, like a treacherous beacon
Holds out false lights to the mistaken,
And when they wander from their way,
Humanely leads them more astray.
Yet Macro, whose peculiar pride
Is to expose a friend's blind side,
Can to more glaring folly stoop:
Himself a bankrupt player's dupe.
There bashful B -- n once was seen, There bashful B -- n once was seen.] --
The rev. Mr. Boden, chaplain to the Lord Chancellor of Ireland.

Mistaking dullness for the spleen;
Who says, unsays, agrees, disputes,
And his own arguments confutes.
How eloquent in shrugs and sighs!
In uplift hands, and winking eyes!
What supplications, what contorsions!
His words half formed, his thoughts abortions!
Such wriggling, grasping, pawing, leering,
You know not if its praise, or sneering.
Such sudden stops, and circumflections;
Such prefacings, and interjections,
With "ah, good Heaven," and "oh, my God, sir,
"I Am wrong, I own, I kiss the rod, sir;
"There Is weight and sense in all you utter -- "
-- Mere prologues to an egg and butter;
That did not pudding sleeves declare him,
Some antic Scaramouch you would swear him.
But oh, what power more dull than sleep,
Does over my torpid senses creep?
Does Morpheus shed his poppies round?
Do fresh-pluck'd cowslips strew the ground?
Do harps AEolian lull my ear?
Are drones of Scottish bagpipes near?
Do beetles wind their drowsy horn?
Are gales from swampy Holland born?
In vain with snuff my nose I ply,
In vain the power of salts I try,
I yawn -- I nod -- for Cl -- ke is nigh. I yawn -- I nod -- for Cl -- ke is
nigh.] -- The rev. Dr. Clarke, Vice-Provost of Trinity-College, Dublin. He has
a very fine taste for poetry, which plainly appears by the specimen annexed
to this piece, as it was first published.

On a lady's forgetting her riding-hat. Written by the rev. Dr. CL. -- KP; when
Vice-Provost of Trinity-College.

I.
Fair Anna had no heart to give,
So left her head behind,
Bright MINA on whose smiles I live,
Was not by half so kind.
II.
Both head and heart she with her brought;
And both she took away,
And with her carried all she caught,
THAT IS all THAT gazed THAT day.
III.
Ye nymphs that over nine wells preside;
Instruct the willing fair,
To give their hearts, whatever betide,
And hands when they come here.
IV.
So when we see St. John's great eve;
The fires that round do move,
Shall each instruct us to receive
A hand and heart that glow with love.


Let mists and fogs invest my head,
Let all the fathers penned be read,
Bid B -- nt recite his speech, Bid B -- nt recite his speech.] -- The Earl of
B -- t; Knight of the Bath; famous for his eloquence and personal
accomplishments.

F -- ns plead, or Garnet preach; F -- ns plead, or Garnet preach.] --
Counselor John Fitz -- s -- Doctor Garnet, Bishop of Clogher. He wrote an
excellent Paraphrase on the Book of Job. -- The whole edition may be found at
my shop in Parliament-street.

Set mayor and aldermen before me,
Bid everlasting C -- ll bore me,
Tell over again a thrice told tale,
Drench me with Port, or ropy ale,
Be opium mingled with my drink,
My hands shall not fold, nor eyelids wink:
But these vain boasts avail not now,
More ponderous Cl -- ke to thee I bow.
When will thou ease the groaning town,
Thou old cast troop horse of the gown?
What have thou with the world to do,
Or what the world to say to you?
Thou can not now in amorous glee,
Write madrigals to fifty-three, Write madrigals to fifty three.] -- Various
are the conjectures of the learned on this passage. Mr. Kavanagh is of opinion,
that it alludeth unto the political disput es which raged in the year
fiftythree; in which the Doctor may be supposed to have wrote madrigals, to
appease the minds of the people. My nephew Todd inclines to believe, that
something is intended which he cannot discover. For my own part, I opine; that
it only refereth to the age of the lady, who had attained her fifty-third year.
It certainly is not very genteel to ridicule this passion, which is properly
called all-powerful, to show that it spares neither age nor condition, station
nor dignity; not to mention the example of Anacreon, who was choked with a
grapestone, drinking the health of his mistress, at the age of four-score: I am
myself this instant a captive to the charms of a lady who has passed her grand
climacteric, and have addressed many sonnets to her, in a style no less tender
than the Doctor's, one of which, the most admired by my friends, I have
selected, and venture to publish, as a proof of my passion, and a specimen of
my poetical endowments.

To the Widow --, on her taking a vomit of Ipecacuanha.

I.
Sost relict whose enchanting charms,
My captive heart enthrall;
Whose frown congeals, whose kindness warms,
Like honey mixed with gall.
II.
Say, when the nauseous draught you take,
On Faulkner will you think;
And for thy own dear lover's sake,
His health in vomit drink.
III.
Discharge, bright maid, the foul contents,
That now your stomach bind;
But oh! be sure, at all events,
Leave Love and George behind.
IV.
So when in sieve, well pierced with holes,
Where dregs of fires do rest,
With shaking naught remains but coals,
To warm the riddler's breast.


And frisk in rhymes to please the dame,
Which Christmas bell-man would disclaim.
Nor can thou now in fulsome strain,
Pen Jacobite address again;
And scandalizing Alma Matter, And scandalizing Alma Matter.] -- Matter, as may be
found in Li tleton's Dictionary, is Latin for mother. My nephew Todd is of
opinion, that the Doctor must have had some quarrel with his mother: for my own
part, how unwilling soever I may be to find fault with my author, I cannot but
agree with Mr. Kavanagh, and other ingenious friends, that it were better not
to divulge family brangles.

Of right divine in monarchs chatter;
Nor can thou on extortion bent,
Raise insurrections and thy rent. Raise insurrections and thy rent.] -- This
relates to a recent fact, which passed about ten years ago in the North of
Ireland. The Doctor being unwilling, (for the benesit of the incumbent who was
to succeed him) that his living should be let at an under value, insisted with
his parishioners, who offered him twelve hundred yearly, to be paid fourteen;
which they thinking unreasonable went to law, and reduced it to the sum of 700l.

Then buzz no more, thou reverend drone,
But to thy kindred earth begone.
What figure next confounds my fight,
An Austrian Count, an Irish Knight!
Much German pride and Irish blunder. Much German pride and Irish blunder.] --
The Germans are supposed in general to be a pround people: Julius Caefar, and
Mr. Nugent, give them this character. The Irish are very unjustly charged for a
particular talent in blundering; but it is well known, that no people express
themselves in their native tongue, the English, with more perspicuity and
precision; the Dean of St. Patrick's, who though born and bred in England, always
declared himself, when sober, to be an Irishman. It will not, I hope, be
considered as presumption, that I add the authority of my Journal, which is
considered as a standard of our language; whereas I have always consulted the
particular propriety of diction, and may be bold to challenge any author now
extant, for such a variety of tracts, written in so unblemished a purity,
without any abbreviations of terminations, and abounding in the best chosen
epithets.

Mark with what ease his brain creates
Speeches never spoke, miscalled Debates,
'Till at the goddess Dulness' summons,
He makes one C -- ll of the commons. He makes one C -- ll of the commons.] --
Doubts having arisen how the deficient vowells are to be filled up, I consulted
several friends: my nephew Todd imagines it means caudle, a liquor drank by
lying-in ladies, as it is composed of several mixtures: (I think it best when
it is strong of white wine). Mr. Croker very ingeniously hinteth, he makes one
cartfull of the commons; that is the commons all move together in the same
machine. I think, with submission to better judgments, that the word dunghill
removes all difficulties, and corresponds exactly with the author's meaning,
and with every thing but the text.

No brain but his could ever contain
Stories so vapid, old and vain;
So Plutarch tells of poison cold,
Which asses hoof alone can hold.
Humor and mirth no more are found,
For C -- ll casts a gloom around.
Lethargic dullness loads each eye,
Even dunces please, when C -- ll's by!
Thus, sunshine, sparks from flint conceals,
Which darkness of the night reveals.
In Pliny's learned page it is found, In Pliny's learned page, etc.] -- Pliny
wrote many books, and was killed by Mount Vesuvius falling upon his head,
though he always wore a pillow fastened to the top of his wig, to save him from
that accident.

That lightning cannot sea-calves wound; That lightning cannot sea-calves woe
nd.] -- An annimal that seldom appears on our seacoasts, unless to sishermen
in the main Ocean.

Congenial is the dunce's matter,
Callous to wit and pointed satire.
Unsatisfied with nonsense said,
He Is now resolved to read us dead,
With pamphlets nauseating he will puke us,
On Lord May'r's feasts and Doctor Lucas. On Lord May'r's seasts and Doctor
Lucas.] -- A very remarkable apothecary, and member of parliament. He lived
upon Ormond-quay, in Dublin, at the sign of Boyle's Head, who was a famous
druggist. He was banished from Ireland by a vote of the House of Commons, which
confined him to Newgate. He returned to his native country by the special mercy
of his Majesty, whom he has always continued to oppose (for his good) in two
parliaments, where he represents the city of Dublin.

He sings of beggars blind and dark,
Like some old snuffling parish clerk:
For stanzas vile he racks his brain,
And vainly mimicks Howard's strain!
He writes, he hobbles, bows and leers,
To gain a seat among the peers;
And every abject art he tries,
To prove he is qualified to rise.
With panegyric he bespatters,
Degrading him he meanly slatters.
Ah, purblind knight! thy arts misplaced,
Think better of a Townshend's taste:
Fools only will such praise assume,
As Hottentots think grease -- persume.
But whither, Clio, would thou rove?
Fond thy descriptive power to prove,
Resume the theme, resigned too long,
And Howard's praise conclude the song.
Maecenas puffed by every quill, Maecenas puffed by every quill.] -- Caius
Clinius Maecenas, a great lover of learning, and learned men. For his history,
and that of the Emperor Augustus, and the whole policy of his reign, see
Littleton's Dictionary.

Sits highest on the three-fork'd hill:
And lives for ever in the praise
Of Horace's, and Virgil's lays, Of Horace's and Virgil's lays.] -- They are
both to be had, from the hours of eight in the morning till twelve at night, at
my shop in Parliament-street.

I have now gone through the several passages of this admired poem, which I
thought required any illustration or comment, and the reader will judge how far
I am qualified for the duty of a commentator; though the success I have already
met with in that capacity, leaves me little room to doubt of the public
indulgence. It would be ungrateful, did I not take this public opportunity of
returning my thanks to the many learned friends who have favored me with their
assistance in this arduous und ertaking: they are such a catalogue of names as
would do honor to the greatest wits of antiquity; and the man who can boast of
the friend-ship of Mr. Deane, sixth-clerk; Mr. Dexter, keeper of the
Four-courts Marshalsea; Mess. Kavanagh and Croker, attorneys at law; need not
be ashamed of putting his name to any work, in which they have been his
coadjutors. My nephew, Thomas Todd, has been so often mentioned in these notes,
that it is unnecessary to say an thing in his praise, further, than that he is
an accute critic, a great traveller, and I have always found him very faithful
and diligent in his duty, as my foreman. To him, therefore, this work is
inscribed, by

His sincere friend, and paternal uncle, GEORGE FAULKINER.



Yet not one stanza of his own
Has made the poet's patron known.
While Howard to unborrow'd fame,
By his own works asserts his claim:
Then let a double wreath reward
The muse's patron, and their bard.
FINIS.

