THE UPHOLSTERER, OR What NEWS? A FARCE, In Two ACTS. As it is Performed at the
THEATER ROYAL* IN DRURY LANE.

-- O Bone (nam te
(...), Deos qu^^tiam propius contingis, oportet)
Number quid de Dacis a^disti? --
HOR. By the Author of the APPRENTICE.

LONDON. Printed for P. VAILLANT, facing Southampton-street, in the Strand.
MDCCLVIII. Price One Shilling.

To Mr. GARRICK.
SIR,
THE UPHOLSTERER would be a Bankrupt even in thanks, could he think of going
abroad into the World, without making his Compliments to Mr. Garrick, for the
Civilities he has shown him. Whatever Figure the poor broken Politician might
make before the Commissioners of Bankruptcy at Guild Hall, you have taken care
of his Appearance before the self-chosen Commissioners of Criticism, at the
Theater Royal, in Drury Lane.

I am not willing to flatter myself that you were drawn forth, on this
occasion, by any extraordinary Touches in the capital Figure, or in the
Accompagnements du Tableau. I rather suppose that you approved the Justness of
the Design, than that you were an Admirer of the Coloring.

The Design, Sir, was conceived and executed long since, because the Author
judged that something in this way might have a seasonable tendency to allay the
Intemperance of too violent a Political Spirit, or at least to laugh it into
good Humor: With the same view it was lately retouched, and given to Mr.
Mossop, to be presented to the Public at his Benefit. And however Men of a
serious Cast may depreciate Amusements of this nature, I shall never blush for
having dedicated a few Hours to them, as I am of opinion that suchlike
Avocations will more profitably unbend the Mind from graver Studies, than the
solitary Pleasures of the Recluse, or any of the more open Dissipations of Life.

I am aware that you, will, very probably, recollect a Passage in a celebrated
Writer Montesquicu.
, which may seem to render the scope of this little Piece somewhat
questionable. Dans une Nation Libre says he, Il est tres Souvent indiferent
que les Particuliers Raisonnets bien ou mal il sufit qu'ils Raisonnent: de la
sort la Liberte qui Garantit des Effets de ces memes Raisonnements. But you
know that the Question here, is not concerning the indisputable Right of the
People to canvass their national Concerns; but the vicious Excess of a
propensity to Politics, when it gives a wrong Bias to the Mind, and is attended
with Circumstances, which create the ridiculous Absurd. In this light it was
considered by Mr. Addison, who tells us in the Tatler, Vide Number 155. and 160.
that he designed his Paper for the Benefit of those Citizens, who live more in
a Coffee-house, than in their Shops, and whose Thoughts are so taken up with
the Affairs of the Allies, that they forget their Customers. For the very same
Species of People, the Upholsterer was brought on the Stage, being perhaps as
proper an Object of Ridicule, as modern I de as and Manners will afford.

With regard to the Execution, I shall not detain you any longer on that head,
than to remark that to preserve the Gravity, which is a specific Quality in Mr.
Addison's fine vein of Humor, has been my Endeavor throughout the Whole;
though I am not insensible that grave Humor is sometimes dangerous on the
Stage. In the principal Character I considered myself rather describing a
Passion than a Man; and this you remember is mentioned by an excellent Critic,
Mr. Hurd.
to belong to the Province of Farce. For this Reason the UPHOLSTERER'S Scenes
are strongly tinctured with his predominant Foible; and as this Foible is
generally fed and inflamed by a swarm of political Writers, I judged it
coincident with my Plan, to expose the Duplicity of their Conduct, by
introducing the Character of PAMPHLET.

This Character I have had the pleasure of seeing set off with all the
exquisite Strokes of so fine a Comic Genius as Mr. GARRICK'S, without being
indebted for Success to the Aid of personal Satire, having entirely levelled it
against those, who are the ready Mercenaries of all Parties; and with all such
I have the Happiness not to be acquainted.

I could here enlarge in the just Praise of Mr. Woodward, Mr. Yates, and Mrs.
Clive, etc. but I have already deviated too far from the Purpose, I set out
with; which was not to inscribe a Farce to you, for neither of us thinks so
highly of these Matters; nor to become your Panegyrist, for your extended
Reputation does not stand in need of it. My Intention was to embrace a public
Opportunity of subscribing myself.

SIR, Your most Obedient, Very Humble Servant, The AUTHOR.
Lincoln's Inn, 7th April, 1758.
PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. MOSSOP. WHEN first, in falling Greece's evil Hour,
Ambition aimed at universal Power;
When the fierce Man of Macedon began
Of a new Monarchy to form the Plan;
Each Greek -- ( as famed Demosthenes relates)
Politically mad! -- would rave of states!
And helped to form, wherever the Mob could meet,
An Areopagus in every, Street.
What News, what News was their eternal cry?
Is Philip sick! Vide the first Philippic.
-- then soared their Spirits high, --
Philip is well! -- dejection in each Eye.
Athenian Cobblers joined in deep debate,
While Gold in secret undermined the State;
Till wisdom's Bird the Vultur's prey was made;
And the Sword gleam'd in Academus' Shade.
Now modern Philips threaten this our Land,
What say Britannia's Sons? -- along the Strand
What News ye cry? -- with the same passion smit;
And there at least you rival Attic Wit.
A Parliament of Porters here shall muse
On State Affairs -- "swall' wing a Taylor's News,"
For ways and means no starved Projector sleeps;
And every Shop some mighty Statesman keeps;
He Britain's foes, like Bobadil, can kill;
Supply the EXCHEQUER, and neglect his Till.
In every Alehouse Legislator's meet;
And Patriots settle Kingdoms in the Fleet.
To show this phrenzy in its genuine Light,
A modern Newsmonger appears to Night;
Tricked out from Addison's accomplished Page,
Behold! the Upholsterer ascends the Stage.
No Minister such trials ever has stood;
He turns a BANKRUPT for the public Good!
Undone himself, yet full of England's Glory!
A Politician! -- neither Whig nor Tory --
Nor can ye high or low the Quixote call;
"He Is Knight of the Shire, and represents ye all."
As for the Bard, -- to you be yields his Plan;
For well be knows, you're candid where ye can.
One only praise be claims, -- no Party-stroke
Here turns a public Character to joke.
His Panacaea is for all Degrees,
For all have more or less of this Disease.
Whatever his Success, of this he is sure,
There Is Merit even to attempt the Cure.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
QUIDNUNC, the Upholsterer, Mr. YATES. PAMPHLET, Mr. GARRICK. RAZOR, a Barber,
Mr. WOODWARD. FEEBLE, Mr. BLAKES. BELLMOUR, Mr. USHER. ROVEWELL. Mr. PALMER.
CODICIL, a Lawyer, For the sake of Brevity, Codicil's Scene is omitted in the
Representation, as are likewise a few Passages in the second Act.
Mr. TASWELL. BRISK, Mr. VERNON. Watchman, Mr. CLOUGH.
WOMEN.
HARRIET, Mrs. YATES. TERMAGANT, Mrs. CLIVE. Maid to FEEBLE. Mrs. SIMPSON.
THE UPHOLSTERER; OR, What NEWS?
ACT I.
SCENE BELLMOUR'S Lodging. Enter BELLMOUR, beating BRISK. BRISK. MR. Bellmour,
-- let me die, Sir, -- as I hope to be saved, Sir, --


BELL. Sirrah! Rogue! Villain! -- I Will teach you, I will, you Rascal, to speak
irreverently of her I love. --


BRISK. As I am a Sinner, Sir, I only meant --


BELL. Only meant! You could not mean it, Jackanapes, -- you had no Meaning,
Booby. --


BRISK. Why, no, Sir, -- that is the very Thing, Sir, -- I had no Meaning.


BELL. Then Sirrah, I Will make you know your Meaning for the future. --


BRISK. Yes, Sir, -- to be sure, Sir, -- and yet upon my Word if you would be
but a little cool, Sir, you would find I am not much to blame. -- Besides Master,
you cannot conceive the good it would do your Health, if you will but keep your
Temper a little. --


BELL. Mighty well Sir, give your Advice.


BRISK. Why really now this same Love has metamorphosed us both very
strangely, Master, -- for to be free; here have we been at this Work these six
Weeks, -- stark-staring mad in Love with a Couple of Baggages not worth a
Groat, -- and yet Heaven help us! they have as much Pride as comes to the Share
of a Lady of Quality before she has been caught in the Fact with a handsome
young Fellow, -- or indeed after she has been caught for that Matter. --


BELL. You will not have done Rascal. --


BRISK. In short, my young Mistress and her Maid have as much Pride and Poverty
as -- as -- no Matter what, they have the Devil and all, -- when at the same
Time every Body knows the old broken Upholsterer Miss Harriet's Father, might
give us all he has in the World, and not eat the worse Pudding on a Sunday for
it.


BELL. Impious, execrable Atheist! What, detract from Heaven! I Will reform your
Notions, I will, you saucy -- beats him.


BRISK. Nay, but my dear Sir! -- a little Patience, -- not so hard. --


Enter ROVEWELL. ROVE. Bellmour your Servant, -- what at Loggerheads with my
old Friend Brisk.


BELL. Confusion! Mr. Rovewell your Servant, -- this is your doing, hang Dog.
-- Jack Rovewell I am glad to see thee. --


ROVE. Brisk used to be a good Servant, -- he has not been tampering with any
of his Master's Girls has he?


BELL. Do you know Rovewell that he has had the Impudence to talk detractingly
and profanely of my Mistress? --


BRISK. For which Sir, I have suffered inhumanly and most unchristian-like, I
assure you.


BELL. Will you leave Prating, Booby?


ROVE. Well, but Bellmour, where does she live? -- I Am but just arrived you
know, and I Will go and beat up her Quarters. --


BELL. [Half aside.] Beat up her Quarters! -- ( looks at him smilingly, then
half aside.)

Favors to none; to all she Smiles extends,
Often she rejects, but never once offends.
[stands musing.]
ROVE. Hey! What fallen into a Reverie! -- Prithee Brisk what does all this
mean?


BRISK. Why, Sir, you must know -- I am over Head and Ears in Love. --


ROVE. But I mean your Master; what alls him?


BRISK. That Is the very Thing I Am going to tell you Sir, -- as I said, Sir, --
I am over Head and Ears in Love with a whimsical, queer kind of a Piece, here
in the Neighborhood, and so nothing can serve my Master, but he must fall in
Love with her Mistress, -- look at him now, Sir, --


[Bellmour continues musing and muttering to himself.] ROVE. Ha, ha, ha, --
Poor Bellmour, I pity thee withal my Heart. -- [Strikes him on the Shoulder,
then ludicrously repeats.] Ye Gods annihilate both Space and Time, -- And make
two Lovers happy. --


BELL. My dear Rovewell, such a Girl, -- ten Thousand Cupids play about her
Mouth, you Rogue. --


ROVE. Ten Thousand Pounds had better play about her Pocket. -- What Fortune
has she?


BRISK. Heaven help us, not much to crack of. --


BELL. Not much to crack of Mr. Brazen, -- prithee Rovewell, how can you be so
ungenerous as to ask such a Question? You know I don't mind Fortune, though by
the Way she has an Uncle who is determined to settle very handsomely on her;
and on the Strength of that, does she give herself innumerable Airs. --


ROVE. Fortune not to be minded! -- I Will tell you what Bellmour, though you have
a good one already, there is no kind of Inconvenience in a little more, -- I Am
sure if I had not minded Fortune, I might have been in Jamaica still, not worth
a Sugar-Cane; but the Widow Molosses took a Fancy to me; -- Heaven, or a worse
Destiny has taken a Fancy to her, and so after ten Years Exile, and being
turned a-drist by my Father, here am I again a warm Planter, and a Widower,
most woefully tired of Matrimony; -- but my dear Bellmour we were both so
overjoyed to meet one another yesterday Evening, just as I arrived in Town,
that I did not hear a Syllable from you of your Love Fit: How, when, and where
did this happen?


BELL. Oh! -- by the most fortunate Accident that ever was, -- I Will tell thee
Rovewell: I was going one Night from the Tavern about Six Weeks ago, -- I had
been there with a Parcel of Blades whose only Joy is centered so their Bottle,
and faith till this Accident I was no better myself, -- but ever since I am
grown quite a new Man.


ROVE. Ay, a new Man indeed! -- Who in the Name of Wonder would take thee, sunk
as thou art into a musing, moping, melancholy Lover, for the gay Charles
Bellmour whom I knew in the West Indies?


BELL. Poh, that is not mentioned, -- you know my Father took me against my
Will from the University, and consigned me over, to the academic Discipline of
a Man of War; so chat to prevent a Dejection of Spirits, I was obliged to run
into the opposite Extreme, -- as you yourself were wont to do.


ROVE. Why, yes, I had my Moments of Reflection, and was glad to dissipate them
-- You know I always told you there was something extraordinary in my Story;
and so there is still, I suppose it must be cleared up in a few Days now -- I Am
in no Hurry about it though; I must see the Town a little this Evening, and have
my Frolic first. But to the Point Bellmour, you was going from the Tavern you
say. --


BELL. Yes, Sir, about two in the Morning, and I perceived an unusual Blaze in
the Air, -- I was in a rambling Humor, and so resolved to know what it was.


BRISK. I, and my Ma^^er went together Sir. --


BELL. Oh! Rovewell! my better Stars ordained it to light me on to Happiness;
-- by sure Attraction led, I came to the very Street where a House was on Fire;
Water-Engines playing, Flames ascending, all Hurry, Confusion, and Distress;
when on a sudden the Voice of Despair, Silver sweet, came thrilling down to my
very Heart; -- poor, dear, little Soul, what can she do, cried the Neighbors?
Again she scream'd, the Fire gathering Force, and gaining upon her every
Instant; -- here Ma'am said I, leap into my Arms, I Will be sure to receive you;
-- and would you think it? -- down she came, -- my dear Rovewell, such a Girl!
-- I caught her in my Arms you Rogue, safe, without Harm. -- The dear naked
Venus, just risen from her Bed, my Boy, -- her slender Waist Rovewell, the
downy Smoothness of her whole Person, and her Limbs harmonious, swelled by
Nature's softest Hand. --


ROVE. Raptures, and Paradise! -- What Seraglio in Covent Garden did you carry
her to?


BELL There again now! Do, prithee correct your Way of Thinking, take a quantum
sufficit of virtuous Love, and purify your Ideas. -- Her lovely Bashfulness,
her delicate Fears, -- her Beauty heightened and endeared by Distress,
dispersed my wildest Thoughts, and melted me into Tenderness and Respect. --


ROVE. But Bellmour, surely she has not the Impudence to be modest after you
have had Possession of her Person. --


BELL. My Views are honorable I assure you, Sir; but her Father is so absurdly
positive. -- The Man's distracted about the Balance of Power, and will give his
Daughter to none but a Politician. -- When there was an Execution in his House,
he thought of nothing but the Camp at Pyrna, and now he is a Bankrupt, his Head
runs upon Ways and Means, and Schemes for paying off the national Debt: The
Affairs of Europe engross all his Attention, while the Distresses of his lovely
Daughter pass unnoticed.


ROVE. Ridiculous enough! -- But why do you mind him? Why don't you go to Bed
to the Wench at once? -- Take her into Keeping Man. --


BELL. How can you talk so affrontingly of her? -- Have not I told you though her
Father is ruined, still she has great Expectancies from a rich Relation? --


ROVE. Then what do you stand watering at the Mouth for? If she is to have
Money enough to pay for her China, her Gaming Debts, her Dogs, and her Monkeys,
marry her then, if you needs must be ensnared; be in a Fool's Paradise for a
Honey-Moon, then come to yourself, wonder at what you have done, and mix with
honest Fellows again; -- carry her off I say, and never stand whining for the
Father's Consent. --


BELL. Carry her off! -- I like the Scheme, -- will you assist me?


ROVE. No, no, there I beg to be excused. Don't you remember what the Satyrist
says, -- Never marry while there is a Halter to be had for Money, or a Bridge to
afford a convenient Leap.


BELL. Prithee leave Fooling. --


ROVE. I am in serious Earnest I assure you; I Will drink with you, game with
you, go into any Scheme of Frolic with you, but war Matrimony. -- Nay, if
you will come to the Tavern this Evening, I Will drink your Mistress's Health in a
Bumper; but as to your conjugal Scheme, I Will have nothing to do with that
Business positively. --


BELL. Well, well, I Will take you at your Word, and me^^ you at ten exactly at
the same Place we were at last Night; then and there I Will let you know what
further Measures I Have concerted.


ROVE. Till then, farewell, a-propos, -- do you know that I Have seen none of my
Relations yet?


BELL. Time enough Tomorrow.


ROVE. Ay, ay, Tomorrow will do, -- well, your Servant.


Exit Rovewell. BELL. Rovewell, yours, -- see the Gentleman down Stairs, -- and
do you hear, come to me into my Study that I may give you a Letter to Harriot,
and hark ye, Sir, -- Be sure your see Harriet yourself; and let me have no
Messages from that officious go-between, her Mrs. Slipslop of a Maid, with her
unintelligible Jargon of hard Words, of which she neither knows the Meaning nor
Pronunciation -- ( Exit Brisk.) I Will write to her this Moment, acquaint her
with the soft Tumult of my Desires, and, if possible, make her mine this very
Night -- Exit repeating.

Love first taught Letters for some Wretch's Aid,
Some banished Lover, or some captive Maid. --

SCENE the Upholsterer's House. Enter HARRIET and TERMAGANT. TERM. WELL, but
Ma'am, he has made love to you six Weeks successfully; he has been as constant
to his 'Moors poor Gentleman, as if you had the Subversion of a 'State to
settle upon him -- and if he slips through your Fingers, now Ma'am, you have,
nobody to depute it to but yourself.


HAR. Lord Termagant, how you ran on -- I tell you again and again my Pride was
^ouched, because he seemed to prosume on his Opulence, and my Father's
Distresses.


TERM. La, Miss Harriet, how can you be so Paradropsical in your 'Pinions?


HAR. Well, but you know though my Father's affairs are ruined I am not in so
desperate a way; consider, my Uncle's Fortune is no trifle, and I think that
Prospect intitles me to give myself a few airs before I resign my Person.


TERM. I grant ye Ma'am, you have very good pretensions; but then it is waiting
for dead Men's Shoes: I Will venture to be perjured Mr. Bellmour never disclaimed
an Idear of your Father's distress --


HAR. Supposing that.


TERMAGANT. Suppose Ma'am -- I know it di sputably to be so.


HAR. Indisputably I guess you mean; -- but I Am tired of wrangling with you
about Words.


TERM. By my troth you're in the right on it; -- there is never a she in all old
England, (as your Father' calls it) is Mistress of such Philsiology, as I am.
Uncertain I am, as how you does not know nobody that puts their Words together
with such a Curacy as myself. I once lived wsth a Mistus, Ma'am, -- Mistus! --
She was a Lady -- a great Brewer's Wife! -- and she wore as fine Clothes, as
any Person of Quality, let her get up as early as she will -- and she used to
call me -- Termagant, says she, -- What Is the Signification of such a Word --
and I always told her -- I told her the Importation of all my Words, though I
could not help laughing, Miss Harriet, to see so fine a Lady such a downright
Ignoranimus,


HAR. Well, -- but pray now Termagant, would you have me directly upon being
asked the Question, throw myself into the Arms of a Man?


TERM. OF my Conscience you did throw yourself into his Arms with scarce a
Shift on, that is what you did.


HAR. Yes, but that was a Leap in the Dark, when there was no Time to think of
it.


TERM. Well, it does not signify Argifying, I wish we were both warm in Bed;
you with Mr. Bellmour, and I wlth his Coxcomb of a Man; instead of being
manured here with an old crasy Fool -- axing your pardon Ma'am, for calling
your Father so -- but he is a Fool, and the worst of Fools, with his Policies
-- when his House is full of Statues of Bangcressy.


HAR. It Is too true Termagant, -- yet he is my Father still, and I cannot help
loving him.


TERM. Fiddle faddle, -- Love him! -- he is an Anecdote against Love.


HAR. Hush! here he comes --


TERM. No, it is your Uncle Feeble, poor Gentleman, I pity's him, eaten up with
Infirmaries, to be taking such pains with a Madman.


Enter FEEBLE. HAR. Well Uncle, have you been able to console him?


FEEBLE. He wants no Consolation Child, -- lackaday, -- I Am so infirm I can
hardly move. -- I found him tracing in the Map, Prince Charles of Lorraine's
Passage over the Rhne and comparing it with Julius Caesar's.


TERM. An old Blockhead -- I Have no Patience with him with his Fellows coming
after him every Hour in the Day with News. Well now I wishes there was no such
a Thing as a News-paper in the World, with such a Pack of Lies, and such a deal
of Jab-jab every day.


FEEBLE. Ay, there were three or four shabby Fellows with him when I went into
his Room -- I cannot get him to think of appearing before the Commissioners
Tomorrow, to disclose his Effects; but I Will send my Neighbor Counselor
Codicil to him, -- don't be dejected Harriet, my poor Sister, your Mother, was
a good Woman; I love you for her sake, Child, and all I am worth, shall be
yours -- But I must be going, -- I find myself but very Ill; good Night
Harriet, good Night.


Exit Feeble. HAR. You Will give me leave to see you to the Door, Sir.


Exit Harriet. TERM. OF my Conscience this Master of mine within here, might
have picked up his Crumbs as well as Mr. Feeble, if he had any Idear of his
Business, I Am sure if I had not hopes from Mr. Feeble, I should not tarry in
this House -- By my Troth, if all who have nothing to say to the 'fairs of the
Nation, would mind their own Business, and those who should take care of our
'fairs, would mind their Business too, I fancy poor old England (as they call
it) would fare the better among 'em -- This old crazy Pate within here --
playing the Fool -- when the Man is past his grand Clytemnester.


Exit Termagant. SCENE discovers QUIDNUNC at a Table, with Newspapers,
Pamphlets, etc. all around him. QUID. Six and three is nine -- seven and four
is eleven, and carry one -- let me see, 126 Million -- 199 Thousand, 328 -- and
all this with about -- where, where is the amount of the Specie? Here, here --
with about 15 Million in Specie, all this great circulation! good, good, -- why
then how are we ruined? -- how are we ruined? -- What says the Land Tax at 4
Shillings in the Pound, two Million! now where is my new Assessment? -- here, --
here, the 5th part of Twenty, 5 in 2 I cannot, but 5 in 20 (pauses) right, 4
times -- why then upon my new Assessment there is 4 Million -- how are we
ruined? -- what says, Malt, Cider, and Mum, -- eleven and carry one, naught and
go 2 -- good, good, Malt, Hops, Cider, and Mum; then there is the Wine License,
and the Gin Act -- The Gin Act is no bad Article, -- if the People will shoot
Fire down their Throats, why in a Christian Country they should pay as much as
possible for Suicide -- Salt! good -- Sugar, very good -- Window lights -- good
again! -- Stamp Duty, that is not so well -- It will have a bad Effect upon the
Newspapers, and we shall not have enough of Politics -- But there is the Lottery
-- where is my new Scheme for a Lottery? -- Here it is -- Now for the Amount of
the whole -- How are we ruined? 7 and carry naught -- naught and carry one --


Enter TERMAGANT. TERM. Sir, Sir, --


QUID. Hold your Tongue you Baggage, you will put me out -- naught and carry one.


TERM. Counselor Codicil will be with you presently --


QUID. Prithee be quiet Woman -- how are we ruined?


TERM. Ay, I Am considous as how you may thank yourself for your own Ruination.


QUID. Ruin the Nation! hold your Tongue you Jade, I Am raising the Supplies
within the Year, -- how many did I carry?


TERM. Yes, you have carried your Pigs to a fine Market --


QUID. Get out of the Room, Hussy -- you Trollop, get out of the Room --
[turning her out]


Enter RAZOR, with Suds on his Hands, etc. QUID. Friend Razor, I am glad to see
thee -- well have got any News?


RAZOR. A Budget! I left a Gentleman half Shaved in my Shop over the way; it
came into my Head of a sudden, so I could not be at ease till I told you --


QUID. That Is kind, that is kind Friend Razor -- never mind the Gentleman, he
can wait. --


RAZOR. Yes, so he can, he can wait. --


QUID. Come, now let us hear, what is it?


RAZOR. I shaved a great Man's Butler to Day. --


QUID Did ye?


RAZOR. I did.


QUID. Ay.


RAZOR. Very true. (both shake their Heads.)


QUID. What did he say?


RAZOR. Nothing.


QUID. Hum -- how did he look.


RAZOR. Full of thought.


QUID. Ay! full of thought -- what can that mean?


RAZOR. It must mean something. (Staring at each other.)


QUID. Mayhap somebody may be going out of Place.


RAZOR. Like enough, -- there is something at the bottom, when a great Man's
Butler looks grave, things cannot hold out in this manner, Matter Quidnunc! --
Kingdoms rise and fall! -- Luxury will be the ruin of us all, it will indeed.
(Stares at him.)


QUID. Pray now, Friend Razor, do you find Business as current now as before
the War?


RAZOR. No, no I have not made a Wig the Lord knows when, I cannot mind it for
thinking of my poor Country.


QUID. That Is generous, Friend Razor --


RAZOR. Yes, I cannot gi' my Mind to any for thinking of my Country, and when I
was in Bedlam, it was the same, I could think of nothing else in Bedlam, but
poor old England, and so they said as how I was Incurable for it. --


QUID. S'bodikins! they might as well say the same of me.


RAZOR. So they might -- well, your Servant Mr. Quidnunc, I Will go now and Shave
the rest of the Gentleman's Face. -- Poor Old England. ( sighs and shakes his
Head.) ( going


QUID. But hark ye, Friend Razor, ask the Gentleman if he has got any News. --


RAZOR. I will, I will.


QUID. And do you hear, come and tell me if he has. --


RAZOR. I will, I will -- poor Old England. (going returns) O, Mr. Quidnunc, I
want to ask you -- pray now --


Enter TERMAGANT. TERM Gemini! Gemini! -- How can the Man have so little
Difference for his Customers --


QUID. I tell you, Mrs. Malapert --


TERM. And I tell you the Gentleman keeps such a Bawling yonder, for shame, Mr.
Razor -- you will be a Bankrupper like my Master, with such a House full of
Children as you have, pretty little things -- that is what you will --


RAZOR. I Am a coming, I Am a coming, Mrs. Termagant -- I say Mr. Quidnunc, I
cannot sleep in my Bed for thinking what will come of the Protestants, if the
Papists should get the better in the present War. --


QUID. I Will tell you -- The Geographer of our Coffee-house was saying the other
Day, that there is an Huge Tract of Land about the Pole, where the Protestants
may retire, and that the Papists will never be able to beat 'em thence, if the
northern Powers hold together, and the grand Turk make a Diversion in their
Favor.


RAZOR. That makes me easy -- I Am glad the Protestants will know where to go if
the Papists should get the better (going returns) Oh! Mr. Qnidnunc -- hark'ye
-- India Bonds are risen.


QUID. Are they? -- how much?


RAZOR. A Jew Pedlar said in my Shop as how they are risen three Sixteenths --


QUID. Why then that makes some Amends for the Price of Corn --


RAZOR. So it does, so it does, if they but hold up and the Protestants know
where to go, I shall then have a Night's Rest mayhap --


Exit RAZOR. QUID. I shall never be rightly easy till those careening Wharfs at
Gibraltar are repaired --


TERM. Fiddle for your Dwarfs, impair your ruined Fortune, do that.


QUID. If only one Ship can heave down at a time, there will be no End of it --
and then, why should Watering be so tedious there?


TERM. Look where your Daughter comes, and yet you will be ruinating about
Give-a-halter, while that poor Thing is breaking her Heart.


Enter HARRIET. QUID. It Is one Comfort, however, they can always have fresh
Provisions in the Mediterranean --


HAR. Dear Papa, what is the Mediterranean to People in our Situation? --


QUID. The Mediterranean Child? Why if we should lose the Mediterranean, we are
all undone.


HAR. Dear Sir, that is our Misfortune -- we are undone already --


QUID. No, no, -- here, here Child -- I have raised the Supplies within the
Year.


TERM. I tell you, you're a lunadic Man.


QUID. Yes, yes, I Am a Lunatic to be sure -- I tell you, Harriet, I have saved
a gread deal out of my Affairs for you --


HAR. For Heaven's Sake, Sir, don't do that -- you must give up every thing, my
Uncle Feeble's Lawyer will be here to talk with you about it --


QUID. Poh, poh, I tell you, I know what I Am about; -- you shall have my Books
and pamphlets, and all the Manifestoes of the powers at War. --


HAR. And so make me a Politician, Sir! --


QUID. It would be the pride of my Heart to find I had got a Politician in
pettycoats -- a Female Machiavel! -- S'bodikins, you might then know as much as
most people that talk in Coffee-houses, and who knows but in time you might be
a Maid of Honor, or Sweeper of the Mall, or --


HAR. Dear Sir, don't I see what you have got by politics?


QUID. Pshaw! my Country's of more Consequence to me, and let me tell you, you
cannot think too much of your Country in these worst of Times; for Mr. Monitor
has told us, that Affairs in the North, and the Protestant Interest begin to
grow TICKLISH.


TERM. And your Daughter's Affairs are very TICKLISH too, I Am sure. --


HAR. Prithee Termagant --


TERM. I must speak to him -- I know you are in a very TICKLISH Situation,
Ma'am.


QUID. I tell you, you Trull --


TERM. But I am convicted it is so -- and the Posture of my Affairs is very
TICKLISH too -- and so I imprecate that Mr. Bellmour would come, and, --


QUID. Mr. Bellmour come! I tell you, Mrs. Saucebox, that my Daughter shall
never be married to a Man that has not better Notions of the Balance of Power.


TERM. But what Purvision will you make for her now with your Balances?


QUID. There again now! -- Why do you think I don't know what I Am about? I Will
look in the Papers for a Match for you, Child; there is often good Matches
advertised in the Papers -- Evil betide it, -- Evil betide it! I once thought
to have struck a great Stroke, that would have astonished all Europe, -- I
thought to have married my Daughter to Theodore King of Corsica --


HAR. What, and have me perish in a Jail, Sir?


QUID. S'bobikins my Daughter would have had her Coronation Day; -- I should
have been allied to acrowned Head, and been FIRST LORD OF THE TREASURY OF
CORSICA! -- But come, -- now I Will go and talk over the London Evening, till the
Gazette comes in -- I shall not sleep to night unless I see the Gazette.


Enter CODICIL. CODIC. Mr. Quidnunc your Servant -- the Door was open, and I
entered upon the Premises -- I Am just come from the Hall.


QUID. S'bodikins! This Man is come now to keep me at Home.


CODIC. Upon my word Miss Harriet's a very pretty young Lady, as pretty a
young. Lady, as one would desire to have and to hold. Ma'am your most obedient;
I have drawn my Friend Feeble's Will, in which you have all his Goods and
Chattles, Lands and Hereditaments.


HAR. I thank you Sir, for the Information --


CODIC. And I hope soon to draw your Marriage Settlement for my Friend Mr.
Bellmour.


HAR. O Lud! Sir, not a Word of that before my Father -- I wish you would try, Sir,
to get him to think of his Affairs --


CODIC. Why yes, I have Instructions for that Purpose; Mr. Quidnunc, I am
instructed to expound the Law to you.


QUID. What, the Law of Nations?


CODIC. I am instructed, Sir, that you're a Bankrupt -- Quasi bancus ruptus --
Banque route fairc -- and my Instructions say further, that you are summoned to
appear before the Commissioners tomorrow --


QUID. That may be, Sir, but I cannot go tomorrow, and so I shall send 'em Word
-- I am to be tomorrow at Slaughter's Coffee-house with a private Committee
about Business of great Consequence to the Affairs of Europe --


CODIC. Then, Sir, if you don't go, I must instruct you, that you will be guilty
of a Felony: it will be deemed to be done malo Animo -- it is held so in the
Books -- and what says the Statute? By the 5th George 2d, Cap. 30. Not
surrendering or imbezzling is Felony without Benefit of Clergy.


QUID. Ay, -- you tell me News --


CODIC. Give me leave, Sir, -- I am instructed to expound the Law to you;
Felony is thus described in the Books, Felonia, says Hotoman, de verbis
feudalibus significat capitale facinus, a capital Offense.


QUID. You tell me News, you do indeed.


CODIC. It was so apprehended by the Goths, and the Longobards, and what says
Sir Edward Coke? Fieri debeat felleo animo.


QUID. You Have told me News -- I did not know it was Felony; but if the Flanders
Mail should come in while I am there -- I shall know nothing at all of it --


CODIC. But why should you be uneasy? cui bono, Mr. Quidnunc, cui bono?


QUID. Not uneasy! If the Papists should beat the Protestants --


CODIC. But I tell you, they can get no Advantage of us. The Laws against the
further Growth of Popery will secure us -- there are Provisoes in Favor of
Protestant Purchasers under Papists -- 10th Geo. I. Cap. 4 and 6 Geo. II. Cap.
5.


QUID. Ay!


CODIC. And besides Popish Recusants cannot carry Arms, so can have no Right of
Conquest, Vi and armis.


QUID. That Is true -- that is true -- I Am easier in my Mind --


CODIC. To be sure, what are you uneasy about? The Papists can have no Claim to
Silesia --


QUID. Cannot they?


CODICIL. No, they can set up no Claim -- If the Queen on her Marriage had put
all her Lands into Hotchpot then indeed -- and it seems says Littleton, that
this Word Hotchpot is in English a Pudding --


QUID. You reason very clearly, Mr. Codicil, upon the Rights of the Powers at
War, and so now if you will, I am ready to talk a little of my Affairs.


CODIC. Nor does the Matter rest here; for how can she set up a Claim, when she
has made a Conveyance to the House of Brandenburgh? the Law, Mr. Quidnunc is
very severe against fraudulent Conveyances --


QUID. S'bodikins, you have satisfied me --


CODIC. Why therefore then -- if he will levy Fines and suffer a common
Recovery, he can bequeath it as he likes in feodum simplex, provided he takes
care to put in ses Here Is.


QUID. I Am heartily glad of it, -- so that with regard to my Effects --


CODIC. Why then suppose she was to bring it to a Trial at Bar --


QUID. I say with regard to the full Disclosure of my Effects --


CODIC. What would she get by that? -- it would go off upon a special Pleading.
-- and as to Equity --


QUID. Pray now must I surrender my Books and my Pamphlets?


CODIC. What would Equity do for her? Equity cannot relieve her, he might keep
her at least twenty Years before a Master to settle the Account --


QUID. You have made me easy about the Protestants in this War, you have indeed
-- so that with regard to my appearing before the Commissioners.


CODIC. And as to the Ban of the Empire, he may demur to that. For all Tenures
by Knight's Service are abolished, and the Statute 12 Char. II. has declared
all Lands to be held under a common Socage.


QUID. Pray now, Mr. Codicil, must not my Creditors appear to prove their
Debts? --


CODIC. Why therefore then, if they are held in Common Socage, I submit it to
the Court, -- whether the Empire can have any Claim to Knight's-Service; --
they cannot call to him for a single Man for the Wars. -- Unum Hominem ad
Guerram; -- for what is Common Socage? -- Socagium idem est quod Servitium
socae, -- the Service of the Plough.


QUID. I am ready to attend 'em -- But pray now, when my Certificate is signed,
-- it is of great Consequence to me to know this. I say, Sir, when my
Certificate is signed, may not I then -- Hey! (starting up) Hey! -- What do I
hear?


CODIC. I apprehend, -- I humbly conceive when your Certificate is signed. --


QUID. Hold your Tongue Man, -- did not I hear the Gazette? Newsman, (within)
Great News in the London-Gazette.


QUID. Yes, yes it is, -- it is the Gazette. -- Termagant run you Jade, ( turns
her out) Harriet fly, it is the Gazette. ( turns her out.


CODIC. The Law in that Case Mr. Quidnunc, prima facie. --


QUID. I cannot hear you, -- I have not Time, -- Termagant, run, make Haste. --
[stamps violently.]


CODIC. I say, Sir, it is held in the Books. --


QUID. I care for no Books, -- I want the Papers. -- ( stamping.)


CODIC. Throughout all the Books, -- Bo! the Man is non compos, and his Friends
instead of a Commission of Bankruptcy, should take out a Commission of Lunacy.


Exit COD. Enter TERMAGANT. TERM. What do you keep such a Bauling for? the
Newsman says as how the Emperor of Mocco is dead. --


QUID. The Emperor of Morocco!


TERM. Yes, him.


QUIDNUNC. My poor dear Emperor of Morocco. (bursts into Tears.)


TERM. Ah! you old Don Quicksett! -- Ma'am, Ma'am, -- Miss Harriet, go your
ways into the next Room, there is Mr. Bellmour's Man there, Mr. Bellmour has
sent you a Billydore. --


HAR. Oh, Termagent, my Heart is in an uproar, -- I don't know what to say --
where is he? let me run to him this instant.


Exit Harriet. QUID. The Emperor of Morocco had a regard for the Balance of
Europe, (sighs) well, well, come, come, give me the Paper.


TERM. The Newsman would not trust because you're a Bankrupper, and so I paid
two Pence half Penny for it. --


QUID. Let Us see, -- let us see --


TERM. Give me my Money then -- ( running from him.)


QUID. Give it me this Instant, you Jade -- ( after her.)


TERM. Give me my Money, I say -- ( from him.)


QUID. I Will teach you, I will you Baggage. ( after her.)


TERM. I will not part with it till I have my Money. ( from him.)


QUID. I Will give you no Money, Hussy. ( after her.)


TERM. Your Daughter shall marry Mr. Bellmour. ( from him.)


QUID. I Will never accede to the Treaty. ( after her.)


TERM. Go you old Fool. ( from him.)


QUIDNUNC. You vile Minx, worse than the Whore of Babylon. ( after her.)


TERM. There, you old cracked Brained Politic, -- there is your Paper for you. (
throws it down, and Exit.)


QUID. (sitting down.) Oh! Heavens! -- I Am quite out of Breath, -- a Jade, to
keep my News from me, -- what does it say? what does it say? what does it say?
( Reads very fa^^ while opening the Paper.) Whereas a Commission of Bankrupt is
awarded and issued forth against Abraham Quidnunc, of the Parish of St.
Martin's in the Fields, Upholsterer, Dealer and Chapman, the said Bankrupt is
hereby required to Surrender himself. Po, what signifies this Stuff? I don't
mind myself, when the Balance of power is concerned. -- however, I shall be
read of, in the same Paper, in the London Gazette, by the Powers abroad;
together with the Pope, and the French King, and the Mogul, and all of 'em --
good, good -- very good! -- here is a Power of News, -- let me see, ( reads)
Letters from the Vice Admiral, dated Tiger off Calcutta. -- ( mutters to
himself very eagerly), Oddsheart those Baggages will interrupt me, I hear their
Tongues a going, clack, clack, clack, I Will run into my Closet, and lock myself
up. -- a Vixin! -- a Trollop, -- to want Money from me, -- when I may have
occasion to buy The State of the sinking Fund, or Faction detected, or The
Barrier Treaty, -- or, -- and besides, how could the Jade tell but Tomorrow we
may have a Gazette Extraordinary?


Exit. End of the First ACT.
ACT II.
Scene the Upholsterer's House. Enter QUIDNUNC. QUIDNUNC. WHERE, where, where
is he? -- where is Mr. Pamphlet? -- Mr. Pamphlet! -- Termagant, Mr. a -- a --
Termagant, Harriet, Termagant, you vile Minx, you saucy Enter TERMAGANT. Here Is
a racket indeed!


QUID. Where Is Mr. Pamphlet? you Baggage if he is gone --


TERM. Did not I intimidate that he is in the next Room -- why sure the Man's
out of his Wits.


QUID. Show him in here then -- I would not miss seeing him for the Discovery
of the North-East Passage.


TERM. Go, you old Gemini Gomini of a Politic.


Exit TER. QUID. Show him in I say, -- I had rather see him than the whole
State of the Peace at Utrecht, or 'the Paris a-la-main,' or the Votes, or the
Minutes, or -- Here he comes -- the best Political writer of the Age.


Enter PAMPHLET. (With a Surtout Coat, a Muff, a long Campaign Wig out of Curl,
and a pair of black Garters, buckled under the Knees.) QUID. Mr. Pamphlet, I am
heartily glad to see you, -- as glad as if you were an Express from the Groyn,
or from Berlin, or from Zell, or from Calcutta over Land, or from --


PAMPH. Mr. Quidnunc, your Servant, -- I Am come from a place of great
importance. --


QUID. Look ye there now? -- well, where, where?


PAMPH. Are we alone?


QUID. Stay, stay, till I shut the Door, -- now, now, where do you come from?


PAMPH. From the Court of Requests.


( laying aside his Surtout Coat.) QUID. The Court of Requests, ( whispers) are
they up?


PAMPH. Hot Work. --


QUID. Debates arising may be.


PAMPH. Yes, and like to sit late.


QUID. What are they upon?


PAMPH. Cannot say, --


QUID. What carried you thither?


PAMPH. I went in hopes of being taken up. --


QUID. Look ye there now. (shaking his Head)


PAMPH. I Have been aiming at it these three Years. --


QUID. Indeed! (staring at him.)


PAMPH. Indeed, -- Sedition is the only thing an Author can live by now, --
Time has been I could turn a Penny by an Earthquake; or live upon a
Jail-Distemper; or dine upon a Bloody Murder; -- but now that is all over, --
nothing will do now but roasting a Minister -- or telling the People that they
are ruined -- the People of England are never so happy as when you tell 'em
they are ruined.


QUID. Yes, but they an't ruined -- I have a Scheme for paying off the national
Debt.


PAMPH. Let Us see, let us see (puts on his Spectacles) well enough! well
imagined, -- a new Thought this -- I must make this my own, ( aside) silly,
futile, absurd. -- abominable, this will never do -- I Will put it in my Pocket,
and read it over in the Morning for you -- now look ye here -- I Will show you a
Scheme ( rummaging his Pockets) no that is not it -- that is my Conduct of the
Ministry, by a Country Gentleman -- I proved the Nation undone here, this sold
hugely, -- and here now, -- here is my Answer to it, by a noble Lord; -- this
did not move among the Trade. --


QUID. What, do you write on both sides?


PAMPH. Yes, both sides, -- I Have two ^ands Mr. Quidnunc, -- always impartial,
-- Ambo dexter. -- now here, here is my Dedication to a great Man -- touched
twenty for this -- and here, -- here is my Libel upon him --


QUID. What, after being obliged to him?


PAMPH. Yes, for that Reason, -- it excites Curiosity -- white wash and
blacking-Ball Mr. Quidnunc! in ut^ umque paratus, -- no thriving without it.


QUID. What have you here in this Pocket? ( prying eagerly.)


PAMPH. That Is my Account with Jacob Zorobable, the Broker, for writing
Paragraphs to raise or tumble the Stocks, or the price of Lottery Tickets,
according to his Purposes.


QUID. Ay, how do you do that?


PAMPH. As thus, -- to Day the Protestant Interest declines, Madrass is taken,
and England's undone; then all the long Faces in the Alley look as dismal as a
Blank, and so Jacob buys away and thrives upon our Ruin. -- Then to Morrow,
we are all alive and merry again, Pondicherry's taken; a certain Northern
Potentate will shortly strike a Blow, to astonish all Europe, and then every
true born Englishman is willing to buy a Lottery Ticket for twenty or thirty
Shillings more than its worth; so Jacob sells away, and reaps the Fruits of our
Success.


QUID. What, and will the People believe that now?


PAMPH. Believe it! -- believe any thing, -- no swallow like a true born
Englishman's -- a Man in a Quart-Bottle, or a Victory, it is all one to them, --
they give a Gulp, -- and down it goes, -- glib, glib. --


QUID. Yes, but they an't at the Bottom of things? --


PAMPH. No, not they, they dabble a little, but cannot dive --


QUID. Pray now Mr. Pamphlet, what do you think of our Situation?


PAMPH. Bad, Sir, bad, -- and how can it be better? -- the People in Power
never send to me, -- never consult me, -- it must be bad. -- Now here, here, (
goes to his loose Coat) here is a M^nuscript! -- this will do the Business, a
Masterpiece, -- I shall be taken up for this. --


QUID Shall ye?


PAMPH. As sure as a Gun I shall, -- I know the Bookseller's a Rogue, and will
give me up.


QUID. But pray now what shall you get by being taken up?


PAMPH. I Will tell you -- ( whispers) in order to make me hold my Tongue.


QUID. Ay, but you will not hold your Tongue for all that.


PAMPH. Po, po, not a Jot of that, -- abuse 'em the next Day.


QUID. Well, well, I wish you Success, -- but do you hear no News? have you
seen the Gazette?


PAMPH. Yes, I Have seen that, -- great news, Mr. Quidnunc, -- but harkye! -- (
whispers) and kiss hands next week.


QUID. Ay!


PAMPH. Certain.


QUID. Nothing permanent in this World. --


PAMPH. All is Vanity. --


QUID. Ups and Downs. --


PAMPH. Ins and puts. --


QUID. Wheels within Wheels. --


PAMPH. No Smoke without Fire.


QUID. All Is well that Ends well.


Each in deep Thought without looking at the other. PAMPH. It will last our
Time.


QUID. Whoever lives to see it, will know more of the Matter.


PAMPH. Time will tell all.


QUID. Ay, we must leave all to the Determination of Time. Mr. Pamphlet, I Am
heartily obliged to you for this Visit, -- I love you better than any Man in
England.


PAMPH. And for my part Mr. Quidnunc, -- I love you better than I do England
itself.


QUID. That Is kind, that is kind, -- there is nothing I would not do Mr.
Pamphlet, to serve you.


PAMPH. Mr. Quidnunc, I know you're a Man of Integrity and Honor, -- I know
you are, -- and now since we have opened our Hearts, there is a Thing Mr.
Quidnunc, in which you can serve me, -- you know, Sir, -- this is in the
fullness of our Hearts, -- you know you have my Note for a Trifle, -- hard
dealing with Assignees, -- now, could not you to serve a Friend, could not you
throw that Note into the Fire?


QUID. Hey! but would that be honest?


PAMPH. Leave that to me, a refined Stroke of Policy, -- Papers have been
destroyed in all Governments.


QUID. So they have, -- it shall be done, it will be political, it will indeed.
-- Pray now Mr. Pamphlet, what do you take to be the true Political Balance of
Power?


PAMPH. What do I take to be the Balance of Power?


QUID. Ay, the Balance of Power.


PAMPH. The Balance of Power is, -- what do I take to be the Balance of Power,
-- the Balance of Power ( shuts his Eyes) what do I take to be the Balance of
Power?


QUID. The Balance of Power, I take to be, when the Court of Aldermen sits.


PAMPH. No, no, --


QUID. Yes, yes. --


PAMPH. No, no, the Balance of Power is when the Foundations of Government and
the Superstructures are natural.


QUID. How do you mean natural?


PAMPH. Prithee be quiet Man, -- this is the Language. -- The Balance of Power
is -- when the Superstructures are reduced to proper Balances, or when the
Balances are not reduced to unnatural Superstructures.


QUID. Po, po, I tell you it is when the Fortifications of Dunquerque are
demolished. --


PAMPH. But I tell you Mr. Quidnunc. --


QUID. I say Mr. Pamphlet. --


PAMPH. Hear me Mr. Quidnunc.


QUID. Give me Leave Mr. Pamphlet. --


PAMPH. I must observe, Sir. --


QUID. I am convinced, Sir. --


PAMPH. That the Balance of Power. --


QUID. That the Fortifications at Dunquerque.


Both in a Passion. PAMPH. Depends upon the Balances, and Superstructures. --


QUID. Constitute the true Political Equilibrium. --


PAMPH. Nor will I converse with a Man. --


QUID. And Sir, I never desire to see your Face. --


PAMPH. Of such anti-constitutional Principles. --


QUID. Nor the Face of any Man who is such a Frenchman in his Heart, and has
such Notions of the Balance of Power.


Exeunt. QUIDNUNC, ( Reenters.) Ay, I Have found him out, -- such abominable
Principles, I never desire to converse with any Man of his Notions, -- no,
never while I live. --


Re-enter PAMPHLET. PAMPH. Mr. Quidnunc, one Word with you if you please.


QUID. Sir, I never desire to see your Face. --


PAMPH. My Property, Mr. Quidnunc, -- I shall not leave my Property in the House
of a Bankrupt, (twisting his Handkerchief round his Arm) a silly, empty,
incomprehensible Blockhead.


QUID. Blockhead! Mr. Pamphlet. --


PAMPH. A Blockhead to use me thus, when I have you so much in my Power. --


QUID. In your Power!


PAMPH. In my Power, Sir, -- it is in my Power to hang you.


QUID. To hang me!


PAMPH. Yes, Sir; to hang you -- ( drawing on his Coat) Did not you propose,
but this Moment, did not you desire me to combine and consederate to burn a
Note, and defraud your Creditors --


QUID. I desire it!


PAMPH. Yes, Mr. Quidnunc, but I shall detect you to the World. I Will give your
Character. -- You shall have a Six-penny touch next Week.

Flebit at insig ^is tota cantabitur urbe. Exit Pamphlet.
QUID. Mercy on me, there is the Effect of his Anticonstitutional Principles. --
The Spirit of his whole Party, I never desire to exchange another Word with him.


Enter TERMAGRANT. TERM. Here Is a Pother indeed! -- did you call me?


QUID. No, you Trollop, no. --


TERM. Will you go to Bed?


QUID. No, no, no, no, -- I tell you, no.


TERM. Better to go to Rest, Sir; -- I heard a Doctor of Physic say as how,
when a Man is past his grand CRIME, -- what the Deuce makes me forget my Word?
-- his Grand CRIME-HYSTERIC, nothing is so good against Indiscompositions as
Rest taken in its prudish natalibus. --


QUID. Hold your Prating, -- I Will not go to Bed, I Will step to my Brother
Feeble, I want to have some Talk with him, and I Will go to him directly.


Exit Quidnunc. TERM. Go thy Ways for an old Hocus pocus of a News-monger --
You Will have good Luck if you find your Daughter here when you come back, Mr.
Bellmour will be here in the Intrim, and if he does not carry her off why then
I shall think him a mere shilly shally Feller; and by m^ Troth I shall think
him as bad a Politishing as yourself. -- Well, as I live and breath, I wonders
what the Dickens the Man sees in these Newspapers to be for ever toxicated
with them -- Let me see one of them, to try if I can vestigate any thing --
(takes the News-Paper and reads.)

Yesterday at Noon arrived at his Lodgings in Pall Mall, John Stukely, Esquire for
the remainder of the winter Season. --

Where the Dewil has the Man been? -- who knows him, or cares a minikin Pin
about him? -- He may go to Jericho for what I cares. --

The same Day, Mr. William Tabby, an eminent Man-Milliner was married to Miss
Jenkins, Daughter of Mr. Jenkins, a considerable Harberdasher in Bearbinder
Lane. --

What the Dickins is this to me? -- cannot Miss Jenkins and her Man-Milliner go
to bed, and hold their Tongues? -- why must they kiss and tell?

By advices from Violenna -- this is Policies now -- (reads to herself) -- and
promises a general peace. -- Why cannot that make the old. Curmudgeon happy? --

By letters from Paris -- this is more Policies -- (reads to herself) and all
seems tending to a general Rupture. -- What the Dewil does the Feller mean? --
Did not he tell me this moment there was to be Peace, and now its bloody News
again -- To go to tell me such an impudent lie to my Face!

At the Academy in Essex-street, Grown People are taught to dance. --

Grown People are taught to dance -- I likes that well enough -- I should like
to be betterer in my dancing -- I like the figerre of a minute as well as a
figerre in speech -- (dances and sings). But such trumpry as the News is, with
Kings, and Cheesemongers, and Bishops, and Highwayrman, and Ladies
Prayer-Books, and Lap-Dogs, and the Domodary and Camomile, and Ambassadors, and
Hair-Cutters, all higgledy piggledy together -- As I hope for Marcy I Will never
read another Paper -- and I wishes old Quidnunc would do the same -- if the Man
would do as I do, there would be some sense in it, -- if instead of his
Policies, he would manure his mind like me, and read good Altars, and improve
himself in fine Langidge, and Bombast, and polite Accollishments. --


Exit singing. SCENE the Street. Enter BELLMOUR, REVEWELL and BRISK, in Liquor.
BELL Women ever were, and ever will be fantastic Beings, vain, capricious, and
fond of Mischief --


BRISK. Well argued, Master.


ROVEWELL (sings.) Deceit is in every Woman,
But none in a Bumper can be my brave Boys,
But none in a Bumper can be.

BELL. To be insulted thus, with such a contemptuous Answer to a Message of
such tender Import, she might methinks at least have treated me with good
Manners, if not with a more grateful Return. --


ROVE. Split her Manners, let us go and drink the other Bumper to drown Sorrow.


BELL. I Will shake off her Fetters, -- I will Brisk, this very Night I will. --


BRISK. That Is right Master, and let her know we have found her out, and as the
Poet says,

'She that will not when she may,
'When she will, she shall have nay,
Master.


BELL. Very true Brisk, very true, -- the Ingratitude of it touches to the
quick. -- my dear Rovewell, only come and see me take a final Leave. --


ROVE. No truly, not I, none of your virtuous Minxes for me, I Will set you down
there, if you have a mind to play the Fool. -- I know she will melt you with a
Tear, and make a Puppy of you with a Smile, and so I Will not be Witness to it.


BELL. You're quite mistaken, I assure you, -- you will see me most manfully
upbraid her with her Ingratitude, and with more Joy than a sugitive Galley
Slave, escape from the Oar, to which I have been chained. --


BRISK. Master, Master, now is our Time, for look by the glimmering of yonder
Lamp, who comes along by the Wall there. --


BELL. Her Father, by all that is Lucky, -- my dear Rovewell let us drive off.


ROVE. I Will speak to him for you, Man --


BELL. Not for the World -- prithee come along --


Exeunt. Enter QUIDNUNC, with a dark Lantborn. QUID. If the Grand Turk should
actually commence open Hostility, and the House-bug Tartars make a Diversion
upon the Frontiers, why then it is my Opinion -- Time will discover to us a
great deal more of the Matter,


WATCH (within.) Past Eleven o'Clock, a Cloudy Night.


QUID. Hey? past Eleven o'Clock, -- 'Sbodikins, my Brother Feeble will be gone
to Bed, -- but he shall not Sleep till I have some Chat with him, -- Hark'ye
Watchman, Watchman.


Enter WATCHMAN. WATCH. Call Master.


QUID. Ay, step hither, step hither, -- have you heard any News?


WATCH. News, Master!


QUID. Ay, about the Prussians or the Russians?


WATCH. Russians, Master.


QUID. Yes, or the Movements in Pomerania?


WATCH. La, Master, I knows nothing -- poor Gentleman ( pointing to his Head)
Good Night to you Master, -- past Eleven o'Clock.


Exit Watchman. QUID. That Man now has a place under the Government, and he
will not speak. But I Am losing Time ( knocks at the Door) Hazy Weather ( looking
up) the Wind's fixed in that quarter, and we shall not have any Mails this Week to
come, -- come about good Wind, do, come about.


Enter a Servant Maid. MAID. La, Sir, is it you?


QUID. Is your Master at home, Child?


MAID. Gone to Bed, Sir.


QUID. Well, well, I Will step up to him.


MAID. Must not disturb him for the World, Sir. --


QUID. Business of the utmost Importance. --


MAID. Pray consider, Sir, my Master an't well. --


QUID. Prithee, be quiet Woman; I must see him.


Exeunt. SCENE, a Room in FEEBLE'S House. Enter FEEBLE, in his Nightgown.
FEEB. I was just stepping into Bed; -- bless my Heart what can this Man want?
-- I know his Voice, -- I hope no new Misfortune brings him at this Hour.


QUID. Hold your Tongue you foolish Hussy, -- he will be glad to see me. --
Brother Feeble, -- Brother Feeble, (within.)


FEEB. What can be the Matter?


Enter QUIDNUNC. QUID. Brother Feeble, I give you Joy, -- the Nabob's
demolished, ( sings) Britons strike home, revenge, etc.


FEEB. Lackaday Mr. Quidnunc, how can you serve me thus?


QUID. Suraja Dowla is no more


FEEB. Poor Man! he is stark staring mad --


QUID. Our Men diverted themselves with killing their Bullocks and their
Camels, till they dislodged the Enemy from the Octagon, and the Counterscarp,
and the Bunglo. --


FEEB. I Will hear the rest tomorrow Morning, -- oh! I Am ready to die.


QUID. Odsheart Man be of good cheer, -- the new Nabob, Jaffier Ally Cawn, has
acceded to a Treaty; and the English Company have got all their rights in the
Phirmaud and the Hushbulhoorums.


FEEB. But dear heart Mr. Quidnunc, why am I to be disturbed for this?


QUID. We had but two Seapoys killed, three Chokeys, four Gaul walls, and two
Zemidars. ( sings) Britons never shall be Slaves.


FEEB. Would not tomorrow Morning do as well for this?


QUID. Light up your Windows Man, light up your Windows, Chandernagore is taken.


FEEB. Well, well, I Am glad of it -- good Night, ( going)


QUID. Here, here is the Gazette. --


FEEB. Oh, I shall certainly faint. ( sits down)


QUID. Ay, ay, sit down, and I Will read it to you, ( Reads) nay, don't run away
-- I Have more News to tell you, there is an account from Williamsburg in America.
-- the Superintendant of Indian affairs --


FEEB. Dear Sir, dear Sir, -- ( avoiding him)


QUID. Has settled Matters with the Cherokees -- ( following him)


FEEB. Enough, enough, -- ( from him)


QUID. In the same manner he did before with the Catabaws, ( after him)


FEEB. Well, well, your Servant. -- ( from him)


QUID. So that the back Inhabitants -- ( after him)


FEEB. I wish you would let me be a quiet Inhabitant in my own House. --


QUID. So that the back Inhabitants will now be secured by the Cherokees and
Catabaws. --


FEEB. You Would better go home, and think of appearing before the Commissioners.
--


QUID. Go home! no, no, I Will go and talk the Matter over at our Coffee-house.
--


FEEB. Do so, do so --


QUID. ( Returning) Mr. Feeble, -- I had a dispute about the Balance of Power,
-- pray now can you tell --


FEEB. I know nothing of the Matter --


QUID. Well, another Time will do for that -- I have a great deal to say about
that ( going returns) right, I had like to have forgot, there is an Erratum in
the last Gazette. --


FEEB. With all my Heart --


QUID. Page 3d, Line 1, Col. 1st, and 3d, for Bombs read Booms.


FEEB. Read what you will --


QUID. Nay, but that alters the Sense, you know, -- well, now your Servant. If
I hear any more News I Will come and tell you --


FEEB. For Heaven's Sake, no more --


QUID. I Will be with you before you're out of your first Sleep --


FEEB. Goodnight, Goodnight --


Runs off. QUID. I forgot to tell you -- the Emperor of Morocco is dead -- (
bawling after him) so -- now I Have made him happy -- I Will go and knock up my
Friend Razor, and make him happy too; -- and then I Will go and see if any Body's
up at the Coffee-houses, -- and make them all happy there too. --


Exit Quidnunc. SCENE, The UPHOLSTERER'S House. Enter HARRIET and BELLMOUR.
HAR. Mr. Bellmour, pray Sir, -- I desire, Sir, you will not follow me from Room
to Room --


BELL. Indulge me but a Moment --


HAR. No, Mr. Bellmour, I Have seen too much of your Temper, I Am touched beyond
all enduring by your unmanly treatment.


BELL. Unmanly, Madam!


HAR. Unmanly, Sir, -- To presume upon the Misfortunes of my Family, and insult
me with the formidable Menaces, that, truly you have done; you will be no more a
Slave to me. Oh fie, Mr. Bellmour, I did not think a Gentleman capable of it --


BELL. But you will not consider --


HAR. Sir, I would have Mr. Bellmour to understand, that though my Father's
Circumstances are embarrassed, I have still an Uncle, who can, and will, place
me in a State of Affluence, in which, Sir, your Declarations --


BELL. But, my dear Ma'am --


HAR. And take this too with you, Sir, that I have Spirit enough to resent an
Indelicacy, nor will I bear ill Usage from any Man in England.


Exit sl^pping the Door after her. BELL. Well, but my dear Harriet, hear me but
a Moment -- it is mighty well, you have freed me from your Chains, I assure you
-- Your Business is done with me, I promise you -- and so adieu to this House
for ever -- ( going returns) Methinks, though we might part upon gentler Terms
-- Perverse and obstinate! -- ay, its all her own Fault. To treat me thus when
she knew my Heart was fixed upon her! Her eternal Coquetting -- her haughty
Airs, her tormenting me with continual Jealousy -- Her -- her -- her lovely
Eyes -- her Shape -- her Mien -- her delicate Sensibility -- her -- hey I --
what the duce am I at? a downright amorous Puppy, by Jupiter? -- I was running
over a List of her Faults, and I find myself gloating on her Perfections --
she is a sweet Girl, that is the Truth of it (Knocks at the Door) Harriet,
Harriet -- will you open the Door? -- I entreat you do it -- on my Knees I beg
it -- ( Kneels) -- will you? -- sdeath! what a sneaking Rascal am I? -- I Will
cringe and whine no more ( going returns, knocks again) will you open it? --
very well, Ma'am, its very well -- Damnation --


Exit Bellmour. Enter HARRIET. HAR. Bless my Heart -- what have I done! -- I
hope he is not gone, a barbarous Man, to go so easily when he ought to take no
Denial, but lie on the Ground still imploring and beseeching, -- as I am a
living Soul, here he comes again.


Exit Harriet and shuts the Door. Enter BELLMOUR. BELL. No, she will not open it
-- I must not go in this manner -- (goes and peeps through they Keyhole) poor,
dear, lovely Angel! By Heaven, she is bathed in Tears (knocks) Harriet, Harriet
-- will not you open the Door? I shall not stir from this Spot unless you open it --


Enter HARRIET. HAR. Mr. Bellmour, I wonder at you, Sir -- upon my Word. Sir,
your Visit becomes troublesome at this Time of Night.


BELL. My dearest Harriet, they were hasty Words, and if you will only consider
the Provocation I had --


HAR. The Provocation, Mr. Bellmour!


BELL. I Will leave it to yourself -- was this an Answer to a Message so fondly
passionate as mine -- look at it yourself and judge --


HAR. This Card, Sir! -- this is my Maid's writing --


BELL. Yes Ma'm! -- I know it is -- and that is the very Circumstance that
aggravates -- I thought at least my Letter deserved an Answer from yourself,
without making your Maid affront me -- my Doom I might at least expect from a
more delicate Hand -- from that Hand -- whose Touch I once could buy with Life
itself --


HAR. Well, Mr. Bellmour, I now must both pity and laugh at you -- This Card,
Sir, was never sent by me --


BELL. No, Ma'am! here Brisk, Brisk -- this is some of that Hang-dog's Doings
-- Brisk --


Enter BRISK and TERMAGANT. BRISK. Did you call, Sir?


BELL. Did not you deliver me this Card, Sir?


BRISK. That Card, Sir? -- yes, Sir, -- I delivered that Card, Sir -- What can
be the Matter now (aside)


TERM. And Ma'am I Will be perjured that I delivered him the same inviduous
Article of Matter you gave me --


HAR. And is Mr. Bellmour so blind that he cannot see through this? Pray
Termagant, did not you write a Card to Brisk?


TERM. Why really Ma'am, I Have as little Antipathy for Fellers as the best She
in England, but I must confess, Ma'am, I did invite a Line to him -- For there
has been a 'Moor between us, Ma'am, that I will not go to deny -- I must needs
gainsay it, -- If a Man is disaffectious of me Ma'am, I Am sure I Am not to
blame, If I have a little Symphony for him -- I have not put my Name to it,
Ma'am, though it is not quite a synonimous Letter neither -- I put the first
Names that accrued to me, Ma'am -- they are the same fictatious Names Mr.
Bellmour and you have made use of --


HAR. Why so I see, Termagant, and a curious Billet-doux it is, (reads)
Sigismondays Compliments waits on Mr. Tankard, she is full of Mazement, how he
can give himself such an Attitude in his 'Moors -- she knows her own Demerrit
better than to be concarned with one who is a Nanny-Goat against Love, and this
is her last irresolution. -- And could Mr. Bellmour imagine this was intended
for him, by me?


BELL. Death and Confusion! -- What could I think, Ma'am? Blockhead, Rascal! --
(to his Man.)


BRISK. Sir!


BELL. How dare you, Sirrah, give me this Scrawl?


BRISK. Sir!


TERM. That Is my Billydore to him, sure enough.


BRISK. Upon my Life, Sir --


BELL. Where Is the other Card, Rascal?


BRISK. Upon my Soul, Sir, I meant no Harm -- Sir, -- Here it is, Sir, -- take
this Sir, -- Master, (in a low Voice) you know I cannot read? -- Pray Sir, don't
expose me.


BELL. And must I be made unhappy, Rascal, because you cannot read? --


TERM. Not able to read! -- the fine Mr. Brisk not able to read -- ha, ha, ha,
-- well, for my part, I despises a Man that is not a Schollard and illiterate.


BRISK. Pox take it, it must come out -- Why, Sir, that is my Misfortune -- I
could not read, Sir, and I put one in this Pocket, and one in this, and then,
Sir, I did not know which was which -- but you're very Welcome, Sir, if you
like that better --


BELL. (Reads) To a Love so delicate of Sentiment, it were Stupidity to remain
any longer insensible; and it would be an inexcusable Prudery to conceal the
Tenderness of Desire with which my Heart lias long fluttered to resign itself
to such Truth and Constancy. My dear Harriet, on my Knees I beg Forgiveness for
the Blindness of my Passion, -- (kneels) And entreat you suffer me to convey
you hence far from your Father's Roof, -- where we may join at length in those
Bonds of Happiness, of which we have long cherished the loved Idea. What say
you, Harriet?


HAR. I don't know what to say -- my Heart's at my very Mouth -- why don't you
take me then?


Enter QUIDNUNC. QUID. Fie upon it, sy upon it -- all the Coffee-houses shut up
-- how could they shut up so soon when they had such great News -- Hey! what
the duce have we here! The Enemy in our very Camp!


HAR. O lud! What Is to be done now?


BELL. Don't be frightened Harriet, -- I Will amuse him with a Piece of News --


QUID. Pray, Sir, what are you doing here in my House?


BELL. Pray, Sir, have you heard the News?


QUID. Is there any News, Sir?


BELL. Very great.


QUID. Let Us hear, let us hear, let us hear, get out of the Room you Baggages, --
get you into your Closet Harriet, -- and get you down Stairs you Baggage, and
let me hear the News, ( turns her out) well, well.


BELL. I Will tell you, Sir, -- the Consumers of Oats are to meet next week.


QUID. The Consumers of Oats!


BELL. The Consumers of Oats, Sir, -- I came on Purpose to tell you.


QUID. That Is kind, that is kind, -- what can it be upon? does nothing transpire?


BELL. A profound secret. --


QUID. Ay, and so it has been for twenty Years, the Consumers of Oats have been
meeting any Time these twenty Years to my knowledge, and I could never learn
what they are about, -- their Negotiations I believe must be left to the
Determination of Time. --


BELL. Their meeting is occasioned by an Express from the Houyhnbims.


QUID. From where?


BELL. From the Houyhnhims. --


QUID. The Humming Hymns! -- fie upon it, why do I ever go without Salmon's
Gazetteer in my Pocket, -- I Will step for the Map, and see where the Place lies,
-- I Am never happy till I know the Latitude and Longitude.


Exit Quid BELL. You're right Sir, Geography is necessary ( runs to the Closet
Door) Harriet, Harriet, -- my dear Harriet open the Door, now is the Time.


Enter HARRIET. HAR. Bless me, Mr. Bellmour, -- what is the matter?


BELL. Away with scruples, Fortune has given this Moment, and you must depend
on my Love and my Honor. -- I Have a License in my Pocket, and I Will marry you
Tomorrow Morning, by Heaven's I will.


HAR. What shall I do? I must trust you. ( a loud rap at the door) dear Heart,
what can all this mean?


BELL. Never mind it, but let us fly hence immediately. ( another rap)


Enter QUIDNUNC. QUID. Hey! what is all this knocking? -- mayhap a Waiter from
the Coffee-house, with some News.


BELL. My evil Genius is at work this Night, and all is marred again. aside.


Enter TERMAGANT. TERM. O Gimini Gemini! I am all over in such a flustration --


QUID. What Is the matter Woman, any thing new?


TERM. A rioghteous Gentle quite inoculated with Liquor, knocks at the Street
Door, and axes, me to except of a Glass of Windy, -- at which I grew quite
vexed and pusillamimous -- prithee Feller, says I, we don't want your Company,
and so be a little more adjacent Friend -- whereof I was seized with a
Panegyric, and I had divorce to my Heels, and I ran up Stairs as dilatory as I
could, and he is coming after me.


BELL. I Will have him sent to the Round-house -- call in the Watch.


QUID. Do so, I Will go and charge him, -- mayhap we may meet a Parliament man in
the Round-house to tell us some News.


Enter ROVEWELL drunk. ROVE. Get me a Bowl of Rack, and let the Bed be well
air'd -- I say I will have a Girl --


BELL. (draws) Let me come at him, -- Hey! who the Devil have we here? Jack
Rovewell, zounds man, what brings you here?


ROVE. Who the Devil thought to have seen you here? I was upon, the look out for
Game ever since I saw you, and I have just sprung it, -- I Will have her by
Jupiter. --


BELL. Zookers, Sir, If you would not be of service to me, why would you not
keep out of the way.


ROVE. This seems to be but an odd sort of a Bagnio we have got into here --


QUID. What does he call my House a Bagnio?


TERM. I wishes as how you would take him away -- the great He Man! my flesh
creeps at the very sight of him -- I believes as sure as any Thing, as how he is
a Highwayrman, and that as how it was he that robbed the Mail-Bags. --


QUID. Ay, what rob a Mail, and stop all the News, -- a vile Fellow away with
him. -- a Man capable of robbing a Mail, would not scruple to rob a Church.


BELL. Hold a Moment, I know the Gentleman, he is only a little in Liquor, --
zounds Rovewell, you have marred all my Schemes with your damned doings. --


ROVE. Bellmour's Girl, by Jupiter, ( aside) I say you shall not marry her, -- and
I tell you Mr. Curmudgeon, ( going to Quidnunc) give me leave to tell you old
Mr. Drybeard, -- Hey! ( stops and looks at him) hey! ( turns from him) my old
reverend Father, by my filial Duty -- what the Devil shall I do now? egad I Am
not so drunk as I thought I was, he little expects to see me, and I Will go through
with my frolic, this is no proper opportunity, -- I say again you shall not marry
her, -- my Sister as sure as a Gun, ( aside) I Will see it out -- I say you
shall not marry her.


TERM. What the Deevil do you let him tarry for? -- I wishes he was out of my
sight, and a little more contiguous from me. --


QUID. Away with him, -- but search him first, perhaps he has some of the
Letters belonging to the Mail in his Pocket now. --


ROVE. I Will let 'em search me, and then all will come out. --


QUID. Let me see, mayhap there may be some News at least -- ay, here is Bank
Notes, -- and here is Letters too what is this? To Mr. Abraham Quidnunc,
Upholsterer, in the Strand. I did live in the Strand some ten Years ago. --
sure this is to me, -- let us see what it is: -- Hey! what is this? ( reads)
Honored Father; -- how is it signed. -- Your dutiful Son, John Quidnunc.

What can this mean? -- What Is your Name Friend?


ROVE. Jack Quidnunc, is my Name.


BELL. Your Name Jack Quidnunc! (to Rovewell.)


ROVE. Yes, my Name, -- faith this Business begins to make me sober, I think --
Quidnunc is my Name Bellmour; and Rovewll was but assumed -- That Letter I
wrote, Sir, to inform you of my Arrival, and to let you know that I should pay
my Respects to you tomorrow Morning -- but faith, Sir, in my Hurry of Spirits,
I forgot to send it. --


QUID. What! and are you returned from the West Indies?


ROVE. From Jamaica, Sir, the Owner of a rich Plantation --


QUID. What, by studying Politics --


ROVE. No, Sir, by a rich Wife, you shall know all hereafter --


QUID. S'bodikins, I recollect his Face -- it is he sure enough -- why there
has not been a Word of this in the Papers.


ROVE. It Is even so, notwithstanding, Sir. -- Upon my Soul, this Affair has
composed me strangely. Thus give me Leave, Sir, to attest at once my Duty and
my Joy. (kneels.)


QUID. Why, you have my Blessing, Boy, I am heartily glad to see thee -- I did
not know you again, you're in such a Kind of Disguise -- mayhap now, you can
tell -- why you look very well -- I Am glad to see thee, Jack, I am indeed --
pray now -- mayhap, I say, you can tell what the Spaniards are doing in the Bay
of Honduras?


ROVE. All in good Time, Sir, -- my dear Bellmour I must embrace you, Faith the
Whimsicalness of my Fortune had like to bring about an odd kind of an
Adventure, -- and make me rob my Father of his Daughter, my Friend of his
Mistress, and go to Bed to -- my dear Sister, whom I left a prattling Infant,
when I went out of England, -- I must embrace you.


HAR. Though your Departure from England was too early for my Recollection, yet
my Heart feels a ready Inclination to make Acquaintance with you; and I shall
ever bless the Hour that has given to my Father so good a Son, to Mr. Bellmour
so warm a Friend, and to me tho unexpected Happiness of a Brother, whom I
despaired of ever seeing. --


QUID. Pray now Jack, how may Ships of the Line has the Admiral with him? --
a-propos, that may be in your Letter. -- Let me read it. --


ROVE. You may spare yourself that Trouble, -- it was but to acquaint you with
what I shall now tell you in Person, that since I find you are become a
voluntary Statesman, I have a Fortune sufficient to support you in the Study of
Politics for the rest of your Life. --


QUID. Have you? -- What, and shall I have every Thing that comes out?


ROVE. Every Thing, Sir, --


BELL. And Sir, an Apartment at my House in the Country you shall ever command.
--


QUID. No, no, I cannot go to the Country, -- that is not the Scene of Action.
--


BELL. You shall have all the Papers down there. --


QUID. Shall I, -- but are there any Coffee-Houses in your Neighborhood in the
Country?


BELL. Several!


QUID. And are there any Politicians there?


BELL. Swarms of them, there is the Curate, and the Justice of the Quorum, and an
Excisemen, and a yellow Admiral, and an Attorney, and --


QUID. Ay! -- why then that will do -- that will do -- ( going returns) but
do you hear -- I will not go into the Country till the House is adjourned.


ROVE. Even as you please, Sir -- and in the mean Time the greatest Favor you
can confer upon me, is to give away this Lady to my Friend Bellmour --


QUID. Why, since I find he knows so much of the Matter, I could find it in my
Heart to accede to the Treaty; here, here, take her -- but should not all this
be in the Papers? -- I Will go and tell 'em the News myself.


Exit Quidnunc. TERM. (Looking earnestly at Rovewell) My Stars and Garters!
what a sudden Evolution here is in Things? fakins, now I looks at him again, I
does not believe he is a Highwarman -- By my troth, the young Gentleman has a
Jen scai about him that I likes well enough, and I could find it in my Heart to
make him an Advowson of my Love, and calcine my Person to him.


ROVE. Prithee, Bellmour, how long has my Father had this Turn?


HAR. Since the last Rebellion; since which there has not been an Affair of any
Importance in Europe but he has taken a considerable Share in it -- while his
own Affairs have been mouldering into ruin. --


BELL. But henceforward all Volunteers in Politics should take Warning from his
Example, before they concern themselves about the Balance of Europe, to have
some Care of the Balance of their Accounts. The first Step toward being a good
Citizen, is to be a good Man, and to act with Propriety in the various
Relations of Life -- and if every one in the Kingdom would resolve upon the
same, the Nation in general would soon feel the Benefit of it.


Then should not sigh the Statesman of Cheapside,
For Poland's Queen -- while be neglects his Bride;
Then needy Shopkeepers no moreshould meet,
To roast a Minister -- yet want to eat;
Nor should the Upholst'rer slight his Daughter's Caus^
For Nabobs, Cherokees, and Catabaws:
But Virtue then, the State's enlivening Soul,
Should rise from Individuals to the whole,
The balanced Passions due Proportion bear,
And every Harriet find a Father's Care.
FINIS.
Lately Published, In Two Pocket Volumes, Price 6 s. By the same AUTHOR. THE
GRAY'S-INN JOURNAL.

Non suit Consilium socordia atque desidia bonum otium conterere. SALLUST. Eye
Nature's Walks, shoot Folly as it flies.
And catch the Manners living as they rise.
POPE. ALSO, The APPRENTICE* A FARCE of Two Acts. Price 1s.

Printed for P. VAILLANT, in the Strand.


