THE CONTRACT: A COMEDY. OF TWO ACTS. AS IT WAS PERFORMED AT THE Theater Royal,
in the Hay-Market.

LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR, by J. MILLIDGE: And sold by T. DAVIES, in
Russel Street, Covent Garden; T. CADELL, and T. EVANS, in the Strand.
MDCCLXXVI. [PRICE ONE SHILLING.]

PROLOGUE,
Intended to have been Spoken by Mr. FOOT. THE Contract is it called? -- I
cannot say,
I much admire the title of his play;
Contracts, they tell me, have been fraught with evil,
Since Faustus signed his Contract with -- the Devil;
Yet, spite of Satan, all men love to make 'em,
Though nineteen out of twenty wish to break 'em:
Butchers and meal-men, brewers, agents, factors,
Pimps, poets, placemen, managers, and actors,
Bawds, bankrupts, booksellers, are all -- Contractors,
All lie, and swear, and cheat, to increase their store,
Then die, and go -- where Faustus went before.
Whilst thus over all we see the infection spread,
No wonder it should taint the marriage bed;
Each wife forgets, each husband breaks his vow,
For what are Contracts? what is wedlock now?
Garrick, who long was married -- to the town,
At length, a fashionable husband grown,
Forsakes his spouse; base man! for, truth to tell,
She loved her own dear Davy wondrous well;
Though now he slights her, breaks from her by force,
And naught will serve him but a full divorce.
But be the fault in women or in men,
Thanks to our laws! they all may -- wed again;
Her faithless favorite gone, the Lady's free,
To choose another, and may smile -- on me,
To the Lame Lover may resign her charms,
And, though a cripple, take me to her arms:
I Will promise to be constant, kind, polite,
And pay my duty -- every other night:
My dear-lov'd rib I never will abandon,
But stand by her whilst I Have ONE leg to stand on;
I Will make a solemn Contract, play or pay,
And hope we shall not part this many a day.
Our brother scribbler too, I greatly fear,
Has made a foolish kind of Contract here,
He promises, and ten to one you're bit,
To furnish fable, sentiment and wit:
I Have seen his piece, the man appealed to me,
And I, as chancellor, issued my decree;
T'has passed the seals -- they are going to rehearse it,
But you're the House of Peers -- and may reverse it.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Colonel Lovemore, an old Officer, Mr. PARSONS, Martin, Servant to the Colonel.
Mr. WHITEFIELD, Commodore Capstern, Mr. BANNISTER, Captain Spritely, Mr. R.
PALMER.
WOMEN.
Miss Eleanor Briggs, an old Maid, Mrs. GARDNER, Betty, her Maid, Miss PLATT,
Maria, Miss ESSEX.
THE CONTRACT.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Miss ELEANOR and BETTY. ELEANOR. (Leaning on a table, and melancholy.)
HEIGH-HO!


BETTY. Dear Ma'am, what is the matter with you? you a'nt ill, I hope.


ELEANOR. Never worse in my life, Betty.


BETTY. Lud! Ma'am, you frighten me!


ELEANOR. Betty.


BETTY. Ma'am.


ELEANOR. In the bottom drawer of my walnut-tree chest, Betty, there lies, if
the moths have not devoured it, my Practice of Piety; look for it, good girl,
and bring it me hither.


BETTY. (Aside.) Yes, Madam. Sure my mistress is in a bad way to think of such
things.

(Exit.
ELEANOR. (Sighing.) Well! it is what we must all come to. O Time, Time, what a
cruel destroyer thou art! (Pulls out a pocket-glass.) Where are all my roses
fled? all faded, gone!

(Betty returns, blowing the dust off the book.)
ELEANOR. Well, Betty!


BETTY. Here it is, Ma'am, but in such a pickle; -- bless me, I believe your
ladyship has not looked in it these ten years.


ELEANOR. Give it me, child. Let me see: somewhere toward the end, on a blank
leaf, if I am not mistaken, are the births of the family: (turns over the
leaves.) O, here it is: -- Eleanor, daughter of Thomas and Sarah, born --
christened, July 14, 17 hundred, and, let me see, 38, 48, 58, and 7, is -- O
Lud, Betty, I am an old woman, positively an old woman. Here -- take away the
filthy memorandum, and never let it see the light 'till --


BETTY. 'Till the birth of your first boy, Ma'am. -- Fie, fie, Madam; never
mind such musty records, but consult this better and more faithful monitor.

(Brings the looking-glass.
ELEANOR. (Looking at herself in the glass.) Since what I was I cannot be,
What I am, I would not see:
As the poet says. O Betty, how provoking it is that I should begin to grow old
and ugly, just at the time I want to be young and handsome!


BETTY. Indeed, Ma'am, you wrong your charms; in my opinion, you have not
looked so well these five years.


ELEANOR. Go, go, you're a wicked flatterer.


BETTY. Indeed but I a'nt, Ma'am. Besides, if you were a little older, you would be
young enough yet I think, for the Colonel. Methinks, Ma'am, it is a thousand
pities you two did not come together some fifteen or twenty years ago.


ELEANOR. Why really, Betty, I wish we had; but then matters did not suit. You
must know the Colonel was under the direction of an old surly guardian, who
wanted him to marry his niece; and because he refused, kept him out of his
fortune by law and chicanery; -- whilst I was teiz'd to death by an immortal
old aunt, who threatened to disinherit me, if I married without her consent. --
About five years ago I became my own mistress, with some thousands in my
pocket, and then the Colonel was gone to the East Indies.


BETTY. There, to be sure, he was out of luck.


ELEANOR. Since that, however, his advancement in the army, with the estate
left him by his uncle, and the lawsuit with his guardian determined in his
favor, have made him a match for the best fortune in the kingdom, at the age
of --


BETTY. Near sixty -- I Will answer for it.


ELEANOR. In short, Betty, whilst we were young we had nothing but love to
bestow one another; and now we have --


BETTY. Every thing else, I suppose.


ELEANOR. Even so, indeed. -- But the worst of the story is yet to come: for do
you know, Betty, such fools were we, such absolute strangers to human nature,
as to vow everlasting fidelity to each other, and to enter into --


BETTY. No contract, I hope.


ELEANOR. The very thing. -- To enter into contract never to marry any body
else, under forfeiture of every thing we were possessed of in the world.


BETTY. Well, and you intend to perform it?


ELEANORA. Never, Betty. What! marry a worn-out soldier of sixty! -- and turn
nurse! -- Besides, these poor remains of beauty are not worth his acceptance.


BETTY. And you have no other reason in nature? -- no, to be sure: -- Ha! ha!
ha! I find how it is then. --


ELEANOR. You do'nt suspect my constancy, I hope: do you know, Mrs. Betty, I
shall be very angry with you?


BETTY. Indeed, Madam, you will not. -- Come, come, I know --


ELEANOR. Why, what do you know, Mrs. Saucebox?


BETTY. Why, Madam, I know you go much oftener of late than you used to Lady
Mary's; I know too, that her nephew -- nay, Madam, you need not blush -- the
agreeable Capt. Spritely, is just returned from his travels; and that he is one
of the handsomest, best-made, most agreeable young fellows in the whole county
--


ELEANOR. Betty, hold your impertinent tongue -- hold your tongue this minute,
or -- Do you really think the Captain is so handsome?


BETTY. Yes, Madam; and what is more, I believe has no dislike to your ladyship.


ELEANOR. Impossible! however, I will confess I have seen the Captain, and am
--


BETTY. Most horribly in love with him --


ELEANOR. No; not that -- but what if he should not like me?


BETTY. Ridiculous! let me see ever a young adventurer in England, without
sixpence to his fortune, refuse a woman of your sense and beauty with twenty
thousand pounds.


ELEANOR. But what must I do with the poor Colonel! By the last letters I had
from him, he depends on marrying me the moment he returns: the very house I am
now in, and the furniture belonging to it, are his; he requested me, in the
most tender manner, to live in it 'till he came, and to consider every thing
that belonged to him as much my property as his own faithful heart: what is to
be done, Betty?


BETTY. Done, Madam? why turn him off at once, and take the Captain. Why, there
is no more nowadays in changing one's lover than in changing ones linen.


ELEANOR. Aye, but this plaguey contract -- signed and sealed, Betty,


BETTY. Why that circumstance, indeed, is rather against us; but time, Madam,
time may reconcile all things.


ELEANOR. True, Betty; but how to keep off the old lover, and to bring on the
new one -- that --


BETTY. Aye, Madam, that is the question -- Let me see -- O! I have it. If the
mountain will not come to Mahomet, why, then Mahomet must come to the mountain --
that is, if you cannot go to the Captain, why, then the Captain must come to
you.


ELEANOR. But how, my dear Machiavel -- tell me but how?


BETTY. O, leave that to me -- Suppose, now, suppose --


ELEANOR. Well, what?


BETTY. Suppose -- but hush! we are interrupted.


Enter a Servant. SERVANT. Commodore Capstern, Madam.


ELEANOR. O heavens! -- that sea monster! -- then I Will lay my life on it his old
friend the Colonel is not far off, -- now will he overwhelm me with his
fore-castle jests on our approaching nuptials. For heaven's sake, Betty, throw
out some tub to this old whale, or he will devour me. Step down immediately, my
good girl, and make some excuse for me. -- Say I Am ill -- I Am gone abroad --
any thing to get rid of him -- this is the most impertinent interruption!


BETTY. Well, Ma'am, I Will do what I can for you, but I fear 'twill be to no
purpose: if I drive him to sea, he will swim ashore again in half an hour.
However, I Will try.

(Betty goes out.
ELEANOR. (Alone.) Well, these chambermaids are certainly the most useful
creatures in the universe: there is not a greater genius for lying and
intrigue, within an hundred miles, than this trusty Abigail of mine: -- and
yet, after all, I begin to have some qualms of conscience about my poor old
Colonel -- But Spritely is so handsome, O love, love, what a vow-breaker art
thou!


Enter Betty. ELEANOR. Well, Betty; what news? -- is he off?


BETTY. O yes, Madam, I dispatched him; he said he would call again presently; but
I told him, I was sure you would not be back soon. -- God forgive me for
galloping, as nurse Trueman says -- I declare it went against me -- he is such a
good creature. Why do you know, he gave me half a crown?


ELEANOR. O yes, the best creature in the world to be sure.


BETTY. To buy me a can of flip, he said, to drink his old friend the Colonel's
health -- your husband elect, as he called him.


ELEANOR. Impertinent enough -- husband elect indeed!


BETTY. Don't abuse him though, ma'am -- I hope he will call again presently.


ELEANOR. I hope not -- however if he does, remember, I positively will not be
at home to him -- But now, Betty, for your scheme; how shall I contrive to see
my dear Spritely? for positively I cannot live without him.


BETTY. Indeed! well then I Will even take pity on you; suppose now, we could now
contrive to bring him into this very house, lodge him under the same roof.


ELEANOR. But how, dear Betty?


BETTY. I have it -- as soon as your old lover comes home, whom you expect
every hour -- hark --


Enter Servant. SERVANT. A servant, madam, in a blue livery, brought this.


ELEANOR. Turned up with yellow?


SERVANT. (Giving a letter.) Yes, madam, and desired me to give it into your
own hands immediately.


ELEANOR. (Looking at the direction.) Ay, it is he.


BETTY. Who, ma'am?


ELEANOR. Why, who should it be, but the Colonel?


BETTY. Lud bless us, he here already!


ELEANOR. (To the servant.) Let him wait below till his master comes.

(Exit Servant.
ELEANOR. Your old admirer, Martin, I suppose. (looks at the letter and reads)
"This moment arrived from Dover, and will be with you in five minutes!" --
bless me, Betty, I am all of a tremble -- what shall I do?


BETTY. O, if the enemy's at our gates, ma'am, there is no time to be lost: in,
in, as fast as possible, and undress yourself, you look horribly handsome as
you are.


ELEANOR. Undress child -- what do thou mean?


BETTY. Mean, madam? why did not you tell me just now, you could not bear the
thought of marrying the Colonel; what have you to do then, but to undress, to
look as old and ugly as you can, that he may be indifferent about you and give
up the contract.


ELEANOR. Admirable thought -- thou art my best of monitors!


BETTY. And yet it will take a world of pains to make so fine a woman as Miss
Eleanor Briggs look plain.


ELEANOR. O your humble servant, madam: now must I wear two faces.


BETTY. That you have done a great while, by the by. (aside.) O yes, madam, be
very fond of your husband, and not care a farthing for him, it is all the
fashion, ma'am, quite the bon ton I assure you.


ELEANOR. Well, but, my dear girl, you have not let me into your real scheme
about Spritely yet.


BETTY. Presently, presently, ma'am -- lud! you are so impatient, but let us go
into your dressingroom, they may show him in here, and we shall be interrupted,
come, come, in, in, and I Will unriddle.

(Exeunt.
Enter COLONEL and MARTIN, ushered in by a servant. SERVANT. Pray, Sir, walk
in, I Will let my mistress know, Sir -- I Am glad to see your honor look so well.


COLONEL. Thank you, Charles, desire your mistress not to hurry herself --
(Exit servant) -- for I should be full as well pleased if she did not come at
all. I suppose by this time, Martin, she is fainting at the news of my arrival.


MARTIN. O yes, Sir, such a perfusion I suppose of hartshorn and salvoletile --
these meetings of old lovers are so affecting --


COLONEL. Or affected, Martin --


MARTIN. I suppose they can hardly keep life and soul in her: poor soul! it is a
miracle if she survives it; I wish it was over with all my heart.


COLONEL. And so do I with all my soul.


MARTIN. If she should not get over it, Sir.


COLONEL. Well, what then?


MARTIN. Why to be sure it would be dreadful --


COLONEL. Terrible, shocking!


MARTIN. But then you know, Sir, 'twou'd annul the contract.


COLONEL. True, Martin, we must endeavor to reconcile these things; -- I Am a
philosopher, you know.


MARTIN. Let me see, Sir, it is now about sixteen years since you saw her last;
Miss Eleanor, I Am afraid, must be pretty far advanced by this time.


COLONEL. Why yes, Martin, I Am afraid so -- and yet she is an amiable woman,
with a thousand good qualities; and if we could call back some twenty odd
springs or so, I should prefer her to -- but this little Maria, whom I have
brought over with me, has got such hold of my heart -- by the by -- where have
you lodged her, Martin?


MARTIN. O not far off, Sir, she is within call.


COLONEL. If we could but find an opportunity of introducing her into the
family, put her off for a relation or so --


MARTIN. That may be easily done, Sir.


COLONEL. But what say you to my appearance, do I look old and ugly enough?


MARTIN. O yes, Sir, old and ugly enough in conscience.


COLONEL. I would wish to be as disagreeable in her eyes as I am sure she will
be in mine.


MARTIN. O I warrant she will let you off easily enough.


COLONEL. Heaven grant she may! and then -- for my sweet Maria! -- I Will send
for the best tailor in town, have a wig made, as the advertisement says, to
imitate nature; recover my dancing at the school for grown gentlemen, and be as
young and jemmy as the best of 'em.


MARTIN. Hush -- hush -- methinks I hear the rustling of silks, mind your p's
and q's, Sir, don't forget your sighs and raptures now for heaven's sake.


COLONEL. Here she comes, egad.


MARTIN. (Peeping.) There the old fright is, sure enough: now, Sir, keep it up.


COLONEL. O never fear me.


Enter Miss ELEANOR and BETTY. COLONEL. (Meeting Eleanor.) She comes, she
comes, the charmer of my heart -- O, Eleanora!

(They embrace.
ELEANOR. My dearest Colonel, is it then given me once more to behold -- O
support me, or I die -- he is a horid creature! (Aside to Betty.


COLONEL. After so many years of tedious absence, again to look on those dear
eyes, to taste these balmy lips. (Embrace again.) She stinks like a pole-cat.
(Aside to Martin.


ELEANOR. (Passing him from her.) Fie, Colonel, I cannot bear it -- Oh! it is
too much!


BETTY. (Aside.) It is indeed.


COLONEL. (Turning to Martin.) O, Martin, this is insupportable!


MARTIN. (Aside.) Very well, Sir, extremely well, keep it up.


BETTY. (Aside.) Now, madam, mind your cue.


ELEANOR. Colonel, I vow and protest I blush at my own behavior, but excess of
joy, betrayed me into a weakness unbecoming the delicacy of my sex.


COLONEL. Not in the least, my lovely Eleanora. -- I Am glad she is come down a
little however. (Aside to Mart.) Passion like ours, my dear, is above forms,
and after such an absence, love must be allowed to plead his own cause with
warmth and energy.


ELEANOR. I grant it, Colonel: but after all, we are not quite so young as when
we parted last; the world perhaps will say these raptures don't become us so
well as they might some few years ago.


COLONEL. Why really, my dear, in spite of all my passion, I must subscribe to
your opinion; but you were always the pattern of prudence and discretion: the
time is come, as you say, when we should endeavor to moderate the affections;
indeed, my dear, ours were far too violent.


MARTIN. (Aside) To last long, I thought.


ELEANOR. Ay, Colonel, we should endeavor to be calm a little.


COLONEL. True, my dear, to look upon one another as I may say, with a kind of
coolness.


ELEANOR. Ay, a sort of affected indifference.


COLONEL. Let our love gradually subside into esteem.


ELEANOR. And mellow into friendship: O the joys of virtuous friendship! Don't
you think, Colonel, time has made dreadful havoc with these poor features?


COLONEL. Why, really no, not much, the bloom indeed is a little off the plumb
-- but, to be sure, as to myself, I am not the same man -- sadly altered you
see.


ELEANOR. Very little, I think; the crows-foot on your right eye is a little
larger indeed, but otherwise you are just the same you were fifteen years ago.


COLONEL. For your sake, I wish I were; but old age creeps upon me -- it does
indeed: And then this nervous weakness -- O, I have suffered dreadfully with
the rheumatism.


ELEANOR. Not so much as I have.


COLONEL. This cough will make an end of me soon.

(Coughs violently.
ELEANOR. O, mine is a thousand times worse. (They cough at each other.) Hark,
what noise is that?


COMMODORE. (Without.) I tell you I will come up, and be d -- 'd to you.


COLONEL. As I live, my old friend the Commodore!


ELEANOR. It Is he, sure enough, firing his nine pounders at my servants for not
giving him admittance.


COMMODORE. (Below.) D -- n you all, I tell you, I will come up; the fleet's
arrived, and I must salute the admiral.


Enter COMMODORE. COMMODORE. Why, what the devil's the matter with you all? --
why, what do you keep your ports blocked up for in time of peace, ha? (going up
to the Colonel.) Ha, Frank, give me thy hand, old boy; split my topsails, but
I Am glad to see thee -- ay, and my little coz here too -- give thee joy, my
girl, with all my heart! -- Ods life, Frank, she is a pretty tight frigate
still, wants a little careening or so; you will sheath her when you get into her
dock, ha, boy? -- by your leave, old friend. (Salutes her.)


ELEANOR. I vow, cousin Capstern, you are a most indelicate creature.


COLONEL. I Am glad to see him in health and spirits, however.


COMMODORE. Glad to see me in health and spirits! -- that is but a cold
fresh water compliment, Frank; but I excuse you, you lovers can think of
nothing but one another: I tell you what, cuz, you're a happy woman; I Have known
my friend Frank here, man and boy, these eight and forty years; we crossed the
Mediterranean together three times, and an honester fellow never stepped between
stem and stern: -- Give me thy hand, old messmate; I was glad to hear you was
landed -- I thought you would cast anchor here, so I came full sail to meet you.


ELEANOR. We are abliged to you, Commodore. I wish he was in the Mediterranean
again with all my heart. (Aside.)


COMMODORE. What! you're bound for Matrimony-Point, I suppose; why, let me see,
if the tide's with you, and a tolerable brisk gale, you may be in by this time
tomorrow: I think I can keep a reckoning pretty well, I Am seldom out in my
log-book, ha, Frank?


ELEANOR. Fie, Commodore, how can you be so indecent?


COLONEL. You put the lady to the blush, Jack.


ELEANOR. I vow, Captain, you are quite vulgar: I believe you take me for a
ship.


COMMODORE. And a good thing too, cousin. Now I think on it, I remember, when I
was a midshipman, I made a good song upon that; it goes to the tune of -- To
all ye ladies now at land -- I Will sing it if you will, what say you, Frank?


COLONEL. O by all means, let us have it.


The two Songs were omitted in the representation.
SONG by CAPSTERN.
A woman's like a ship, they say,
Decked out in all her pride;
When once a float, she will have her way,
And loves to stem the tide;
She veers about with every wind,
And often leaves her mate behind.
With a fall, a roll, lal, etc.
If without ballast she sets sail,
However so richly stored,
She Will overset the first brisk gale,
Then woe to all on board:
And if she has too many men,
She Will want careening now and then.
With a fall, a roll, lal, etc.
The way I Have heard but few can tell,
To hold her stern upright,
But if you sheath and freight her well,
And keep her bottom tight;
Before Gad, she will make a first-rate wife,
And last you all the voyage of life.
With a fall, a roll, lal, etc.

COMMODORE. Nonsense -- never tell me; you have been long enough doubling the
Cape, now you're got into smooth water and safe riding, get to your moorings as
fast as you can; where is your graplings, my boy? Send for the parson
immediately. Harkee, Mrs. Demure, I insist upon giving you away for old
acquaintance sake -- when must it be -- tomorrow -- or next day?


COLONEL. The day, Sir, as yet is not determined.


COMMODORE. Not determined! more shame for you; I tell you, Cuz. I must and
will dance at your wedding; and what is more, do you see, I Will stand godfather to
your first bantling, and give you a cool hundred to buy rigging for it; if I
say it I Will do it, that is the humor of Commodore Capstern.


ELEANOR. Pri'thee, Cousin, don't run on so ridiculously -- I wish he was out
of the house. (aside.)


COMMODORE. But do you hear; if it is a boy, his name must be Capstern; and if
it is a girl, you shall call it after my first ship, the Venus Frigate, a sweet
vessel she was as ever swam upon the salt seas -- Miss Venus it shall be -- an
excellent name -- come, come, you must and shall swing in the same hammock
tomorrow night.


COLONEL. Zounds, Sir, do you take us for a boy and a girl!


ELEANOR. Aye, Sir, to precipitate matters, Sir.


COMMODORE. Precipitate! I don't know what you call precipitate; it is a d --
n'd hard word, by the ^e, and not in my dictionary: but I Will tell you what,
Cuz, a vessel that has got love in the sails, and affection in the poop, will
run you fifteen knots an hour; now you don't seem to care to go above three.


ELEANOR. You're very facetious, Commodore; but things of this nature are not
to be done in a hurry, let me tell you.


COLONEL. No, my friend, at our time of life people should not be hurried.


ELEANOR. Very true, Colonel.


BETTY (whispering Miss.) Now Is your time, Madam.


ELEANOR. Many things must be done, Sir, I assure you, before we come together;
how do you know, Cousin, but I may expect the Colonel will settle something on
my Nephew.


COMMODORE. Your Nephew! who the devil's he? Sink me in a storm if ever I heard
you had one; who is he?


ELEANOR. Who is he? why my sister Dolly's second son, the other died abroad;
this is just arrived from the coast of Barbary.


BETTY (aside.) Yes, I brought him from thence within this half hour.


COL. (aside to Martin.) This may prove a lucky circumstance, Martin.


MARTIN (aside to Col.) Take the hint Sir, and improve upon it -- a Niece, a
Niece.


COMMODORE. The coast of Barbary! the devil he did; you mistake COZ. I fancy he
came over with Dr. Salamander, and the other gentlemen there from Otahite.


COLONEL. What Nephew is that, my dear!


ELEANOR. O the sweetest youth, my dear, that ever you set your eyes on; and so
fond of his aunt; we do something for him, positively must.


COLONEL. O with all my heart: he shall come in at our deaths with my niece, if
you approve of it, share and share alike.


COMMODORE. Your niece, Colonel!


COLONEL. Aye, Jack, don't you remember her? the only surviving daughter of my
brother Tom?


COMMODORE. Tom! why I always thought he died a bachelor.


COLONEL. Ay, but there, my dear Commodore, you are egregiously mistaken.


ELEANOR. An excellent scheme. I tell you what, Colonel, I was thinking, if you
approve of it, to send for Charles immediately, and let him live with us.


COLONEL. With allmy heart; provided, my dear, which I Am sure you will have no
objection to, you give me leave to introduce my little Angelica; it is the
prettiest little innocent wench. -- Martin, this will do charmingly. (Aside to
Martin.


ELEANOR. Agreed; this is delightful, Betty, he has no Suspicions (Aside) -- we
shall be so happy in seeing the young folks -- well; I Will go and send for my
nephew. (To the Col.


COLONEL. And I Will write to my niece, to come immediately -- well, good bye to
you, Jack.


ELEANOR. Cousin, your servant, we shall always be happy to see you, your
humble servant, Cousin.


COLONEL. Yours, noble commodore; jusqu' au revoir.

(Exeunt.
COMMODORE. (Alone.) Yours jusk-a-river; why what the Devils that! a pox of
your parlevous I say; there is no good going forward, when an old English
soldier begins sputt'ring French: there is something at the bottom of all this.
I expected to find my two lovers at close quarters, kissing and smuggling, and,
egad! instead of that, they were gaping at one another like a couple of
oysters. Then this Nephew and Niece -- two undiscovered Islands, that are not
in my map. Yonder Is the Colonel's valet and my Lady's maid, they are used to
these seas, and mayhap may have a chart of 'em: I Will go a little cruize after
'em however; every gentleman of curiosity now a days takes a trip in search of
some terra incognita, so I Will not be out of the fashion. If I say it I Will do it,
that is the humor of Commodore Capstern.


ACT II.
Enter COLONEL and Miss ELEANOR. ELEANOR. WELL, Colonel, how do you like my
nephew?


COLONEL. Prodigiously! a very agreeable young fellow.


ELEANOR. And handsome, is not he?


COLONEL. Ay, and so polite.


ELEANOR. And so well made!


COLONEL. Has read a good deal.


ELEANOR. And dances most delightfully -- he has very fine eyebrows.


COLONEL. And no bad understanding -- But pray what say you to my niece?


ELEANOR. Oh! I dote on her.


COLONEL. (Aside.) And so do I.


ELEANOR. She is very sensible.


COLONEL. Has fine eyes, has not she?


ELEANOR. And seem perfectly good natured -- she will do any thing you desire her.


COLONEL. I shall try that. (aside.) And has the prettiest foot -- Well, after
all, my dear, there is nothing like the company of young people -- it is so
pleasant --


ELEANOR. So it is -- there is something so cheerful and joyous -- why, do you
know? when I Am in company with my nephew, I forget all my infirmities, and
fancy I Am fifteen again.


COLONEL. Egad, and just so it is with me -- would you believe it, my dear,
when I Am with my niece, I have all the vigor and spirit of five and twenty.


ELEANOR. I Am glad they are with us.


COLONEL. And so am I -- it makes the time pass away so prettily; we sha'n't
think it half so long before we are married.


ELEANOR. Apropos, now you talk of that, Colonel, when are we to be tacked
together?

(Gapes.
COLONEL. When you please, my dear; there is no hurry, we can marry, you know,
now -- or --


ELEANOR. Let it alone -- just as you will.


COLONEL. Suppose then we put it off for -- a week.


ELEANOR. A fortnight.


COLONEL. A month.


ELEANOR. A year -- as long as --


COLONEL. As may be necessary to settle our -- But then, that -- that -- that
Contract -- what is become of it? Now for a trial. (aside.) Do you know now,
Miss Eleanor, between friends, I think that was but a foolish thing of us.


ELEANOR. Very young indeed, and pretty ridiculous.


COLONEL. Extremely so -- something in it so illiberal.


ELEANOR. True; so mistrustful, as it were.


COLONEL. As if you and I --


ELEANOR. That love one another so dearly --


COLONEL. Doubted each other's honor -- or were to be bound by such ties --


ELEANOR. As restrain only the basest of mankind.


COLONEL. Now for it. (aside.) What did you do with that filthy paper?


ELEANOR. It lies, I believe, upon my dressing table -- I Will step in and fetch
it if you will.


COLONEL. Do, if it is only for the curiosity. (Ex. Ele. And luckily, I have
got the counterpart in my pocket -- now, love, assist me! If I could but get
rid of these fetters -- Well, thank heaven, she has no suspicion of my passion
for Maria -- but hush -- she comes.


Re-enter Miss ELEANOR, with the contract in her hand. They stand at some
distance from each other. ELEANOR. Here it is -- and in a sweet pickle.

(Blowing the dust off.)
COLONEL. And here is the counterpart.


ELEANOR. Did you ever see such a couple of old decayed barristers?


COLONEL. A little fatigued and dirty -- or so -- worn out.


ELEANOR. Like ourselves, Colonel, a little the worse for wear.


COLONEL. It Is mighty soft.

(Handling it.)
ELEANOR. Decaying -- mouldering!


COLONEL. I fancy it would tear easily.


ELEANOR. Suppose we try.


COLONEL. With all my heart.


ELEANOR. And with all mine -- look here, I Am beginning --


COLONEL. So am I -- go on --

(They tear the Contract bit by bit.
ELEANOR. Away with it.


COLONEL. Proceed.


ELEANOR. Bravo! -- it is done.


COLONEL. It Is finished.


ELEANOR. I Am glad on it.


COLONEL. So am I.


ELEANOR. Now we are at liberty,


COLONEL. Now we are free my dear Eleanor.


ELEANOR. My dear Colonel.

(they embrace.
COLONEL. I believe I shall die a bachelor.


ELEANOR. And I a virgin -- O dreadful! -- well good bye to you -- I Will go and
see my nephew.


COLONEL. And I Will go and drink a dish of tea, with my niece. Adieu.


ELEANOR. Your servant -- Ha, ha, ha!

(Exit Col.
Enter Betty. BETTY. So, Madam, I Am glad to see you so merry.


ELEANOR. Betty, I Am the happiest creature in the universe. Do you know I Have
regained my freedom, am mistress of myself, and from this moment shall enjoy
the sovereign happiness of woman, to act just as I please: In short, my old
Damon and I have been comparing notes, settled our love accounts, struck the
balance, and dissolved the partnership.


BETTY. And now I hope you are at liberty to set up for yourself.


ELEANOR. (Pointing to the floor.) Yes, Betty, the Contract is torn; look
there, it is moulting time with poor Cupid.


BETTY. So I see -- and the ground is strewn with his feathers.


ELEANOR. And now, Betty, for my dear Captain; have you sounded his
inclinations, as I desired you?


BETTY. I have.


ELEANOR. Well! and how?


BETTY. Oh! he doats upon you -- sighs and wishes -- but as I told you, has his
fears -- he is horribly afraid you should change your mind, and therefore you
know what I told you about articles, the settlement, and all that.


ELEANOR. Yes, yes, every scruple shall be satisfied, and every doubt removed
-- I Have given my lawyer orders about it. Well, I must go and dress -- if he
comes, you will let me know immediately -- and, do you hear, let me see no more
of my Cousin Capstern.


BETTY. No, no, Madam, leave that to me.


ELEANOR. Betty, you will come in, and help to dress me.

(Exit.
BETTY. I Will follow you Ma'am, in two minutes. -- To be sure, I Am a false Jade,
but it is in a good cause, and what is more, I shall be well paid for it --
now is the time to release my poor prisoner. Mr. Capstern, Mr. Capstern.

(goes to the door, and whispers.
Enter COMMODORE, peeping at the door. COMMODORE. Is the coast clear?


BETTY. Ay, ay, all is safe, you may come in.


COMMODORE. Keep a good look oat though -- the enemy's just a-stern of us.


BETTY. O never fear, Sir, I Will take care of that.


COMMODORE. Thou art an honest girl, Bet: the best adviceboat that has come in
this tide; I see how the land lies; fine work, In Faith -- that an old hulk,
like my Cousin Eleanor, should wish to be new rigged and manned -- I Am not
surpised -- but that my honest sensible friend Frank, should want to slip his
cable too -- but I Will counter plot 'em; a couple of ridiculous dotards -- but
what say the young folks! how blows the wind there?


BETTY. O, as fair as we could wish, Sir; they would never have consented to
marry the old ones, though they are both starving.


COMMODORE. Why, that is noble!


BETTY. Besides, they have taken a huge fancy one to another, and if they could
shake off this unnatural connection, which necessity forced them to and get a
little something to live upon, they would be the happiest of all human beings.
But I told 'em of your honor's scheme, and they came into it immediately --
they are resolved to follow your honor's direction in every thing.


COMMODORE. Why, that is right -- mayhap, they may be the better for it -- I
like the young rogues they are a couple of pretty little cock-boats, I intend to
splice 'em together, call 'em the Union frigate, and launch 'em into the world
with a good ballast mayhap in their bottom.


BETTY. God bless your honor for your goodness; they are a couple of sweet
creatures, that they are; I told 'em of your honor's generosity. I Am sure Mr.
Martin and I Will do any thing to serve your honor, and I hope your honor will
remember us.


COMMODORE. That I will, by and by, my girl; in the mean time, there is a
biscuit and a dram for you. (Gives her money.) And so, Maria, you say, has
promised the old Colonel to marry him.


BETTY. Yes, Sir, but I could hardly persuade her to it; she did not like to
promise, she said, where she never meant to perform: But I told her 'twas all
fair.


COMMODORE. Fair! aye, to be sure -- don't we always hang out false colors, to
deceive the enemy? I did it all last war, or I should not have so many shiners
in my pocket.


BETTY. And now, Sir, all we have to do is to prevent --


COMMODORE. These two shattered old hulks from splitting on the rocks; I Will
send a fire-ship out, and blow 'em up first -- let me see -- (pausing) -- aye,
that will do. The best part of our plot is yet behind, my girl; always close
your line of battle with a first rate -- that is my maxim.


Enter MARTIN, peeping. MARTIN. Mrs. Betty! Mrs. Betty! where are you?


BETTY. Here, here, man: what is the matter? come in, there is nobody here but
the Commodore.


MARTIN. O Sir, I Am glad you're here, for our ship leaks confoundedly.


COMMODORE. To work then, boy; pump away, and we'll clear her, I warrant you.
But where is the damage?


MARTIN. O Sir, these impatient young lovers will ruin all, and spoil our sport
with the old ones.


COMMODORE. How so?


MARTIN. I heard them just now making an appointment to meet in the blue room,
to settle matters, as they called it. If my master, or your mistress, should
over hear them --


COMMODORE. By Neptune, the luckiest thing that could happen; the very point in
the compass that blows fairest for us. Now, first and second mate, observe my
orders

(Takes hold of both their hands.)
MARTIN and BETTY. Yes, your honor.


COMMODORE. Let 'em be seen.


BETTY. By whom?


COMMODORE. By your mistress. Let 'em be overheard.


MARTIN. By whom?


COMMODORE. By your master -- Have you never a back staircase, never an old
screen to stand behind?


BETTY. O, Sir, if that be all, in the next room are two of the most convenient
closets for an eves dropper, not a word, nor a whisper can escape.


COMMODORE. That Is fortunate, indeed; then stow your lumber there -- do you,
Martin, convey the Colonel to one, and let Betty shut up her mistress in the
other; give 'em a hint first of the lovers design, and jealousy will do the
rest.


MARTIN. But will not this precipitate matters, Sir?


COMMODORE. O leave that to me; if this does not open their eyes, let 'em sink
like a couple of blind puppies, and go to the bottom.


BETTY. But what is to become of your honor?


COMMODORE. O I shall wrap myself up in the shrouds, peep at 'em from above,
then drop souse down upon deck like a water-spout, and overwhelm them; come,
come, every man to his gun; touch the wildfire and away -- brisk, brisk, my
lad, the engagement is beginning, and the first fire, they say, is half the
battle. I Will be with 'em, I warrant you; if I say it I Will do it, that is the
humor of Commodore Capstern.

(Exit Com. Mart. and Betty.
SCENE the Blue Parlour, with a Closet on each Side. Enter COLONEL LOVEMORE.
COLONEL. Well! I wish this business was over, and Maria fairly mine. O the
delicious creature! methought 'twas but a faint promise which she made me --
the little gypsy insists upon a settlement too; my old girl would have been
very well contented without one -- but if a man will have dainties, he must
expect to pay for 'em. I have some qualms of conscience still about poor
Eleanor; and then that old Commodore will so fire his broad sides upon me.


Enter MARTIN, (not seeing the Colonel.) MARTIN. The devil's in these girls, I
think -- a little false jade!


COLONEL. Who Is that, Martin? what is the matter now?


MARTIN. O nothing, Sir; nothing at all; only Miss Maria --


COLONEL. Maria! what of her? is she gone? is she off?


MARTIN. O no, Sir, I believe she will be on presently, but not with your honor.


COLONEL. What do you mean, Sirrah?


MARTIN. Only, Sir, that Miss Maria, your honor's new neice, Sir, and Captain
Sprightly, Miss Eleanor's new nephew, are a little acquainted with each other,
Sir, that is all. I heard 'em whispering together, and if I am not mistaken,
(looks out.) they are coming this way. There Is something in the wind, I Am sure.


COLONEL. O Martin, if I could but conceal myself any where.


MARTIN. That you may easily do, Sir; here is a very convenient closet, Sir;
step in, and shut the door after you, I Will let you know when they come -- in,
in. (puts the Colonel into the closet.) So, I have caged my bird, and yonder
comes Betty with here is.


Enter Miss ELEANOR and BETTY. BETTY. I Am sorry to say it, Ma'am, but it
certainly is as I tell you, and if you will step into this closet a moment you will
be convinced of it; for I see 'em coming.

(Betty puts Miss Eleanor into the other closet.
MARTIN. (To the Col. at the closet door. Here they are, Sir.

(Martin and Betty make signs to each other, laugh and retire.)
Enter CAPT. SPRITELY and MARIA. SPRITELY. Come in, my sweet Maria; don't be so
terrified, there is nobody near us.


MARIA. I Am so afraid of being watched. I would not be overheard for the world.


SPRITELY. Fear nothing, my soul; the old frights are both abroad, they have
been gone out this half hour.


MARIA. To prepare matters for their wedding, I suppose, and buy cords for our
execution -- but we shall slip our necks out of the collar, I can assure 'em.


SPRITELY. Or get a reprieve at the gallows.


MARIA. O, Spritely, our fate advances to a crisis, and I tremble for the event
-- Suppose our noble friend who has promised to support, should forsake and
leave us to poverty and ruin.


SPRITELY. Be not alarmed, my love, he is the worthiest of all human beings.


COLONEL. (aside. from the closet) Who the devil is he?


SPRITELY. You have promised and vowed to marry the Colonel, I think.


MARIA. Certainly.


SPRITELY. And mean to fulfill it?


MARIA. O no doubt of it -- when next we meet I am to fix the day with him, and
then --


SPRITELY. Aye, and then, Maria --


MARIA. Take the first opportunity of decamping with my dear Spritely.


COLONEL. (from the closet.) The devil you will.


SPRITELY. There Is the girl of my heart; and I --


MARIA. Aye, what will you do?


SPRITELY. Why, as soon as Moldy Miss and I --


ELEANOR. (from the closet.) Thank you for the title.


SPRITELY. Have settled our affairs, and appointed the time for our happy
union, then will I fly to the generous Commodore --


ELEANOR. (From the closet.) I am much obliged to you, good cousin Capstern.


SPRITELY. Where I hope to meet --


MARIA. Well, that is as you behave; in the mean time, before we build for
ourselves, let us take care of the ancient structures here.


SPRITELY. O the ridiculous pair of turtles! that ever age and youth should
think of coming together -- that June and January, frost and sunshine, the
frigid and torrid zones, should want to unite.


COLONEL, (from the closet.) So, so!


ELEANOR, (from the closet.) Very fine, indeed!


SPRITELY. But come, my love, the time slips away, and we may be discovered --
we must not be seen together. Farewell, my sweet Maria.

(kisses her.
MARIA. Dear Spritely, adieu -- I must to my old Cambyses.


SPRITELY. And I must pay my compliments to Sisygambis.

(They separate, and just as they get to the closets the Col. and Miss Eleanor
come out.
COLONEL. Here Is your old Cambyses. (To Maria.


ELEANOR. Here Is your old Sisygambis. (To Spritely.


MARIA. Here Is fine work. (aside.


SPRITELY. This is luck indeed. (aside.

(The Col. and Miss Eleanor looking round spy each other, and all four stand
aghast.
ELEANOR. Your servant, noble Colonel. (curtsying.


COLONEL. Your servant, Miss Eleanor. (bowing.


ELEANOR. I Am thunderstruck!


COLONEL. I Am all amazement!


ELEANOR. At length, Sir, I have discovered your baseness.


COLONEL. At length, madam, I Am satisfied of your infidelity -- What, wed your
own nephew!


ELEANOR. Marry your own neice!


COLONEL. Play the fool with a boy!


ELEANOR. Marry a chit at last! a girl! O fie, Colonel! and you too, Sir, (to
Spritely.) whom I have cherished like a viper in my bosom --


COLONEL. And you, false crocodile, (to Maria.) whom I have --


Enter COMMODORE, laughing heartily. COMMODORE. Ha, ha, ha, ha!


ELEANOR. The Commodore too!


COLONEL. Et tu Brute!


COMMODORE. Ha, ha! what! my noble Cambyses, and my fair cousin Sisygambis too!
truly ridiculous indeed! now do you look like a couple of Dutch bum-boats that
had been lost in a fog and fallen foul of one another; when the sun comes out
what a foolish figure they both cut! Well, cousin, am I to give you joy? what
say you, Frank, are you married yet?


COLONEL. No, Sir,


COMMODORE. Why then I say it is high time you were.


COLONEL. And pray, Mr. Capstern, what right --


ELEANOR. And pray, Mr. Capstern, what privilege --


COLONEL. Aye, Sir, what right --


ELEANOR. Aye, Sir, what privilege --


COMMODORE. Z -- ds, Sir, I have a right: I have a a privilege -- a privilege
which every honest man has a title to, to prevent his friend from playing the
fool, and making himself either ridiculous or contemptible.


ELEANOR. You take strange liberties in my house, Mr. Capstern.


COMMODORE. I may take more, madam, perhaps, before I leave it. I shall beg
leave to take the command of the vessel 'till I get you safe into port, and
then you may supersede me if you please -- If I say it I Will do it, that is the
humor of Commodore Capstern.


ELEANOR. I protest, Commodore, you're an arbitrary monarch.


COMMODORE. Where there is a good king, as we always have at sea, it is the best
government, take my word for it -- come, come, my worthy friend, and most
amiable cousin, if you have not a mind that the whole world should laugh at you
for a couple of idiots, fulfill your old contract, marry, and be happy. Go, go,
(pushes them forward) settle your matters immediately; I think I have powder
and shot enough about me to silence this small battery. I Will try at least if
they can hold out against my cannon here.

(Clapping his hand on his breeches pocket, and taking them aside. The Col. and
Miss Eleanor come forward.)
ELEANOR. Well, Colonel, what say you?


COLONEL. Why, I think we have nothing else for it; my friend the Commodore,
here, is a man of sense; suppose for once we take his advice.


ELEANOR. Any thing to oblige a friend of Mr. Lovemore's.


COLONEL. Lets do it with a grace however. (Whispers her.) Shall it be so?


ELEANOR. O by all means -- the thought is excellent! Ha, ha, ha!

(Laughs heartily.)
COLONEL. Ha, ha, ha! well, Commodore, now the jest is over -- we had only a
mind to hum you a little -- you could never believe I seriously meant to marry
that giggling girl there.


COMMODORE. No, to be sure, my little Cambyses.


ELEANOR. Or that I, when all the world knows I am turned of thirty, would
throw myself away on a military macaroni of eighteen.


COMMODORE. Never, my good Sysigambis, never; so, if you please, we'll even
send for the parson and tack you together.


COLONEL. Ay, tomorrow morning if you will.


COMMODORE. To night, by heaven! -- Spritely, Maria, come, give your uncle and
aunt joy, like a dutiful nephew and niece as you are.


COLONEL. No more of that as thou love me, Hal -- Come, old girl, give me thy
hand, and I think we should join in thanking our good preserver here, for
giving us an opportunity of doing that now, which, if we had followed our own
foolish inclinations, we should in vain have wished to do a twelvemonth hence.


ELEANOR. Well, Commodore, I Will give the Colonel my hand, but you must promise
to secure us from ridicule at all points: you must not send your small shot
after us.


COMMODORE. O no; you have struck your flag, begged for quarter, and there is an
end of it. A British conqueror never insults a fallen enemy. And now, my young
friends, have you any objection to following a good example?


SPRITELY. None at all -- I Will answer for both: but matrimony you know, Sir, is
a long voyage, and who shall fit out the vessel for us?


ELEANOR. O that gentleman.


COMMODORE. With all my heart. The pleasure of riches is to be able, to give to
those that deserve 'em; and the more shiners one has, the more pleasure there
is in dispensing 'em; that is my maxim. As they are going to lose their uncle
and aunt, the loss cannot be better supplied than by a father: I have adopted
them therefore for my own; and to show you I Am no bad relation, shall present
them with ten thousand pounds to begin the world with.


MARIA. Generous creature! O Spritely, how shall we repay our noble benefactor?


COMMODORE. By loving one another better and better every day; and if your
uncle and aunt had but a cap full of gratitude, they would contribute to stow
your locker a little -- what say you? -- they have a long voyage to make, in a
dangerous sea, a young pilot, and little provision but love.


COLONEL. Why, Commodore, as far as a few barrels of biscuits and beer --


COMMODORE. Well said; and my cousin here, I Will answer for her, will not grudge
to throw in some check shirts, a hammock and trowsers.


ELEANOR. I sha'n't scruple to follow the Colonel's example.


COMMODORE. Then we'll furnish the slops, I warrant; I Will tell you what, Frank:
the greatest pleasure an honest man can enjoy aboard of this world, is to
contribute to the happiness of the whole crew. Give me thy hand, boy: coz, I
give thee joy with all my heart: did not I tell you I Would dance at your wedding
tonight? if I say it, I Will do it -- that is the humor of Commodore Capstern.
And now, my brave boys and girls, you're all bound I find for the same port --
I wish you a pleasant voyage: and before you go, let an experienced old Tar
give you a few sailing orders.


SONG.
All you who set sail for the land of delight,
Who in wedlock's soft hammock would swing every night;
If you hope that your voyage successful shall prove,
Fill your sails with affection, your cabbins with love.
Fill your sails, etc.
Let your hearts, like your mainmast, be ever upright,
And the union you boast, like your tackle, be tight;
Of the shoals of indiff'rence be sure to keep clear,
And the quicksands of jealousy never come near.
And the quicksands, etc.
If vapors and whims, like sea sickness, prevail,
You must spread all your canvas, and catch the fresh gale;
But if brisk blows the wind, and there comes a rough sea,
Then lower your topsails, and scud under lee.
Then lower, etc.
If, husbands, you hope to live peaceable lives,
Keep the reckoning yourselves, give the helm to your wives;
For the evener we go, boys, the better we sail,
And on shipboard the head is still ruled by the tail.
And on shipboard, etc.
Then listen to Capstern, my lads, and be wise;
If my precepts you scorn, and my maxims despise,
A brace of proud antlers your brows may adorn,
And a hundred to one, but you double Cape-Horn.
And a hundred, etc.

FINIS.

