A COLLECTION of POEMS.

VOL. II.

A COLLECTION OF POEMS IN SIX VOLUMES.

BY SEVERAL HANDS.



LONDON: Printed by J. HUGHS, For R. and J. DODSLEY, at Tully's-Head in
Pall Mall. M DCC LXIII.

THE PROGRESS of LOVE. IN Four ECLOGUES.
UNCERTAINTY. ECLOGUE I. To Mr. POPE.
POPE, to whose reed beneath the beechen shade,
The Nymphs of Thames a pleased attention paid;
While yet thy Muse, content with humbler praise,
Warbled in Windsor's grove her sylvan lays,
Though now sublimely borne on Homer's wing,
Of glorious wars, and godlike chiefs she sing:
Will thou with me re-visit once again
The crystal fountain, and the flowery plain?
Will thou, indulgent, hear my verse relate
The various changes of a lover's state;
And while each turn of passion I pursue,
Ask thy own heart if what I tell be true?
To the green margin of a lonely wood,
Whose pendent shades o'erlook'd a silver flood,
Young Damon came, unknowing where he strayed,
Full of the image of his beauteous maid:
His flock far off, unfed, untended lay,
To every savage a defenseless prey;
No sense of interest could their master move,
And every care seemed trifling now but Love.
Awhile in pensive silence he remained,
But though his voice was mute his looks complained;
At length the thoughts within his bosom pent,
Forced his unwilling tongue to give them vent.
Ye Nymphs, he cried, ye Dryads, who so long
Have favored Damon, and inspired his song;
For whom, retired, I shun the gay resorts
Of sportful cities, and of pompous courts;
In vain I bid the restless world adieu,
To seek tranquillity and peace with you.
Though wild Ambition and destructive Rage,
No Factions here can form, no Wars can wage;
Though Envy frowns not on your humble shades,
Nor Calumny your innocence invades,
Yet cruel Love, that troubler of the breast,
Too often violates your boasted rest;
With inbred storms disturb your calm retreat,
And taints with bitterness each rural sweet.
Ah luckless day! when first with fond surprise
On Delia's face I fixed my eager eyes;
Then in wild tumults all my soul was tossed:
Then reason, liberty, at once were lost:
And every wish, and thought, and care was gone,
But what my heart employed on her alone.
Then too she smiled: can smiles our peace destroy,
Those lovely children of Content and Joy?
How can soft pleasure and tormenting woe,
From the same spring at the same moment flow?
Unhappy boy, these vain enquiries cease,
Thought could not guard, nor will restore thy peace:
Indulge the frenzy that thou must endure,
And sooth the pain thou know not how to cure.
Come, flattering Memory, and tell my heart
How kind she was, and with what pleasing art
She strove its fondest wishes to obtain,
Confirm her power, and faster bind my chain.
If on the green we danced, a mirthful band,
To me alone she gave her willing hand;
Her partial taste, if ever I touched the lyre,
Still in my song found something to admire.
By none but her my crook with flowers was crowned,
By none but her my brows with ivy bound:
The world that Damon was her choice believed,
The world, alas! like Damon, was deceived!
When last I saw her, and declared my fire
In words as soft as passion could inspire,
Coldly she heard, and full of scorn withdrew,
Without one pitying glance, or sweet adieu.
The frighted hind, who sees his ripened corn
Up from the roots by sudden tempests torn,
Whose fairest hopes destroyed and blasted lie,
Feels not so keen a pang of grief as I.
Ah, how have I deserved, inhuman maid,
To have my faithful service thus repaid?
Were all the marks of kindness I received,
But dreams of joy, that charmed me and deceived?
Or did you only nurse my growing love,
That with more pain I might your hatred prove?
Sure guilty treachery no place could find
In such a gentle, such a generous mind:
A maid brought up the woods and wilds among,
Could never have learnt the art of courts so young:
No; let me rather think her anger feigned,
Still let me hope my Delia may be gained;
'Twas only modesty that seemed disdain,
And her heart suffered when she gave me pain.
Pleased with this flattering thought the lovesick boy
Felt the faint dawnings of a doubtful joy;
Back to his flock more cheerful he returned,
When now the setting sun less fiercely burned:
Blue vapors rose along the mazy rills,
And light's last blushes tinged the distant hills.
HOPE. ECLOGUE II. To Mr. DODDINGTON.
HEar, DODDINGTON, the notes that shepherds sing,
Notes soft as those of nightingales in spring:
Nor Pan, nor Phoebus tune the shepherd's reed:
From Love alone our tender lays proceed:
Love warms our fancy with enlivening fires,
Refines our genius, and our verse inspires:
From him Theocritus, on Enna's plains,
Learnt the wild sweetness of his Doric strains;
Virgil by him was taught the moving art,
That charmed each ear, and softened every heart:
O would thou quit the pride of courts, and deign
To dwell with us upon the vocal plain,
Thee too his power should reach, and every shade
Resound the praises of thy favorite maid;
Thy pipe our rural concert would improve,
And we should learn of thee to please and love.
Damon no longer sought the silent shade,
No more in unfrequented paths he strayed,
But called the nymphs to hear his jocund song,
And told his joy to all the rustic throng.
Blessed be the hour, he said, that happy hour*
When first I owned my Delia's gentle power;
Then gloomy Discontent and pining Care
Forsook my breast, and left soft wishes there:
Soft wishes there they left, and gay desires,
Delightful languors, and transporting fires.
Where yonder limes combine to form a shade,
These eyes first gazed upon the charming maid;
There she appeared, on that auspicious day,
When swains their sportive rites to Bacchus pay:
She led the dance -- heavens! with what grace she moved!
Who could have seen her then, and not have loved?
I strove not to resist so sweet a flame,
But gloried in a happy captive's name;
Nor would I now, could Love permit, be free,
But leave to brutes their savage liberty.
And art thou then, fond swain, secure of joy?
Can no reverse thy flattering bliss destroy?
Has treacherous Love no torment yet in store?
Or have thou never proved his fatal power?
Whence flowed those tears that late bedewed thy cheek?
Why sighed thy heart as if it strove to break?
Why were the desert rocks invoked to hear
The plaintive accents of thy sad despair?
From Delia's rigor all those pains arose,
Delia, who now compassionates my woes,
Who bids me hope; and in that charming word
Has peace and transport to my soul restored.
Begin, my pipe, begin the gladsome lay;
A kiss from Delia shall thy music pay;
A kiss obtained 'twixt struggling and consent,
Given with forced anger, and disguised content:
No laureat wreaths I ask to bind my brows,
Such as the Muse on lofy bards bestows;
Let other swains to praise or fame aspire:
I from her lips my recompense require.
Hark how the bees with murmurs fill the plain,
While every flower of every sweet they drain:
See, how beneath yon hillock's shady steep,
The sheltered herds on flowery couches sleep;
Nor bees, nor herds, are half so blessed as I,
If with my fond desires my Love comply:
From Delia's lips a sweeter honey flows,
And on her bosom dwells more soft repose.
Ah how, my dear, shall I deserve thy charms?
What gift can bribe thee to my longing arms?
A bird for thee in silken bands I hold,
Whose yellow plumage shines like polished gold;
From distant isles the lovely stranger came,
And bears the Fortunate Canaries name;
In all our woods none boasts so sweet a note,
Not even the nightingale's melodious throat.
Accept of this; and could I add beside
What wealth the rich Peruvian mountains hide;
If all the gems in Eastern rocks were mine,
On thee alone their glittering pride should shine.
But if thy mind no gifts have power to move,
Phoebus himself shall leave the Aonian grove;
The tuneful Nine, who never sue in vain,
Shall come sweet suppliants for their favorite swain.
For him each blue-ey'd Naiad of the flood,
For him each green-hair'd sister of the wood,
Whom often beneath fair Cynthia's gentle ray
His music calls to dance the night away.
And you, fair nymphs, companions of my Love;
With whom she joys the cowslip meads to rove,
I beg you recommend my faithful flame,
And let her often hear her shepherd's name;
Shade all my faults from her enquiring sight,
And show my merits in the fairest light;
My pipe your kind assistance shall repay,
And every friend shall claim a different lay.
But see! in yonder glade the heavenly fair
Enjoys the fragrance of the breezy air --
Ah, thither let me fly with eager feet;
Adieu, my pipe, I go my Love to meet --
O may I find her as we parted last,
And may each future hour be like the past!
So shall the whitest lamb these pastures feed,
Propitious Venus, on thy altars bleed.
JEALOUSY. ECLOGUE III. To Mr. EDWARD WALPOLE.
THE gods, O WALPOLE, give no bliss sincere:
Wealth is disturbed by care, and power by fear.
Of all the passions that employ the mind,
In gentle Love the sweetest joys we find;
Yet even those joys dire Jealousy molests,
And blackens each fair image in our breasts.
O may the warmth of thy too tender heart
Never feel the sharpness of his venomed dart;
For thy own quiet think thy mistress just,
And wisely take thy happiness on trust.
Begin, my Muse, and Damon's woes rehearse,
In wildest numbers and disordered verse.
On a romantic mountain's airy head
(While browzing goats at ease around him fed)
Anxious he lay, with jealous cares oppressed;
Distrust and anger laboring in his breast --
The vale beneath a pleasing prospect yields,
Of verdant meads and cultivated fields;
Through these a river rolls its winding flood,
Adorned with various tufts of rising wood;
Here half concealed in trees a cottage stands,
A castle there the opening plain commands,
Beyond, a town with glittering spires is crowned,
And distant hills the wide horizon bound:
So charming was the scene, awhile the swain
Beheld delighted, and forgot his pain;
But soon the stings infix'd within his heart,
With cruel force renewed their raging smart:
His flowery wreath, which long with pride he wore,
The gift of Delia, from his brows he tore:
Then cried; May all thy charms, ungrateful maid,
Like these neglected roses droop and fade;
May angry Heaven deform each guilty grace,
That triumphs now in that deluding face;
Those altered looks may every shepherd fly,
And even thy Daphnis hate thee worse than I.
Say, thou inconstant, what has Damon done,
To lose the heart his tedious pains had won;
Tell me what charms you in my rival find,
Against whose power no ties have strength to bind;
Has he, like me, with long obedience strove
To conquer your disdain, and merit love?
Has he with transport every smile adored,
And died with grief at each ungentle word?
Ah, no! the conquest was obtained with ease:
He pleased you, by not studying to please:
His careless indolence your pride alarmed;
And had he loved you more, he less had charmed.
O pain to think, another shall possess
Those balmy lips which I was wont to press:
Another on her panting breast shall lie,
And catch sweet madness from her swimming eye! --
I saw their friendly flocks together feed,
I saw them hand in hand walk over the mead;
Would my closed eyes had sunk in endless night,
Ere I was doomed to bear that hateful sight!
Wherever they passed, be blasted every flower,
And hungry wolves their helpless flocks devour. --
Ah wretched swain, could no examples move
Thy heedless heart to shun the rage of love?
Have thou not heard how poor See Mr. GAY'S Dione.
Menalcas died
A victim to Parthenia's fatal pride?
Dear was the youth to all the tuneful plain,
Loved by the nymphs, by Phoebus loved in vain:
Around his tomb their tears the Muses paid,
And all things mourned but the relentless maid.
Would I could die like him and be at peace,
These torments in the quiet grave would cease;
There my vexed thoughts a calm repose would find.
And rest as if my Delia still were kind.
No, let me live her falsehood to upbraid;
Some god perhaps my just revenge will aid. --
Alas what aid, fond swain, would thou receive?
Could thy heart bear to see its Delia grieve?
Protect her, Heaven, and let her never know
The slightest part of hapless Damon's woe:
I ask no vengeance from the powers above;
All I implore is never more to love --
Let me this fondness from my bosom tear,
Let me forget that ever I thought her fair.
Come, cool Indifference, and heal my breast;
Wearied, at length, I seek thy downy rest:
No turbulence of passion shall destroy
My future ease with flattering hopes of joy.
Hear, mighty Pan, and all ye Sylvans hear,
What by your guardian deities I swear;
No more my eyes shall view her fatal charms,
No more I Will court the trayt'ress to my arms;
Not all her arts my steady soul shall move,
And she shall find that Reason conquers Love. --
Scarce had he spoke, when through the lawn below
Alone he saw the beauteous Delia go;
At once transported he forgot his vow,
(Such perjuries the laughing gods allow)
Down the steep hills with ardent haste he flew;
He found her kind, and soon believed her true.
POSSESSION. ECLOGUE IV. To the Lord COBHAM.
COBHAM, to thee this rural lay I bring,
Whose guiding judgment gives me skill to sing;
Though far unequal to those polished strains,
With which thy Congreve charmed the listening plains,
Yet shall its music please the partial ear,
And sooth thy breast with thoughts that once were dear;
Recall those years which time has thrown behind,
When smiling Love with Honor shared thy mind:
The sweet remembrance shall thy youth restore,
Fancy again shall run past pleasures over,
And while in Stowe's enchanting walks you stray,
This theme may help to cheat the summer's day.
Beneath the covert of a myrtle wood,
To Venus raised a rustic altar stood,
To Venus and to Hymen, there combined,
In friendly league to favor humankind.
With wanton Cupids in that happy shade,
The gentle Virtues, and mild Wisdom played.
Nor there in sprightly Pleasure's genial train,
Lurked sick Disgust, or late repenting Pain,
Nor Force, nor Interest, joined unwilling hands,
But Love consenting tied the blissful bands.
Thither with glad devotion Damon came,
To thank the powers who blessed his faithful flame;
Two milk-white doves he on their altar laid,
And thus to both his grateful homage paid:
Hail, bounteous god, before whose hallowed shrine
My Delia vowed to be for ever mine,
While glowing in her cheeks, with tender love,
Sweet virgin modesty reluctant strove:
And hail to thee, fair queen of young desires,
Long shall my heart preserve thy pleasing fires,
Since Delia now can all its warmth return,
As fondly languish, and as fiercely burn.
O the dear gloom of last propitious night!
O shade more charming than the fairest light!
Then in my arms I clasped the melting maid,
Then all my pains one moment overpaid;
Then first the sweet excess of bliss I proved,
Which none can taste but who like me have loved,
Thou too, bright goddess, once in Ida's grove,
Did not disdain to meet a shepherd's love,
With him while frisking lambs around you played,
Concealed you sported in the secret shade;
Scarce could Anchises' raptures equal mine,
And Delia's beauties only yield to thine.
What are you now, my once most valued joys,
Insipid trifles all, and childish toys --
Friendship itself never knew a charm like this,
Nor Colin's talk could please like Delia's kiss.
Ye Muses, skilled in every winning art,
Teach me more deeply to engage her heart;
Ye Nymphs, to her your freshest roses bring,
And crown her with the pride of all the spring;
On all her days let health and peace attend;
May she never want, nor ever lose a friend;
May some new pleasure every hour employ;
But let her Damon be her highest joy.
With thee, my Love, for ever will I stay,
All night caress thee, and admire all day;
In the same field our mingled flocks we'll feed,
To the same spring our thirsty heifers lead,
Together will we share the harvest toils,
Together press the vine's autumnal spoils,
Delightful state, where peace and love combine,
To bid our tranquil days unclouded shine!
Here limpid fountains roll through flowery meads,
Here rising forests lift their verdant heads;
Here let me wear my careless life away,
And in thy arms insensibly decay.
When late old age our heads shall silver over,
And our slow pulses dance with joy no more;
When time no longer will thy beauties spare,
And only Damon's eye shall think thee fair;
Then may the gentle hand of welcome death,
At one soft stroke deprive us both of breath;
May we beneath one common stone be laid,
And the same cypress both our ashes shade.
Perhaps some friendly Muse, in tender verse,
Shall deign our faithful passion to rehearse,
And future ages with just envy moved,
Be told how Damon and his Delia loved.
SOLILOQUY Of a BEAUTY in the COUNTRY. Written at ETON School.
By the Same.
'TWAS night; and FLAVIA to her room retired,
With evening chat and sober reading tired;
There melancholy, pensive, and alone,
She meditates on the forsaken town:
On her raised arm reclined her drooping head,
She sighed, and thus in plaintive accents said:
"Ah, what avails it to be young and fair,
"To move with negligence, to dress with care?
"What worth have all the charms our pride can boast,
"If all in envious solitude are lost?
"Where none admire, it is useless to excel;
"Where none are Beaus, it is vain to be a Belle:
"Beauty, like wit, to judges should be shown;
"Both most are valued where they best are known.
"With every grace of nature, or of art,
"We cannot break one stubborn country heart:
"The brutes, insensible, our power defy:
"To love exceeds a 'Squire's capacity.
"The town, the court, is Beauty's proper sphere;
"That is our heaven, and we are angels There:
"In that gay circle thousand Cupids rove,
"The court of Britain is the court of Love.
"How has my conscious heart with triumph glowed,
"How have my sparkling eyes their transport showed,
"At each distinguished birth-night ball, to see
"The homage due to empire, paid to me!
"When every eye was fixed on me alone,
"And dreaded mine more than the monarch's frown:
"When rival statesmen for my favor strove,
"Less jealous in their power, than in their love.
"Changed is the scene; and all my glories die,
"Like flowers transplanted to a colder sky;
"Lost is the dear delight of giving pain,
"The tyrant joy of hearing slaves complain.
"In stupid indolence my life is spent,
"Supinely calm, and dully innocent:
"Unblest I wear my useless time away;
"Sleep (wretched maid!) all night, and dream all day;
"Go at set hours to dinner and to prayer;
"For dullness ever must be regular.
"Now with mamma at tedious whist I play;
"Now without scandal drink insipid tea;
"Or in the garden breathe the country air,
"Secure from meeting any Tempter there:
"From books to work, from work to books I rove,
"And am (alas!) at leisure to improve!
"Is this the life a Beauty ought to lead?
"Were eyes so radiant only made to read?
"These fingers, at whose touch even age would glow,
"Are these of use for nothing but to sew?
"Sure erring Nature never could design
"To form a housewife in a mould like mine!
"O Venus, queen and guardian of the fair,
"Attend propitious to thy vot'ry's prayer:
"Let me revisit the dear town again:
"Let me be seen! -- could I that wish obtain,
"All other wishes my own power would gain.
BLENHEIM. Written at the University of OXFORD in the Year 1727.
By the Same.
PARENT of arts, whose skilful hand first taught
The towering pile to rise, and formed the plan
With fair proportion; architect divine,
Minerva, thee to my adventurous lyre
Assistant I invoke, the means to sing
BLENHEMIA, monument of British fame,
Thy glorious work! for thou the lofty towers
Did to his virtue raise, whom often thy shield
In peril guarded, and thy wisdom steered
Through all the storms of war. -- Thee too I call,
Thalia, sylvan Muse, who love to rove
Along the shady paths and verdant bowers
Of Woodstock's happy grove: there tuning sweet
Thy rural pipe, while all the Dryad train
Attentive listen; let thy warbling song
Paint with melodious praise the pleasing scene,
And equal these to Pindus' honored shades.
When Europe freed, confessed the saving power
Of MARLB'ROUGH'S hand; Britain who sent him forth
Chief of confed'rate hosts, to fight the cause
Of Liberty and Justice, grateful raised
This palace sacred to her Leader's fame;
A trophy of success; with spoils adorned
Of conquered towns, and glorying in the name
Of that auspicious field, where CHURCHILL'S sword
Vanquished the might of Gallia, and chastis'd
Rebel Bavar. -- Majestic in its strength
Stands the proud dome, and speaks its great design.
Hail happy Chief, whose valor could deserve
Reward so glorious! grateful nation hail,
Who paid'st his service with so rich a meed!
Which most shall I admire, which worthiest praise,
The Hero or the People? Honor doubts,
And weighs their virtues in an equal scale.
Not thus Germania pays the uncancell'd debt
Of gratitude to us. -- Blush, Caesar, blush,
When thou behold'st these towers, ingrate to thee
A monument of shame. Can thou forget
Whence they are named, and what an English arm
Did for thy throne that day? But we disdain
Or to upbraid, or imitate thy guilt.
Steel thy obdurate heart against the sense
Of obligation infinite, and know,
Britain, like Heaven, protects a thankless world
For her own glory, nor expects reward.
Pleased with the noble theme, her task the Muse
Pursues untir'd, and through the palace roves
With ever-new delight. The tap'stry rich
With gold, and gay with all the beauteous paint
Of various-colour'd silks, disposed with skill,
Attracts her curious eye. Here Ister rolls
His purple wave; and there the Granic flood
With passing squadrons foams: here hardy Gaul
Flies from the sword of Britain; there to Greece
Effeminate Persia yields. -- In arms opposed
MARLB'ROUGH and ALEXANDER vie for fame
With glorious competition; equal both
In valor and in fortune, but their praise
Be different, for with different views they fought;
This to subdue, and that to free mankind.
Now through the stately portals issuing forth,
The Muse to softer glories turns and seeks
The woodland shade, delighted. Not the vale
Of Tempe famed in song, or Ida's grove
Such beauty boasts. Amid the mazy gloom
Of this romantic wilderness once stood
The bower of Rosamonda, hapless fair,
Sacred to grief and love: the crystal fount
In which she used to bathe her beauteous limbs
Still warbling flows, pleased to reflect the face
Of SPENCER, lovely maid, when tired she fits
Beside its flowery brink, and views those charms
Which only Rosamond could once excel.
But see where flowing with a nobler stream,
A limpid lake of purest waters rolls
Beneath the wide-stretch'd arch, stupendous work,
Through which the Danube might collected pour
His spacious urn! Silent awhile and smooth
The current glides, till with an headlong force
Broke and disordered, down the steep it falls
In loud cascades; the silver-sparkling foam
Glitters relucent in the dancing ray.
In these retreats reposed the mighty soul
Of CHURCHILL, from the toils of war and state,
Splendidly private, and the tranquil joy
Of contemplation felt, while BLENHEIM'S dome
Triumphal, ever in his mind renewed
The memory of his fame, and soothed his thoughts
With pleasing record of his glorious deeds.
So by the rage of faction, home recalled,
Lucullus, while he waged successful war
Against the pride of Asia, and the power
Of Mithridates, whose aspiring mind
No losses could subdue, enriched with spoils
Of conquered nations, back returned to Rome,
And in magnificent retirement past
The evening of his life. -- But not alone,
In the calm shades of honorable ease,
Great MARLB'ROUGH peaceful dwelt: Indulgent heaven
Gave a companion to his softer hours,
With whom conversing, he forgot all change
Of fortune, or of taste, and in her mind
Found greatness equal to his own, and loved
Himself in her. -- Thus each by each admired,
In mutual honor, mutual fondness joined:
Like two fair stars with intermingled light,
In friendly union they together shone,
Aiding each other's brightness, till the cloud
Of night eternal quenched the beams of one.
Thee CHURCHILL first the ruthless hand of death
Tore from thy consort's side, and called thee hence
To the sublimer seats of joy and love;
Where Fate again shall join her soul to thine,
Who now, regardful of thy fame, erects
The column to thy praise, and sooths her woe
With pious honors to thy sacred name
Immortal. Lo! where towering on the height
Of yon aerial pillar proudly stands
Thy image, like a guardian god, sublime,
And awes the subject plain: beneath his feet,
The German eagles spread their wings, his hand
Grasps Victory, its slave. Such was the brow
Majestic, such thy martial port, when Gaul
Fled from thy frown, and in the Danube sought
A refuge from thy sword. -- There, where the field
Was deepest stained with gore, on Hochstet's plain,
The theater of thy glory, once was raised
A meaner trophy, by the Imperial hand;
Extorted gratitude; which now the rage
Of Malice impotent, beseeming ill
A regal breast, has levelled to the ground:
Mean insult! this with better auspices
Shall stand on British earth, to tell the world
How MARLB'ROUGH fought, for whom, and how repaid
His services. Nor shall the constant love
Of her who raised the monument be lost
In dark oblivion: That shall be the theme
Of future bards in ages yet unborn,
Inspired with Chaucer's fire, who in these groves
First tuned the British harp, and little deemed
His humble dwelling should the neighbor be
Of BLENHEIM, house superb; to which the throng
Of travelers approaching, shall not pass
His roof unnoted, but respectful hail
With reverence due. Such honor does the Muse
Obtain her favorites. -- But the noble pile
(My theme) demands my voice. -- O shade adored,
MARLB'ROUGH! who now above the starry sphere
Dwell'st in the palaces of heaven, enthroned
Amongst the demigods, deign to defend
This thy abode, while present here below,
And sacred still to thy immortal fame,
With tutelary care. Preserve it safe
From Time's destroying hand, and cruel stroke
Of factious Envy's more relentless rage.
Here may, long ages hence, the British youth,
When Honor calls them to the field of war,
Behold the trophies which thy valor raised;
The proud reward of thy successful toils
For Europe's freedom, and Britannia's fame:
That fired with generous envy, they may dare
To emulate thy deeds. -- So shall thy name,
Dear to thy country, still inspire her sons
With martial virtue: and to high attempts
Excite their arms, till other battles won,
And nations saved, new Monuments require,
And other BLENHEIMS shall adorn the land.
TO THE Reverend Dr. AYSCOUGH at OXFORD. Written from PARIS in the Year 1728.
By the Same.
SAY, dearest friend, how roll thy hours away?
What pleasing study cheats the tedious day?
Do thou the sacred volumes often explore
Of wise Antiquity's immortal lore,
Where virtue by the charms of wit refined,
At once exalts and polishes the mind?
How different from our modern guilty art,
Which pleases only to corrupt the heart;
Whose cursed refinements odious Vice adorn,
And teach to honor what we ought to scorn!
Do thou in sage Historians joy to see
How Roman Greatness rose with Liberty;
How the same hands that tyrants durst control,
Their empire stretched from Atlas to the Pole;
Till wealth and conquest into slaves refined
The proud luxurious masters of mankind?
Do thou in lettered Greece each charm admire,
Each grace, each virtue Freedom could inspire;
Yet in her troubled states see all the woes
And all the crimes that giddy Faction knows;
Till rent by parties, by Corruption sold,
Or weakly careless, or too rashly bold,
She sunk beneath a mitigated doom,
The slave and tut'ress of protecting Rome?
Does calm Philosophy her aid impart,
To guide the passions, and to mend the heart?
Taught by her precepts, have thou learnt the end
To which alone the wise their studies bend;
For which alone by nature were designed
The powers of thought -- to benefit mankind?
Not like a cloistered drone, to read and doze,
In undeserving, undeserved repose;
But reason's influence to diffuse; to clear
The enlightened world of every gloomy fear;
Dispel the mists of error, and unbind
Those pedant chains that clog the freeborn mind,
Happy who thus his leisure can employ!
He knows the purest hours of tranquil joy;
Nor vexed with pangs that busier bosoms tear,
Nor lost to social Virtue's pleasing care;
Safe in the port, yet laboring to sustain
Those who will float on the tempestuous main.
So Lock the days of studious quiet spent;
So Boil in wisdom found divine content;
So Cambray, worthy of a happier doom,
The virtuous slave of Louis and of Rome.
Good Dr. HOUGH.
Wor'ster thus supports his drooping age,
Far from court-flatt'ry, far from party rage;
He, who in youth a tyrant's frown defied,
Firm and intrepid on his country's side,
Her boldest champion then, and now her mildest guide.
O generous warmth! O sanctity divine!
To emulate his worth, my friend, be thine:
Learn from his life the duties of the gown;
Learn not to flatter, nor insult the crown;
Nor basely servile court the guilty great,
Nor raise the Church a rival to the State:
To Error mild, to Vice alone severe,
Seek not to spread the law of Love by Fear.
The priest, who plagues the world, can never mend:
No foe to Man was ever to God a friend:
Let reason and let virtue faith maintain,
All force but theirs is impious, weak, and vain.
Me other cares in other climes engage,
Cares that become my birth, and suit my age;
In various knowledge to improve my youth,
And conquer Prejudice, worst foe to Truth;
By foreign arts domestic faults to mend,
Enlarge my notions, and my views extend;
The useful science of the world to know,
Which books can never teach, or pedants show.
A nation here I pity, and admire,
Whom noblest sentiments of glory fire,
Yet taught by custom's force, and bigot fear,
To serve with pride, and boast the yoke they bear:
Whose Nobles born to cringe, and to command,
In courts a mean, in camps a generous band;
From each low tool of power content receive
Those laws, their dreaded arms to Europe give.
Whose people vain in want, in bondage blessed,
Though plundered, gay; industrious, though oppressed;
With happy follies rise above their fate,
The jest and envy of each wiser state.
Yet here the Muses deigned awhile to sport
In the short sunshine of a favoring court:
Here Boileau strong in sense, and sharp in wit,
Who from the ancients, like the ancients writ,
Permission gained inferior vice to blame,
By flattering incense to his Master's fame.
Here Moliere, first of comic wits, excelled
Whatever Athenian theaters beheld;
By keen, yet decent satire skilled to please,
With morals mirth uniting, strength with ease.
Now charmed, I hear the bold Corneille inspire
Heroic thought with Shakespeare's force and fire;
Now sweet Racine with milder influence move
The softened heart to Pity and to Love.
With mingled pain and pleasure I survey
The pompous works of arbitrary sway;
Proud palaces, that drained the subject store,
Raised on the ruins of the oppressed and poor;
Where even mute walls are taught to flatter state,
And painted triumphs style Ambition GREAT The victories of LOUIS XVI. painted
in the galleries of Versailles.
.
With more delight those pleasing shades I view,
Where Conde from an envious court withdrew Chantilly.
;
Where, sick of glory, faction, power and pride,
(Sure judge how empty all, who all had tried)
Beneath his palms the weary Chief reposed,
And life's great scene in quiet Virtue closed.
With shame that other famed retreat I see
Adorned by Art, disgraced by Luxury St. Cloud.
;
Where Orleans wasted every vacant hour
In the wild riot of unbounded power.
Where feverish Debauch and impious Love
Stained the mad table and the guilty grove.
With these amusements is thy friend detained,
Pleased and instructed in a foreign land;
Yet often a tender wish recalls my mind
From present joys to dearer left behind:
O native isle, fair Freedom's happiest feat!
At thought of thee my bounding pulses beat;
At thought of thee my heart impatient burns,
And all my country on my soul returns.
When shall I see the fields, whose plenteous grain
No power can ravish from the industrious swain?
When kiss with pious love the sacred earth,
That gave a BURLEIGH, or a RUSSEL birth?
When, in the shade of laws, that long have stood,
Prop'd by their care, or strengthened by their blood,
Of fearless independence wisely vain,
The proudest slave of Bourbon's race disdain?
Yet oh! what doubt, what sad presaging voice
Whispers within, and bids me not rejoice;
Bids me contemplate every state around,
From sultry Spain to Norway's icy bound;
Bids their lost rights, their ruined glories see;
And tells me, These, like England, once were Free.
To Mr. POYNTZ, Ambassador at the Congress of SOISSONS, in the Year 1728.
Written at PARIS.
By the Same.
O Thou whose friendship is my joy and pride,
Whose virtues warm me, and whose precepts guide;
Thou, to whom greatness rightly understood,
Is but a larger power of being good;
Say, Poyntz, amidst the toils of anxious state,
Does not thy secret soul desire retreat?
Do thou not wish (the task of glory done)
Thy busy life at length might be thy own;
That to thy loved Philosophy resigned,
No care might ruffle thy unbended mind?
Just is the wish. For sure the happy meed,
To favored man by smiling heaven decreed,
Is to reflect at ease on glorious pains,
And calmly to enjoy what Virtue gains.
Not him I praise, who from the world retired,
By no enlivening generous passion fired,
On flowery couches slumbers life away,
And gently bids his active powers decay;
Who fears bright Glory's awful face to see;
And shuns Renown as much as Infamy:
But blessed is he, who exercised in cares,
To private Leisure public Virtue bears;
Who tranquil ends the race he nobly run,
And decks Repose with trophies Labor won.
Him Honor follows to the secret shade,
And crowns propitious his declining head:
In his retreats their harps the Muses string,
For him in lays unbought spontaneous sing;
Friendship and Truth on all his moments wait,
Pleased with Retirement better than with State;
And round the bower where humbly great he lies,
Fair olives bloom, or verdant laurels rise.
So when thy Country shall no more demand
The needful aid of thy sustaining hand;
When Peace restored shall on her downy wing
Secure Repose and careless Leisure bring;
Then to the shades of learned ease retired,
The world forgetting, by the world admired,
Among thy books and friends, thou shall possess
Contemplative and quiet happiness;
Pleased to review a life in honor spent,
And painful merit paid with sweet content.
Yet though thy hours unclogg'd with sorrow roll,
Though wisdom calm, and science feed thy soul;
One dearer bliss remains to be possessed,
That only can improve and crown the rest --
Permit thy friend this secret to reveal,
Which thy own heart perhaps would better tell;
The point to which our sweetest passions move;
Is to be truly loved, and fondly love.
This is the charm that sooths the troubled breast,
Friend to our health, and author of our rest,
Bids every gloomy vexing passion fly,
And tunes each jarring string to harmony.
Even while I write; the name of Love inspires
More pleasing thoughts, and more enlivening fires;
Beneath his power my raptured fancy glows,
And every tender verse more sweetly flows.
Dull is the privilege of living free;
Our hearts were never formed for Liberty:
Some beauteous image well imprinted there,
Can best defend them from consuming care.
In vain to groves and gardens we retire,
And nature in her rural works admire;
Though grateful these, yet these but faintly charm,
They may Delight us, but can never Warm.
May some fair eyes, my friend, thy bosom fire
With pleasing pangs of ever gay desire;
And teach thee that soft science, which alone
Still to thy searching mind rests slightly known.
Thy soul, though great, is tender and refined,
To friendship sensible, to love inclined;
And therefore long thou can not arm thy breast
Against the entrance of so sweet a guest.
Hear what the inspiring Muses bid me tell,
For Heaven shall ratify what they reveal.
A chosen bride shall in thy arms be placed,
With all attractive charms of beauty graced;
Whose wit and virtue shall thy own express,
Distinguished only by their softer dress:
Thy greatness she, or thy retreat shall share,
Sweeten tranquillity, or soften care:
Her smiles the taste of every joy shall raise,
And add new pleasure to renown and praise;
Till charmed you own the truth my verse would prove,
That Happiness is near allied to Love.
VERSES to be written under a Picture of Mr. POYNTZ.
By the Same.
SUCH is thy form, O Poyntz! but who shall find
A hand, or colors, to express thy mind?
A mind unmoved by every vulgar fear,
In a false world that dares to be sincere;
Wise without art; without ambition great;
Though firm, yet pliant; active, though sedate;
With all the richest stores of Learning fraught,
Yet better still by native Prudence taught;
That, fond the griefs of the distressed to heal,
Can pity frailties it could never feel;
That, when Misfortune su'd, never sought to know
What sect, what party, whether friend or foe;
That, fixed on equal Virtue's temperate laws,
Despises calumny, and shuns applause;
That, to its own perfections singly blind,
Would for another think this praise designed.
An Epistle to Mr. POPE. From ROME, 1730.
By the Same.
IMmortal bard! for whom each Muse has wove
The fairest garlands of the Aonian grove;
Preserved, our drooping genius to restore,
When Addison and Congreve are no more.
After so many stars extinct in night
The darkened ages last remaining light!
To thee from Latian realms this verse is writ,
Inspired by memory of ancient wit;
For now no more these climes their influence boast,
Fallen is their glory, and their virtue lost;
From Tyrants and from Priests the Muses fly,
Daughters of Reason and of Liberty:
Nor Baioe now, nor Umbria's plain they love,
Nor on the banks of Var, or Mincius rove;
To Thames's flowery borders they retire,
And kindle in thy breast the Roman fire.
So in the shades, where cheered with summer rays
Melodious linnets warbled sprightly lays,
Soon as the faded, falling leaves complain
Of gloomy Winter's unauspicious reign,
No tuneful voice is heard of joy or love,
But mournful silence saddens all the grove.
Unhappy Italy! whose altered state
Has felt the worst severity of fate:
Not that Barbarian hands her Fasces broke,
And bowed her haughty neck beneath their yoke;
Not that her palaces to earth are thrown,
Her cities desert, and her fields unsown;
But that her ancient spirit is decayed,
That sacred Wisdom from her bounds is fled,
That there the source of Science flows no more,
Whence its rich streams supplied the world before.
Illustrious names! that once in Latium shined,
Born to instruct and to command mankind;
Chiefs, by whose virtue mighty Rome was raised,
And Poets, who those Chiefs sublimely praised!
Often I the traces you have left explore,
Your ashes visit, and your urns adore;
Often kiss, with lips devout, some mouldering stone,
With ivy's venerable shade o'ergrown;
Those hallowed ruins better pleased to see
Than all the pomp of modern luxury.
As late on Virgil's tomb fresh flowers I strow'd,
While with the inspiring Muse my bosom glowed,
Crowned with eternal bays my ravished eyes
Beheld the poet's aweful form arise;
Stranger, he said, whose pious hand has paid
These grateful rites to my attentive shade,
When thou shall breathe thy happy native air,
To Pope this message from his Master bear:
'Great Bard, whose numbers I myself inspire,
To whom I gave my own harmonious lyre,
If high exalted on the throne of Wit,
Near me and Homer thou aspire to sit,
No more let meaner Satire dim the rays
That flow majestic from thy nobler bays;
In all the flowery paths of Pindus stray,
But shun that thorny, that unpleasing way;
Nor when each soft engaging Muse is thine,
Address the least attractive of the Nine.
Of thee more worthy were the task, to raise
A lasting column to thy Country's praise;
To sing the land, which yet alone can boast
That Liberty corrupted Rome has lost;
Where Science in the arms of Peace is laid,
And plants her Palm beside the Olive's shade.
Such was the theme for which my lyre I strung,
Such was the people whose exploits I sung;
Brave, yet refined, for arms and arts renowned,
With different bays by Mars and Phoebus crowned;
Dauntless opposers of tyrannick sway,
But pleased a mild Augustus to obey.
If these commands submissive thou receive,
Immortal and unblam'd thy name shall live;
Envy to black Cocytus shall retire,
And howl with Furies in tormenting fire;
Approving Time shall consecrate thy lays,
And join the Patriot's to the Poet's praise.'
To my LORD -- In the Year 1730. From WORCESTERSHIRE.
By the Same.
Strenua nos exercet Inertia: Navibus atque
Quadrigis petimus been Vivere: quod petis hic est;
Est Ulubris, Animus si te non deficit aequus.
HORACE.
FAVORITE of Venus and the tuneful Nine,
Pollio, by nature formed in courts to shine,
Will thou once more a kind attention lend
To thy long absent and forgotten friend;
Who after seas and mountains wandered over,
Returned at length to his own native shore,
From all that is gay retired, and all that is great,
Beneath the shades of his paternal seat
Has found that Happiness he sought in vain
On the famed banks of Tiber and of Scine?
It Is not to view the well-proportion'd pile,
The charms of Titian's and of Raphael's style;
At soft Italian sounds to melt away;
Or in the fragrant groves of myrtle stray;
That lulls the tumults of the soul to rest,
Or makes the fond possessor truly blessed.
In our own breasts the source of Pleasure lies
Still open, and still flowing to the wise;
Not forced by toilsome art and wild desire
Beyond the bounds of nature to aspire,
But in its proper channels gliding fair;
A common benefit, which all may share,
Yet half mankind this easy Good disdain,
Nor relish happiness unbought by pain;
False is their taste of bliss, and thence their search is vain.
So idle, yet so restless are our minds,
We climb the Alps, and brave the raging winds,
Through various toils to seek Content we roam,
Which but with thinking right were our's at home.
For not the ceaseless change of shifted place
Can from the heart a settled grief erase;
Nor can the purer balm of foreign air
Heal the distempered mind of aching care.
The wretch by wild impatience driven to rove,
Vexed with the pangs of ill-requited love,
From pole to pole the fatal arrow bears,
Whose rooted point his bleeding bosom tears,
With equal pain each different clime he tries,
And is himself that torment which he flies.
For how should ills, that from our passions flow,
Be changed by Afric's heat, or Russia's snow?
Or how can aught but powerful Reason cure,
What from unthinking Folly we endure?
Happy is He, and He alone, who knows
His heart's uneasy discord to compose;
In generous love of others' good to find
The sweetest pleasures of the social mind;
To bound his wishes in their proper sphere;
To nourish pleasing hope, and conquer anxious fear,
This was the wisdom ancient Sages taught,
This was the sovereign good they justly sought;
This to no place or climate is confined,
But the free native produce of the mind.
Nor think, my Lord, that Courts to you deny
The useful practice of Philosophy:
Horace, the wisest of the tuneful choir,
Not always chose from Greatness to retire,
But in the palace of Augustus knew
The same unnerring maxims to pursue,
Which in the Sabine or the Velian shade
His study and his happiness he made.
May you, my friend, by his example taught,
View all the giddy scene with sober thought;
Undazzled every glittering folly see,
And in the midst of slavish forms be free;
In its own center keep your steady mind;
Let Prudence guide you, but let Honor bind;
In show, in manners, act the Courtier's part,
But be a Country-gentleman at heart.
ADVICE to a LADY.
By the Same. 1731.
THE counsels of a friend, Belinda, hear,
Too roughly kind to please a Lady's ear,
Unlike the flatt'ries of a lover's pen,
Such truths as women seldom learn from men.
Nor think I praise you ill, when thus I show
What female Vanity might fear to know:
Some merit's mine, to dare to be sincere,
But greater yours, sincerity to bear.
Hard is the fortune that your sex attends;
Women, like Princes, find few real friends:
All who approach them their own ends pursue:
Lovers and ministers are seldom true.
Hence often from Reason heedless Beauty strays,
And the most trusted Guide the most betrays:
Hence by fond dreams of fancied power amused,
When most you tyrannize you're most abused.
What is your sex's earliest, latest care,
Your heart's supreme ambition? To be fair:
For this the toilet every thought employs,
Hence all the toils of dress, and all the joys:
For this, hands, lips, and eyes are put to school*
And each instructive feature has its rule;
And yet how few have learnt, when this is given.
Not to disgrace the partial boon of heaven?
How few with all their pride of form can move?
How few are lovely, that were made for love?
Do you, my fair, endeavor to possess
An elegance of mind as well as dress;
Be that your ornament, and know to please
By grateful Nature's unaffected ease.
Nor make to dangerous Wit a vain pretense,
But wisely rest content with modest Sense;
For wit, like wine, intoxicates the brain,
Too strong for feeble women to sustain;
Of those who claim it, more than half have none,
And half of those who have it, are undone.
Be still superior to your sex's arts,
Nor think Dishonesty a proof of Parts;
For you the plainest is the wisest rule,
A CUNNING WOMAN is a KNAVISH FOOL.
Be good yourself, nor think another's shame
Can raise your merit, or adorn your fame.
Prudes rail at whores, as statesmen in disgrace
At ministers, because they wish their place.
Virtue is amiable, mild, serene,
Without all beauty, and all peace within:
The honor of a prude is rage and storm,
It Is ugliness in its most frightful form:
Fiercely it stands defying gods and men,
As fiery monsters guard a giant's den.
Seek to be good, but aim not to be great:
A woman's noblest station is Retreat;
Her fairest virtues fly from public sight,
Domestic worth, that shuns too strong a light.
To rougher man Ambition's task resign:
It Is ours in Senates or in Courts to shine,
To labor for a sunk corrupted state,
Or dare the rage of envy, and be great.
One only care your gentle breasts should move,
The important business of your life is Love:
To this great point direct your constant aim,
This makes your Happiness, and this your Fame.
Be never cool reserve with passion joined;
With caution choose; but then be fondly kind.
The selfish heart, that but by halves is given,
Shall find no place in Love's delightful heaven;
Here sweet extremes alone can truly bless,
The virtue of a lover is excess.
A maid unasked may own a well-plac'd flame,
Not loving first, but loving wrong is shame.
Contemn the little pride of giving pain,
Nor think that conquest justifies disdain;
Short is the period of insulting Power;
Offended Cupid finds his vengeful hour,
Soon will resume the empire which he gave,
And soon the Tyrant shall become the Slave.
Blessed is the maid, and worthy to be blessed,
Whose soul, entire by him she loves possessed,
Feels every vanity in fondness lost,
And asks no power, but that of pleasing most:
Here Is is the bliss in just return to prove
The honest warmth of undissembled Love;
For her, inconstant man might cease to range,
And Gratitude forbid Desire to change.
But lest harsh Care the lover's peace destroy,
And roughly blight the tender buds of joy,
Let Reason teach what Passion fain would hide,
That Hymen's bands by Prudence should be tied,
Venus in vain the wedded pair would crown,
If angry Fortune on their union frown:
Soon will the flattering dream of bliss be over,
And cloyed imagination cheat no more.
Then waking to the sense of lasting pain,
With mutual tears the nuptial couch they stain;
And that fond love, which should afford relief,
Does but increase the anguish of their grief;
While both could easier their own sorrows bear,
Than the sad knowledge of each other's care.
Yet may you rather feel that virtuous pain,
Than sell your violated charms for gain;
Than wed the wretch whom you despise, or hate,
For the vain glare of useless wealth or state.
The most abandoned prostitutes are they,
Who not to Love, but Avarice fall a prey:
Nor aught avails the specious name of WIFE;
A maid so wedded, is a WHORE FOR LIFE.
Even in the happiest choice, where favoring Heaven
Has equal love, and easy fortune given,
Think not, the husband gained, that all is done;
The prize of Happiness must still be won;
And often, the careless find it to their cost,
The Lover in the Husband may be lost;
The Graces might alone his heart allure;
They and the Virtues meeting must secure.
Let even your Prudence wear the pleasing dress
Of care for him, and anxious tenderness.
From kind concern about his weal or woe,
Let each domestic duty seem to flow;
The HOUSEHOLD SCEPTER, if he bids you bear,
Make it your pride his servant to appear;
Endearing thus the common acts of life,
The Mistress still shall charm him in the Wife;
And wrinkled age shall unobserved come on,
Before his eye perceives one beauty gone:
Even over your cold, and ever-sacred urn,
His constant flame shall unextinguish'd burn.
Thus I, Belinda, would your charms improve,
And form your heart to all the arts of Love;
The task were harder to secure my own
Against the power of those already known;
For well you twist the secret chains that bind
With gentle force the captivated mind,
Skilled every soft attraction to employ,
Each flattering hope, and each alluring joy;
I own your genius, and from you receive
The rules of Pleasing, which to you I give.
SONG. Written in the Year 1732.
By the Same.
I.
WHEN DELIA on the plain appears,
Awed by a thousand tender fears,
I would approach, but dare not move; --
Tell me, my Heart, if this be Love.
II.
Whenever she speaks, my ravished ear
No other voice but here is can hear,
No other wit but here is approve; --
Tell me, my Heart, if this be Love.
III.
If she some other youth commend,
Though I was once his fondest friend,
His instant enemy I prove; --
Tell me, my Heart, if this be Love.
IV.
When she is absent, I no more
Delight in all that pleased before,
The clearest spring, or shadiest grove; --
Tell me, my Heart, if this be Love.
V.
When fond of power, of beauty vain,
Her nets she spreads for every swain,
I strove to hate, but vainly strove; --
Tell me, my Heart, if this be Love.
SONG. Written in the Year 1733.
By the Same.
I.
THE heavy hours are almost past
That part my Love and me;
My longing eyes may hope at last,
Their only wish to see.
II.
But how, my Delia, will you meet
The man you have lost so long?
Will Love in all your pulses beat,
And tremble on your tongue?
III.
Will you in every look declare
Your heart is still the same?
And heal each idly anxious care
Our fears in absence frame?
IV.
Thus, Delia, thus I paint the scene,
When shortly we shall meet,
And try what yet remains between
Of loit'ring time to cheat.
V.
But if the dream that sooths my mind
Shall false and groundless prove;
If I am doomed at length to find
You have forgot to love;
VI.
All I of Venus ask, is this;
No more to let us join;
But grant me here the flattering bliss,
To Die and Think you mine.
DAMON and DELIA. In Imitation of HORACE and LYDIA. Written in the Year 1732.
By the same.
DAMON. TELL me, my Delia, tell me why
My kindest, fondest looks you fly:
What means this cloud upon your brow?
Have I offended? tell me how?
Some change has happened in your heart,
Some rival there has stolen a part;
Reason these fears may disapprove:
But yet I fear, because I love.

DELIA. First, tell me, Damon, why today
At Belvidera's feet you lay?
Why with such warmth her charms you praised,
And every trifling beauty raised,
As if you meant to let me see
Your flattery is not All for me?
Alas! too well your sex I knew,
Nor was so weak to think you true.

DAMON. Unkind! my falsehood to upbraid,
When your own orders I obeyed;
You bid me try by this deceit
The notice of the world to cheat,
And hide beneath another name
The secret of our mutual flame.

DELIA. Damon, your prudence I confess,
But let me wish it had been less;
Too well the lover's part you played,
With too much art your court you made;
Had it been only art, your eyes
Would not have joined in the disguise.

DAMON. Ah, cease thus idly to molest
With groundless fears thy virgin breast.
While thus at fancied wrongs you grieve,
To me a real pain you give.

DELIA. Though well I might your truth distrust,
My foolish heart believes you just;
Reason this faith may disapprove,
But I believe, because I love.

ODE, in Imitation of PASTOR FIDO.
(O Primavera Gioventu del Anno.) Written Abroad in 1729.
By the Same.
I.
PArent of blooming flowers and gay desires,
Youth of the tender year, delightful Spring,
At whose approach, inspired with equal fires,
The amorous Nightingale and Poet sing.
II.
Again do thou return, but not with thee
Return the smiling hours I once possessed;
Blessings thou bring'st to others, but to me
The sad remembrance, that I once was blessed.
III.
Thy faded charms, which Winter snatched away,
Renewed in all their former luster shine;
But ah! no more shall hapless I be gay,
Or know the vernal joys that have been mine.
IV.
Though linnets sing, though flowers adorn the green,
Though on their wings soft zeyhyrs fragrance bear;
Harsh is the music, joyless is the scene,
The odor faint; for Delia is not there.
V.
Cheerless and cold I feel the genial sun,
From thee while absent I in exile rove;
Thy lovely presence, fairest light, alone
Can warm my heart to gladness and to love.
Part of an ELEGY of TIBULLUS, translated.
(Divitias alius fulvo sibi congerat Auro.) 1729-30.
By the Same.
LET others heap of wealth a shining store,
And much possessing labor still for more;
Let them, disquieted with dire alarms,
Aspire to win a dangerous fame in arms:
Me tranquil poverty shall lull to rest,
Humbly secure and indolently blessed;
Warmed by the blaze of my own cheerful hearth,
I Will waste the wintry hours in social mirth;
In summer pleased attend to harvest toils,
In autumn press the vineyard's purple spoils,
And often to Delia in my bosom bear
Some kid, or lamb that wants its mother's care:
With her I Will celebrate each gladsome day,
When swains their sportive rites to Bacchus pay:
With her new milk on Pales' altar pour,
And deck with ripened fruits Pomona's bower.
At night how soothing would it be to hear,
Sheltered and warm, the tempest whistling near;
And while my charmer in my arms I strain,
Slumber assisted by the beating rain!
Ah! how much happier, than the fool who braves
In search of wealth the black tempestuous waves!
While I, contented with my little store,
In tedious voyage seek no distant shore,
But idle lolling on some shady seat,
Near cooling fountains shun the dog-star's heat;
For what reward so rich could Fortune give
That I by absence should my Delia grieve?
Let great Messalla shine in martial toils,
And grace his palace with triumphal spoils;
Me beauty holds in strong, though gentle chains,
Far from tumultuous war and dusty plains.
With thee, my love, to pass my tranquil days,
How would I slight ambition's painful praise!
How would I joy with thee, my love, to yoke
The ox, and feed my solitary flock!
On thy soft breast might I but lean my head,
How downy should I think the woodland bed!
The wretch who sleeps not by his fair one's side,
Detests the gilded couch's useless pride,
Nor knows his weary, weeping eyes to close,
Though murmuring rills invite him to repose.
Hard was his heart, who thee, my fair, could leave
For all the honors prosperous War can give;
Though through the vanquished east he spread his fame,
And Parthian tyrants tremble at his name;
Though bright in arms, while hosts around him bleed,
With martial pride he pressed his foaming steed.
No pomps like these my humble vows require;
I ask, in thy embraces to expire:
Thee may my closing eyes in death behold!
Thee may my fault'ring hand yet strive to hold!
Then, Delia, then thy heart will melt in woe,
Then over my breathless clay thy tears will flow;
Thy tears will flow, for gentle is thy mind,
Nor do thou think it weakness to be kind.
With thee each youth and tender maid shall join
In grief, and mix their friendly sighs with thine;
But ah! my Delia, I conjure thee spare
Thy heaving breasts and loose dishevelled hair:
Wound not thy form; lest on the Elysian coast
Thy anguish should disturb my peaceful ghost.
But now nor death, nor parting should employ
Our sprightly thought, or damp our bridal joy:
We'll live, my Delia, and from life remove
All care, all business, but delightful Love.
Old age in vain those pleasures would retrieve,
Which youth alone can taste, alone can give;
Then let us snatch the moment to be blessed,
This hour is Love's -- be Fortune's all the rest.
SONG. Written in the Year 1732.
By the Same.
I.
SAY, MYRA, why is gentle Love
A stranger to that mind,
Which pity and esteem can move;
Which can be just and kind?
II.
Is it because you fear to share
The ills that Love molest:
The jealous Doubt, the tender Care,
That rack the amorous breast?
III.
Alas! by some degree of woe
We every bliss must gain:
The heart can never a transport know,
That never feels a pain.
Written at Mr. POPE'S House at Twickenham, which he had lent to Mrs. G -- lle.
In AUGUST 1735.
By the Same.
I.
GO, Thames, and tell the busy town,
Not all its wealth or pride
Could tempt me from the charms that crown
That rural flowery side:
II.
Thy flowery side, where POPE has placed
The Muses' green retreat,
With every smile of Nature graced,
With every art complete.
III.
But now, sweet bard, thy heavenly song
Enchants us here no more;
Their darling glory lost too long
Thy once loved shades deplore.
IV.
Yet still for beauteous G -- lle's sake,
The Muses here remain;
G -- lle, whose eyes have power to make
A POPE of every swain.
EPIGRAM.
By the Same.
NONE without Hope ever loved the brightest Fair,
But Love can hope where Reason would despair.
To Mr. WEST at Wickham. Written in the Year 1740.
By the Same.
FAIR Nature's sweet simplicity
With elegance refined,
Well in thy Seat, my friend, I see,
But better in my Mind.
To both from courts and all their state
Eager I fly, to prove
Joys far above a courtier's fate,
Tranquillity and love.
To Miss LUCY F --
By the Same.
ONCE by the Muse alone inspired,
I sung my amorous strains:
No serious love my bosom fired;
Yet every tender maid deceived
The idly mournful tale believed,
And wept my fancied pains,
But Venus now to punish me,
For having feigned so well,
Has made my heart so fond of thee,
That not the whole Aonian quire
Can accents soft enough inspire,
Its real flame to tell.
To the Same, with HAMMOND'S Elegies.
ALL that of Love can be expressed
In these soft numbers see;
But, LUCY, would you know the rest,
It must be read in me.
To the Same.
TO him who in an hour must die,
Not swifter seems that hour to fly,
Than slow the minutes seem to me,
Which keep me from the sight of thee.
Not more that trembling wretch would give
Another day or year to live;
Than I to shorten what remains
Of that long hour which thee detains.
Oh! come to my impatient arms,
Oh! come with all thy heavenly charms,
At once to justify and pay
The pain I feel from this delay.
To the Same.
I.
TO ease my troubled mind of anxious care,
Last night the secret casket I explored;
Where all the letters of my absent fair,
(His richest treasure) careful Love had stored:
II.
In every word a magic spell I found
Of power to charm each busy thought to rest,
Though every word increased the tender wound
Of fond desire still throbbing in my breast.
III.
So to his hoarded gold the miser steals,
And loses every sorrow at the sight;
Yet wishes still for more, nor ever feels
Entire contentment, or secure delight.
IV.
Ah! should I lose thee, my too lovely maid,
Could thou forget thy heart was ever mine,
Fear not thy letters should the change upbraid:
My hand each dear memorial shall resign:
V.
Not one kind word shall in my power remain
A painful witness of reproach to thee;
And lest my heart should still their sense retain,
My heart shall break, to leave thee wholly free.
A Prayer to VENUS in her Temple at STOWE. To the Same.
I.
FAIR VENUS, whose delightful shrine surveys
Its front reflected in the silver lake,
These humble offerings, which thy servant pays,
Fresh flowers, and myrtle wreaths, propitious take.
II.
If less my love exceeds all other love,
Than Lucy's charms all other charms excel,
Far from my breast each soothing hope remove,
And there let sad despair for ever dwell.
III.
But if my soul is filled with her alone,
No other wish, nor other object knows,
Oh! make her, Goddess, make her all my own,
And give my trembling heart secure repose.
IV.
No watchful spies I ask to guard her charms,
No walls of brass, no steel-defended door;
Place her but once within my circling arms,
Love's surest fort, and I will doubt no more.
To the Same. On her pleading want of TIME.
I.
ON Thames's bank, a gentle youth
For LUCY sighed with matchless truth,
Even when he sighed in rhyme;
The lovely maid his flame returned,
And would with equal warmth have burned,
But that she had not Time.
II.
Often he repaired with eager feet
In secret shades this fair to meet
Beneath the accustomed lyme;
She would have fondly met him there,
And healed with love each tender care,
But that she had not Time.
IV.
"It was not thus, inconstant maid,
"You acted once (the shepherd said)
"When love was in its prime:
She grieved to hear him thus complain,
And would have writ to ease his pain,
But that she had not Time.
IV.
How can you act so cold a part?
No crime of mine has changed your heart,
If Love be not a crime. --
We soon must part for months, for years --
She would have answered with her tears,
But that she had not Time.
To the Same.
YOUR shape, your lips, your eyes are still the same,
Still the bright object of my constant flame;
But where is now the tender glance, that stole
With gentle sweetness my enchanted soul?
Kind fears, impatient wishes, soft desires,
Each melting charm that love alone inspires,
These, these are lost; and I behold no more
The maid, my heart delighted to adore.
Yet still unchanged, still doting to excess,
I ought but dare not try to love you less;
Weakly I grieve, unpitied I complain;
But not unpunished shall your change remain;
For you, cold maid, whom no complaints can move,
Were far more blessed, when you like me could love.
To the Same.
I.
WHEN I think on your truth, I doubt you no more,
I blame all the fears I gave way to before,
I say to my heart, "Be at rest, and believe
That whom once she has chosen she never will leave.
II.
But ah! when I think on each ravishing grace
That plays in the smiles of that heavenly face,
My heart beats again; I again apprehend
Some fortunate rival in every friend.
III.
These painful suspicions you cannot remove,
Since you neither can lessen your charms nor my love;
But doubts caused by passion you never can blame;
For they are not ill founded, or you feel the same.
To the same with a NEW WATCH.
WITH me while present, may thy lovely eyes
Be never turned upon this golden toy:
Think every pleasing hour too swiftly flies,
And measure time, by joy succeeding joy.
But when the cares that interrupt our bliss
To me not always will thy sight allow,
Then often with kind impatience look on this,
Then every minute count -- as I do now.
An Irregular ODE written at Wickham, in 1746. To the Same.
I.
YE sylvan scenes with artless beauty gay,
Ye gentle shades of Wickham say,
What is the charm that each successive year,
Which sees me with my LUCY here,
Can thus to my transported heart,
A sense of joy unfelt before impart?
II.
Is it glad Summer's balmy breath that blows
From the fair jess'mine, and the blushing rose?
Her balmy breath, and all her blooming store,
Of rural bliss was here before:
Often have I met her on the verdant side
Of Norwood-hill, and in the yellow meads,
Where Pan the dancing Graces leads,
Arrayed in all her flowery pride.
No sweeter fragrance now the gardens yield,
No brighter colors paint the enameled field.
III.
Is it to Love these new delights I owe?
Four times has the revolving sun
His annual circle through the zodiac run;
Since all that Love's indulgent power
On favored mortals can bestow,
Was given to me in this auspicious bower.
IV.
Here first my LUCY, sweet in virgin charms,
Was yielded to my longing arms;
And round our nuptial bed,
Hovering with purple wings, the Idalian boy
Shook from his radiant torch the blissful fires
Of innocent desires,
While Venus scattered myrtles over her head.
Whence then this strange increase of joy?
He, only he can tell, who matched like me,
(If such another happy man there be)
Has by his own experience tried
How much the Wife is dearer than the Bride.
To the MEMORY of the same LADY, A MONODY. A. D. 1747.
Ipse cava solans aegrum testudine amorem,
Te dulcis conjux, te solo in littore secum,
Te veniente die, te decedente canebat.

By the Same.
I.
AT length escaped from every human eye,
From every duty, every care,
That in my mournful thoughts might claim a share,
Or force my tears their flowing stream to dry,
Beneath the gloom of this embow'ring shade,
This lone retreat, for tender sorrow made,
I now may give my burdened heart relief,
And pour forth all my stores of grief,
Of grief surpassing every other woe,
Far as the purest bliss, the happiest love
Can on the ennobled mind bestow,
Exceeds the vulgar joys that move
Our gross desires, inelegant, and low.
II.
Ye tufted groves, ye gently-falling rills,
Ye high o'ershadowing hills,
Ye lawns gay-smiling with eternal green,
Often have you my LUCY seen!
But never shall you now behold her more:
Nor will she now with fond delight
And taste refined your rural charms explore.
Closed are those beauteous eyes in endless night,
Those beauteous eyes where beaming used to shine
Reason's pure light, and Virtue's spark divine.
III.
Often would the Dryads of these woods rejoice
To hear her heavenly voice,
For her despising, when she deigned to sing,
The sweetest songsters of the spring:
The woodlark and the linnet pleased no more;
The nightingale was mute,
And every shepherd's flute
Was cast in silent scorn away,
While all attended to her sweeter lay.
Ye larks and linnets now resume your song,
And thou, melodious Philomel,
Again thy plaintive story tell.
For death has stopped that tuneful tongue,
Whose music could alone your warbling notes excel.
IV.
In vain I look around
Over all the well-known ground
My LUCY'S wonted footsteps to descry;
Where often we used to walk,
Where often in tender talk
We saw the summer sun go down the sky;
Nor by yon fountain's side,
Nor where its waters glide
Along the valley, can she now be found:
In all the wide-stretch'd prospect's ample bound
No more my mournful eye
Can aught of her espy,
But the sad sacred earth where her dear relics lie.
V.
O shades of H -- y, where is now your boast?
Your bright inhabitant is lost.
You she preferred to all the gay resorts
Where female vanity might wish to shine,
The pomp of cities, and the pride of courts.
Her modest beauties shunned the public eye:
To your sequestered dales
And flow'r-embroider'd vales
From an admiring world she chose to fly;
With Nature there retired, and Nature's GOD,
The silent paths of wisdom trod,
And banished every passion from her breast,
But those, the gentlest and the best,
Whose holy flames with energy divine
The virtuous heat enliven and improve,
The conjugal, and the maternal love.
VI.
Sweet babes, who, like the little playful fawns,
Were wont to trip along these verdant lawns
By your delighted Mother's side,
Who now your infant steps shall guide?
Ah! where is now the hand whose tender care
To every Virtue would have formed your Youth,
And strewn with flowers the thorny ways of Truth?
O loss beyond repair!
O wretched Father left alone
To weep their dire misfortune, and thy own!
How shall thy weakened mind, oppressed with woe,
And drooping over thy LUCY'S grave,
Perform the duties that you doubly owe,
Now she, alas! is gone,
From folly, and from vice, their helpless age to save?
VII.
Where were ye, Muses, when relentless Fate
From these fond arms your fair disciple tore,
From these fond arms that vainly strove
With hapless ineffectual Love
To guard her bosom from the mortal blow?
Could not your favoring power, Aonian maids,
Could not, alas! your power prolong her date,
For whom so often in these inspiring shades,
Or under Campden's moss-clad mountains hoar,
You opened all your sacred store,
Whatever your ancient sages taught,
Your ancient bards sublimely thought,
And bade her raptured breast with all your spirit glow?
VIII.
Nor then did Pindus' or Castalia's plain,
Or Aganippe's fount your steps detain,
Nor in the Thespian valleys did you play;
Nor then on The Mincio runs by Mantua, the birthplace of VIRGIL.
Mincio's bank
Beset with osiers dank,
Nor where The Clitumnus is a river of Umbria, the residence of PROPERTIUS.
Clitumnus rolls his gentle stream,
Nor where through hanging woods
Steep The Anio runs through Tibur or Tivoli, where HORACE had a villa.
Anio pours his floods,
Nor yet where The Meles is a river of Ionia, from whence HOMER, supposed to be
born on its banks, is called Melisigenes.
Meles, or The Ilissus is a river at Athens.
Ilissus stray,
Ill does it now beseem,
That, of your guardian care bereft,
To dire disease and death your darling should be left.
IX.
Now what avails it that in early bloom,
When light fantastic toys
Are all her sex's joys,
With you she searched the wit of Greece and Rome?
And all that in her latter days
To emulate her ancient praise
Italia's happy genius could produce;
Or what the Gallic fire
Bright-sparkling could inspire,
By all the Graces tempered and refined;
Or what in Britain's isle,
Most favored with your smile,
The powers of reason and of fancy joined
To full perfection have conspired to raise?
Ah what is now the use
Of all these treasures that enriched her mind,
To black oblivion's gloom for ever now consigned?
X.
At least, ye Nine, her spotless name
It Is yours from death to save,
And in the temple of immortal Fame
With golden characters her worth engrave.
Come then, ye virgin sisters, come,
And strew with choicest flowers her hallowed tomb.
But foremost thou, in sable vestment clad,
With accents sweet and sad,
Thou, plaintive Muse, whom over his Laura's urn
Unhappy Petrarch called to mourn,
O come, and to this fairer Laura pay
A more impassioned tear, a more pathetick lay.
XI.
Tell how each beauty of her mind and face
Was brightened by some sweet, peculiar grace!
How eloquent in every look
Through her expressive eyes her soul distinctly spoke!
Tell how her manners by the world refined
Left all the taint of modish vice behind,
And made each charm of polished courts agree
With candid Truth's simplicity,
And uncorrupted Innocence!
Tell how to more than manly sense
She joined the softening influence
Of more than female tenderness:
How in the thoughtless days of wealth and joy,
Which often the care of others' good destroy,
Her kindly-melting heart,
To every want, and every woe,
To guilt itself when in distress
The balm of pity would impart,
And all relief that bounty could bestow!
Even for the kid or lamb that poured its life
Beneath the bloody knife,
Her gentle tears would fall,
Tears from sweet Virtue's source, benevolent to all.
XII.
Not only good and kind,
But strong and elevated was her mind:
A spirit that with noble pride
Could look superior down
On Fortune's smile, or frown;
That could without regret or pain
To virtue's lowest duty sacrifice
Or int'rest's or ambition's highest prize;
That injured or offended never tried
Its dignity by vengeance to maintain,
But by magnanimous disdain,
A wit that temperately bright,
With inoffensive light
All pleasing shone, nor ever past
The decent bounds that Wisdom's sober hand,
And sweet Benevolence's mild command,
And bashful Modesty before it cast.
A prudence undeceiving, undeceived,
That nor too little, nor too much believed,
That scorned unjust Suspicion's coward fear,
And without weakness knew to be sincere.
Such LUCY was, when in her fairest days
Amidst the acclaim of universal praise,
In life's and glory's freshest bloom
Death came remorseless on, and sunk her to the tomb.
XIII.
So where the silent streams of Liris glide,
In the soft bosom of Campania's vale,
When now the wintry tempests all are fled,
And genial Summer breathes her gentle gale,
The verdant orange lifts its beauteous head:
From every branch the balmy flowerets rise,
On every bough the golden fruits are seen;
With odours sweet it fills the smiling skies,
The wood-nymphs tend it, and the Idalian queen:
But in the midst of all its blooming pride
A sudden blast from Apenninus blows,
Cold with perpetual snows:
The tender blighted plant shrinks up its leaves, and dies.
XIV.
Arise, O Petrarch, from the Elysian bowers,
With never-fading myrtles twined,
And fragrant with ambrosial flowers,
Where to thy Laura thou again art joined;
Arise, and hither bring the silver lyre,
Tuned by thy skilful hand,
To the soft notes of elegant desire,
With which over many a land
Was spread the same of thy disastrous love;
To me resign the vocal shell,
And teach my sorrows to relate
Their melancholy tale so well,
As may even things inanimate,
Rough mountain oaks, and desert rocks, to pity move.
XV.
What were, alas! thy woes compared to mine?
To thee thy mistress in the blissful band
Of Hymen never gave her hand;
The joys of wedded love were never thine,
In thy domestic care
She never bore a share,
Nor with endearing art
Would heal thy wounded heart
Of every secret grief that fester'd there:
Nor did her fond affection on the bed
Of sickness watch thee, and thy languid head
Whole nights on her unwearied arm sustain,
And charm away the sense of pain:
Nor did she crown your mutual flame
With pledges dear, and with a father's tender name.
XVI.
O best of wives! O dearer far to me
That when thy virgin charms
Were yielded to my arms,
How can my soul endure the loss of thee?
How in the world to me a desert grown,
Abandoned, and alone,
Without my sweet companion can I live?
Without thy lovely smile,
The dear reward of every virtuous toil,
What pleasures now can palled Ambition give?
Even the delightful sense of well-earn'd praise,
Unshar'd by thee, no more my lifeless thoughts could raise,
XVII.
For my distracted mind
What succor can I find?
On whom for consolation shall I call?
Support me every friend,
Your kind assistance lend
To bear the weight of this oppressive woe.
Alas! each friend of mine,
My dear departed love, so much was thine,
That none has any comfort to bestow.
My books, the best relief
In every other grief,
Are now with your idea sadden'd all:
Each favorite author we together read
My tortured memory wounds, and speaks of LUCY dead.
XVIII.
We were the happiest pair of human kind!
The rolling year its varying course performed,
And back returned again,
Another and another smiling came,
And saw our happiness unchanged remain;
Still in her golden chain
Harmonious Concord did our wishes bind:
Our studies, pleasures, taste, the same.
O fatal, fatal stroke,
That all this pleasing fabric Love had raised
Of rare felicity,
On which even wanton Vice with envy gazed,
And every scheme of bliss our hearts had formed,
With soothing hope, for many a future day,
In one sad moment broke!
Yet, O my soul, thy rising murmurs stay,
Nor dare the all-wise Disposer to arraign,
Or against his supreme decree
With impious grief complain.
That all thy full-blown joys at once should fade
Was his most righteous will, and be that will obeyed.
XIX.
Would thy fond love his grace to her control,
And in these low abodes of sin and pain
Her pure exalted soul
Unjustly for thy partial good detain?
No -- rather strive thy groveling mind to raise
Up to that unclouded blaze,
That heavenly radiance of eternal light,
In which enthroned she now with pity sees
How frail, how insecure, how slight
Is every mortal bliss,
Even love itself, if rising by degrees
Beyond the bounds of this imperfect state,
Whose fleeting joys so soon must end,
It does not to its sovereign Good ascend.
Rise then, my soul, with hope elate,
And seek those regions of serene delight,
Whose peaceful path and ever open gate
No feet but those of hardened Guilt shall miss.
There Death himself thy LUCY shall restore,
There yield up all his power ever to divide you more.
VERSES Making PART of an EPITAPH on the same LADY.
By the Same.
MADE to engage all hearts, and charm all eyes:
Though meek, magnanimous; though witty, wise;
Polite, as all her life in courts had been;
Yet good, as she the world had never seen;
The noble fire of an exalted mind,
With gentle female tenderness combined.
Her Speech was the melodious voice of Love,
Her Song the warbling of the vernal Grove;
Her Eloquence was sweeter than her Song,
Soft as her Heart, and as her-Reason strong;
Her Form each beauty of her mind expressed.
Her Mind was Virtue by the Graces dressed.
ON THE ABUSE of TRAVELING. A CANTO, In Imitation of SPENSER. By GILBERT WEST,
Esquire
The ARGUMENT.
Archimage tempts the Red-Cross Knight
From love of Fairy-land,
With show of foreign pleasures all,
The which he does withstand.
I.
WISE was that Spartan Lawgiver of old,
Who raised on Virtue's base his well built state,
Exiling from her walls barbaric gold,
With all the mischiefs that upon it wait,
Corruption, luxury, and envious hate;
And the distinctions proud of rich and poor,
Which among brethren kindle foul debate,
And teach Ambition, that to Fame would soar,
To the false lure of wealth her stooping wing to lower.
II.
Yet would Corruption soon have entrance found,
And all his boasted schemes eftsoon decayed,
Had not he cast a powerful circle round,
Which to a distance the arch felon fray'd,
And ineffectual his foul engines made:
This was, to weet, that politic command,
Which from vain travel the young Spartan stayed,
Ne suffered him forsake his native land,
To learn deceitful arts, and science contraband.
III.
Yet had the ancient world her courts and schools;
Great Kings and Courtiers civil and refined;
Great Rabbis, deeply read in Wisdom's rules,
And all the arts that cultivate the mind,
Embellish life, and polish human kind.
Such, Asia, birthplace of proud monarchy,
Such, elder Egypt, in thy kingdoms shined,
Mysterious Egypt, the rank nursery
Of superstitions fond, and learned vanity.
IV.
But what accomplishments, what arts polite,
Did the young Spartan want his deeds to grace,
Whose manly virtues, and heroic spright,
Checked by no thought impure, no falsehood base,
With natural dignity might well outface
The glare of manners false, and mimic pride
And wherefore should they range from place to place,
Who to their country's love so firm were tied,
All homely as she was, that for her often they died?
V.
And Truth.
sooth it is (with reverence may ye hear,
And honor due to passion so refined)
The strong affection which true patriots bear
To their dear country, zealous is and blind,
And fond as is the love of womankind,
So that they may not her defects espy,
No other rival, or one to compare with her.
paragone may ever find,
But gazing on her with an aweful eye
And superstitious zeal, her learn to deify.
VI.
And, like as is the faith unsound, untrue,
Of him, who wandering aye from fair to fair,
Conceives from each object passion new,
Or from his heart quite drives the troublous care;
So with the patriot-lover does it fare,
Who through the world delighting aye to rove,
His country changes with each change of air,
Or weening the delights of all to prove,
On none, or all alike bestows his vagrant love.
VII.
moreover, besides.
Als does corruption in a distant soil,
With double force assault.
assay the youthful heart,
Exposed suspectless to the traytor's wile,
Exposed unwarn'd to Pleasure's poisoned dart,
Exposed unpracticed in the world's wide mart,
Where each one lies, imposes, and betrays,
Without a friend due counsel to impart,
Without a parent's awe to rule his ways,
Without the check of shame, or spur of public praise
VIII.
therefore.
Forthy, false Archimago, traitor vile,
Who burnt against Fairy-land with ceaseless ire,
'Gan cast with foreign pleasures to beguile
Her faithful knight, and quench the heavenly fire
That did his virtuous bosom aye inspire
With zeal unfeigned for her service true,
And send him forth in chivalrous attire,
Armed at all points adventures to pursue,
And wreak upon her foes his vowed vengeance due.
IX.
So as he journeyed upon the way,
Him soon the sly enchaunter overtook.
over-hent,
Clad like a Fairy knight in armor gay,
With painted shield, and spear right forward bent,
In knightly fashion.
guise and show of courage.
hardiment,
That aye prepared was for bloody fight.
Whereat the fairy.
Elfin knight with speeches gent
Him first saluted, who, well as he might,
Him fair salutes again, as beseems.
seems courteous knight.
X.
Then 'gan he discourse, or argument.
purpose frame of valiant deeds
Achieved by foreign knights of might, valor.
prowess great,
And mighty fame which emulation breeds
In virtuous breast, and kindles martial heat;
Of arts and sciences for warrior proper, fit.
meet,
And knights that would in feats of arms excel,
Or him, who rather.
liefer choosing calm retreat,
With Peace and gentle Virtue aye would dwell,
Who have their triumphs, like as has Bellona fell.
XI.
These, as he said, beseemed knight to know,
And all be they in Fairy-lond y-taught,
Where every art and all fair virtues grow;
Yet various climes with various fruits are fraught,
And such in one has full perfection reached.
raught
The which no skill may in another rear,
So gloz'd the enchaunter till he has him brought
To a huge rock, that clomb so high in air,
That from it he hardly.
uneath the murmuring surge mote hear.
XII.
Thence the salt wave beyond in prospect wide
A spacious plain the false enchaunter showed,
With goodly castles decked on every side,
And silver streams, that down the champain flowed,
And washed the vineyards that beside them stood,
And groves of myrtle; als the lamp of day
His orient beams displayed withouten cloud,
Which lightly on the glist'ning waters play,
And tinge the castles, woods, and hills with purple ray.
XIII.
So fair a landscape charmed the wondering knight;
And eke the breath of morning fresh and sweet
Inspired his jocund spirit with delight,
And ease of heart for soft pursuasion meet.
Then him the traitor base 'gan fair entreat,
And from the rock as downward they descend,
Of that blessed land his praises 'gan repeat,
Till he him moved has with him to to go.
wend;
So to the billowy shore their hasty march they bend.
XIV.
There in a painted bark all trim and gay,
Whose sails full glad embraced the wanton wind,
There sat a stranger man or woman.
wight in quaint array,
That seemed of various garbs together.
atone combined,
Of Europe, Afric, east and western Inde.
Als round about him many creatures stood,
Of several nations and of diverse kind,
Apes, serpents, birds with human speech endowed,
And monsters of the land, and wonders of the flood.
XV.
He was to weet a mighty traveller,
Who Curiosity thereafter was called.
hight,
And well he knew each coast and harbor fair,
And every nation's latitude and site,
And how to steer the wandering bark aright.
So to him strait the false enchaunter bore,
And with him likewise brought the red-cross knight.
Then fairly him besought to waft them over;
Swift flew the dancing bark, and reached the adverse shore.
XVI.
There when they landed were, them ran to greet
A bevy of bright damsels gent and gay,
Who with soft smiles, and salutation sweet,
And courteous violence would force them stay,
And rest them in their bower not far away;
Their bower that most luxuriously was adorned, set forth.
dight
With all the dainties of air, earth and sea,
All that mote please the taste, and charm the sight,
The pleasure of the board, and charm of beauty bright.
XVII.
Als might he therein hear a mingled sound
Of feast and song and laughing jollity,
That in the noise was all distinction drowned
Of graver sense, or musick's harmony.
Yet were there some in that blithe company
That aptly could discourse of virtuous lore,
Of manners, wisdom and sound policy;
Yet would not.
nould they often open their sacred store,
Ne might their voice be heard mid riot and uproar.
XVIII.
Thereto the joys of idleness and love,
And luxury, that besots the noblest mind,
And custom prevalent at distance drove
All sense and relish of a higher kind,
Whereby the soul to virtue is refined.
Instead whereof the arts of slavery
Were taught, of slavery perverse and blind,
That vainly boasts her native liberty,
Yet wears the chains of pride, of lust, and gluttony.
XIX.
Of which the red-cross knight right well aware,
Would in no wise agree with them to go,
Albeit with courtly glee their leader fair,
called.
Hight Politessa, him did kindly woo.
But all was false pretense, and hollow show,
False as the flowers which to their breasts they tied,
Or those which seemed in their cheeks to glow,
For both were false, and not by Nature died,
False rivals of the spring, and beauty's rosy pride.
XX.
Then from behind then straightway 'gan advance
An uncouth stripling quaintly habited,
As for some revel mask, or antic dance,
All checkered over with yellow, blue, and red;
Als in a vizor black he shrouds his head,
The which he tossed to and fro amain,
And often.
eft his lathy falchion brandished,
As if he meant fierce battle to attempt.
darrain,
And like a wanton ape eft skip'd he on the plain.
XXI.
And eft about him skip'd a gaudy throng
Of youthful gallants, frolic, trim, and gay,
Chanting in careless notes their amourous song,
Matched with like careless gests, like amourous play.
Als were they gorgeous, dressed in rich array,
And well accepted of that female train,
Whose hearts to joy and mirth devoted aye,
Each proffered love receive without disdain,
And part without regret from each late-favour'd swain.
XXII.
And now they do accord in wanton dance
To join their hands upon the flowery plain;
The whiles with amourous leer and eyes askaunce
Each damsel fires with love her glowing swain;
Till all-impatient of the tickling pain,
In sudden laughter forth at once they break,
And ending so their dance, each tender twain
To shady bowers forthwith themselves betake,
Deep hid in myrtle groves, beside a silver lake.
XXIII.
Thereat the red-cross knight was much enmov'd,
And 'gan his heart with indignation swell,
To view in forms so made to be beloved,
Ne faith, ne truth, ne heavenly virtue dwell;
But lust instead, and falsehood, child of hell;
And glutton sloth, and love of gay attire:
And sooth to say, them well could parallel
Their lusty lovers.
paramours in vain desire;
Well fitted to each dame was every gallant squire.
XXIV.
Yet when their sovereign calls them forth to arms,
Their sovereign, whose commands.
behests they most revere,
Right wisely can they menage war's alarms,
And wield with valor great the martial spear,
So that their name is dreaded far and near.
Oh! that for Liberty they so did fight!
Then need no Fairy-land their prowess fear,
Ne give in charge to her adventurous knight
Their friendship to beware, and sense-deluding slight.
XXV.
But not for liberty they wagen war,
But solely to please.
aggrate their mighty lord,
For whom their dearest blood they will not.
nillen spare,
Whenso him lists draw the conquering sword;
So is that idol vain of them adored,
Who ne with might beyond his meanest thrall
Endued, ne superior wisdom stored,
Sees at his feet prostrated millions fall,
And with religious drad obey his princely call.
XXVI.
Thereto so high and stately was his port,
That all the petty kings him sore envied,
And would him imitate in any sort,
With all the mimick pageantry of pride,
And worshipped be like him, and deify'd
Of courtly sycophants and scoundrels.
caitifs vile,
Who to those services themselves applied,
And in that school of servitude ere while
Had learned to bow and grin, and flatter, and beguile.
XXVII.
For to that seminary of fashions vain
The rich and noble from all parts repair,
Where grown enamored of the gaudy train,
And courteous haviour gent and debonair,
They cast to imitate such semblaunce fair;
And deeming meanly of their native land,
Their own rough virtues they disdain to wear,
And back returning dressed by foreign hond,
Ne other matter care, ne other understond.
XXVIII.
Wherefore the enchaunter vile, who sore was grieved
To see the knight reject those damsels gay,
Wherewith he thought him sure to have deceived,
Was minded to that court him to convey,
And daze his eyes with Majesty's bright ray:
So to a stately castle he him brought,
Which in the midst of a great garden lay,
And wisely was by cunning craftsmen wrought,
And with all riches decked surpassing human thought.
XXIX.
There underneath a sumptuous canopy,
That with bright ore and diamonds glittered far,
Sat the swollen form of royal pride.
surquedry,
And deemed itself by all means; omnino.
allgates some creature rare,
While its own haughty state it mote compare
With the base countenance of the vassal fry,
That seemed to have nor eye, nor tongue, nor ear;
Ne any sense, ne any faculty,
That did not to his throne owe servile ministry.
XXX.
Yet wist he not that half that homage low
Was at a wizard's shrine in private paid,
The which conducted all that goodly show,
And as he list the imperial puppet played,
By secret springs and wheels right wisely made,
That he the subtle wires mote not discover, perceive.
avize,
But deem in sooth that all he did or said,
From his own motion and free grace did rise,
And that he justly hight immortal, great, and wise.
XXXI.
And eke to each of that same gilded train,
That meekly round that lordly throne did stand,
Was by that wizard tied a magic chain,
Whereby their actions all he mote command,
And rule with hidden influence the land.
Yet to his lord he outwardly did bend,
And those same magic chains within his hand
Did seem to place, albeit by the end
He held them fast, that none them from his gripe mote rend.
XXXII.
He was to weet an old and wrinkled mage,
Deep read in all the arts of policy,
And from experience grown so crafty sage,
That none his secret counsels mote descry,
Ne search the mines of his deep subtlety.
Thereto fair peace he loved and cherished;
And traffic did promote and industry,
Whereby the vulgar were in quiet fed,
And the proud lords in ease and plenty wallowed.
XXXIII.
Thence all the gorgeous splendour of the court,
since.
Since the sole business of the rich and great,
Was to that hope-built temple to resort,
And round their earthly god in glory wait,
Who with their pride to swell his royal state,
Did pour large sums of gold on every one,
Brought him by harpies fell, him to aggrate,
And torn from peasants vile, beneath the throne
Who lay deep sunk in earth, and inwardly did groan.
XXXIV.
Behold, says ARCHIMAGE, the envied height
Of human grandeur to the gods allied!
Behold yon sun of power, whose glorious light,
Over this rejoicing land out-beaming wide,
Calls up those princely flowers on every side;
Which like the painted daughters of the plain,
Ne toil, ne spin, ne stain their silken pride
With care, or sorrow, since withouten pain,
Them in eternal joy those heavenly beams maintain.
XXXV.
Them morn and evening joy eternal greets,
And for them thousands and ten thousands work hard.
moil,
Gathering from land and ocean honied sweets
For them, who in soft indolence the while
And slumbering peace enjoy the luscious spoil;
And as they view around the careful bees
quite spent.
Forespent with labor and incessant toil,
With the sweet contrast learn themselves to please,
And heighten by compare the luxury of ease.
XXXVI.
Ungenerous man, quoth then the Fairy knight,
That can rejoice to see another's woe!
And thou, unworthy of that glory bright,
Wherewith the gods have decked thy princely brow,
That does on Sloth and Gluttony bestow
The hard-earn'd fruits of Industry and Pain,
And to the dogs the labourer's morsel throw,
Unmindful of the hand that sowed the grain,
The poor earth-trodden root of all thy greatness vain.
XXXVII.
Oh foul abuse of sacred Majesty,
That boasts her fair self from heaven ysprong!
Where are the marks of thy divinity?
Truth, Mercy, Justice steady, bold and strong,
To aid the meek, and curb oppressive wrong?
Where is the care and love of public good,
That to the people's father does belong?
Where the vicegerent of that bounteous God,
Who bids dispense to all, what he for all bestowed?
XXXVIII.
Dwell'st thou not rather, like the prince of hell,
In Pandemonium full of ugly fiends?
Dissimulation, Discord, Malice fell,
Reckless Ambition, that right onward goes.
wends,
Though his wild march o'erthrow both fame and friends,
And virtue and his country; crooked Guile,
Obliquely creeping to his treacherous ends,
And Flattery, cursed assassin, who the while
He holds the murderous knife, can fawn, and kiss, and smile.
XXXIX.
Then 'gan he strait unvail the mirror bright,
The which fair Una in Spenser represents Truth, see B. 1. Fairy Queen.
Una gave him heretofore,
Ere he as yet, with Heathen, the usual enemy of knighterrants in Spenser.
Paynim foe to fight,
For foreign land had left his native shore.
This in his careful breast he always bore,
And on it often would cast his wary eye;
For it by magic framed was of yore,
So that no falsehood mote it well abye,
But it was plainly seen, or fearfully did fly.
XL.
This on that gay assembly did he turn,
And saw confounded quite the gaudy scene;
Saw the close fire that inwardly did burn,
And waste the throbbing heart with secret pain, anguish.
teen;
Saw base dependence in the haughty mien
Of lords and princes; saw the magic chain
That each did wear, but deemed he wore unseen,
The whiles with count'naunce glad he hid his pain,
And homage did require from each poor lowly swain.
XLI.
And though to that old mage they louted down,
Yet did they dearly wish for his decay:
Als trembled he, and aye upon the throne
Of his great lord his tottering steps did stay,
And often behind him skulk'd for great dismay;
Als shook the throne, when so the villain crew,
That underneath oppressed and grovelling lay,
Impatient of the grievous burden grew,
And loudly for redress and liberty did sue.
XLII.
There mote he likewise see a ribbald train
Of dancers, broid'rers, slaves of luxury,
Who cast over all those lords and ladies vain
A veil of semblaunce fair, and richest dye,
That none their inward baseness mote descry.
But naught was hidden from that mirror bright.
Which when false ARCHIMAGO 'gan espy,
He feared for himself, and warned the knight
From so detested place to maken speedy flight.
XLIII.
So on he passed, till he comen has
To a small river, that full slow did glide,
As it uneath mote find its watery path
For stones and rubbish, that did choke its tide;
So lay the mouldering piles on every side,
Seemed there a goodly city once had been,
Albeit now fallen were her royal pride,
Yet mote her ancient greatness still be seen,
Still from her ruins proved the world's imperial queen.
XLIV.
For the rich spoil of all the continents,
The boast of art and nature there was brought,
Corinthian brass, Egyptian monuments,
With hieroglyphick sculptures all inwrought,
And Parian marbles, by Greek artists taught
To counterfeit the forms of heroes old,
And set before the eye of sober thought
Lycurgus, Homer, and Alcides bold.
All these and many more that may not here be told.
XLV.
There in the midst of a ruined pile,
That seemed a theater of circuit vast,
Where thousands might be seated, he erewhile
Discovered has an uncouth trophy placed;
Seemed a huge heap of stone together cast
In nice disorder and wild symmetry,
Urns, broken freezes, statues half defaced,
And pedestals with antique imagery
Embossed, and pillars huge of costly porphyry.
XLVI.
Aloft on this strange basis was placed.
ypight
With girlonds gay adorned a golden chair,
In which aye smiling with self-bred delight,
In careless pride reclined a lady fair,
And to soft music lent her idle ear;
The which with pleasure so did her enthrall,
That for aught else she had but little care,
For wealth, or fame, or honor feminal,
Or gentle love, sole king of pleasures natural.
XLVII.
Als by her side, in richest robes arrayed,
An eunuch sat, of visage pale and dead,
Unseemly paramour for royal maid!
Yet him she courted often and honored,
And often would by her place in princely seat or place.
sted,
Though from the dregs of earth he springen were,
And often with regal crowns she decked his head,
And often, to sooth her vain and foolish ear,
She bade him the great names of mighty emperors.
Kesars bear.
XLVIII.
Thereto herself a pompous title bore,
For she was vain of her great auncestry,
But vainer still of that prodigious store
Of arts and learning, which she vaunts to lie
In the rich archives of her treasury.
These she to strangers oftentimes would show,
With grave demean and solemn vanity,
Then proudly claim as to her merit due,
The venerable praise and title of Virtue.
XLIX.
Virtue she was called or named.
yclep'd, and held her court
With outward shows of pomp and majesty,
To which natheless few others did resort,
But men of base and vulgar industry.
Or such perdy as of them cozened be,
Mimes, fiddlers, pipers, eunuchs squeaking fine,
Painters and builders, sons of masonry,
Who could well measure with the rule and line,
And all the orders five right craftily define.
L.
But other skill of cunning architect,
How to contrive the house for dwelling best,
With self-sufficient scorn they wont neglect,
As corresponding with their purpose least;
And herein be they copied of the rest,
Who aye pretending love of science fair,
And generous purpose to adorn the breast
With liberal arts, to Vertu's court repair,
Yet naught but tunes and names, and coins away do bear.
LI.
For long, to visit her once-honour'd seat
The studious sons of learning have forbore:
Who whilom thither ran with pilgrim feet
Her venerable relics to adore,
And load her bosom with the sacred store,
Whereof the world large treasure yet enjoys.
But since.
sithence she declined from wisdom's lore,
They left her to display her pompous toys
To virtuosi vain, and wonder-gaping boys.
LII.
Forthy to her a numerous train does belong.
long
Of ushers in her court well practiced,
Who aye about the monied stranger throng,
Offering with shows of courteous goodnature or civility.
bountihed
Him through the rich apartments all to lead,
And show him all the wonders of her state,
Whose names and price they wisely can relate or declare. These under sort of
antiquarians, who go about with strangers to show them the antiquities, etc. of
Rome, are called Ciceroni.
areed,
And tell of coins of old and modern date,
And pictures false and true right well discriminate.
LIII.
Als are they named after him, whose tongue
Shook the dictator in his curule chair,
And thundering through the Roman senate, rung
His bold Philippics in Antonius' ear;
Which when the Fairy heard, he sighed full dear,
And casting round his quick discerning eye,
At every At every turn, every now and then.
deal he dropped a manly tear,
As he the stately buildings mote descry,
Baths, theaters, and fanes in mouldering fragments lie.
LIVE.
And, oh! imperial city! then he said,
How art thou tumbled from thine Alpine throne!
Whereon, like Jove on high Olympus' head,
Thou sittedst erst unequalled and alone,
And madedst through the world thy greatness known;
While from the western isles, to Indus' shore,
From seven-mouth'd Nilus, to the frozen Don,
Thy dradded bolts the strong-pounc'd Eagle bore,
And taught the nations round thy Fasces to adore.
LV.
And does among thy relics naught remain,
No little portion of that haughty spright?
Which made thee whilom scorn soft Pleasure's chain,
And in free Virtue place thy chief delight,
Whereby through ages shone thy glory bright?
And is there naught remaining to confound
Those, who regardless of thy woeful plight,
With idle wonder view thy ruins round,
And without thought survey thy memorable wound?
LVI.
Arise, thou genuine Cicero, and declare
That all these mighty ruins scattered wide,
The sepulchers of Roman virtue were,
And trophies vast of Luxury and Pride,
Those fell diseases whereof Rome erst died.
And do you then with vile mechanic thought
Your course, ye sons of Fairy, hither guide,
That ye those gay refinements may be taught,
Which Liberty's fair land to shame and thraldom brought?
LVII.
Let Rome those vassal arts now meanly boast,
Which to her vanquished thralls she erst resigned;
Ye who enjoy that freedom she has lost,
That great prerogative of human-kind,
Close to your hearts the precious jewel bind,
And learn the rich possession to maintain,
Learn Virtue, Justice, Constancy of Mind,
Not to be moved by Fear or Pleasure's train;
Be these your arts, ye brave, these only are humane.
LVIII.
As he thus spoke, the enchaunter half ashamed
Wist not what fitting answer to devise,
Als was his caitive heart well-nigh inflamed,
By that same knight so virtuous, brave and wise,
That long he doubts him farther to entice.
But he was hardened and remorseless grown,
Through practice old of villainy and vice;
So to his former wiles he turns him soon,
As in another place hereafter shall be shown.
THE INSTITUTION OF THE ORDER OF THE GARTER.
A Dramatic POEM.
By the Same.
-- Lectos ex omnibus Oris
Evehis; and meritum, non quae cunabula quaeris,
Et qualis, non unde satus: sub test benigno
Vivitur; egregios invitant praemia mores.
CLAUD. HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE.
Dramatis Personae.
EDWARD the Third, King of England, etc. PHILIPPA, Queen of England, etc.
EDWARD, Prince of Wales. JOHN, The order of the GARTER was instituted on St.
George's day the 23d of April 1350. King John came into England in 1357. I have
taken the advantage of the license usually allowed to poets, of departing a
little from chronology; and have postponed for a few years the institution of
this order, for the sake of rendering that solemnity more august, by
introducing king John of France, who, though a prisoner, was treated both by
Edward and his son the prince of Wales with all the regard due to the quality
and virtue of so great a prince. To alleviate his captivity, Edward entertained
him and the other French prisoners with diversions of various kinds: among
which a tournament he held at Windsor on the 23d of April, to solemnize the
feast of St. George, the patron of the order of the GARTER, held the chief
place; and was, as Rapin tells us, the most sumptuous and magnificent that had
ever been seen in England. The duke of Brabant, with several other sovereign
princes, and an infinite number of knights of all nations there present, and
splendidly entertained.
King of France, etc. SPIRITS. Genius of England. Bards. Druids.
Heralds, Attendants, etc.
SCENE, Windsor Park, with a Prospect of the Castle.

THE INSTITUTION OF THE Order of the GARTER.
SCENE, WINDSOR PARK.
Flourish of aerial music at a distance, after which the following verses are
sung in the air by SPIRITS, while the GENIUS of England descends. First SPIRIT.
HITHER, all ye heavenly powers,
From your empyreal bowers;
From the fields for ever gay,
From the star-pav'd milky way,
From the moon's relucent horn,
From the star that wakes the morn;
From the bow, whose mingling dies
Sweetly cheer the frowning skies;
From the silver cloud that sails
Shadowy over the darkened vales;
From the Elysiums of the sky,
Spirits immortal, hither fly!

CHORUS of SPIRITS. Fly, and through the limpid air
Guard in pomp the sliding car,
Which to his terrestrial throne
Wafts Britannia's Genius down.

Second SPIRIT. Hither, all ye heavenly powers!
From your empyreal bowers!
Chiefly ye, whose brows divine
Crowned with starry circlets shine;
Who in various labors tried,
Once Britannia's strength and pride,
Now in everlasting rest
Share the glories of the blessed!
Peers and nobles of the sky,
Spirits immortal, hither fly!

CHORUS of SPIRITS. Fly, and through the limpid air
Guard in pomp the sliding car,
Which to his terrestrial throne
Wafts Britannia's Genius dawn.

Third SPIRIT. Hither too, ye tuneful throng,
Masters of enchanting song,
Sacred bards! whose rapturous strains
Sooth the toiling hero's pains,
Sooth the patriot's generous cares;
Sweetly through their ravished ears
Whispering to the immortal mind
Heavenly visions, hopes refined;
Hopes of endless peace and fame,
Safe from envy's blasting flame,
Pure, sincere, in those abodes,
Where to throngs of listening gods,
Hymning bards, to virtue's praise,
Tune their never-dying lays.
Sweet encomiasts of the sky,
Spirits immortal, hither fly!

CHORUS of SPIRITS. Fly, and charm the limpid air,
While the softly-sliding car,
To his sea-encircled throne
Wafts Britannia's Genius down.

Chorus of BARDS descends, dressed in long flowing sky-colour'd robes spangled
with stars, with garlands of oaken bought upon their heads, and golden harps in
their hands, made like the Welsh, or old British harp. Before they appear, they
sing the chorus, and afterward, as they descend, the following songs; at the
last stanza of which, the chariot of the GENIUS appears, and descends gradually
all the while that and the grand chorus is singing. CHORUS of BARDS. Gentle
Spirit, we obey;
Thus along the aetherial way,
We attend our monarch's car;
Thus we charm the silent air.

SONG.
First BARD. Ye southern gales, that ever fly
In frolic April's vernal train,
Who, as ye skim along the sky,
Dip your light pinions in the main,
Then shake them fraught with genial showers,
Over blooming Flora's primrose bowers:

2. Now cease awhile your wanton sport,
Now drive each threatening cloud away;
Then to the flowery vale resort,
And hither all its sweets convey;
And ever as ye dance along,
With soft murmurs aid our song.

SONG II.
Second BARD. But lo! fair Windsor's towers appear,
And hills with spreading oaks imbrown'd!
Hark! hark! the voice of joy I hear,
Sung by a thousand echoes round;
And now I view a glittering train,
In triumph march over yonder plain.
Grand CHORUS of SPIRITS and BARDS.
Hail mighty nation! ever famed in war!
Lo! heaven descends thy festivals to share;
To view those heroes, whose immortal praise
Celestial bards shall sing in living lays.

At the conclusion of this chorus, the GENIUS alights from his chariot, the
front of which resembling the head of a man of war, is adorned with a carved
lion, holding before his breast the arms of England, as they were borne by
Edward. Behind, on a raised seat, sits the GENIUS, leaning upon an anchor of
silver, and bearing in his right hand the vindicta, or wand of enfranchisement,
and in his left a roll of parchment, upon which is written, in large letters of
gold, MAGNA CHARTA. On his head is a corona rostrata, or naval crown; and his
robe, of a seagreen color, is embroidered with cornucopia's and golden
tridents. GENIUS. Disdain not, ye blessed denizens of air,
To breathe this grosser atmosphere awhile,
Your service I shall need; mean time resort
To yon imperial palace, and in air
Draw up your squadrons in a radiant orb,
Suspended over those lofty battlements,
Like the bright halo that invests the moon,
Or Saturn's lucid ring: thence shed benign
Your choicest influence on the noble train,
There on this solemn day assembled round
The throne of British Edward: I awhile
Must here await the approach of other spirits,
Sage Druids, Britain's old philosophers;
Fetched by my summons from the western isles,
That, scattered over the rough Hibernian flood,
Seem like huge fragments by the wild wave torn
From stormy Scotland, and the Cambrian shore.
There, from the world retired in secret shades,
Chiefly where Breint and Meinai washed the oaks
Of ancient Mona, their academies
And schools of sage and moral discipline
They held; and to the neighboring Britons round,
From their revered tribunals, holy mounts,
Dispensed at once their oracles and laws.
'Till fierce Paulinus, and his Roman bands,
Them and their gods defying, drove them thence
To seek for shelter in Hibernian shades.
Yet still enamored of their ancient haunts,
Unseen of mortal eyes, they hover round
Their ruined altars, consecrated hills
Once girt with spreading oaks, mysterious rows
Of rude enormous obelisks, that rise
Orb within orb, stupendous monuments
Of artless architecture, such as now
Often times amaze the wandering traveller,
By the pale moon discerned on Sarum's plain.
But hence, aerial spirits: lo, they come!

Here the SPIRITS and BARDS, together with the chariot of the GENIUS, reascend,
and at the same time the DRUIDS enter, clothed in dark-colour'd coarse stuff
gowns which before hang no lower than the knee, but behind almost touch the
ground. The sleeves of these gowns reach down below the elbow, and from behind
comes up a sort of hood or cowle, which hangs loose about the head and
forehead. From the left shoulder hangs in a string a kind of pouch, or scrip,
and rests on the right hip. In their right hand they hold a staff, and in their
left an oaken branch. Their beards are very large and long, reaching below
their waists. Their legs are naked, and their feet shod with sandals, which are
fastened by thongs wound about the foot and the small of the leg. See a cut of
the chief Druid in Rowland's Mona Antiqua restaurata, taken from a statue, p.
65.
Enter DRUIDS. Chief DRUID. Inform us, happy spirit, protecting power
Of this our ancient country, wherefore now
From our sequestered valleys, pensive groves
And dark recesses, thou have summoned us
To wait thy orders on this flowery hill?

GENIUS. A great event, sage Druids, that no less
Imports than this your ancient country's fame,
From contemplation, and your silent shades,
Calls you to meet me on this flowery hill.
Know, in yon castle, whose proud battlements
Sit like a regal crown upon the brow
Of high-climbing lawn, does Edward hold
This day his solemn session to receive
The pleas of all the aspiring candidates,
Who, summoned by the Edward having communicated his intention of instituting
the order of the GARTER to the great council of his realm, and having received
their approbation, dispatched his heralds to severals parts of Europe, to
invite all that were eminent for military virtue, etc. to be present at its
institution. And his queen Philippa, on her part, assembled a train of 300 of
the fairest ladies to grace the solemnity, and add to its magnificence.
herald's public voice,
To Windsor, as to Fame's bright temple, haste
From every shore; the noble, wise, and brave,
Knights, senators, and statesmen, lords and kings;
Ambitious each to gain the splendid prize,
By Edward promised to transcendent worth.
For who of mortals is too great and high
In the career of virtue to contend?
Of these selecting the most glorious names,
Does England's monarch purpose to compose
A princely brotherhood, himself the chief,
And worthy sovereign of the illustrious band;
A band of heroes, listed in the cause
Of honor, virtue, and celestial truth,
Under the name and holy patronage
Of Cappadocian GEORGE, Britannia's saint.
Such is the plan by generous Edward formed;
A plan of glory, that beyond the reach
Of his own conquering arms, shall propagate
The sov'reignty of Britain, and erect
Her monarchs into judges of mankind.
But from this day's decisions, from the choice
Of his first colleagues, shall succeeding times
Of Edward judge, and on his fame pronounce.
For dignities and titles, when misplaced
Upon the vicious, the corrupt and vile,
Like princely virgins to low peasants matched,
Descend from their nobility, and soiled
By base alliance, not their pride alone
And native splendour lose, but shame retort
Even on the sacred throne, from whence they sprung.
So may the luster of this order bright,
This eldest child of chivalry be stained,
If at her first espousals, her great sire,
Caught by the specious outsides, that deceive
And captivate the world, admit the suit
Of vain pretenders void of real worth;
Light empty bubbles, by the wanton gale
Of fortune swelled, and only formed to dance
And glitter in the sunshine of a court.
Begin we then with Edward; first let him
At his own high tribunal undergo
The rigid inquisition -- I for this
Have left my lucid star-encircled throne:
For this, immortal sages have required
Your wise and prudent ministry, well skilled
In various science and the human heart.
Search Edward's to the bottom: sound the depths
And shallows of his soul; if he possess
That first of regal talents, to discern
With quick-ey'd penetration, through the veil
Of art, each character's intrinsic worth,
And all the labyrinths of the human mind.
Nor blush for this good end yourselves to wear
Fallacious forms to plead the cause of false
But specious merit; at his throne appear
In borrowed shapes, and there with artful guile,
When the shrill trumpet cites the candidates,
Urge your pretensions: all the power employ
Of wit and eloquence: Edward, I trust,
The trial shall abide; which shall but tend
To manifest, that not from arrogance,
But conscious virtue, has he thus assumed
Above all other kings, to be the judge
And great rewarder of heroic deeds.
Nor wholly unassisted will I leave
My royal charge, but with blessed influence clear
His intellectual eye from the dim mists
It happily has contracted from a long
Unebbing current of felicity,
Unhop'd, unequalled triumphs, from the view
Of captive monarchs, and the glittering throng,
Who at his summons from all climates come,
To take, as from their sovereign, honors new.
When heaven tries mortals in unusual ways,
It Is fit it should afford unusual aid.
Now, sages, to yon spreading oaks retire
There wait my summons; and mean time advise
How best to execute the task enjoined.
Ex. Genesis and Druids.
The SCENE changes to a large room in the castle (St. George's Hall) at the
upper end of which is a royal canopy with the figure of St George, and the
motto of the Garter, HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE, beneath it embroidered in gold.
Under this canopy appears seated on an elevation of two or three steps, king
Edward, in the habit of the order of the Garter, with a scepter in his right
hand, and a globe in his left. On his left hand is seated queen Philippa, with
a crown upon her head, and dressed in a royal mantle of crimson velvet,
powdered with embroidered garters, and an enameled That the ladies of the
knights of the Garter wore this ensign of the order upon their left arms, may
be seen in Ashmole's History of the Garter.
garter bound like a bracelet upon her left arm. By her stand a great number of
ladies very richly dressed. On Edward's right hand is seated king John, in the
imperial robes of France; and on the same side, but a step lower, sits Edward
the Black Prince, in the robes belonging to the Prince of Wales. Next to queen
Philippa are seated the rest of Edward's children; and next to the Black
Prince, on the other side, stand the French prisoners, and a great number of
lords, etc. richly dressed. On the floor, at some distance, stands Garter king
at arms in the habit of his office, holding in his hand a Garter, with the
grand collar of the order. Near him stand other heralds, ushers, attendants,
etc. Flourish of trumpets, kettle-drums, etc. After which Edward rising up from
his throne, addresses himself to the assembly. EDWARD. That hither from your
distant residence,
By solemn invitation, noble guests,
I have entreated your illustrious train,
Misconstrue not to levity and pride,
Or ostentatious vain magnificence,
Unworthy the grave majesty of kings,
Unworthy your atention, my renown.
This bright assemblage of the wise, the brave,
The noble, the magnificent, the fair,
The ornaments of Europe, have I sought
To grace the pomp of Virtue, to adorn
With noblest offerings her unspotted shrine,
Attracting thus to her divine commands
The aweful veneration of mankind.
This was the cause, great princes, this the call,
The voice of Virtue, not of England's king,
That with respectful zeal ye heard and followed:
From Burgundy's rich vineyards, from the meads
Of Hainault and Brabant, the rocky wave
Of Danube, from Germania's warlike towers,
Imperial mother of an hundred states;
From Spain, long exercised by Moorish arms,
From Italy's fair princedoms, and the walls
Of sea-wash'd Venice, Adria's haughty spouse.
With me then, all ye virtuous, by what style
Recorded in the registers of fame,
Knights, senators, or soldiers, ermin'd lords,
Or sceptered princes; from whatever clime
Ye come, ennobled by heroic acts,
With me unite the splendour of your names
To dignify the erection of a new
And noble order, which to heaven's high praise,
And to heaven's champion Cappadocian GEORGE,
On this his holy festival I mean
To found a recompense for worthiest deeds.
Thus as the orient sun, adored of old
By prostrate Persia, owed his deity
Less to that genial and benignant heat
That cherishes and warms the seeds of life,
Than to those gorgeous beams, that deck with gold
And crimson the gay portals of the morn;
So shall this rising order owe its fame
And brightest luster to the splendid train
Of lords and purpled princes, who are met
This day to usher and adorn its birth.
Nor deem that to allure heroic minds,
My private interests partially to serve,
To lift the valiant in ambition's cause,
And form a league of conquest, I have laid
In subtle policy this great design:
ASHAMED BE HE WHO WITH MALIGNANT EYE
SO READS MY PURPOSE: and be he accursed
Whoever in aftertimes shall so pervert
This sacred institution. To the world
I here consign it, to the good and great
Of every age and clime, and them alone. Edward being engaged in a war with
France, for the obtaining that crown, in order to draw into England great
multitudes of foreigners, with whom he might negotiate either for their
personal service, or aids of troops to assist him in that undertaking, ordered,
during the truce that then subsisted between the two crowns, publication to be
made of a great tournament, to be held at Windsor; an expedient, says Rapin,
which could not fail of success, because it was entirely agreeable to the taste
of that age. Accordingly many persons of distinction came over, to all of whom
he gave an honorable reception, caressing them in such a manner that they
could never sufficiently admire his politeness, magnificence, and liberality.
To render these entertainments the more solemn, and to free himself also from
the ceremonies, to which the difference of rank and condition would have
subjected him, he caused a circular hall of boards to be run up at Windsor, 200
feet in diameter. There it was that he feasted all the knights at one table,
which was called the Round Table, in memory of the great Arthur, who, as it is
pretended, instituted an order of knighthood by that name. Next year he caused
a more solid building to be erected, that he might continue yearly the same
diversions. During that time he treated with these several lords about the
aids, wherewith each could furnish him, in proportion to his forces. His rival
king Philip could not see without jealousy, Spaniards, Italians, Germans,
Flemings, and Frenchmen themselves flock to England to assist at these
tournaments. He suspected some hidden design in these ntertainments, and to
break Edward's measures, caused the like to be published in his dominions;
which meeting with success, proved a countermine to Edward's main design, so
that he did not long continue to keep up his round table. From thence, however,
it is generally agreed, he took the first hint of instituting the order of the
Garter. But as his purpose in erecting this order was very different from that
which had induced him to revive Arthur's round table, as he had in this no
private views, no ambitious scheme of engaging such as should be admitted into
this fraternity to assist him in his wars, he thought proper, in order to
obviate the like jealousies and suspicion as had alarmed king Philip, to
signify by his motto the purity of his intentions, and to retort shame upon all
those who should put any malignant construction upon his design in instituting
this order. This therefore I take to be the true meaning and import of the
famous motto, HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE. The not understanding the purport of
which, gave rise, in all probability, to that vulgar story of the countess of
Salisbury's garter, rejected by all the best writers.

Now sound the trumpet; bid the candidates
With confidence appear, and urge their claims.

Flourish of trumpets, etc. which is answered by another trumpet from without;
then enter a grandee of Spain, magnificently attired in the Spanish habit,
holding in his hand the pedigree of his family, and preceded by heralds, etc.
bearing achievements, banners, coats of armor, helmets, gauntlets, spurs,
etc. SPANIARD. Illustrious monarch! emp'ror of the isles!
My name is Guzman -- from those heroes sprung,
Who with Pelagio 'mid the Asturian rocks
Against the invasion of unnumber'd Moors,
Maintained the same and empire of the Goths,
And founded at Oviedo once again
The Spanish monarchy and catholic faith,
Transporting from the mountain's dreary womb
To glittering temples her most holy altars.
Thence on the bordering Moor their valiant sons
Waging incessant war, ere long regained
Their ancient realms of Leon, Arragon,
And rich Castilia: in which great exploits
My brave progenitors, by valor, zeal,
And loyalty distinguished, from their kings
Gained those high honors, princely signories,
And proud prerogatives, which have extolled
The name of Guzman to such envied grandeur,
That scarce above it towers the regal throne.
These honors undiminish'd, undefiled,
To me delivered down, might well content
A vulgar mind; but spirits highly born
Are full of generous and aspiring thoughts;
And use the vantage ground of rank and power
But to ascend still higher. Thus I come
Thy GARTER to solicit; pleased, great prince,
With thee to be enrolled thy brother knight,
And fearing no repulse. Nobility,
As nearest in her orbit, first receives
The beams of majesty; alone can bear
The fullness of that glory, which o'erpow'rs
Inferior natures. Virtue's self would blush,
Did she at once approach too near the throne.
But the young eagle borne amid the blaze
Of glancing lightnings, with undazzled eye
Soars to the courts of heaven, and perches bold
On the bright scepter of imperial Jove.
The greatest king is he, who is the king
Of greatest subjects. Seek'st thou to advance
The glory of thy order? To thy self
Associate those, whose high-exalted names
For ages past from Envy's self have forced
Habitual veneration, never paid
To new and upstart merit. Such am I,
Whose pure and generous blood descending down
From noblest fountains, in its course enriched
By glorious mixtures with each royal stream
That fair Iberia boasts, might even pretend
To thy alliance, Edward. View this scroll,
The faithful blazon of my ancient line,
A line of potentates, whose every son
Deserved to wear the GARTER I demand.
In me their representative, the heir,
Of all their honors, son of their renown,
Do thou reward their virtues: in their names
I claim, and on hereditary right,
The right of monarchs, Edward, rest my plea.

EDWARD. The high desert of thy renowned forefathers
Well have thou shown; but have thou therefore proved
Thy self deserving to be called their son?
To thee their prosperous virtues have indeed
Transmitted lineal rank, and titles proud,
By them more hardly gained; for which thou stand'st
To custom and the indulgence of thy country
Indebted, Guzman, in a large account;
Which thou must first discharge by noble deeds,
Ere thou can style those dignities thine own.
This if thou have not paid, why do thou seek,
Like thriftless prodigals, to swell the debt,
And overwhelm thy self with obligations?
Virtue is honor, and the noblest titles
Are but the public stamps set on the ore
To ascertain its value to mankind.
It were a kind of treason to my crown,
To mark base metal with the royal impress,
And put off lazy pride in virtue's name.
Would thou attain my GARTER? Seek it there
Where thy heroic ancestors acquired
Their glorious honors, in the embattled field
Among the squadrons of the warlike Moors:
Or in the council of thy king, by truth
And wisdom equal to the important trust.
Be what thy fathers were, and then return
To ask the pledge of merit from my hand,
And be the fit companion of a king. Exit Spaniard.

Flourish of trumpets, etc. which, as before, is answered by another trumpet
from without; then enter an usurer and senator of Genoa ( at that time the bank
of Europe) dressed in his senatorial gown of black velvet, profusely, but
aukwardly adorned with jewels, pearls and diamond necklaces, pendents,
bracelets, rings, such as he may be supposed to have received as pawns, and to
wear rather as marks of his great riches, than as ornaments of his dress. He is
attended by a large train of people of every profession, appearing to be his
debtors, by their abject and timid countenances, at the head of whom, and next
to the usurer, marches a scrivener, bearing a large bundle of bonds, mortgages,
etc. GENOESE. From Genoa the opulent, the bank
And treasury of the world, most puissant king,
Invited by thy heralds, am I come
To claim the honor by thy promise due,
Due by thy justice to superior worth;
Due then to me, great Edward, who possess
That object of the toils, the cares, the vows
Of all mankind, that comprehensive good,
Source of all power and grandeur, boundless wealth.
Behold yon glittering train, whose sumptuous pride,
Bright with the treasures of each precious mine,
Invests with glory thy imperial throne:
Whence is their dignity? The ray august,
That awes and dazzles the respectful crowd,
Proceeds it from nobility, from virtue,
Their wisdom, or their valor, or their fame?
Comes it not rather from the beaming ore?
The diamond's star-like radiance? Wealth, O king,
Wealth is the sun that decks the gorgeous scene;
That cherishes, adorns, and calls to view
These princely flowers of honor, virtue, fame,
Which in the shades of poverty were lost.
Whatever men desire or venerate,
On wealth attends; even empire's self is bought.
Nor could the mighty Julius have attained
By wisdom or by valor sovereign power,
Had not the gold of vanquished Gaul subdued
The liberties of Rome. On wretched want,
Contempt and narrow-soul'd dependence wait.
Even kings, of necessary wealth deprived,
In powerless indigence lose all respect,
All homage from their subjects: while the rich,
Like gods adored, over every neck extend
Their potent sceptres, and in golden chains
Fierce Faction and rebellious Freedom bind.
The glory, strength, importance of a realm
Is measured by its riches: Venice thus,
Thus Genoa's petty state out-balances,
In Europe's scale, the boundless wilds that cloth
With tributary furs the Russian Czar.
With like pre-eminence exalted shines
In every land above the proudest names,
The blessed possessor of all-worship'd gold.
My birth or rank I boast not here, though born
A senator of Genoa. The desert,
On which I found my claim, is all my own;
To have adorned and dignified the state
Of my declining house with greater wealth
Than ever my thriftless ancestors possessed;
Whose richest acquisitions were but sprigs
Of barren laurel, or the flaunting rags
Of some torn ensign, to their needy son
A worthless heritage. Yet not to swell
My narrow fortunes would my soul descend
To the base methods of ignoble trade,
And vulgar mercantile pursuit of gain.
Mine were the noble arts of raising gold
From gold, of nursing and improving wealth
By gainful use; arts practiced heretofore
By senators and sages of old Rome,
Illustrious Crassus, and wise Seneca.
Thus have I graced the splendour of my name
With suitable possessions; thus I hold
In firm subjection to my will the poor
Of every rank and order, soldier, priest,
The venurous merchant, and the sumptuous lord,
Who in a lower vassalage to me,
Than to thy scepter, Edward, bow their heads,
Pledging their lands and liberties for gold.
Hence am I bold to stand before thy throne
A candidate for glory's highest prize:
And let me add, that policy alone
Should teach thy prudence to approve my claim;
Should teach thee in thy subjects to excite,
By honors on superior wealth bestowed,
An useful emulation to be rich:
Which once inspired, thy Albion shall become
The first of nations, thou the first of kings.

EDWARD. Had thou by opening to thy native land
The golden veins of commerce, by employing
The useful hands of industry in works
Of national advantage, by uniting
Remotest regions in the friendly bands
And honest intercourse of mutual trade;
Had thou by these humane and generous arts,
Which thy mistaken pride so much disdains,
Enriched at once thy country and thy self,
Then not unworthy had thou been to wear
The brightest marks of honor; but thy wealth,
The base-born child of sordid usury,
That foe to commerce, nurse of idleness,
Stains and degrades thee from thy noble birth;
Nor in the usurer can I discern
The senator of Genoa. -- To enlarge
The mind with generous sentiments, to raise
Its aims by virtuous emulation, here
I sit; but not to gild with honor's beams
That selfish passion which congeals the heart,
And stops the streams of sweet benevolence,
Mean avarice, the vice of narrowest souls,
Incapable of glory. -- Wealth, thou say,
Can buy even empire, and to Julius gave
Dominion over his country -- Fatal gift,
And ruinous to both! But what to Rome,
What to that Caesar's successors availed
The boundless treasures of the ravaged world,
When they had lost their virtue? Did not soon
The valiant sons of poverty, the Goths,
The Huns and Vandals, from their barren hills
And rugged woods descending, to their steel
Subject the Roman gold? Yet I deny not
The power and use of riches: to the wise
And good, in public or in private life,
They are the means of virtue, and best serve
The noblest purposes; but in the use,
Not in the bare possession, lies the merit.
Show me thy merit then, thy bounteous acts,
Public munificence, or private alms,
The hungry and the naked, and the sick,
Sustained and cherished by thy saving hand;
Plead this, and I allow thy worthy claim,
For this is virtue, and deserves reward.

Ex. Genesis Flourish of trumpets, etc. which is answered by a symphony of flutes,
violins, etc. playing a light amorous air; then appears a Neapolitan courtier,
a favorite of queen Joan, who then reigned at Naples, and whose court was the
most debauched and dissolute of that age. He comes in with a gay and affected
gesture, and is dressed in loose silken robes, rich, but finical and
esseminate; on his hair, which is curled and spread all over his shoulders down
to the middle of his back, he wears a chaplet of roses, and is attended by a
train of beautiful boys, habited like Cupids, and musicians, who, as he marches
toward the throne, continue playing their soft and wanton airs. NEAPOLITAN.
Not on my wealth, nor on my noble blood,
Shall I presume to claim thy royal gift,
Auspicious prince, but on the skill to give
That splendour to nobility and wealth,
That elegance of taste, from which alone
Their value they derive; of this to judge,
This to direct, I boast, fit arbiter
Of all refined delights. -- But chief to kings
My happy talents I devote; on them
My genius waits with duteous care, and wafts
The golden cup of pleasure to their lips,
Like Ganymede before the throne of Jove.
And who indeed would wish to be a god
Only to thunder, and to hear the prayers
Of clamorous suitors? It Is the nectar'd feast,
The dance of Graces, and the wanton charms
Of Venus, sporting with the Smiles and Loves,
That make the court of heaven a blessed abode.
Far happier were the meanest peasant's lot
Who sleeps or sings in careless ease beneath
The sunburned hay-cock, or the flowery thorn,
Than to be placed on high in anxious pride,
The purple drudge and slave of tiresome state,
If to superior power superior means
Of joy were not annexed, and larger scope
For every wish the lavish heart can form:
If the soft hand of pleasure did not wreathe
Around the royal diadem, whose weight
Oppressive loads the monarch's aching brow,
Her fairest growth of ever-blooming flowers.
On thee, victorious prince, propitious Fortune
Has poured her richest gifts, renown and wealth,
And greatness equal to thy mighty mind;
One only bliss is wanting to thy court,
Voluptuous elegance, the lovely child
Of ease and opulence; that never comes,
But like a bird of summer to attend
The brightest sunshine of a glorious state.
To her, and her alone belongs the task,
By learned delicacy to remove
What yet remains in this thy ancient realm
Of Gothic barbarism, the rust of war,
And valiant ignorance. -- Her artful hand
Thy rugged Britons shall refine, and teach
More courtly manners, to their sov'reign's will
Politely pliant: do but thou command
Thy willing servant, with thy favors graced,
From fair Joanna's ever-smiling court,
Under whose happy influence I was trained,
From polished Naples, her delightful seat,
The blooming goddess to transport, with all
Her train of joys, and fix them here beneath
Thy great protection. -- But perhaps thou fear
The voice of censure, and the grave reproof
Of moralizing dullness: idle fear!
The vulgar herd, indeed, religious craft
And policy of state have well confined
With wise severity to rigid laws:
Else would that headstrong beast the multitude
Forget obedience, and its rider's voice
Disdain. But shall the rider put a curb
In his own mouth? The laws that kings have made
Shall they restrain the makers? Edward, no!
For thee indulgent justice shall relax
Her harsh decrees, and piety shall wait
To give her reverend sanction to thy will.
It Is thine to rove at large through nature's field,
Crop every flower, and taste of every fruit;
By sweet variety provoking still
The languid appetite to new desires.
Nor useless to thy pleasures, happy prince,
Shall be my faithful service; nicer joys,
Joys of a quicker, more exalted taste,
Than ever ripened in this northern clime,
The growth of softer regions, shall my hand
By skilful culture in thy Britain raise.
To them, whose gross and dull capacities
Are fit to bear the burdens of the state,
The laboring mules, that through the mire of forms
Draw the slow car of government along,
Gladly the task of business I resign.
Be mine the brighter province, to direct
Thy pleasures, Edward, minister supreme
Of all thy softer hours: to serve the king
Be theirs the glory, let me serve the man.
But should thy sterner Genius, only pleased
With arms and royalty's important cares,
The duties of a king, my gentle arts
Too lightly prize, and thence reject my suit:
Permit at least, that to Philippa's ear,
Divine Philippa, thine and beauty's queen,
And her attendant graces, I may plead
The cause of bliss, a cause so much their own:
They will approve my claim, to whom the cares,
The labors of my life, my head, my heart
Are all devoted -- Let me from their hands
Receive the GARTER, and be called their knight.

PHILIPPA. Permit me, gracious Edward, to reply
To this irreverent flatt'rer, who presumes
Before a matron and a queen to plead
The cause of vice, and impudently hopes
To find in her a fautress of his suit.
But know, pernicious sophister, my heart
Has learned from Edward's love, and this high rank
Which I partake with him, a noble pride,
That ill can brook the too familiar eye
And saucy tongue of riot and debauch;
In whose unmanner'd light society,
Nor majesty, nor virtue can maintain
That dignity, which is their proper guard.
Thy vile refinements, and luxurious arts,
Miscalled politeness, I detest; and feel,
In the soft duties of a virtuous love,
Such pure, serene delight, as far transcends
What thou styl'st pleasure, the delirious joy
Of an intoxicated feverish brain.
Behold my royal lord, the first and best
Of kings, the love and wonder of mankind!
Behold my children, worthy their great sire,
The general theme of praise and benediction!
These are my pleasures; can thy skill bestow
Superior bliss? Ah no, the vain attempt.
Would only bring disgust, remorse, and shame.

EDWARD. That I have loved, Philippa, and esteemed thee
More for thy virtues than those female charms,
Which this vile flatterer deems singly worth
His panegyric, be thy happiness
And glory, as it is thy Edward's pride.
With the like spirit have I also wooed
And wedded sovereign power; nor weakly caught
With outward pomp, or seeking to myself
A privilege to riot uncontrolled
In sensual pleasures, and behind the throne
To laugh securely at restraint and law.
No: I embraced her as the child of heaven,
Dowr'd with the ample means of doing good;
From whose espousals I might hope to raise
An offspring, worth the ambition of a king,
Immortal glory; to a generous mind
As far surpassing all the wanton toys,
Which he calls pleasure, as thy faithful love
(The sweet overflowing of heartfelt delight)
Excels, Philippa, the lascivious smile
Of common prostitutes, caressed and loathed.
Hence from my sight with thy detested arts,
Base minister of luxury, the bane
Of every flourishing and happy state:
Presume no more within my court to sing
Thy Syren-song, nor soften into slaves
And cowards my brave subjects. -- I disdain
That elegance, which such as thou can teach.
Virtue alone is elegant, alone
Polite; vice must be sordid and deformed,
Though to adorn her every art contend.
And rather would I see my Britons roam
Untutored savages, among the woods,
As once they did, in naked innocence,
Than polished like the vile degenerate race
Of modern Italy's corrupted sons.

Exit Neap. Trumpet sounds, and is answered from without by another trumpet,
which sounds a march, accompanied by kettledrums, and other warlike
instruments: Then enters, preceded by soldiers playing upon fifes, and others
bearing tattered ensigns, standards and trophies, a leader of mercenary bands,
completely armed from head to foot, and carrying in his right hand a baton or
truncheon. On each side of him march his 'squires, one bearing his lance, the
other his shield. Behind him, as his attendants, comes a train of officers and
soldiers maimed, and their faces all seam'd with scars. SOLDIER. Nor riches,
nor nobility of birth,
Nor the soft arts of base effem'nate ease,
Which justly thou rejectest, valiant prince,
But thy own darling attribute I boast,
Undaunted courage, tried in many a field,
In every clime, and under every banner,
That for these forty summers have been waved
Over Europe's plains, by Ister, Rhine, and Po,
Hungarian and Bohemian, Flemish, French,
Venetian, Spanish, Guelph and Gibbeline:
Whence in just confidence secure I come
This military honor to demand,
Due to my toils and service, to my wounds,
My laurels, and that generous love of glory,
Which without any call, or public cause,
Or private animosity, alone
Raised my strong arm, and drew my dreadful sword.
Wherever Mars his crimson flag displayed,
That was my country, thither swift I bore
My ready valor, and the dauntless band
Of various nations, under my command,
Prepared to sell their blood, their limbs, their lives:
Nor where the right, nor where the justest cause,
Deigned we to ask -- those intricate debates
We left to lazy penmen in the shade
Of coward ease; while our impetuous fire
Still bore us forward, ardent to pursue
Through danger's roughest paths the steps to fame.
On such a spirit should thy favor smile.
But let me wonder, Edward, that so long
Thy ear the vain pretensions could endure
Of men unknown to war, attendants meet
Of some luxurious Asiatic court,
Or female distaff-reign; but suiting ill
The presence of a monarch great in arms.
Had thou to those inglorious sons of peace
Thy martial order given, the warrior-saint
Had blushed to see his image so profaned,
Which on my manly breast, indented over
With many a noble scar, will fitly shine.
But wherefore stand I thus haranguing here,
Unskilful as I am in smooth discourse,
The coward's argument? On force alone
I rest my title: let the glorious prize
Be hung on high amid the listed field,
And let me there dispute it; there my lance
Shall plead my cause far better than my tongue,
If any dare deny my rightful claim.

EDWARD. Not for the brave alone have I ordained
This institution, but for all desert,
All public virtue, wisdom, all that serves,
Improves, defends, or dignifies a state:
Though first indeed to valor, as the guard
Of all the rest, when in the public cause,
With justice and benevolence employed.
But thou, base mercenary, can thou dare
The glorious name of valor to usurp,
Who know no public cause, no sense of right,
Nor pity, nor affection, nor remorse?
Who under any chief, in any quarrel,
Can stain with gore thy prostituted arms?
Call it not love of glory; that is built
On acts for the deliverance of mankind;
On generous principles, and noble scorn
Of sordid interest: call it cruel pride,
And savageness of nature, that delights
To conquer, and oppress, afflict, insult;
Or call it love of plunder, that can draw
Unauthoris'd, uninjur'd, unprovoked,
The sword of war; that bravo-like can lift
For hire the venal hand to perpetrate
Assassinations, murders, massacres.
But thou have served with courage: be it so --
Thou have thy pay, and with it thy reward;
Pretend no farther, nor compare thy deeds,
Dishonored by the mean desire of gain,
With his, who for his country and his king
Resigns his ease, his fortune, or his life.
Those battles thou have fought, those forty years
Of blood and horror, which thy vaunting tongue
So high has sounded, are indeed thy crimes,
Flagitious crimes; for which the impartial bar
Of reason would condemn thee, as the foe
Of human nature, did not custom screen
By her unjust esteem thy guilty head.
But hope not honor or employment here.
Unsafe and wretched is that monarch's state
Who weakly trusts to mercenary bands,
The guard or of his person, or his realm:
Unfaithful, insolent, rapacious, base
He soon shall prove them, and become himself
Their slave, to hold his kingdom at their will.
For this within my Britain have I sought
To raise a martial spirit, and ordained
These new incitements, honors, and rewards,
To virtuous chivalry, that never king
Who wears hereafter my imperial crown,
May need to stoop to the precarious aid
Of venal foreign swords; but in the hearts
Of his brave subjects find a stronger guard,
Prepared with zeal unbought, and English valor,
His rights to vindicate, and save their own.

Exit Soldier. Trumpet sounds, to which another from without replies: Then
enters an Italian politician, habited like a Venetian nobleman, who advancing
with a solemn and important air toward the throne, makes a low reverence to
king Edward, and proceeds. POLITICIAN. Well has thy sovereign wisdom, royal
judge,
The suit refused of these pretenders vain,
And, by rejecting them, emboldened me.
For valor, and nobility, and wealth,
Though by their proud possessors vaunted high,
Are but subordinate, the slaves and tools,
Not the companions, and the counselors
Of godlike monarchy; whose aweful throne
By darksome clouds envelop'd, far beyond
The ken of vulgar eyes, supported stands
On that deep-rooted prop, the craft of state,
Mysterious policy. -- Who best has learned
Her wily lessons, best deserves to share
The honors, counsels, and the hearts of kings.
By him instructed, even the meanest prince
Shall rise to envied greatness, shall advance
His dreaded power above restraint and fear,
And all the rules that in fantastic chains
Inferior minds confine. Thus Milan's dukes,
Thus Padua's lords above their country's laws
Have raised their heads, and trampled to the dust
The pride of freedom, that essays in vain
Their high superior genius to control.
These were my masters, mighty prince; beneath
Their rule, and in their councils was I formed
To know the false corrupted heart of man,
His every weakness, every vice, and thence
To tempt, or break his passions to the yoke:
To scorn the public as an empty name,
And on the helpless multitude impose
The adamantine bonds of fraud and force.
Thus was I trained, thus fitted to conduct
The fate of proudest empires; thus I come
To claim thy GARTER, Edward, the just meed
Of worth praeeminent, and in return
My services to offer, which no doubt
Thy wisdom gladly will accept: for who
So fit to serve the majesty of kings,
As he, who slighting every meaner tie,
Friends, parents, country, to advance their power
Devotes his toil, experience, fortune, fame,
Nor other favor courts, nor refuge hopes
But in their high protection? -- Led by me,
Thou, royal Edward, shall attain that height,
That glorious summit of imperial power,
Which not thy mighty ancestors have reached;
Where in a freer air, a more enlarged
Horizon, bounded only by thy will,
Thou shall exalted sit, and view beneath,
In humbler distances and safer bounds,
Those subjects, who presumptuous now approach
Too near, and with rude hands profane thy throne.
Nor let weak scruples check thy manly soul
In the bright task of glory; know, great prince,
A king's divinity is sovereign power,
The only god, before whose shrine the wise
Their incense offer, whence inspired, they draw
Divine ambition, and heroic scorn
Of vulgar prejudices, vulgar fears.
Virtue's the people's idol, and by them
Rewarded well with popular applause,
That idle breath, the gift and prize of fools.
It Is thine to govern, not to court mankind,
Nor on their smiles precarious to depend,
But nobly force them to depend on thine.
O sacred sir, can virtue give thee this,
This bright supremacy? Trust not her boasts,
Her idle pageanty of barren praise:
Reject her saucy claims, importunate,
And self-supported; nor admit her train,
Proud independency, and public zeal,
Those factious demagogues, the foes of kings.

EDWARD. Are virtue then, and love of public good,
The foes of monarchy? and are deceit,
Injustice and oppression, qualities
Becoming and expedient in a king?
Then know I not to govern; but have nursed
For twice these fifteen years even in my heart,
A poisonous viper; nay unking'd myself,
By yielding to restrain my sovereign power
With laws and charters of enfranchisement,
Not due, it seems, from monarchs to their slaves.
But know, vile counselor of infamy,
That I disdain thy politics, those false
And shallow politics, by which my sire,
Weak judging Edward, was betrayed to shame
And foul destruction, while to such as thee
His ear and heart incautious he resigned,
And was indeed their slave, not England's king.
By maxims different far have I sustained
The strength and splendour of my regal state,
On the broad basis of true wisdom fixed
With solid firmness. By encouraging
The generous love of virtue and of fame,
That source of valor, pledge of victory.
By granting to my subjects, what indeed
Is their inherent right, security,
The cheerful father of content and peace,
Of industry and opulence, which fills
With smiling multitudes the land, and pays
In willing subsidies that prince's care,
Who lays up treasure in his people's hearts.
By holding with a firm impartial hand
The sleddy scale of justice; not alone
Betwixt my subjects in their private rights,
But in the general, more important cause,
Betwixt the crown and them, the different claims
Of freedom and of just prerogative:
Transgressing not myself by boundless power,
Nor suffering others to transgress those laws,
That in their golden chain together bind*
For common good, the whole united state.
But more than all, by guarding from contempt,
Or impious violation, that supreme
Protrectress of all government and law,
Religion; in whose train for ever wait
Obedience, order, justice, mercy, love,
A guard of angels placed around the throne.
Her sacred counsels have I still revered,
Her high commands enforced, her power implored,
Over all my subject nations to call down
From heavenly wisdom, her eternal fire,
A fixed secure felicity, beyond
The force of human prudence to attain.
These are my arts of government, those arts
By which my British crown I have advanced
Above the imperial diadem, above
The pride of Afric's, or of Asia's thrones.
I would not tell thee this, but that thou seem
A stranger to my fame, as to my realm,
And to the real greatness of a king:
Whose sacred dignity, by thee traduced,
Much it behooves a king to vindicate;
Not by rejecting only with disdain
Thy arrogant pretensions, but in thee
Dishonouring and branding with reproach
Thy tenets also, the pernicious lore
Of tyrants and usurpers, which thy tongue,
Blaspheming justice, government, and law,
Has in a land of freedom dared to vent.
Hence! from my kingdom, with thy quickest speed,
Lest the revenge of an insulted king
With sudden ruin intercept thy flight. Exit Politician.

King JOHN. Permit me, Edward, to thy royal voice
To add my suffrage also, and with thee
Protest against this coward policy,
That meanly skulks behind opprobrious fraud,
And low unprincely artifice; I feel
A virtue in my heart, a generous pride,
That tells me kings were clothed with majesty,
Encircled with authority, revered
And almost deify'd, to teach them thence
That goodness and the saving attributes
Of heaven become their office, justice chief,
And truth, the virtue of heroic minds,
Which, were it banished from all other breasts,
Should dwell for ever in the hearts of kings.

Aerial music, upon which re-enter the five Druids who personated the Grandee,
etc. in their original characters and habits of Druids, the chief of whom
advancing toward the throne, addresses himself to king Edward. Chief DRUID.
Behold in us, great king, the ancient priests
And judges of this land, the Druids old:
Who late in borrowed characters have stood
Before thy sage tribunal, to prefer
The claims of valor, wealth, nobility,
And those soft specious flatt'rers, who beneath
The rosy wreath of pleasure and of love
Conceal the sickly and disgustful brow
Of riot and debauch, and often win
From weak unmanly princes the rich prize
To virtue due and wisdom, not to these
The cankers of a state; but least of all
Due to that traitor of his king and country,
Who laboring to build up the regal throne
Beyond its due proportion, and the strength
Of those foundations which the laws have laid,
O'erwhelms the people, and at once o'erturns
His royal master, places him at best
On an uneasy tottering pinnacle,
The mark of execration and reproach.
These claims have thou rejected; like a king
Discerning in mankind, and knowing well
The value of his favors: like a king
Deserving the high office of the judge
And arbiter of Europe: like a king
Equal to his great fame, and worth the care
Of those immortal spirits, who this day
Have quitted their celestial residence,
To view and to approve thy glorious deeds.
But, Edward, be not thou amazed to find
That those who lately for thy favor su'd
Were not the personages they assumed.
O king! thou art beset with counterfeits
The very opposites to us, who seem
Far better than they are. For Flattery,
Cameleon-like, accommodates with care
To the court-hue his changeful countenance.
And when a prince is brave, magnanimous,
And high in spirit, then Ambition wears
A face of dignity, and nothing breathes
But lofty enterprises, conquest, power,
And schemes of glory to the sovereign ear,
Pretending love and care for his renown
With more than duteous zeal. -- Of these beware!
For as the Theban queen, in fables old,
Was, by the specious guile of fraudful Jove,
In her Amphitryon's form to guilt betrayed,
So by these counterfeits are kings seduced,
Even in the most beloved suspectless shapes,
To take a traitor to their royal arms.
But thou shall know them, Edward, by their works,
And of this truth be most assured, that he,
Who in his private commerce with mankind
Is mean, dishonest, interested, false,
Can never be true to thee; nor can he love
His prince, who feels not for his country's good.
Thus warned we leave thee, mighty prince: be firm,
Be constant in the paths of fair renown.
Think it thy duty to revere thyself
The sacred laws of chivalry, the wise
Injunctions by thy order laid on all
The GARTER'D KNIGHTS; so shall thy fame remain
The great example of all future kings.
Farewell! for lo! the Genius of thy realm
With all his pomp attended, comes to share,
And grace the glories of this signal day.
These clouds of fragrance, that far-beaming blaze
Of heavenly brightness, his approach declare.

Druids vanish. Flashes of light, and symphony of aerial music. Genius of
England descends in his chariot attended by spirits and bards; then alighting,
he advances toward the throne, and addresses himself to Edward. GENIUS. From
the gay realms of cloudless day I come,
Where in the glitter of unnumber'd worlds,
That like to isles of various magnitudes
Float in the ocean of unbounded space;
On my invisible aerial throne
I sit, attended with a radiant band
Of spirits immortal, whose pure essences,
While clad in human shapes on earth they dwelt,
Through the dull clay of gross mortality
Disclosed their heavenly vigor, and burst forth
In godlike virtues and heroic deeds,
Their Albion gracing with as fair a growth
Of fame, as ever enriched imperial Rome.
Thence ripe for heaven and immortality,
To me, the Genius of this happy isle,
They fly, and claim the meed of their desert,
Celestial crowns, and ever-living praise
Recorded in the songs of heavenly bards,
That round my throne their hymns of triumph sing,
Attuning to the sweet harmonious spheres
Their undiscording lyres and voice divine.
Nor thus removed to heaven, and thus employed
In careless raptures, wont they to forget
Their native country, and the public weal,
To which on earth their labors and their lives
They once devoted; but pursuing still
The bent and habit of their souls, with me
They watch the British empire, still intent
To check alternately the incroaching waves
Of regal power and popular liberty:
I, chief attentive near the royal throne,
Take up my watchful station, to infuse
My sage and moderate counsels in those ears,
Which wisdom has prepared and purified
To relish honest, though unpleasing truth.
Thus am I always, though invisible,
Attendant, Edward, on thy glorious deeds.
But on this solemn day have I vouchsafed
To manifest my presence; to declare,
Not in those whispers which have often spoke
Peace to thy conscious heart, but audibly
And evident to all, the assent of heaven
To the great business, which has gathered here
This troop of princes from all nations round.
Hence all may know that virtue has a train
More bright than earthly empire can command:
Know, that those actions which are great and good,
Receive a nobler sanction from the free
And universal voice of all mankind,
Which is the voice of heaven, than from the highest,
The most illustrious act of regal power.
This nobler sanction, Edward, in the name
Not of this age alone, but latest time,
Here do I solemnly annex to each
Of thy great acts, but chief to this most wise,
Most virtuous institution, which extends
Wide as thy fame, beyond thy empire's bound,
A prize of virtue published to mankind.
Ye registers of heaven, record the deed.

BARDS. Now tune, ye bards, the British lyre;
Now wake the vocal string;
While heaven and earth in Edward's praise conspire,
Join to the general voice your sacred choir,
And on your soaring wing,
From time and envy waft his glorious name,
And place it in the shrine of incorruptive fame.
Begin: the listening echoes round
Shall catch with joy the long-forgotten sound,
And warbling through each grove the British strain
To Windsor's smiling nymphs, recall their Arthur's reign.
Ye nymphs of Windsor's bow'ry woods,
Ye powers who haunt yon glist'ning floods,
That with reluctant fond delay
Around yon flowery valley stray;
Say, from your minds has time eras'd
The pleasing images of glory passed?
Review ye now those scenes no more?
When nobly stained with Saxon gore,
From Badon's long-contended plain
Great Arthur with his martial train
To Windsor's chosen shades repaired,
And with his knights the festive banquet shared.
Then first exulting Thames beheld
The triumphs of the listed field;
Beheld along his level meads
Careering knights, encount'ring steeds,
Heroic games, whose toils inspire
The thirst of praise, and kindle martial fire.
Fair Peace in war's bright mail arrayed,
With smiles the glorious lists surveyed;
So should the brave (she cried) prepare
Their hearts and sinewy arms for war:
Such combats break not my repose,
Such sons best guard my rights from daring foes.
Then too in feastful hall or bower,
Attendant on the genial hour,
The British harp sweet lyrists strung,
And Albion's generous victors sung:
While valiant Arthur's copious fame
Incessant fed the bright poetic flame.
But mortals erring in excess,
Overwhelm the virtue they caress.
Thus Arthur his great story mourned,
By too fond praise to fable turned:
Mourned the companions of his toils,
Mocked with false glory and fantastic spoils.
'Till through the dark romantic tale,
Through superstition's magic veil,
Sage Edward piercing viewed, and owned
The chief with genuine luster crowned:
Viewed the great model, and restored
The long-lost honors of his martial board.
Hail British prince! these faithful lays,
Eternal records of heroic worth,
Shall reassert thy ancient praise,
And from the cloud of fiction call thee forth,
In glory's sphere thy orbit to reclaim,
And at great Edward's beam relume thy darkened fame.
But see in heavenly panoply arrayed,
Whose streaming radiance skirts the clouds with gold,
I view Pendragon burst the veiling shade,
And all his blazing magnitude unfold!
Over yon broad tower he takes his airy stand,
And pointing, Edward, toward the royal throne,
To his famed knights around, a laureled band,
Shows on thy knee the bright sky-tinctur'd zone.
Virtue, he cries, (the aetherial sound
Thy gross material organ cannot hear)
Virtue on earth by British Edward crowned.
Her reverend throne once more shall rear.
To her own self-applauding breast
Forced for reward no longer to retreat,
She sees her aweful charms by kings caressed,
Sees honor woo her for his mate.
Honor, her heav'n-elected spouse,
From her embrace by lawless power withheld,
Now at yon altar plights his holy vows,
Vows by assenting Edward sealed.
And now the fair angelic bride
Gathering her noble train from every land,
To her late wedded lord with decent pride
Presents the venerable band.
The great procession Edward leads;
I see yon hallowed dome with heroes thronged:
Incessant still the white-plum'd pomp proceeds,
Through time's eternal course prolonged.
And you, dear partners of my fame,
Your ancient honors now again shall boast;
This noble ORDER shall retrieve our name,
In visionary fables lost.
This from our martial board derived,
These for our brethren let us proudly own,
More pleased to view our deeds by thee revived,
Then grieved, great king, to be outdone.

CHORUS. Hail British prince! these faithful lays
Shall reassert thy ancient praise.
Nor thee, O Windsor, shall I pass unsung,
Mansion of princes, and fit haunt of gods,
Who frequent shall desert their bright abodes,
To view thy sacred walls with trophies hung:
Thy walls by British Arthur first renowned,
The early seat of chivalry and fame;
By Edward now with deathless honors crowned,
Illustrious by his BIRTH, his GARTER, and his NAME.

GENIUS. Conferring just rewards, most worthy prince,
Is the first attribute of sovereign power,
And that which best distinguishes a king:
For punishment, and all the nice awards
Of civil justice, by the laws are fixed,
And kings but execute what they decree.
While in rewarding merit, uncontrolled,
Unguided, unassisted is the hand
Of majesty; the prince himself alone
There judges, and his wisdom is the law.
Well does thy court, great king, with every worth
And every virtue filled, this wisdom show
In thee transcendent: well have thou approved
Its force in this great trial, which my power
Commanded, in no common ways to prove
Thy royal mind. -- But that a father's name
May not restrain thy justice in the choice
Of the first knights-companions of St. GEORGE,
Myself here take upon me to present
A candidate, whom, were he not thy son,
Thou would thyself select from all mankind.
His modesty compels me to declare
That candidate is Edward, prince of Wales.

Prince EDWARD. Inhabitant of heaven! I not presume
To deprecate or question that high will,
To which it best becomes me to submit.
But, gentle spirit, be propitious to me;
And thou, my gracious liege, if I request
That this illustrious monarch, whose desert
Is equal to the grandeur of his crown,
May stand before me in this list of fame.

King JOHN. O generous youth! in vain thy goodness strives
To raise thy captive thus above his fortune.
The king that is not free, is not a king;
Nor can thy bounteous favor reconcile
Honor and bondage. -- To thy conquering son
Do thou, great Edward, give this noble mark
Of prosperous virtue; ill becomes it me,
To wear at once thy GARTER and thy chains.
Though by my former dignity I swear,
That were I reinstated in my throne,
The thronc of Capet and of Charlemagne,
Thus to be joined in fellowship with thee,
Would be the first ambition of my soul;
A ray of glory I would sue to gain,
And prize it equal with my diadem.

GENIUS. Wisely thou have determined, worthy prince,
For thine and Edward's honor, and have fixed
Its proper value on his royal gift,
Which as the meed of merit, may become
The proudest monarchs, by this GARTER marked
For something more than monarchs, virtuous men.
This be the glory of thy order, Edward.
And Besides the great persons of our own nation, that have been admitted of
this order, the English reader may be glad to be informed, that in the annals
of the Garter are found the names of Charles V. emperor of Germany; of Francis
I. and Henry IV. kings of France; and of Gustavus Adolphus king of Sweden.
never shall it want the greatest names
Of all succeeding times to grace its annals.
France, Sweden, Poland, Germany, and Spain,
Each realm of Europe's wide-extended bounds,
Shall count among thy knights its mightiest lords,
And see, in emulation of thy fame,
New royal founders of like orders rise.
Proceed then, mighty king, and set the world
The precedent of glory: thou begin
The radiant list of Sov'reigns, while thy son,
Like a young bride, that on her nuptial morn
Leads on with modest pride the virgin-choir,
Herself the brightest, heads the shining band
Of knights-companions, nobly seconding
His father's glorious deeds with equal fame.

EDWARD. The testimony of heaven to thee, my son,
Thus gloriously accorded, renders vain
All farther trial. -- To my people's voice,
By this their tutelary power declared,
With pleasure I consent, directing still
By theirs my choice, my judgment, my desires.
Approach then, my beloved, my noble son,
Strength of my crown, and honor of my realm;
In whom my heart more joys, and glories more,
Than in the highest pride of sovereign power.
The prince of Wales advances to his father, and kneels; while the king, taking
the Garter from the herald, buckles it round his left leg.
Thus I admit thee, Edward prince of Wales,
First founder of the order of St. GEORGE;
In evidence whereof, about thy knee
I bind this mystic GARTER; to denote
The bond of honor that together ties
The brethren of St. GEORGE in friendly league,
United to maintain the cause of truth
And justice only -- The sense, and almost the words in the verses of this
speech, marked thus "are taken from the admonition read to the knights, at the
time of their receiving the GARTER and the RIBBON or COLLAR of the order. Vide
Ashmole's History of the order of the GARTER.
"May propitious heaven
"Grant thou may henceforth wear it to his praise,
"The exaltation of this noble order,
"And thy own glory." -- With like reverence,
My son receive and wear this golden chain,
"Graced with the image of Britannia's saint,
"Heaven's valiant soldier, CAPPADOCIAN GEORGE;
"In imitation of whose glorious deeds
"May thou triumphant in each state of life,
"Or prosperous or adverse, still subdue
"Thy spiritual and carnal enemies;
"That not on earth alone thou may obtain
"The guerdon of thy valor, endless praise,
"But with the virtuous and the brave above,
"In solemn triumph, wear celestial palms,
"To crown thy final noblest victory."

Embraces Pr. EDW. Prince EDWARD. Accept, my sovereign liege, my grateful
thanks,
That thou have thus vouchsafed to place thy son
First next thyself upon the roll of fame,
As he indeed is first in filial love,
And emulation of thy royal virtues
And may thy benediction, gracious lord,
May thy paternal vows be heard in heaven!
That he, whom thou have listed in the cause
Of truth and virtue, never may forget
His vowed engagements, nor defraud thy hopes,
By soiling with dishonorable deeds
The luster of that ORDER, which thy name
Should teach him to respect and to adorn.

ODE.
STROPHE I. BARDS.
Celestial maid!
Bright spark of that aetherial flame,
Whose vivid spirit through all nature spread,
Sustains and actuates this boundless frame!
O by whatever style to mortals known,
Virtue, benevolence, or public zeal,
Divine assessor of the regal throne,
Divine protectress of the common weal,
O in our hearts thy energy infuse!
Be thou our Muse,
Celestial maid,
And, as of old, impart thy heavenly aid
To those, who warmed by thy benignant fire,
To public merit and their country's good
Devoted ever their recording lyre,
Wont along DEVA'S sacred flood,
Or, beneath Mona's oak retired,
To warble forth their patriot lays,
And nourish with immortal praise
The bright heroic flames by thee inspired.
ANTISTROPHE I.
I feel, I feel
Thy soul-invigorating heat;
My bounding veins distend with fervent zeal,
And to Britannia's fame responsive beat. --
Hail Albion, native country! but how changed
Thy once grim aspect, how adorned and gay
Thy howling forests! where together ranged
The naked hunter and his savage prey:
Where amid black inhospitable woods
The sedge-grown floods
All cheerless strayed.
Not in their lonely wandering course surveyed,
Or tower, or castle, heav'n-ascending fane,
Or lowly village, residence of peace
And joyous industry, or furrowed plain,
Or lowing herd, or silver fleece
That whitens now each verdant vale;
While laden with their precious store
Far trading barks to every shore,
Swift heralds of Britannia's glory, sail.
EPODE I.
These are thy shining works: this smiling face
Of beauteous nature thus in regal state,
Decked by each handmaid art, each polished grace,
That on fair liberty and order wait.
This pomp, these riches, this repose,
To thee imperial Britain owes.
To thee, great substitute of heaven,
To whom the charge of earthly realms was given;
Their social systems by wise nature's plan
To form and rule by her eternal laws;
To teach the selfish soul of wayward man
To seek the public good, and aid the common cause.
So did thou move the mighty heart
Of Alfred, founder of the British state:
So to Matilda's sceptered son,
To him whose virtue and renown
First made the name of Edward great,
Thy ample spirit so did thou impart:
Protecting thus in every age,
From greedy power and factious rage,
The law of freedom, which to Britain's shore
From Saxon Elva's many-headed flood,
The valiant sons of Odin with them bore,
Their national, adored, inseparable good.
STROPHE II.
Runny Mead near Stains, where the Grand Charter was signed by king John.
On yonder plain,
Along whose willow-fringed side
The silver-footed Naiads, sportive train,
Down the smooth Thames amid the cygnets glide,
I saw, when at thy reconciling word,
Injustice, anarchy, intestine jar,
Despotick insolence, the wasting sword,
And all the brazen throats of civil war,
Were hushed in peace; from his imperious throne
Hurled furious down,
Abashed, dismayed,
Like a chased lion to the savage shade
Of his own forests, fell oppression fled,
With vengeance brooding in his sullen breast.
Then justice fearless reared her decent head,
Healed every grief, each wrong redressed;
While round her valiant squadrons stood,
And bade her aweful tongue demand,
From vanquished John's reluctant hand,
The deed of freedom purchased with their blood.
ANTISTROPHE II.
O vain surmise!
To deem the grandeur of a crown
Consists in lawless power! to deem them wife
Who change security and fair renown,
For detestation, shame, distrust, and fear!
Who, shut for ever from the blissful bowers,
With horror and remorse at distance hear
The music that inchants the immortal powers,
The heavenly music of well-purchas'd praise,
Seraphick lays,
The sweet reward
On heroes, patriots, righteous kings conferred.
For such alone the heav'n-taught poets sing.
Tune ye for Edward, then, the mortal strain,
His name shall well become your golden string,
Begirt with this aetherial train,
Seems he not ranked among the gods?
Then let him reap the glorious meed
Due to each great heroic deed,
And taste the pleasures of the blessed abodes.
EPODE II.
Hail, happy prince! on whom kind Fate bestows
Sublimer joys, and glory brighter far
Than Cressy's palm, and every wreath that grows
In all the blood-stained field of prosperous war;
Joys that might charm an heavenly breast,
To make dependent millions blessed,
A dying nation to restore
And save fallen liberty with kingly power;
To quench the torch of discord and debate,
Relume the languid spark of public zeal,
Repair the breaches of a shattered state,
And gloriously complete the plan of England's weal;
Complete the noble Gothic pile,
That on the rock of justice reared shall stand
In symmetry, and strength, and fame,
A rival of that boasted frame
Which virtue raised on Tiber's strand.
This, Edward, guardian, father of our isle,
This god-like task, to few assigned,
Exalts thee above human-kind,
And from the realms of everlasting day
Calls down celestial bards thy praise to sing;
Calls this bright troop of spirits to survey
Thee, the great miracle of earth, a PATRIOT-King.
GENIUS. Now reascend your skies, immortal spirits!
The important act, that drew ye down to earth,
^s finished. Spare we now their mortal sense,
That cannot long endure the unshrouded beam
Of higher natures. Well has Edward laid,
under your happy auspices, the base
Of his great ORDER: let him undisturbed,
But not unaided by the heavenly powers,
Complete the illustrious work, which future kings,
Struck with the beauty of the noble plan,
Shall emulously labor to maintain.
And may thy spirit, Edward, be their guide!
In every chapter, thou henceforth preside,
In every breast infuse thy virtuous flame,
And teach them to respect their country's fame.

Genius and Spirits reascend to a loud sympony of music. An Epistle to the
Right Honorable the Lord Viscount CORNBURY.
By -- Esquire
WHILE you, my Lord, alas! amidst a few,
With generous warmth your country's good pursue;
While to the center all your wishes tend,
Accept the zeal that prompts a willing friend.
Others like you heaven's hallowed spark inspired,
Whom soon the blaze of selfish passion fired,
Soon ruder flames extinguished reason's light,
While prejudices foul'd their jaundic'd sight.
Such through false optics every object prove,
And try the good and bad, by hate and love.
All-powerful means each virtue to supply,
All-powerful means each virtue to deny;
To Wyndham strength, and grace, and fire, and weight;
To Granville parts, to save a sinking state,
Hence various judgments form the madden'd throng,
Only in this alike, they all are wrong.
Hence to false praise shall blame unjust succeed,
And cherubs fall, and gods unpitied bleed.
Would you, my friend, not mix the purer flame,
Nor lose the patriot in a baser name;
Nor factious rage mistake for public zeal,
Nor private interest for the general weal?
By truth's sure test let every deed be tried,
And justice ever be the unerring guide.
Her rules are plain, and easy is her way,
And yet how hard to find if once we stray!
All lost alike the maze perplexed we tread,
However prompted, whether drove or led;
Whether false honor or ambition goad,
Or sneaking avarice wind the miry road,
Or whether swayed by passions not our own,
And the weak fear of being right alone.
Alone in such a cause is base to fear,
Though fools suspect, and knaves designing sneer.
Sneer, villains, sneer! the avenging time is nigh,
When Balbo scourged shall weep the taunting lie;
When Stopus foul with each imputed crime,
Shall dread false prose repaid with honest rhyme.
It Is not enough you scorn a private claim,
And to your country's good direct your aim.
Wrong is still wrong, however great the end,
Though all the realm were brother, father, friend;
Justice regards not these -- where right prevails,
A nation is an atom in her scales.
Heaven means not all the good which man can gain,
But that which truth can earn, and right maintain.
However fair the tempting prize may be,
If guilt the price, it is not meant for thee.
Succeeding times may claim the just design,
Or other means, or other powers than thine.
Each part's connected with the general plan,
The weal of Britain with the weal of man.
Justice the scale of interest for the whole,
The same in Indies as beneath the pole;
Sure rule by which heaven's blessings to dispense,
Unerring light of guiding providence.
Others may fail. -- If wrongly understood,
How fatal is the thirst of public good!
No heavier curse almighty vengeance brings,
Nor plagues, nor famine, nor the lust of kings.
Fired by this rage the frantic sons of Rome,
The suffering world to death and bondage doom;
Nations must sink to raise her cumb'rous frame,
And millions bleed to eternize her name.
But lo! her glories fade, her empire's past,
She madly conquered but to fall the last.
Nor would I here the patriot's views reprove,
Or damp the sacred flame of social love.
Still may that portion of the eternal ray
Sublime our sense, and animate our clay;
Above low self exalt the immortal frame,
And emulate that heaven from whence it came.
Oh! would it never be confined to place,
But beam extensive as the human race:
Be, as it was designed, the world's great soul,
Connect its parts, and actuate the whole,
So each should think himself a part alone,
And for a nation's welfare stake his own!
Yet farther still, though dearest to the breast,
That nation think but part of all the rest.
For this let equal justice poise the ball,
Her swaying force unites us all to all;
Of manners, worship, form, no difference knows,
Condemns our friends, and saves our better foes.
Confess the heavenly power! nor need you fear
Let Britain suffer, while you follow her.
Though prosperous crimes some daring villains raise,
Nor life's short date my halting vengeance seize;
A nation cannot 'scape -- the destined rage
Pursues her ceaseless to some future age;
Speeds the sure ruin from the conqueror's hand,
Or spreads corruption over a pining land.
Ask hoary time, what nation is most blessed?
For sage experience shall this truth attest:
"Where freedom sleeps secure from lawless wrath,
"Where commerce sheltered flows through public faith,
"Where fell ambition lights no foreign wars,
"Nor discord rages with intestine wars;
"Where justice reigns." -- Immortal were that state,
If aught immortal here were given by Fate.
Such, lost Iberia! were those happy reigns,
When liberty sat brooding over thy plains.
The rich in plenteous peace their stores enjoyed,
By cares unvex'd, by luxury uncloy'd.
Hope soothed the poor with promises of gain,
And paid with future joys their present pain;
Showed the full bowl amidst their sultry toil,
While those who pruned the olive drank the oil;
By night of all the fruits of day possessed,
Labor soft-clos'd the eye, and sweetened rest.
Such was thy state all gay in nature's smiles!
And such is now the state of Britain's isles.
Hence over the ocean's waste her sail unfurled,
Wide wafts the tribute of a willing world.
Hence trusting nations treasure here their wealth,
Safe from tyrannick force or legal stealth:
And hence the injured exile doomed to roam,
Shall find his country here and dearer home.
Still be this truth, this saving truth confessed,
Britain is great, because with freedom blessed;
Her prince is great, because her people free,
And power here springs from public liberty.
Hail mighty monarch of the free and great!
Firm on the basis of a prosperous state.
The wealth, the strength of happy millions thine,
United rise, united shall decline.
For time will come, sad period of the brave,
When Britain's humble prince shall rule the slave;
When traffic vile shall stain the guilty throne,
And kings shall buy our ruin and their own.
But long, O long the inglorious doom suspend!
What virtue gained may virtue still defend!
Thrice sacred spirit, never may you cease,
But as you blazed in war, shine forth in peace!
Dauntless with all the force of truth engage
The headlong tide of each corrupted age.
O ever wake around one favored throne,
Nor let our guardian monarch wake alone!
Though often defeated and though often betrayed,
Numbers shall rise in sacred freedom's aid.
Far as her all-enlivening influence reigns,
Heroic ardour beats in generous veins.
Now bids learned Greece barbarian might defy,
Now the soft arts of polished tyranny;
Now to no stock, or sect, or place confined,
She takes adopted sons from human kind;
While denizen'd by her eternal laws,
They all are Britons who shall serve her cause.
Lo! to the banner crowds a youthful band;
Formed for the glorious task by nature's hand;
Wisdom unclogg'd by years, with toil unbought,
A zeal by vigor kindled, ruled by thought.
Such gifts she to the happy few imparts,
To judging heads and to determined hearts;
To heads unfir'd by youth's tumultuous rage,
To hearts unnumb'd by the chill ice of age;
And while they both preserve a separate claim,
Their passions reason, and their reasons flame.
Proceed brave youths! Let others court renown
In hostile fields, be yours the olive crown:
And trust to fame, those heroes brighter shone
Who saved a nation, than who nations won.
Nor let assuming age restrain your flight,
Fearful to tempt the yet unpracticed height;
Deceitful counsel lurks in hoary hairs,
And the last dregs of life are sordid cares.
Objects are clear proportioned in degree,
To general use, or strong necessity,
Nor are two things so plainly understood,
As the worst evil and the greatest good;
If rescued from the misty breath of schools;
Men will but feel without the help of rules.
So unbewilder'd in the crooked maze,
Where guilt low sculks, and reptile cunning strays,
A nation's interest, and a people's rights,
Distinctly shine in nature's simple rights,
And claim in him who fairly acts his part,
Before a Lonsdale's head, a Lonsdale's heart.
But chief when snatched by heaven's preserving hand,
From the fell contests of each hostile land,
A happy island to the incircling main
Trusts for a sure report and honest gain.
The just are heaven's, earth is for heaven ordained,
Formed by its laws, and by its laws maintained.
These one true interest, one great system frame,
Political and moral are the same.
Guilt toils for gain at honor's vast expense,
Heaven throws the trifle in to innocence;
And fixes happiness in hell's despite,
The necessary consequence of right.
Proceed, ye deists! blindfold rage employ,
And prove the sacred truths ye would destroy.
Prove christian faith the wisest scheme to bind,
In chains of cordial love, our jarring kind;
And thence conclude it human, if you can,
The perfect produce of imperfect man!
While prostrate we adore that power divine,
Whose simple rule connects each great design;
Bids social earth a type of heaven appear,
Where justice tastes those joys which wait her there.
But though self-int'rest follow virtue's train!
Yet selfish think not virtue's end is gain!
Older than time, ere interest had a name,
Justice existed, and is still the same;
Alike the creature's and creator's guide,
His rule to form, the law by which we are tied:
In reason's light, eternal word, expressed,
Stamped with his image in the creature's breast.
Thus speaks the sage, who skilled in nature's laws,
Deep from effects high-trac'd the all-ruling cause.
"Before creation was, the almighty mind
"In time's abyss the future world designed;
"Did the great system in its parts survey,
"And fit the springs, and regulate their play;
"In meet gradations plan'd the harmonious round,
"These links by which depending parts are bound.
"All these he knew, ere yet the things he made,
"In types which well the mimick world displayed.
"The types are real, since from them he drew
"The real forms of whatsoever we view.
"Made to their 'semblance, heaven and earth exist,
"But they unmade eternally subsist.
"For if created, we must sure suppose
"Some other types whence their resemblance flows;
"While these on others equally depend,
"Nor ever shall the long progression end.
"God ere it was, the future being saw,
"Or blindfold made his world, and gave his law.
"But chance could never frame the vast design,
"Where countless parts in justest order join.
"The types eternal just proportions teach,
"Greater or less, more or less perfect each.
"These ever present power omniscient sees,
"On them he forms his ever-made decrees;
"Nor can he better love what merits least,
"Man than an angel, or than man a beast.
"Hence Reason, hence immortal Order springs,
"Knowledge and Love adapted to the things,
"And thence the unerring rule of justice flows,
"To act what Order prompts, and Reason shows.
"What man in nature's purity remained,
"By pain untroubled, and by sin unstained;
"Fair image of the God, and close conjoined,
"By innate union with the heavenly mind;
"In the pure splendour of substantial light,
"The beam divine of Reason blessed his sight;
"Seraphick Order in its fount he viewed,
"Seeing he loved, and loving he pursued;
"Nor dared the body, passive slave, control
"The sovereign mandates of the ruling soul.
"But soon by sin the sacred union broke,
"Man bows to earth beneath the heavy yoke.
"The darkling soul scarce feels a glimmering ray,
"Shrouded in sense from her immortal day.
"Vengeance divine offended Order arms,
"And clothes in terrors her celestial charms.
"Now grosser objects heaven-born souls possess,
"Passions enslave, and servile cares oppress.
"Fraud, rapine, murder, guilt's long horrid train,
"Distracted nature's anarchy maintain.
"No more pure Reason earthly minds can move,
"No more can Order's charms persuasive prove.
"But as the moon reflecting borrowed day,
"Sheds on our shadowed world a feeble ray;
"Some scattered beams of Reason law contains,
"While Order's rule must be enforced by pains.
"Hence death's black scroll, dire tortures hence are given;
"Hence kings, the necessary curse of heaven.
"And just the doom of an avenging God,
"Who spurned his scepter, feel the tyrant's rod.
"Blind by our fears we meet the ills we fly,
"In rule oppression, want in property."
So spoke the sage, and if not learned in vain,
If spotless truth in sacred books remain;
Dearly the child has paid the parent's pride,
And ill has Law the heavenly rule supplied.
Thus boasts some leech with unavailing art,
To mend the tainted lungs and wasting heart;
Bids the loose springs with wonted vigor play,
And sprightly juices warm in cold decay.
Or would imperious reason deign to own,
The world not made for sovereign man alone;
Some things there are for human use designed,
And these in common dealt to human kind.
To mortal wants is given a power to use,
What to the immortal part just heaven might well refuse.
This faithful instinct in each breast implants,
All know their rights, for all must feel their wants.
But soon began the rage of wild desire,
To thirst for more than use could over require.
Ere stung by luxury's unsated call,
And ere ambition madly grasped the ball,
Vain restless man in busy search employed,
Saw somewhat still beyond the bliss enjoyed,
Pressed eager on; the lowly and the great,
Alike their wish beyond their destined state;
Alike condemned, whatever Fortune grant,
To real poorness in phantastic want.
And now some sages high by others deemed,
For virtue honored, and for parts esteemed;
Called forth to judge where dubious claims are tried,
Convince with reason, and with counsel guide;
Fixed rules devise to sway the assenting throng,
And marks distinct impress on right and wrong.
The simple precept subtle wiles invade,
And statutes as our crimes increased were made,
These were at first unwritten, plain and few,
'Till swelled by time the law's vast volume grew;
And grown with these, to sway the unwieldy trust,
Thousands we chose to keep the millions just,
Some placed over others, others placed over these,
Thus government grew up by slow degrees;
Higher the pile arose, and still more high,
When lo! the summit ends in monarchy.
There placed, a man in gorgeous pomp appears,
And far over earth his towering aspect rears;
While prostrate crowds his sacred smile implore,
And what their crimes had formed, their fears adore.
Low from beneath they lift their servile eyes,
And see the proud colossus touch the skies.
So at some mountain's foot have children gazed,
While close to heaven they view the summit raised,
Eager they mount, new regions to explore,
But heaven is now as distant as before.
Thus views the crowd a throne, while those who rise
Claim not a nearer kindred to the skies;
Earth is their parent, thither kings should bend,
From thence they rise, and not from heaven descend.
Happy, had all the royal sons of earth
Thus sprung, nor guilt had claimed the monstrous birth.
Where from the fire descending through the line,
Rapine and fraud confer a right divine.
Ye mortal gods, how vainly are ye proud?
If just your title, servants to the crowd;
If wide your sway, if large your treasured store,
These but increase your servitude the more;
A part is only yours, the rest is theirs,
And nothing all your own, except your cares.
Shall man, by nature free, by nature made
To share the feast her bounteous hand displayed,
Transfer these rights? as well he may dispense
The beam of reason, or the nerve of sense;
With all his strength the monarch's limbs invest,
Or pour his valor in the royal breast.
Take the starved peasant's taste, devouring lord!
Ere you deprive him of the genial board.
And if you would his liberty control,
Assume the various actings of his soul!
So shall one man a people's powers enjoy,
Thus Indians deem of wretches they destroy.
Thus in old tales the fabled monster stands,
Proud of a thousand eyes, a thousand hands.
Thus dreams the sophist, who with subtle art
Would prove the whole included in a part,
A people in their king; and from the throng,
Transfer to him their rights in nature's wrong;
Those sacred rights in nature's charter plain,
By wants that claim them, and by powers that gain.
Though sophists err, yet stand confessed thy claim,
And be the king and multitude the same,
Whose deeds benevolent his title prove,
And royal selfishness, in public love;
Nor, draining wasted realms for sordid pelf,
O sceptered suicide! destroy thy self.
Where fails this proof, in vain would we unite
The ruler's interest with the people's right.
Frantic ambition has her separate claim,
The dropsy'd thirst of empire, wealth, or fame;
Pride's boundless hope, valor's enthusiast rant,
With the long nameless train of fancied want.
Urged on by these, all view the magic prize,
The prospect widening as they higher rise;
For him who seeks a limited command,
To him whose wish devours air, sea, and land.
Alike all foes to freedom's holy cause,
For freedom ties unbounded will with laws,
Alike all foes to every public gain,
For public blessings loose the bond-man's chain.
Ill-fated slaves of arbitrary sway!
Where trusted power seduces to betray;
Makes private failings rage a general pest,
And taints even virtue in the social breast;
Bids friendship plunder, charity undo
The blameless MANY, for the favored FEW.
'Till guilt high reared on crimes protecting crime,
Fills the heaped measure of predestined time.
Far others, ye, O wealthy, wise, and brave!
Though subject, free; more freedom would enslave.
Blessed with a rule by long experience tried,
Unwarp'd by faction's rage, or kingly pride;
Blessed with the means, whenever this rule shall bend,
Again to trace it to its glorious end;
And blessed with proofs, the proofs are sealed with blood,
Whatever the form, the end is public good.
But yet admit the sire his right fore-goes!
Can he his children's separate claim dispose?
Whatever the parent gave, whatever he give,
They who have right to life, have right to live.
And spite of man's consent, or man's decree,
A right to life, is right to liberty.
Though for convenience framed the laws should shine,
Pure emanation from the source divine;
Such as can pierce the gloom of pagan night,
And untaught savages in woods enlight;
Such as on scaffolds can the guiltless save,
And torture on his throne the sceptered slave;
Such as the offending wretch reluctant owns,
And hails its beauty with his dying groans:
In such fair laws the will of heaven impressed,
Shines to all eyes, and rules the conscious breast.
Though tortures cease, though night's thick-mantling vail
From mortal ken the secret deed conceal;
Reason and conscience shall awake within,
And light the shade, and loud proclaim the sin.
"But should the universal voice combine,
"To cloth injustice in a robe divine?"
Let the same breath divest the day of light,
To blazon forth the dusky face of night.
Then shall the laws of sainted evil bind,
And human will subvert the all-ruling mind;
That sacred fount whence lawful rule must spring,
And different from the robber marks the king.
Yet vainly would despotick will conclude,
That force may sway the erring multitude,
Justice, it is owned, should ever guide the free,
But power of wrong, in all, is liberty;
And for whatever purposes restrained,
A nation is enslaved that may be chained.
Heaven gives to all a liberty of choice,
A people's good requires a people's voice;
Man's surest guide, where different views agree,
From private hate, and private interest free.
Fatal their change from such who rashly fly,
To the hard grasp of guiding tyranny;
Soon shall they find, when will is armed with might,
Injustice wield the sword, though drawn for right.
Blind to these truths who fond of boundless sway,
Bids trembling slaves implicitly obey;
Though by a long descent from Adam down
Through sceptered heirs, he boasts his ancient crown,
Great nature's rebel forfeits every claim,
And loads the tyrant with the usurper's name;
While with each lawless act of proud command,
He stands proscribed by his own guilty hand.
Bow, Filmer, bow! to hell's tremendous throne,
And bid thy fellow-damn'd suppress each groan!
There sits a king whom power divine has given,
Nor earth boasts one so surely sent from heaven.
And thou, blessed martyr in fair freedom's cause,
Thou great asserter of thy country's laws;
Vainly oppression stopped thy potent breath;
Truth shone more powerful through the vail of death;
Example moved whom precept could not save,
And lifted axes waked each drowsy slave.
Yet magistrates must rule, they are useful things,
Our guilt the vengeance, and avenger brings.
Whatever more perfect heaven might first create,
A state well-governed, now, is nature's state;
For law from reason springs, spontaneous fruit,
And reason sure is man's first attribute.
Let visionary schoolmen toil in vain,
Who seek in anarchy for nature's reign;
Wretched alike the slaves of lawless will,
Whether the savage, or the tyrant kill;
Unjust alike all rule, where public choice
Speaks not through laws a willing people's voice.
Nor freedom suffers when the guilty fall,
It Is nature's doom, it is self-defence in all.
Such now is man depraved that fear must sway,
To tread the paths where duty points the way;
The wretch must suffer to forewarn the rest,
And some must fall to stop the spreading pest.
Alone the general welfare can demand
The bleeding victim from the unwilling hand.
Hence public pains -- what to the crime is due,
O Judge supreme! must be reserved for you.
To you alone, whose all-pervading eye
Deep in the breast can latent thought espy;
Try every action by the known intent,
And to each crime adapt its punishment;
While men, misled by erring lights, dispense
The doom of guilt to injured innocence;
Or though repentance cleanse the moral stain,
Inflict on crimes atton'd avenging pain.
Yet blameless they who act sincere their part,
Faultless he errs who cannot read the heart.
Not such fierce flames the mad enthusiast's zeal,
On errors harmless to the general weal,
Whether false notions wander far from truth,
Or age retained the trace impressed in youth.
While interest prompts the holy murd'rer's hand,
In sacred fires to light the unhallowed brand;
To draw destruction from heaven's saving page,
And bid sweet mercy breathe relentless rage.
Accursed all such! and he with joy elate,
Whose baleful breath embitters certain fate;
Who on the imploring face malignant smiles,
And sentenced wretches wantonly reviles.
Better, far better in the savage den,
Let the robbed lion judge over prostrate men:
Better let power the lawless faulchion draw,
Than coward cruelty disgrace the law.
This well you know, O --! whose righteous seat
Gives to the innocent a sure retreat;
Severely just, and piously humane,
The wretch you punish, while you share his pain.
Tears with the dreadful words of sentence flow,
Nor does the rigid judge the man forego.
So feels the breast humane, ye truly brave!
And such is thine, my friend, intent to save!
Whether thy bounty pining want relieve,
Or lenient pity sooth the hearts that grieve;
Whether thy pious hand due bounds prescribe
To little tyrants, over the lesser tribe;
Or whether noble warmth expand thy soul,
And huge leviathan unawed control.
Nor Britain only claims thy generous plan,
Thy rule is justice, and thy care is man.
And may this truth thy fair example prove,
Justice shall fan the flame of social love.
An EPISTLE.
By the Same.
Through the wild maze of life's still varying plan,
Bliss is alone the important task of man.
All else is trifling, whether grave or gay,
A Newton's labors, or an infant's play;
Whether this vainly wastes the unheeded sun,
Or those more vainly mark the course it run;
For of the two, sure smaller is the fault,
To err unthinking, than to err with thought;
But if, like them, we still must trifles use,
Harmless at least, like theirs, be those we choose.
Enough it is that reason blames the choice,
Join not to here is the wretch's plaintive voice;
Be folly free from guilt: let foplings play,
Or write, or talk, or dress, or die away.
Let those, if such there be, whose giant-mind
Superior towers above their pigmy kind,
Unaided and alone, the realms explore,
Where hail and snow renew their treasured store. Joh, chap. xxxviii.

Lo! heaven spreads all its stars; let those explain,
What balanced powers the rolling orb sustain;
Nor in more humble scales, pernicious weigh
Sense, justice, truth, against seducing pay.
So distant regions shall employ their thought,
And spotless senates here remain unbought.
Well had great Charles V. Emperor of Germany, who in his retirement amused
himself with puppets. See Strada de bello Belgico.
Charles, by early want inspired,
With warring puppets, guiltless praise acquired;
So would that flame have mimick fights engaged,
Which fanned by power, over wasted nations raged.
Cursed be the wretch, should all the mouths of fame
Wide over the world his deathless deeds proclaim,
Who like a baneful comet spreads his blaze,
While trembling crowds in stupid wonder gaze;
Whose potent talents serve his lawless will,
Which turns each virtue to a public ill,
With direful rage perverted might employs,
And heaven's great ends with heaven's best means destroys.
The praise of power is his, whose hand supplies
Fire to the bold, and prudence to the wise;
While man this only real merit knows,
Fitly to use the gifts which heaven bestows:
If savage valor be his vaunted fame,
The mountain-lion shall dispute his claim:
Or, if perfidious wiles deserve applause,
Through slighted vows, and violated laws;
The subtle plotter's title stands confessed,
Whose dagger gores the trusting tyrant's breast.
And sure the villain less deserves his fate,
Who stabs one wretch, than he who stabs a state.
Now, mighty hero! boast thy dear delights,
The price of toilsome days and sleepless nights;
Say, can thou aught in purple grandeur find,
Sweet as the slumbers of the lowly hind?
Better are ye, the youthful and the gay,
Who jocund rove through pleasure's flowery way!
Yet seek not there for bliss! your toil were vain,
(And disappointed toil is double pain)
Though from the living fount your nectar-bowls
Pour the soft balm upon your thirsty souls;
Though pure the spring, though every draught sincere,
By pain unbitter'd, and unpall'd by fear;
Though all were full as high as thought can soar,
Till fancy fires, and wishes crave no more:
Let lovely woman artless charms display,
Where truth and goodness bask in beauty's ray;
Let heavn'ly melody luxuriant float
In swelling sounds, and breathe the melting note;
Let generous wines enlivening thoughts inspire,
While social converse sooths the genial fire:
If aught can yet more potent charms dispense,
Some stronger rapture, some sublimer sense;
Be these enjoyed. -- Then from the crowd arise
Some chief, in life's full pride maturely wise.
Even you, my Lord, with titles, honors graced,
And higher still by native merit placed;
By stinted talents to no sphere confined,
Free ranging every province of the mind:
Equally fit, a nation's weight to bear,
Or shine in circles of the young and fair;
In grave debates instructed senates move,
Or melt the glowing dame to mutual love.
To heighten these, let conscious worth infuse
Sweet ease, and smiling mirth the inspiring Muse.
Then answer, thou of every gift possessed,
Say, from thy soul, art thou sincerely blessed!
To various subjects wherefore do thou range?
Pleasure must cease, ere man can wish to change.
Have thou not quitted Flaccus' sacred lay,
To talk with Bavius, or with Flavia play;
When wasted nature shuns the large expense
Of deep attention to exalted sense!
Precarious bliss! which soon, which often must cloy,
And which how few, how very few enjoy!
Say, is there aught, on which, completely blessed,
Fearless and full the raptured mind may rest?
Is there aught constant? Or, if such there be,
Can varying man be pleased with constancy?
Mark then what sense the blessing must employ!
The senses change, and loath accustomed joy:
Eden in vain immortal sweets displays,
If the taste sickens, or our frame decays.
The range of life contracted limits bound;
Yet more confined is pleasure's faithless round:
Fair opening to the sight, when first we run,
But, ah! how altered, when again begun!
When tired we view the same known prospect over,
And lagging, tread the steps we trod before.
Now clogged with spleen, the lazy current flows,
Through doubts, and fears, and self-augmenting woes;
Till sated, loathing, hopeless here of bliss,
Some plunge to seek it into death's abyss.
Of all superfluous wealth's unnumber'd stings,
The sharpest is that knowledge which it brings;
Enjoyment purchased makes its object known,
And then, alas! each soft illusion's flown:
Love's promised sweet, ambition's lofty scheme,
The painter's image, and the poet's theme.
These, in perspective fair exalted high,
Attract with seeming charms the distant eye;
But when by envious Fortune placed too near,
Misshapen forms, and grosser tints appear:
Where lovely Venus led her beauteous train,
Some fiend gigantic holds her monstrous reign;
Crowns, scepters, laurels are confusedly strow'd,
A wild, deformed, unmeaning, heavy load.
Some pleasures here with sparing hand are given,
That sons of earth should taste their promised heaven:
But what was meant to urge us to the chase,
Now stops, or sideway turns our devious race:
Though still to make the destined course more plain,
Thick are our erring paths beset with pain;
Nor has one object equal charms to prove
The fitting center of our restless love.
And when the great Creator's will had joined,
Unequal pair! the body and the mind,
Lest the proud spirit should neglect her clay,
He bad corporeal objects thought convey;
Each strong sensation to the soul impart
Ecstatic transport or afflicting smart:
By that enticed, the useful she enjoys;
By this deterred, she flies whatever destroys:
Hence from the dagger's point sharp anguish flows,
And the soft couch is spread with sweet repose.
In something frail, though general this design,
For some exceptions every rule confine:
Yet few were they, while nature's genuine store
Supplied our wants, nor man yet sought for more;
Ere different mixtures left no form the same,
And vicious habits changed our sickly frame.
Now subtle art may gild the venomed pill,
And bait with soothing sweets destructive ill.
To narrow self heaven's impulse unconfined
Diffusive reigns, and takes in all our kind.
The smile of joy reflected joy imparts;
The wretch's groans pierce sympathizing hearts.
Yet not alike are all conjoined with all,
Nor throng with rival heat to nature's call:
By varying instinct different ties are known,
While love superior points to each his own;
Those next the reach of our assisting hands,
And those to whom we are linked by kindred bands;
Those who most want, and best deserve our care,
In warmer streams the sacred influence share;
Ambrosial sweets her infant's lip distills,
While through the mother's heart quick rapture thrills.
The social fires friend, servant, neighbor claim,
Which blaze collected in the patriot's flame:
Hence Britain throbs superior in thy soul,
Nor idly wak'st thou for the distant pole.
Yet farther still the saving instinct moves,
And to the future wide extends our loves;
Glows in our bosom for an unborn race,
And warms us mutual to the kind embrace,
For this, to man was given the graceful air;
For this, was woman formed divinely fair.
But now to pleasure sensual views confined,
Reach not the use, for which it was designed;
To this one point our hopes, our wishes tend,
And thus mistake the motive for the end.
Whatever sensations from enjoyment flow,
Our erring thought to matter's force would owe;
To that ascribe our pleasures and our pains,
And blindly for the cause mistake the means;
In odorous meads the vernal gale we praise,
Or dread the storm, that blows the wintry seas;
While he is unheeded, who alone can move,
Claims all our fears, and merits all our love;
Alone to souls can sense and thought convey,
Through the dark mansions of surrounding clay.
Man, part from heaven, and part from humble earth,
A motley substance, takes his various birth;
Close linked to both, he hangs in different chains,
The pliant fetter lengthening as he strains.
If, bravely conscious of her native fires,
To the bold height his nobler frame aspires;
Near as she soars to join the approaching skies,
Our earth still lessens to her distant eyes.
But if o'erpois'd she sinks, her downward course
Each moment weighs, with still augmenting force;
Low and more low, the burdened spirit bends,
While weaker still each heavenly link extends;
Till prostrate, groveling, fettered to the ground,
She lies in matter's heap overwhelmed and bound.
Wrapped in the toils of sin, just heaven employs
What caused her guilt, to blast her lawless joys:
Love, potent guardian of our lengthening race,
Unnerves the feeble lecher's cold embrace;
And appetite, by nature given to save,
Sinks the gorged glutton in his early grave.
What sends yon fleet over boisterous seas to roll,
Beneath the burning line, and frozen pole?
Why ravage men the hills, the plains, the woods?
Why spoil all nature, earth, and air, and floods?
Seek they some prize to help a sinking state,
No! -- this must all be done, ere A Frenchman rendered famous by a most
extravagant expense in eating.
Bernard eat.
Tell it some untaught savage! with surprise
He asks, "How vast must be that giant's size!
"How great his power, who thousands can employ?
"How great his force, who millions can destroy?"
But if the savage would, more curious, know
What potent virtues from such viands flow,
What blessed effects they cause -- consult with Sloane,
Let him explain the colic, gout, and stone!
Pleasure's for use; it differs in degree,
Proportioned to the thing's necessity.
Hence various objects variously excite,
And different is the date of each delight;
But when the allotted end we once attain,
Each step beyond it, is a step to pain.
Nor let us murmur. -- Has not earth a store
For every want? it was not meant for more.
Blessed is the man, as far as earth can bless,
Whose measured passions reach no wild excess;
Who, urged by nature's voice, her gifts enjoys,
Nor other means, than nature's force, employs.
While warm with youth the sprightly current flows,
Each vivid sense with vigorous rapture glows;
And when he droops beneath the hand of age,
No vicious habit stings with fruitless rage;
Gradual, his strength, and gay sensations cease,
While joys tumultuous sink in silent peace.
Far other is his lot, who, not content
With what the bounteous care of nature meant,
With labored skill would all her joys dilate,
Sublime their sense, and lengthen out their date;
Add, blend, compose, each various mixture try,
And wind up appetite to luxury.
Thus guilty art unknown desires implants,
And viler arts must satisfy their wants;
When to corruption by himself betrayed,
Gold blinds the slave, whom luxury has made.
The hand, that formed us, must some use intend,
It gives us powers proportioned to that end;
And happiness may justly be defined,
A full attainment of the end designed.
Virtue and wisdom this alike implies,
And blessed must be the virtuous and the wise.
Bliss is ordained for all, since heaven intends
All beings should attain their destined ends:
For this the fair idea shines confessed
To every mind, and glows in every breast.
Compared with this, all mortal joys are vain;
Inspired by this, we restless onward strain.
High though we mount, the objects mount more high,
Eludes our grasp, and mingles with the sky.
With nothing less the aspiring soul's content,
For nothing less her generous flame was meant;
The unerring rule, which all our steps should guide,
The certain test, by which true good is tried.
Blessed when we reach it, wretched while we miss,
Our joys, our sorrows prove, there must be bliss.
Nor can this be some visionary dream,
Where heated fancy forms the flattering scheme.
There sure is bliss -- else, why by all desired?
What guileful power has the mad search inspired?
Could accident produce in all the same,
Or a vain shadow raise a real flame?
When nature in the world's distended space,
Or filled, or almost filled each smaller place;
Careful in meanest matter to produce
Each single motion for some certain use;
Hard was the lot of her first favorite, man,
Faulty the scheme of his contracted span,
If that alone must know an useless void,
And he feel longings never to be enjoyed.
That only can produce consummate joy,
Which equals all the powers it would employ;
Such fitting object to each talent given,
Earth cannot fit what was designed for heaven.
Why then is man with gifts sublimest fraught,
And active will and comprehensive thought?
For what is all this waste of mental force?
What! for a house, a coach, a dog, a horse?
Has nature's lord inverted nature's plan?
Is man now made for what was made for man?
There must be pleasures past the reach of sense,
Some nobler source must happiness dispense:
Reason, arise! and vindicate thy claim,
Flash on our minds the joy-infusing flame;
Pour forth the fount of light, whose endless store
Thought drinks insatiate, while it thirsts for more.
And thou, seraphick flame! who would inspire
The prophet's voice, and wrap his soul in fire;
Ray of the eternal beam! who can pervade
The distant past, and future's gloomy shade;
While trembling reason tempts heaven's dazzling height,
Sublime her force, and guide her dubious flight;
Strengthened by thee, she bears the streaming blaze,
And drinks new light from truth's immortal rays.
Great, only evidence of things divine!
By thee revealed, the mystic wonders shine!
What puzzled sophists vainly would explore,
What humbled pride in silence must adore,
What plainly marked in heaven's delivered page,
Makes the taught hind more wise than Greece's sage.
Yet reason proves thee in her low degree,
And owns thy truths, from their necessity.
Conspicuous now is happiness displayed,
Possessing him for whom alone we are made.
For he alone all human bliss compleats,
To him alone the expanding bosom beats;
Who fills each faculty, each power can move,
Exerts all thought, and deep absorbs all love;
Whose ceaseless being years would tell in vain,
Whose attributes immense all bounds disdain.
No sickly taste the heavenly rapture cloys,
Nor wearied senses sink in whelming joys
While, raised above low matter's grosser frame,
Pure spirit blazes in his purer flame.
Such are the immortal blessings that attend
The just and good, the patriot and the friend.
Nor such alone in distant prospect cheer,
They taste heaven's joys anticipated here.
These in the smiling cups of pleasure flow,
Or, mingling, sooth the bitter stream of woe;
These pay the loss of honors, and of place,
And teach that guilt alone is true disgrace;
These with the glorious exile cheerful rove,
And, far from courts, fresh bloom in Curio's grove.
Long may such bliss, by such enjoyed, attest,
The greatly virtuous are the greatly blessed!
Enough there are amidst yon gorgeous train,
Who, wretched, prove all other joys are vain.
So shines the truth these humble lines unfold,
"Fair virtue ever is unwisely sold."
Too mean a price sublimest fortune brings,
Too mean the wealth, the smiles, the crowns of kings
For raised over these, she makes our bliss secure,
The present pleasing, and the future sure.
While prosperous guilt a sad reverse appears,
And in the tasteless now, the future fears.
An EPISTLE to a LADY.
By the Same.
CLarinda, dearly loved, attend
The counsels of a faithful friend;
Who with the warmest wishes fraught,
Feels all, at least, that friendship ought.
But since by ruling heaven's design,
Another's fate shall influence thine;
O! may these lines for him prepare
A bliss, which I would die to share!
Man may for wealth or glory roam,
But woman must be blessed at home;
To this should all her studies tend,
This her great object and her end.
Distaste unmingled pleasures bring,
And use can blunt affliction's sting;
Hence perfect bliss no mortals know,
And few are plunged in utter woe;
While nature armed against despair,
Gives power to mend, or strength to bear;
And half the thought content may gain,
Which spleen employs to purchase pain.
Trace not the fair domestic plan,
From what you would, but what you can!
Nor, peevish, spurn the scanty score,
Because you think you merit more!
Bliss ever differs in degree,
Thy share alone is meant for thee;
And thou should think, however small,
That share enough, for it is thy all:
Vain scorn will aggravate distress,
And only make that little less.
Admit whatever trifles come,
Units compose the largest sum:
O! tell them over, and say how vain
Are those which form ambition's train:
Which swell the monarch's gorgeous state,
And bribe to ill the guilty great!
But thou more blessed, more wise than these,
Shall build up happiness on ease.
Hail sweet Content! where joy serene
Gilds the mild soul's unruffled scene:
And with blithe fancy's pencil wrought,
Spreads the white web of flowing thought;
Shines lovely in the cheerful face,
And clothes each charm with native grace;
Effusion pure of bliss sincere,
A vestment for a god to wear.
Far other ornaments compose
The garb that shrouds dissembled woes,
Piec'd out with motley dies and sorts,
Freaks, whimsies, festivals and sports;
The troubled mind's fantastic dress,
Which madness titles happiness.
While the gay wretch to revel bears
The pale remains of sighs and tears;
And seeks in crowds, like her undone,
What only can be found in one.
But, chief, my gentle friend! remove
Far from thy couch seducing love!
O! shun the false magician's art,
Nor trust thy yet unguarded heart!
Charmed by his spells fair honor flies,
And thousand treacherous phantoms rise
Where guilt in beauty's ray beguiles,
And ruin lurks in friendship's smiles.
Lo! where the enchanted captive dreams
Of warbling groves, and purling streams;
Of painted meads, of flowers that shed
Their odours round her fragrant bed.
Quick shifts the scene, the charm is lost,
She wakes upon a desert coast!
No friendly hand to lend its aid,
No guardian bower to spread its shade;
Exposed to every chilling blast,
She treads the inhospitable waste;
And down the drear decline of life,
Sinks a forlorn, dishonored wife.
Neglect not thou the voice of Fame,
But clear from crime, be free from blame!
Though all were innocence within,
It Is guilt to wear the garb of sin.
Virtue rejects the foul disguise:
None merit praise who praise despise.
Slight not, in supercilious strain,
Long practiced modes, as low or vain!
The world will vindicate their cause,
And claim blind faith in custom's laws.
Safer with multitudes to stray,
Than tread alone a fairer way;
To mingle with the erring throng,
Than boldly speak ten millions wrong.
Beware of the relentless train
Who forms adore, whom forms maintain!
Lest prudes demure, or coxcombs loud,
Accuse thee to the partial crowd;
Foes who the laws of honor slight,
A judge who measures guilt by spite.
Behold the sage Aurelia stand,
Disgrace and fame at her command!
As if heaven's delegate designed,
Sole arbiter of all her kind.
Whether she try some favored piece,
By rules devised in ancient Greece;
Or whether modern in her flight,
She tells what Paris thinks polite.
For much her talents to advance,
She studied Greece, and traveled France.
There learned the happy art to please,
With all the charms of labored ease;
Through looks and nods with meaning fraught,
To teach what she was never taught.
By her each latent spring is seen,
The workings foul of secret spleen;
The guilt that sculks in fair pretense,
Or folly veiled in specious sense.
And much her righteous spirit grieves,
When worthlessness the world deceives;
Whether the erring crowd commends
Some patriot swayed by private ends;
Or husband trust a faithless wife,
Secure in ignorance from strife.
Averse she brings their deeds to view,
But justice claims the rig'rous due;
Humanely anxious to produce
At least some possible excuse.
O never may virtue's dire disgrace
Prepare a triumph for the base!
Mere forms the fool implicit sway,
Which witlings with contempt survey,
Blind folly no defect can see,
Half wisdom views but one degree;
The wise remoter uses reach,
Which judgment and experience teach.
Whoever would be pleased and please,
Must do what others do with ease.
Great precept undefin'd by rule,
And only learned in custom's school;
To no peculiar form confined,
It spreads through all the human kind;
Beauty and wit and worth supplies,
Yet graceful in the good and wise.
Rich with this gift and none beside,
In fashion's stream how many glide?
Secure from every mental woe,
From treacherous friend or open foe;
From social sympathy that shares
The public loss or private cares;
Whether the barbarous foe invade,
Or merit pine in fortune's shade.
Hence gentle Anna ever-gay,
The same tomorrow as today,
Save where perchance, when others weep,
Her cheek the decent sorrow steep;
Save when perhaps a melting tale,
Over every tender breast prevail.
The good, the bad, the great, the small,
She likes, she loves, she honors all.
And yet if sland'rous malice blame,
Patient she yields a sister's fame.
Alike if satire or if praise,
She says whatever the circle says;
Implicit does whatever we do,
Without one point or wish in view,
Sure test of others, faithful glass
Through which the various phantoms pass.
Wide blank, unfeeling when alone,
No care, no joy, no thought her own.
Not thus succeeds the peerless dame,
Who looks, and talks, and acts for fame;
Intent, so wide her cares extend,
To make the universe her friend.
Now with the gay in frolic shines,
Now reasons deep with deep divines.
With courtiers now extols the great,
With patriots sighs over Britain's fate.
Now breathes with zealots holy fires,
Now melts in less refined desires.
Doomed to exceed in each degree,
Too wise, too weak, too proud, too free,
Too various for one single word,
The high sublime of deep absurd.
While every talent nature grants,
Just serves to show how much she wants.
Although in -- combine
The virtues of our sex and thine:
Her hand restrains the widow's tears,
Her sense informs, and sooths and cheers;
Yet like an angel in disguise,
She shines but to some favored eyes;
Nor is the distant herd allowed
To view the radiance through the cloud.
But thine is every winning art,
Thine is the friendly honest heart:
And should the generous spirit flow,
Beyond where prudence fears to go;
Such sallies are of nobler kind,
Than virtues of a narrow mind.
An EPISTLE to Mr. POPE.
By the Same.
HEAVEN in the human breast implants
Fit appetites for all our wants;
With hunger prompts to strengthening food,
With love of praise to public good;
These to their object straight convey,
While reason winds her tardy way.
Yet in one center should unite,
Faith, instinct, reason, appetite:
One perfect plan ordained to trace,
And nature dignify with grace;
In one great system meant to roll,
To move, support, and guide the whole.
But some there are who rigid blame
The mind that thirsts for righteous fame;
And with weak lights presumptuous scan
The springs which move predestined man.
And some there are, accursed their art,
Though all the nine their charms impart,
Who in false forms of great and just,
Cloth avarice, treachery, rage and lust:
As if superior beings suit
Those attributes which sink the brute.
But vainly chime the partial lays,
Chaste Fame rejects all spurious praise.
She, fairest offspring of the skies,
The goddess of the brave and wise,
Whose sacred impulse prompts the best
To succor and preserve the rest,
Is deaf to every private call,
And wakes but at the voice of all.
From heaps of ill-collected gain,
From hecatombs by heroes slain,
From courts where guilty greatness dwells,
She flys to penury and cells;
With Erskine, pious exile, goes,
To sooth a drooping father's woes;
Or mingling with the orphan-train,
She sings the bounties of Germain.
Nor power, nor policy of state,
Can ever give intrinsic weight:
And should fallacious art display
Over titled dross a golden ray,
Still baser through detecting years,
The speckled counterfeit appears.
But when from proof, far issuing forth,
The ore asserts its native worth;
Then, sovereign bard, it is justly thine
To stamp the well-attested coin;
And consecrated with thy name,
To treasure in the stores of Fame.
EPISTLE to POLLIO, from the Hills of HOWTH in IRELAND.
By the Same.
POLLIO! would thou condescend
Here to see thy humble friend,
Far from doctors, potions, pills,
Drinking health on native hills;
Thou the precious draught may share,
Lucy shall the bowl prepare.
From the brousing goat it flows,
From each balmy shrub that grows;
Hence the kidling's wanton fire,
Hence the nerves that brace his fire.
Vigorous, buxom, young and gay,
Thou like them shall love and play.
What, though far from silver Thames,
Stately piles, and courtly dames?
Here we boast a purer flood,
Joys that stream from sprightly blood;
Here is simple beauty seen,
Fair, and clothed like beauty's queen:
Nature's hands the garbs compose,
From the lilly and the rose.
Or, if charmed with richer dies,
Fancy every robe supplies.
Should perchance some highborn fair,
Absent, claim thy tender care;
Here, enraptured shall thou trace,
S -- 's shape, and R -- 's face;
While the waking dream shall pay,
Many a wishing hopeless day.
Domes with gold and toil unbought,
Rise by magic power of thought,
Where by artist's hand undrawn,
Slopes the vale, and spreads the lawn;
As if sportive nature meant,
Here to mock the works of Kent.
Come, and with thee bring along
Jocund tale and witty song,
Sense to teach, and words to move,
Arts that please, adorn, improve;
And, to gild the glorious scene,
Conscience spotless and serene.
Poor with all a H -- t's store,
Lives the man who pines for more.
Wretched he who doomed to roam,
Never can be blessed at home;
Nor retire within his mind,
From the ungrateful and unkind.
Happy they whom crowds befriend,
Cursed who on the crowd depend;
On the great one's peevish fit,
On the coxcomb's spurious wit;
Ever sentenced to bemoan
Others failings in their own.
If, like them, rejecting ease,
Hills and health no longer please;
Quick descend! -- Thou may resort
To the viceroy's splendid court.
There, indignant, shall thou see
Cringing slaves, who might be free,
Bribed, with titles, hope, or gain,
Tie their country's shameful chain;
Or, inspired by heaven's good cause,
Waste the land with holy laws:
While the gleanings of their power,
Lawyers, lordlings, priests devour.
Now, methinks, I hear thee say,
"Drink alone thy mountain-whey!
"Wherefore tempt the Irish shoals?
"Sights like these are nearer Paul's.
An ODE to WILLIAM PULTNEY, Esquire
By the Same.
I.
REMOTE from liberty and truth,
By fortune's crime, my early youth
Drank error's poisoned springs.
Taught by dark creeds and mystic law,
Wrapped up in reverential awe,
I bowed to priests and kings.
II.
Soon reason dawned, with troubled sight
I caught the glimpse of painful light,
Afflicted and afraid.
Too weak it shone to mark my way,
Enough to tempt my steps to stray
Along the dubious shade.
III.
Restless I roam'd, when from afar
Lo HOOKER shines! the friendly star
Sends forth a steady ray.
Thus cheered, and eager to pursue,
I mount, till glorious to my view,
LOCK spreads the realms of day.
IV.
Now warmed with noble SIDNEY'S page,
I pant with all the patriot's rage;
Now wrapped in PLATO'S dream,
With MORE and HARRINGTON around
I tread fair Freedom's magic ground,
And trace the flattering scheme.
V.
But soon the beauteous vision flies;
And hideous specter now arise,
Corruption's direful train:
The partial judge perverting laws,
The priest forsaking virtue's cause,
And senates slaves to gain.
VI.
Vainly the pious artist's toil
Would rear to heaven a mortal pile,
On some immortal plan;
Within a sure, though varying date,
Confined alas! is every state
Of empire and of man.
VII.
What though the good, the brave, the wise,
With adverse force undaunted rise,
To break the eternal doom!
Though CATO lived, though TULLY spoke,
Though BRUTUS dealt the godlike stroke,
Yet perished fated ROME.
VIII.
To swell some future tyrant's pride,
Good FLEURY pours the golden tide
On Gallia's smiling shores;
Once more her fields shall thirst in vain
For wholesome streams of honest gain,
While rapine wastes her stores.
IX.
Yet glorious is the great design,
And such, O PULTNEY! such is thine,
To prop a nation's frame.
If crushed beneath the sacred weight,
The ruins of a falling state
Shall tell the patriot's name.
An Ode to the Right Honorable the Lord LONSDALE.
By the Same.
I.
LONSDALE! thou ever-honour'd name,
For such is sacred virtue's claim,
Say, why! my noble friend!
While nature sheds her balmy powers
Over hill and dale, in leaves and flowers,
Say, why my joys suspend!
II.
Here spreads the lawn high-crown'd with wood,
Here slopes the vale, there winds the flood
In many a crystal maze;
The fishes sport, in silver pride
Slow moves the swan, on either side
The herds promiscuous graze.
III.
Or if the stiller shade you love,
Here solemn nods the imbow'ring grove
Over innocence and ease;
Whether with deep reflection fraught,
Or in the sprightly stream of thought,
The lighter trifles please.
IV.
Alluding to a certain scandalous libel.
And should the shaft of treacherous spleen
Glance venomed through this peaceful scene,
Unheeded may it fly.
Provoked, nor tempted to repay,
Though truth severer prompt the lay,
A mean prosaic lie.
V.
Here with the pheasant and the hare,
Unfearful of the human snare,
Have statesmen passed a day.
While far from yon forbidden gate,
Pale care and lank remorse await
Their slow-returning prey.
VI.
O! blind to all the joys of life,
Who seek them in the storm of strife,
Destroying, or destroyed.
Less wretched they, and yet unblessed,
Who batten in lethargic rest,
On blessings unenjoy'd.
VII.
But come, my friend, the sun invites,
For thee the town has no delights,
Distasted and aggrieved;
While fools believe, while villains cheat,
Too honest to approve deceit,
Too wise to be deceived.
VIII.
Or do thou fear lest dire disease
Again thy tortured frame may seize;
And have thou therefore stayed?
O! rather haste, where thou shall find
A ready hand, a gentle mind,
To comfort and to aid.
IX.
And while by sore afflictions tried,
You bear without the Stoic's pride,
What Stoic never bore;
O! may I learn like thee to bear,
And what shall be my destined share,
To suffer, not explore.
An ODE.
By the Same.
GENTLE, idle, trifling boy,
Sing of pleasures, sing of joy!
Well you paint the crystal spring,
Well the flowery meadow sing.
But beware with bolder flight,
Tempt not heaven's unequal height;
But beware! with impious strain,
Mock not freedom's hallowed train!
Sacred, here, O! ever be
Heaven, and heaven-born liberty!
Let the slaves of lawless sway,
Let the stupid flock obey!
Pent within a narrow fold,
Tied, and stripped, and slain, and sold.
Happier stars the brave befriend,
Britons know a nobler end.
Theirs it is to temper laws,
Theirs to watch in freedom's cause,
Theirs one common good to share,
Theirs to feel one common care;
In the glorious task combined,
From the monarch to the hind.
Yet O! cease not gentle boy!
Sing of pleasures, sing of joy!
Like thy brothers of the wing,
Idly hop, and chirp, and sing.
Heaven can nothing vain produce,
Every creature has its use.
Thine it is to sooth our toil,
Thine to make even wisdom smile.
Much they err who such despise,
Trifles please the truly wise.
An ODE.
By the Same.
I.
ON Stow, the Muse's happy theme,
Let fancy's eye enamored gaze;
Where through one nobly simple scheme,
Ten thousand varying beauties please.
There patriot-virtue rears her shrine,
Nor love! art thou deprived of thine.
II.
Mark where from POPE'S exhaustless vein,
Pure flows the stream of copious thought,
While nature pours the genial strain,
With fairest springs of learning fraught;
The treasures of each clime and age,
Grace and enrich his sacred page.
III.
So while through Britain's fields her Thames
Prolifick rolls his silver tide;
The tribute of a thousand streams
Swells the majestic river's pride;
And where his generous current strays,
The wealth of either world conveys.
IV.
Far other, is that wretch's song,
Whose scanty rill devoid of force,
With idle tinklings creeps along,
A narrow, crooked, dubious course;
Or foul with congregated floods,
Spreads a wide waste over plains, and woods.
V.
In action thus the mind expressed
High soars in Pope the true sublime;
A Stow unfolds a Cobham's breast,
A Bavius crawls in doggrel rhyme.
Through all their various works we trace
The greatly virtuous, and the base.
An ODE.
By the Same.
I.
TOO anxious for the public weal,
Awhile suspend the toilsome strife!
O think if Britain claim thy zeal,
Thy friends and Britain claim thy life!
II.
Thy generous, free, and active soul,
Inspired by glory's sacred flame,
Springs ardent to the distant goal,
And strains the weaker mortal frame.
III.
Happy whom reason deigns to guide,
Secure within the golden mean,
Who shuns the Stoic's senseless pride,
Nor wallows with the herd obscene.
IV.
He nor with brow severely bent,
Chides pleasure's smiling train away;
Nor careless of life's great intent,
With folly wastes each heedless day.
V.
But from the mountain's lofty height,
Now nature's mighty frame surveys;
And now descending with delight,
Along the humble valley strays.
VI.
So have I seen thee gain applause,
Though faction raged, from Britain's peers;
Then glorious in thy country's cause,
Go whisper love in Chloe's ears.
An ODE to MANKIND. Addressed to the Prince.
By the Same.
INTRODUCTION to the PRINCE.
NOR me the glories of thy birth engage,
With royal names to swell my pompous page:
Nor meaner views allure, in soothing lays
To court thy favor with officious praise.
Yet praise it is, thus to address thine ear
In strains no slave dare sing, no tyrant hear;
While warm for Britain's rights and nature's laws,
I call forth Britain's HOPE in freedom's cause:
Assert an empire which to ALL belongs,
And vindicate a world's long suffered wrongs.
These saving truths import thee most to know,
The links that tie the mighty to the low;
What now, our fellow-subject, is your due,
And, when our lord, shall be a debt on you.
O! may thou to the throne such maxims bring!
And feel the freeman while thou reign'st the king.
Far hence the tribe, whose servile arts delude,
And teach the great to spurn the multitude.
Are those unworthy of the royal heir,
Who claim the future monarch's duteous care?
Still may thy thoughts the godlike task pursue,
And to the many never prefer the few!
Still may thou fly thy fortune's specious friends,
Who deal forth sovereign grace to private ends;
In narrow streams divert the copious tide,
Exalt one sect, and damn the world beside;
While with false lights directing partial rule,
The lord of nations falls a party's tool.
Such there have been -- and such, in truth's despite,
Disgraced the cause of liberty and right.
But thou shall rise superior to their arts,
And fix thy empire in a people's hearts.
Nor hence may faction boast her favored claim,
Where selfish passions borow virtue's name:
Free government alone preserves the free,
And righteous rule is general liberty;
Their guiding law is freedom's native voice,
The public good defined by public choice;
And justly should the bold offenders fall,
Who dare invade the sovereign rights of all;
A king who proudly makes these claims his own,
Or they whose rage should shake a lawful throne.
From truths like these proceeds a right divine,
And may the power that raised, preserve thy sceptered line.
To MANKIND: An ODE.
I.
IS there, or do the schoolmen dream?
Is there on earth a power supreme,
The delegate of heaven?
To whom an uncontrolled command,
In every realm over sea and land,
By special grace is given?
II.
Then say, what signs this god proclaim?
Dwells he amidst the diamond's flame,
A throne his hallowed shrine?
The borrowed pomp, the armed array,
Want, fear, and impotence betray:
Strange proofs of power divine!
III.
If service due from human kind,
To men in slothful ease reclined,
Can form a sovereign claim:
Hail monarchs! ye, whom heaven ordains,
Our toils unshar'd, to share our gains,
Ye idiots, blind and lame!
IV.
Superior virtue, wisdom, might,
Create and mark the ruler's right,
So reason must conclude:
Then thine it is, to whom belong
The wise, the virtuous, and the strong,
Thrice sacred multitude!
V.
In thee, vast ALL! are these contained,
For thee are those, thy parts ordained,
So nature's systems roll:
The scepter's thine, if such there be;
If none there is, then thou art free,
Great monarch! mighty whole!
VI.
Let the proud tyrant rest his cause
On faith, prescription, force, or laws,
An host's or senate's voice!
His voice affirms thy stronger due,
Who for the many made the few,
And gave the species choice.
VII.
Unsanctify'd by thy command,
Unown'd by thee, the sceptered hand
The trembling slave may bind.
But loose from nature's moral ties,
The oath by force imposed belies
The unassenting mind.
VIII.
Thy will's thy rule, thy good its end;
You punish only to defend
What parent nature gave:
And he who dare her gifts invade,
By nature's oldest law is made
Thy victim or thy slave.
IX.
Thus reason founds the just decree
On universal liberty,
Not private rights resigned:
Through various nature's wide extent,
No private beings ever were meant
To hurt the general kind.
X.
Thee justice guides, thee right maintains,
The oppressor's wrong, the pilf'rer's gains,
Thy injured weal impair.
Thy warmest passions soon subside,
Nor partial envy, hate, nor pride,
Thy tempered counsels share.
XI.
Each instance of thy vengeful rage,
Collected from each clime and age,
Though malice swell the sum,
Would seem a spotless scanty scroll,
Compared with Marius' bloody roll,
Or Sylla's hippodrome.
XII.
But thine has been imputed blame,
The unworthy few assume thy name,
The rabble weak and loud;
Or those who on thy ruins feast,
The lord, the lawyer, and the priest;
A more ignoble crowd.
XIII.
Avails it thee, if one devours,
Or lesser spoilers share his powers,
While both thy claim oppose?
Monsters who wore thy sullied crown,
Tyrants who pulled those monsters down,
Alike to thee were foes.
XIV.
Far other shone fair Freedom's hand,
Far other was the immortal stand,
When Hampden fought for thee:
They snatched from rapine's gripe thy spoils,
The fruits and prize of glorious toils,
Of arts and industry.
XV.
On thee yet foams the preacher's rage,
On thee fierce frowns the historian's page,
A false apostate train:
Tears stream adown the martyr's tomb;
Unpitied in their harder doom,
Thy thousands strew the plain.
XVI.
These had no charms to please the sense.
No graceful port, no eloquence,
To win the Muse's throng:
Unknown, unsung, unmarked they lie;
But Caesar's fate o'ercasts the sky,
And Nature mourns his wrong.
XVII.
Thy foes, a frontless band, invade;
Thy friends afford a timid aid,
And yield up half thy right.
Even Lock beams forth a mingled ray,
Afraid to pour the flood of day
On man's too feeble sight.
XVIII.
Hence are the motly systems framed,
Of right transferred, of power reclaimed;
Distinctions weak and vain.
Wise Nature mocks the wrangling herd;
For unreclaim'd, and untransfer'd,
Her powers and rights remain.
XIX.
While law the royal agent moves,
The instrument thy choice approves,
We bow through him to you.
But change, or cease the inspiring choice,
The sovereign sinks a private voice,
Alike in one, or few!
XX.
Shall then the wretch, whose dastard heart
Shrinks at a tyrant's nobler part,
And only dares betray;
With reptile wiles, alas! prevail,
Where force, and rage, and priestcraft fail,
To pilfer power away?
XXI.
O! shall the bought, and buying tribe,
The slaves who take, and deal the bribe,
A people's claims enjoy!
So Indian murd'rers hope to gain
The powers and virtues of the slain,
Of wretches they destroy.
XXII.
"Avert it, heaven! you love the brave,
"You hate the treacherous, willing slave,
"The self-devoted head.
"Nor shall an hireling's voice convey
"That sacred prize to lawless sway,
"For which a nation bled."
XXIII.
Vain prayer, the coward's weak resource!
Directing reason, active force,
Propitious heaven bestows.
But never shall flame the thundering sky,
To aid the trembling herd that fly
Before the weaker foes.
XXIV.
In names there dwell no magic charms,
The British virtues, British arms
Unloos'd our fathers' band:
Say, Greece and Rome! if these should fail,
What names, what ancestors avail,
To save a sinking land?
XXV.
Far, far from us such ills shall be,
Mankind shall boast one nation free,
One monarch truly great:
Whose title speaks a people's choice,
Whose sovereign will a people's voice,
Whose strength a prosperous state.
VERSES to CAMILLA.
By the Same.
WEARIED with indolent repose,
A life unmixed with joys or woes;
Where all the lazy moments crept,
And every passion sluggish slept;
I wished for love's inspiring pains,
To rouse the loiterer in my veins.
The officious power my call attends,
He who uncalled his succor lends;
And with a smile of wanton spite,
He gave Camilla to my sight.
Her eyes their willing captive seize,
Her look, her air, her manner please;
New beauties please, unseen before,
Or seen, in her they please me more;
And soon, too soon, alas! I find
The virtues of a nobler kind.
Now cheerful springs the morning ray,
Now cheerful sinks the closing day;
For every morn with her I walked,
And every eve with her I talked;
With her I liked the vernal bloom,
With her I liked the crowded room;
From her at night I went with pain,
And longed for morn to meet again.
How quick the smiling moments pass,
Through varying fancy's mimick glass!
While the gay seen is painted over,
Where all was one wide blank before:
And sweetly soothed the enchanting dream,
Till love inspired a bolder scheme.
Camilla, stung with grief and shame,
Now marks, and shuns the guilty flame;
Fierce anger lightened in her face,
Then cold reserve assumed its place:
And soon, the wretch's hardest fate,
Contempt succeeds declining hate,
No more my presence now she flies,
She sees me with unheeding eyes;
Sees me with various passion burn,
Enraged depart, submiss return;
Return with flattering hopes to find
Soft pity move her gentle mind.
But ah! her looks were still the same,
Unmarked I went, unmarked I came;
Unmarked were all my hopes and fears,
While Strephon whispers in her ears.
O Jealousy! distracting guest!
Fly to some happy lover's breast;
Fitly with joy thou minglest care,
But why inhabit with despair?
To CLARISSA.
By the Same.
'TWAS when the friendly shade of night
Suspends the busy cares of light,
And on the various world bestows
Or sprightly joy, or calm repose.
With generous wine the glass was crowned,
And mirth, and talk, and toasts went round.
Clarissa came to bless the feast,
Clarissa dearly welcome guest.
Not such she looked as when by day
She blazes in the diamond's ray;
And adding to each gem a grace,
Give's India's wealth the second place.
But soft reclined in careless ease,
More pleasing, less intent to please.
Loose flowed her hair in wanton pride,
Her robe unbound, her zone untied;
Half bare to view her milk-white breast,
A slender veil scarce shades the rest:
Her eye with sparkling luster glows,
And wit in sweetest accent flows.
Now soothed the angel's voice I hear,
And drink in love at either ear;
Now stung with wilder rapture gaze,
While our eyes meet with blended rays;
And kindling in the infectious flame,
I feel what words want power to name.
Awaking from the silent trance,
Cautious I steal a broken glance;
In clamorous mirth each pang disguise,
And laughter swell with bursting sighs;
For Envy, pallid fiend, was there,
And Jealousy with watchful care.
Now ends the feast, each guest retires,
And with them all my soul desires
Clarissa goes. -- Ah! cruel fate!
She goes with her ill-sorted mate:
Sullen and slow he moves along,
And heavy hums a drowsy song.
O! drowsy may the monster lie,
And instant slumbers seal his eye!
So shall thou, best beloved, escape
The horrors of a legal rape.
Or, should the brutish instinct goad,
And thou must bear the unwelcome load;
If struggle, prayer, pretense be vain,
To shun what tyrant-laws ordain;
Ah sparing deal out scanty dues,
And keep whatever thou can refuse!
Ah! give no bounding pulse to beat,
No cheek to glow with genial heat!
No breast to heave in amorous play,
No limbs to twine, no hands to stray;
But sluggish press the joyless bed,
And lie in cold indiff'rence dead:
Nor let the blasting spoiler sip.
The fragrance of thy balmy lip!
To share with him the lover's part,
Were rank adultery of the heart.
But if, in chaster love's despite,
Warm nature catch the known delight;
While fierce desires tumultuous rise,
And rapture melts thy closing eyes;
Ah! be those joys for me designed,
And let me rush upon thy mind!
To me the burning kiss impart,
On me impress the humid dart,
For me unlock the nectar'd store,
Then sigh, and dream the transport over!
Thus with her loved idea fraught,
Delusive fancy charms my thought;
And joining in the flattering cheat,
Willing I hug the dear deceit;
From fiction real bliss receive,
And all I fondly wish believe;
Nor envy to a husband's arms,
The dull fruition of her charms.
But when, regardless of my truth,
She smiles on some more favored youth;
And while he whispers in her ears,
With more than wonted pleasure hears;
My jealous thought his voice supplies,
And reads perdition in her eyes.
Then torn with envy, love, and hate,
I wish her with her wedded mate.
An INSCRIPTION on the TOMB, Raised to the memory of the author's father, and
of others his ancestors.
By the Same.
Unmarked by trophies of the great and vain,
Here sleeps in silent tombs a gentle train.
No folly wasted their paternal store,
No guilt, no sordid avarice made it more;
With honest fame, and sober plenty crowned,
They lived and spread their cheering influence round.
May he whose hand this pious tribute pays,
Receive a like return of filial praise!
EPIGRAMS.
By the Same.
EPIGRAM I.
I Loved thee beautiful and kind,
And plighted an eternal vow;
So altered are thy face and mind,
'Twere perjury to love thee now.
EPIGRAM II.
SInce first you knew my amorous smart,
Each day augments your proud disdain;
'Twas then enough to break my heart,
And now, thank heaven! to break my chain.
Cease, thou scorner, cease to shun me!
Now let love and hatred cease!
Half that rigor had undone me,
All that rigor gives me peace.
EPIGRAM III.
MY heart still hovering round about you,
I thought I could not live without you;
Now we have lived three months asunder,
How I lived with you is the wonder.
EPIGRAM IV.
Upon the Bust of English worthies, at Stow.
AMONG these chiefs of British race,
Who live in breathing stone,
Why has not COBHAM'S bust a place?
The structure was his own.
EPIGRAM V.
THOUGH cheerful, discreet, and with freedom well bred,
She never repented an idle word said:
Securely she smiles on the forward and bold,
They feel what they owe her, and feel it untold.
EPIGRAM VI.
LIE on! while my revenge shall be,
To speak the very truth of thee.
EPIGRAM VII.
I Swore I loved, and you believed,
Yet, trust me, we were both deceived;
Though all I swore, was true.
I loved one generous, good, and kind,
A form created in my mind;
And thought that form was you.
EPIGRAM VIII. On Mrs. PENELOPE.
THE gentle Pen with look demure,
Awhile was thought a virgin pure:
But Pen, as ancient poets say,
Undid by night the work of day.
EPIGRAM IX.
On one who first abused, and then made love to a LADY.
FOUL -- with graceless verse,
The noble -- dared asperse.
But when he saw her well bespattered,
Her reputation stained and tattered;
He gazed and loved the hideous elf,
She looked so very like himself.
True sung the bard well known to fame,
Self-love and social are the same.
EPIGRAM X.
WHILE Lucy, chaste as mountain snows,
Gives every idle fop a hearing;
In Mary's breast a passion glows,
Which stronger is from not appearing.
Say, who has chose the better part!
Mary to whom no joy is missing;
Or she, who dupe to her own heart,
Pays the full price of Mary's kissing.
EPIGRAM XI.
SHE who in secret yields her heart,
Again may claim it from her lover;
But she who plays the trifler's part,
Can never her squandered fame recover.
Then grant the boon for which I pray!
It Is better lend than throw away.
EPIGRAM XII.
WE thought you without titles great,
And wealthy with a small estate;
While by your humble self alone,
You seem unrated and unknown.
But now on fortune's swelling tide
High-borne, in all the pomp of pride;
Of grandeur vain and fond of pelf,
It Is plain, my lord, you knew yourself.
EPIGRAM XIII.
LOvely shines thy wedded fair,
Gentle as the yielding air;
Cheering as the solar beam,
Soothing as the fountain-stream.
Why then, jealous husband, rail?
All may breathe the ambient gale,
Bask in heaven's diffusive ray,
Drink the streams that pass away.
All may share unless'ning joy,
Why then jealous, peevish boy?
Water, air, and light confine,
Ere thou think her only thine.
EPIGRAM XIV.
TOM thought a wild profusion great:
And therefore spent his whole estate:
Will thinks the wealthy are adored,
And gleans what misers blush to hoard.
Their passion, merit, fate the same,
They thirst and starve alike for fame.
EPIGRAM XV. To CLARISSA.
WHY like a tyrant will thou reign,
When thou may rule the willing mind?
Can the poor pride of giving pain
Repay the joys that wait the kind?
I curse my fond enduring heart,
Which scorned presumes not to be free,
Condemned to feel a double smart,
To hate myself, and burn for thee.
EPIGRAM XVI.
EVER busied, never employed,
Ever loving, never enjoyed,
Ever doomed to seek and miss,
And pay unblessed the price of bliss.
EPIGRAM XVI.
VAINLY has heaven denounced the woman's woes,
Thou know no tender cares, no bitter woes,
Unfelt your offspring comes, unfelt it goes.
The DANGER of Writing VERSE. An EPISTLE. First printed in the Year 1741.
By WILLIAM WHITEHEAD, Esquire
Quae poterant unquam satis expurgare cicutae,
Ni melius dormire putem, quam scribere versus?
HOR. Ep. 2. Lib. 2.
YOU ask me, sir, why thus by phantoms awed,
No kind occasion tempts the Muse abroad?
Why, when retirement sooths this idle art,
To fame regardless sleeps the youthful heart?
'Twou'd wrong your judgment, should I fairly say
Distrust or weakness caused the cold delay:
Hint the small difference, till we touch the lyre,
'Twixt real genius and too strong desire;
The human slips, or seeming slips pretend,
That rouse the critic, but escape the friend;
Nay which, though dreadful when the foe pursues,
You pass, and smile, and still provoke the Muse.
Yet, spite of all you think, or kindly feign,
My hand will tremble while it grasps the pen.
For not in this, like other arts, we try
Our light excursions in a summer sky,
No casual flights the dangerous train admits,
But wits once authors, are for ever wits.
The fool in prose, like earth's unwieldy son,
May often rise vigorous, though he is often overthrown;
One dangerous crisis marks our rise or fall,
By all we are courted, or we are shunned by all.
Will it avail, that unmatur'd by years,
My easy numbers pleased your partial ears,
If now condemned, my riper lays must bear
The wise man's censure, and the vain man's sneer?
Or, still more hard, even where he is valued most,
The man must suffer if the poet's lost;
For wanting wit, be totally undone,
And barred all arts for having failed in one.
When fears like these his serious thoughts engage,
No bugbear phantom curbs the poet's rage.
It Is powerful reason holds the streighten'd rein,
While fluttering fancy to the distant plain
Sends a long look, and spreads her wings in vain.
But grant for once, the officious Muse has shed
Her gentlest influence on his infant head,
Let fears lie vanquished, and resounding Fame
Give to the bellowing blast the poet's name.
And see! distinguished from the crowd he moves,
Each finger marks him, and each eye approves!
Secure, as halcyons brooding over the deep,
The waves roll gently, and the thunders sleep,
Obsequious nature binds the tempest's wings,
And pleased attention listens whilst he sings!
O blissful state, O more than human joy!
What shafts can reach him, or what cares annoy?
What cares, my friend? why all that man can know,
Oppressed with real or with fancied woe.
Rude to the world, like earth's first lord expelled,
To climes unknown, from Eden's safer field;
No more eternal springs around him breathe,
Black air scowls over him, deadly damps beneath;
Now must he learn, misguided youth, to bear
Each varying season of the poet's year:
Flatt'ry's full beam, detraction's wintry store,
The frowns of fortune, or the pride of power.
His acts, his words, his thoughts no more his own,
Each folly blazoned, and each frailty known.
Is he reserved? -- his sense is so refined
It never descends to trifle with mankind.
Open and free? -- they find the secret cause
Is vanity; He courts the world's applause.
Nay, though he speak not, something still is seen,
Each change of face betrays a fault within.
If grave, it is spleen; he smiles but to deride;
And downright aukwardness in him is pride.
Thus must he steer through fame's uncertain seas,
Now sunk by censure, and now puffed by praise;
Contempt with envy strangely mixed endure,
Feared where caressed, and jealous though secure.
One fatal rock on which good authors split
Is thinking all mankind must have their wit;
And the grand business of the world stand still
To listen to the dictates of their quill.
Hurt if they fail, and yet how few succeed,
What Is born in leisure men of leisure read;
And half of those have some peculiar whim
Their test of sense, and read but to condemn.
Besides, on parties now our fame depends,
And frowns or smiles, as these are foes or friends.
Wit, judgment, nature join; you strive in vain;
It Is keen invective stamps the current strain.
Fixed to one side like Homer's gods, we fight,
These always wrong, and those for ever right.
And would you choose to see your friend, resigned
Each conscious tie which guides the virtuous mind,
Embroiled in factions, hurl with dreadful skill
The random vengeance of his desperate quill?
Against pride in man with equal pride declaim,
And hide ill nature under virtue's name?
Or deeply versed in flattery's wily ways,
Flow in full reams of undistinguished praise?
To vice's grave, or folly's bust bequeath
The blushing trophy, and indignant wreath?
Qui nescit qualia demens
Aegyptus portenta colat? crocodilon adorat.
JUV. Sat. 15.
Like Aegypt's priests, did endless temples rise,
And people with earth's pests the offended skies?
The Muse of old her native freedom knew,
And wild in air the sportive wanderer flew;
On worth alone her bays eternal strow'd,
And found the hero, ere she hymn'd the god.
Nor less the chief his kind support returned,
No drooping Muse her slighted labors mourned;
But stretched at ease she pruned her growing wings,
By sages honored and revered by kings.
Even knowing Greece confessed her early claim,
And warlike Latium caught the generous flame.
Not so our age regards the tuneful tongue,
It Is senseless rapture all, and empty song:
No Pollio sheds his genial influence round,
No Varus listens whilst the groves resound.
Even those, the knowing and the virtuous few,
Who noblest ends by noblest means pursue,
Forget the poet's use; the powerful spell
Of magic verse, which SIDNEY paints so well,
Forget that Homer waked the Grecian flame,
That Pindar roused inglorious Thebes to fame,
That every age has great examples given
Of virtue taught in verse, and verse inspired by heaven.
But I forbear -- these dreams no longer last,
The times of fable and of flights are past.
To glory now no laureled suppliants bend,
No coins are struck, no sacred domes ascend.
Yet ye, who still the Muse's charms admire,
And best deserve the verse your deeds inspire,
Even in these gainful unambitious days,
Feel for yourselves at least, ye fond of praise,
And learn one lesson taught in mystic rhyme,
"'It Is verse alone arrests the wings of Time."
Bacon de augmentis.
Fast to the thread of life, annexed by Fame,
A sculptured medal bears each human name,
Over Lethe's streams the fatal threads depend,
The glittering medal trembles as they bend;
Close but the shears, when chance or nature calls,
The birds of rumor catch it as it falls;
Awhile from bill to bill the trifle's tossed,
The waves receive it, and it is ever lost!
But should the meanest swan that cuts the stream
Consigned to Phoebus, catch the favored name,
Safe in her mouth she bears the sacred prize
To where bright Fame's eternal altars rise.
It Is there the Muse's friends true laurels wear,
There Ptolemy Philadelphus.
Aegypt's monarch reigns, and great Augustus there.
Patrons of arts must live 'till arts decay,
Sacred to verse in every poet's lay.
Thus grateful France does Richlieu's worth proclaim,
Thus grateful Britain doats on Somers' name.
And, spite of party rage, and human flaws,
And British liberty and British laws,
Times yet to come shall sing of ANNA'S reign,
And bards, who blame the measures, love the men.
But why round patrons climb the ambitious bays?
Is interest then the sordid spur to praise?
Persius.
Shall the same cause, which prompts the chatt'ring jay
To aim at words, inspire the poet's lay?
And is there nothing in the boasted claim
Of living labors and a deathless name?
The pictured front, with sacred fillets bound?
The sculptured bust with laurels wreathed around?
The annual roses scattered over his urn,
And tears to flow from poets yet unborn?
Illustrious all! but sure to merit these,
Demands at least the poet's learned ease.
Say, can the bard attempt what is truly great,
Who pants in secret for his future fate?
Him serious toils, and humbler arts engage,
To make youth easy, and provide for age;
While lost in silence hangs his useless lyre,
And though from heaven it came, fast dies the sacred fire.
Or grant true genius with superior force
Bursts every bond, resistless in its course,
Yet lives the man, how wild soever his aim,
Would madly barter fortune's smiles for fame!
Or distant hopes of future ease forego,
For all the wreaths that all the Nine bestow?
Well pleased to shine, through each recording page,
The hapless Dryden of a shameless age?
Ill-fated bard! wherever thy name appears,
The weeping verse a sad memento bears.
Ah! what availed the enormous blaze between
Thy dawn of glory, and thy closing scene!
When sinking nature asks our kind repairs,
Unstrung the nerves, and silvered over the hairs;
When stayed reflection comes uncalled at last,
And gray experience counts each folly past,
Untuned and harsh the sweetest strains appear,
And loudest Paeans but fatigue the ear.
It Is true the man of verse, though born to ills,
Too often deserves the very fate he feels.
When, vainly frequent at the great man's board,
He shares in every vice with every lord:
Makes to their taste his sober sense submit,
And against his reason madly arms his wit;
Heaven but in justice turns their serious heart
To scorn the wretch, whose life belies his art.
He, only he, should haunt the Muse's grove,
Whom youth might reverence and gray hairs approve;
Whose heav'n-taught numbers, now, in thunder rolled,
Might rouse the virtuous and appal the bold.
Now, to truth's dictates lend the grace of ease,
And teach instruction happier arts to please.
For him would PLATO change their general fate,
And own one poet might improve his state.
Cursed be their verse, and blasted all their bays,
Whose sensual lure the unconscious ear betrays;
Wounds the young breast, ere virtue spreads her shield,
And takes, not wins, the scarce disputed field,
Though specious rhetoric each loose thought refine,
Though music charm in every labored line,
The dangerous verse, to full perfection grown,
BAVIUS might blush, and QUARLES disdain to own.
Should some MACHAON, whose sagacious soul
Traced blushing nature to her inmost goal,
Skilled in each drug the varying world provides,
All earth embosoms, and all ocean hides,
Nor cooling herb, nor healing balm supply,
Ease the swollen breast, or close the languid eye;
But, exquisitely ill, awake disease,
And arm with poisons every baleful breeze:
What racks, what tortures must his crimes demand,
The more than BORGIA of a bleeding land!
And is less guilty he, whose shameless page
Not to the present bounds its subtle rage,
But spreads contagion wide, and stains a future age?
Forgive me, Sir, that thus the moral strain,
With indignation warmed, rejects the rein;
Nor think I rove regardless of my theme,
It Is hence new dangers clog the paths to fame.
Not to themselves alone such bards confine
Fame's just reproach for virtue's injured shrine;
Profaned by them, the Muse's laurels fade,
Her voice neglected, and her flame decayed.
And the son's son must feel the father's crime,
A curse entailed on all the race that rhyme,
New cares appear, new terrors swell the train,
And must we paint them ere we close the scene?
Say, must the Muse the unwilling task pursue,
And to complete her dangers mention you?
Yes you, my friend, and those whose kind regard
With partial fondness views this humble bard:
Even you he dreads. -- Ah! kindly cease to raise
Unwilling censure, by exacting praise.
Just to itself the jealous world will claim
A right to judge; or give, or cancel fame.
And, if the officious zeal unbounded flows,
The friend too partial is the worst of foes.
Platonis Apologia.
Behold the ATHENIAN sage, whose piercing mind
Had traced the wily lab'rinths of mankind,
When now condemned, he leaves his infant care
To all those evils man is born to bear.
Not to his friends alone the charge he yields,
But nobler hopes on juster motives builds;
Bids even his foes their future steps attend,
And dare to censure, if they dared offend.
Would thus the poet trust his offspring forth,
Or bloomed our BRITAIN with ATHENIAN worth:
Would the brave foe the imperfect work engage
With honest freedom, not with partial rage,
What just productions might the world surprise!
What other POPES, what other MAROS rise!
But since by foes, or friends alike deceived,
Too little those, and these too much believed;
Since the same fate pursues by different ways,
Undone by censure, or undone by praise;
Since bards themselves submit to vice's rule,
And party-feuds grow high, and patrons cool:
Since, still unnam'd, unnumber'd ills behind
Rise black in air, and only wait the wind:
Let me, O let me, ere the tempest roar,
Catch the first gale, and make the nearest shore;
In sacred silence join the inglorious train,
Where humble peace, and sweet contentment reign;
If not thy precepts, thy example own,
And steal through life not useless, though unknown.
To the Honorable * * *
By the Same.
O CHARLES, in absence hear a friend complain,
Who knows thou love him whereso'er he goes,
Yet feels uneasy starts of idle pain,
And often would be told the thing he knows.
Why then, thou loiterer, fleets the silent year,
How dare thou give a friend unnecessary fear?
We are not now beside that osier'd stream,
Where erst we wandered, thoughtless of the way:
We do not now of distant ages dream,
And cheat in converse half the lingering day;
No fancied heroes rise at our command,
And no TIMOLEON weeps, and bleeds no THEBAN band.
Yet why complain? thou feel'st no want like these,
From me, it is true, but me alone debarred,
Thou still in GRANTA'S shades enjoy'st at ease
The books we reverenced, and the friends we shared;
Nor see without such aids the day decline,
Nor think how much their loss has added weight to thine.
Truth's genuine voice, the freely-opening mind,
Are thine, are friendship's, and retirement's lot;
To conversation is the world confined,
Friends of an hour, who please and are forgot;
And interest stains, and vanity controuls
The pure unsullied thoughts, and sallies of our souls.
O I remember, and with pride repeat
The rapid progress which our friendship knew!
Even at the first with willing minds we met,
And ere the root was fixed the branches grew,
In vain had fortune placed her weak barrier,
Clear was thy breast from pride, and mine from servile fear.
I saw thee generous, and with joy can say,
My education rose above my birth,
Thanks to those parent shades, on whose cold clay
Fall fast my tears, and lightly lie the earth!
To them I owe whatever I dare pretend,
Thou saw with partial eyes, and bade me call thee friend.
Let others meanly heap the treasured store,
And awkward fondness cares on cares employ
To leave a race more exquisitely poor,
Possessed of riches which they never enjoy:
He Is only kind who takes the noble way
T'unbind the springs of thought and give them power to play.
His heirs shall bless him, and look down with scorn
On vulgar pride from vaunted heroes sprung;
Lords of themselves, thank heaven that they were born
Above the sordid miser's glittering dung,
Above the servile grandeur of a throne,
For they are Nature's heirs, and all her works their own.
To Mr. GARRICK.
By the Same.
ON old PARNASSUS, to other day,
The Muses met to sing and play;
Apart from all the rest were seen
The tragic and the comic queen,
Engaged, perhaps, in deep debate,
On RICH'S, or on FLEETWOOD'S fate.
When, on a sudden, news was brought
That GARRICK had the patent got,
And both their ladyships again
Might now return to Drury Lane.
They bowed, they simper'd, and agreed
They wished the project might succeed,
'Twas very possible, the case
Was likely too, and had a face --
A face! Thalia titt'ring cried,
And could her joy no longer hide;
Why, sister, all the world must see
How much this makes for you and me;
No longer now shall we expose
Our unbought goods to empty rows,
Or meanly be obliged to court
From foreign aid a weak support;
No more the poor polluted scene
Shall teem with births of Harlequin;
Or vindicated stage shall feel
The insults of the dancer's heel.
Such idle trash we'll kindly spare
To operas now -- they will want them there;
For Sadler's-Wells, they say, this year
Has quite undone their engineer.
Pugh, you're a wag, the buskined prude
Replied, and smiled; besides it is rude
To laugh at foreigners, you know,
And triumph over a vanquished foe:
For my part, I shall be content
If things succeed as they are meant;
And should not be displeased to find
Some changes of the tragic kind.
And say, THALIA, may not we hope
The stage will take a larger scope?
Shall he whose all-expressive powers
Can reach the heights that SHAKESPEARE soars,
Descend to touch an humbler key,
And tickle ears with poetry;
Where every tear is taught to flow
Through many a line's melodious woe,
And heartfelt pangs of deep distress
Are fritter'd into similes?
-- O thou, whom nature taught the art
To pierce, to cleave, to tear the heart,
Whatever name delight thine ear,
OTHELLO, RICHARD, HAMLET, LEAR,
O undertake my just defense,
And banish all but nature hence!
See, to thy aid with streaming eyes
The fair afflicted Mrs. Cibber.
CONSTANCE flies;
Now wild as winds in madness tears
Her heaving breasts and scattered hairs;
Or low on earth disdains relief
With all the conscious pride of grief.
My PRITCHARD too in HAMLET'S queen --
The goddess of the sportive vein
Here stopped her short, and with a sneer,
My PRITCHARD, if you please, my dear!
Her tragic merit I confess,
But surely mine is her proper dress;
Behold her there with native ease,
And native spirit, born to please;
With all MARIA'S charms engage,
Or MILWOOD'S arts, or TOUCHWOOD'S rage,
Through every foible trace the fair,
Or leave the town, and toilet's care
To chaunt in forests unconfined
The wilder notes of ROSALIND.
O thou, wherever thou fix thy praise,
BRUTE, DRUGGER, FRIBBLE, RANGER, BAYS!
O join with her in my behalf,
And teach an audience when to laugh.
So shall buffoons with shame repair
To draw in fools at Smithfield fair,
And real humor charm the age,
Though Mr. Quin, inimitable in that character, who was then leaving the stage.
FALSTAFF should forsake the stage.
She spoke. MELPOMENE replied,
And much was said on either side;
And many a chief, and many a fair,
Were mentioned to their credit there.
But I Will not venture to display
What goddesses think fit to say.
However, GARRICK, this at least
Appears, by both a truth confessed,
That their whole fate for many a year
But hangs on your paternal care.
A nation's taste depends on you
-- Perhaps a nation's virtue too.
O think how glorious 'twere to raise
A theater to virtue's praise.
Where no indignant blush might rise,
Nor wit be taught to plead for vice:
But every young attentive ear
Imbibe the precepts, living there.
And every unexperienced breast
There feel its own rude hints expressed,
And, wakened by the glowing scene,
Unfold the worth that lurks within.
If possible, be perfect quite;
A few short rules will guide you right.
Consult your own good sense in all,
Be deaf to fashion's fickle call,
Nor ever descend from reason's laws
To court what you command, applause.
NATURE to Dr. HOADLY. On his Comedy of the SUSPICIOUS HUSBAND.
By the Same.
SLY hypocrite! was this your aim?
To borrow Paeon's sacred name,
And lurk beneath his graver mien,
To trace the secrets of my reign?
Did I for this applaud your zeal,
And point out each minuter wheel,
Which finely taught the next to roll,
And made my works one perfect whole?
For who, but I, till you appeared
To model the dramatic herd,
Ever bade to wondering ears and eyes,
Such pleasing intricacies rise?
Where every part is nicely true,
Yet touches still some master clue;
Each riddle opening by degrees,
'Till all unravels with such ease,
That only those who will be blind
Can feel one doubt perplex their mind.
Nor was it enough, you thought, to write,
But you must impiously unite
With GARRICK too, who long before
Had stole my whole expressive power.
That changeful Proteus of the stage
Usurps my mirth, my grief, my rage;
And as his different parts incline,
Gives joys or pains, sincere as mine.
Yet you shall find (however elate
You triumph in your former cheat)
It Is not so easy to escape
In Nature's as in Paeon's shape.
For every critic, great or small,
Hates every thing that is natural.
The beaus, and ladies too, can say,
What does he mean? is this a play?
We see such people every day.
Nay more, to chafe, and teize your spleen,
And teach you how to steal again,
My very fools shall prove you're bit,
And damn you for your want of wit.
The YOUTH and the PHILOSOPHER. A FABLE.
By the Same.
A Grecian Youth, of talents rare,
Whom Plato's philosophic care
Had formed for virtue's nobler view,
By precept and example too,
Would often boast his matchless skill,
To curb the steed and guide the wheel.
And as he passed the gazing throng,
With graceful ease, and smack'd the thong,
The idiot wonder they expressed
Was praise and transport to his breast.
At length quite vain, he needs would show
His master what his art could do;
And bade his slaves the chariot lead
To Academus' sacred shade.
The trembling grove confessed its fright,
The wood-nymphs startled at the sight,
The Muses drop the learned lyre,
And to their inmost shades retire!
However, the youth with forward air,
Bows to the sage, and mounts the car,
The lash resounds, the coursers spring,
The chariot marks the rolling ring,
And gathering crowds with eager eyes,
And shouts, pursue him as he flies.
Triumphant to the goal returned,
With nobler thirst his bosom burned;
And now along the indented plain,
The self-same track he marks again,
Pursues with care the nice design,
Nor ever deviates from the line.
Amazement seized the circling crowd;
The youths with emulation glowed;
Even bearded sages hailed the boy,
And all, but Plato, gazed with joy.
For he, deep-judging sage, beheld
With pain the triumphs of the field:
And when the charioteer drew nigh,
And, flushed with hope, had caught his eye,
Alas! unhappy youth, he cried,
Expect no praise from me, (and sighed)
With indignation I survey
Such skill and judgment thrown away.
The time profusely squandered there,
On vulgar arts beneath thy care,
If well employed, at less expense,
Had taught thee honor, virtue, sense,
And raised thee from a coachman's fate
To govern men, and guide the state.
An ODE to a GENTLEMAN, On his pitching a Tent in his GARDEN.
By the Same.
AH! friend, forbear, nor fright the fields
With hostile scenes of imag'd war;
Content still roves the blooming wilds,
And sheds her mildest influence there:
Ah! drive not the sweet wanderer from her seat,
Nor with rude arts profane her latest best retreat.
Are there not bowers, and sylvan scenes,
By nature's kind luxuriance wove?
Has Romely lost the living greens
Which erst adorned her artless grove?
Where through each hallowed haunt the poet strayed,
And met the willing Muse, and peopled every shade.
But now no bards thy woods among,
Shall wait the inspiring Muse's call;
For though to mirth and festal song
Thy choice devotes the woven wall,
Yet what avails that all be peace within,
If horrors guard the gate, and scare us from the scene?
It Is true of old the patriarch spread
His happier tents which knew not war,
And changed at will the trampled mead
For fresher greens and purer air;
But long has man forgot such simple ways,
Truth unsuspecting harm! -- the dream of ancient days.
Even he, cut off from human kind,
(Thy neighboring wretch) the child of Care,
Who to his native mines confined,
Nor sees the sun, nor breathes the air,
But 'midst the damps and darkness of earth's womb
Drags out laborious life, and scarcely dreads the tomb;
Even he, should some indulgent chance
Transport him to thy sylvan reign,
Would eye the floating veil askance,
And hide him in his caves again,
While dire presage in every breeze that blows
Hears shrieks and clashing arms, and all Germania's woes.
And doubt not thy polluted taste
A sudden vengeance shall pursue;
Each fairy form we whilom traced
Along the morn or evening dew,
Nymph, Satyr, Faun, shall vindicate their grove,
Robbed of its genuine charms, and hospitable Jove.
I see, all-arm'd with dews unblest,
Keen frosts, and noisome vapors drear,
Already, from the bleak north-east,
The Genius of the wood appear!
-- Far other office once his prime delight,
To nurse thy saplings tall, and heal the harms of night,
With ringlets quaint to curl thy shade,
To bid the infect tribes retire,
To guard thy walks and not invade --
O wherefore then provoke his ire?
Alas! with prayers, with tears his rage repel,
While yet the red'ning shoots with embryo-blossoms swell.
Too late thou wilt weep, when blights deform
The fairest produce of the year;
Too late thou wilt weep, when every storm
Shall loudly thunder in thy ear,
"Thus, thus the green-hair'd deities maintain
"Their own eternal rights, and Nature's injured reign."
On a MESSAGE-CARD in Verse. Sent by a LADY.
By the Same.
HERMES, the gamester of the sky,
To share for once mankind's delights,
Slipped down to earth, exceeding sly,
And bade his coachman drive to White's.
In form a beau; so light he trips,
You Would swear his wings were at his heels;
From glass to glass alert he skips,
And bows and prattles while he deals.
In short, so well his part he played,
The waiters took him for a peer;
And even some great ones whispering said
He was no vulgar foreigner.
Whatever he was, he swept the board,
Won every bett, and every game;
Stripped even the Rooks, who stamped and roared,
And wondered how the devil it came!
He wondered too, and thought it hard;
But found at last this great command
Was owing to one favorite card,
Which still brought luck into his hand.
The four of spades; whenever he saw
Its sable spots, he laughed at rules,
Took odds beyond the gaming law,
And Hoyle and Philidor were fools.
But now, for now 'twas time to go,
What gratitude shall he express?
And what peculiar boon bestow
Upon the cause of his success?
Suppose, for something must be done,
On Juno's self he could prevail
To pick the pips out, one by one,
And stick them in her peacock's tail,
Should Pallas have it, was a doubt,
To twist her silk, or range her pins;
Or should the Muses cut it out,
For bridges to their violins.
To Venus should the prize be given,
Superior beauty's just reward,
And against the next great rout in heaven
Be sent her for a message card.
Or hold -- by Jove, a lucky hit!
Your goddesses are arrant farces;
Go, carry it to Mrs. --
And bid her fill it full of verses.
The Je ne scai Quoi. A SONG.
By the Same.
I.
YES, I Am in love, I feel it now,
And CAELIA has undone me;
And yet I Will swear I cannot tell how
The pleasing plague stole on me.
II.
It Is not her face which love creates,
For there no graces revel;
It Is not her shape, for there the fates
Have rather been uncivil.
III.
It Is not her air, for sure in that
There Is nothing more than common;
And all her sense is only chat,
Like any other woman.
IV.
Her voice, her touch might give the alarm --
'Twas both perhaps, or neither;
In short, 'twas that provoking charm
Of CAELIA altogether.
An ODE On a distant Prospect of ETON COLLEGE.
By Mr. GRAY.
YE distant spires, ye antique towers,
That crown the watery glade,
Where grateful science still adores
Her HENRY'S holy shade;
And ye that from the stately brow
Of WINDSOR'S heights the expanse below
Of grove, of lawn, of mead survey,
Whose turf, whose shade, whose flowers among
Wanders the hoary Thames along
His silver-winding way.
Ah happy hills, ah pleasing shade,
Ah fields beloved in vain,
Where once my careless childhood strayed,
A stranger yet to pain!
I feel the gales, that from ye blow,
A momentary bliss bestow,
As waving fresh their gladsome wing,
My weary soul they seem to sooth,
And, redolent of joy and youth,
To breathe a second spring.
Say, father THAMES, for thou have seen
Full many a sprightly race
Disporting on thy margent green,
The paths of pleasure trace,
Who foremost now delight to cleave
With pliant arms thy glassy wave?
The captive linnet which enthrall?
What idle progeny succeed
To chase the rolling circle's speed,
Or urge the flying ball?
While some on earnest business bent
Their murmuring labors ply,
Against graver hours, that bring constraint
To sweeten liberty:
Some bold adventurers disdain
The limits of their little reign,
And unknown regions dare descry:
Still as they run, they look behind,
They hear a voice in every wind,
And snatch a fearful joy.
Gay hope is theirs by fancy fed,
Less pleasing when possessed;
The tear forgot as soon as shed,
The sunshine of the breast.
Theirs buxom health of rosy hue,
Wild wit, invention ever-new,
And lively cheer of vigor born;
The thoughtless day, the easy night,
The spirits pure, the slumbers light,
That fly the approach of morn.
Alas, regardless of their doom,
The little victims play!
No sense have they of ills to come,
No care beyond today:
Yet see how all around 'em wait
The ministers of human fate,
And black misfortune's baleful train!
Ah, show them where in ambush stand,
To seize their prey the murderous band,
Ah, show them they are men!
These shall the fury passions tear,
The vultures of the mind,
Disdainful anger, pallid fear,
And shame that sculks behind;
Or pineing love shall waste their youth,
Or jealousy with rank'ling tooth,
That inly gnaws the secret heart,
And envy wan, and faded care,
Grim-visag'd comfortless despair,
And sorrow's piercing dart.
Ambition this shall tempt to rise,
Then whirl the wretch from high,
To bitter scorn a sacrifice,
And grinning infamy;
The stings of falsehood those shall try,
And hard unkindness' altered eye,
That mocks the tear it forced to flow;
And keen remorse with blood defiled,
And moody madness laughing wild
Amidst severest woe.
Lo, in the vale of years beneath,
A griefly troop are seen,
The painful family of death,
More hideous than their queen:
This racks the joints, this fires the veins,
That every laboring sinew strains,
Those in the deeper vitals rage:
Lo, poverty, to fill the band,
That numbs the soul with icy hand,
And slow-consuming age.
To each his sufferings: all are men,
Condemned alike to groan,
The tender for another's pain;
The unfeeling for his own.
Yet ah! why should they know their fate!
Since sorrow never comes too late,
And happiness too swiftly flies.
Thought would destroy their paradise.
No more, where ignorance is bliss,
It Is folly to be wise.
ODE.
By the Same.
I.
LO! where the rosy-bosom'd hours,
Fair VENUS' train appear,
Disclose the long-expecting flowers,
And wake the purple year!
The ATTICK warbler pours her throat
Responsive to the cuckow's note,
The untaught harmony of spring:
While whispering pleasure as they fly,
Cool Zephyrs through the clear blue sky
Their gathered fragrance fling.
II.
Wherever the oak's thick branches stretch
A broader browner shade;
Wherever the rude and moss-green beech
O'er-canopies the glade;
Beside some water's rushy brink
With me the Muse shall sit and think
(At ease reclined in rustic state)
How vain the ardour of the crowd,
How low, how indigent the proud,
How little are the great!
III.
Still is the toiling hand of care:
The panting herds repose:
Yet hark, how through the peopled air
The busy murmur glows!
The insect youth are on the wing,
Eager to taste the honied spring,
And float amid the liquid noon:
Some lightly over the current skim,
Some show their gayly-gilded trim
Quick-glancing to the sun.
IV.
To Contemplation's sober eye
Such is the race of man:
And they that creep, and they that fly,
Shall end where they began.
Alike the busy and the gay
But flutter through life's little day,
In fortune's varying colors dressed:
Brushed by the hand of rough mischance,
Or chilled by age, their airy dance
They leave, in dust to rest.
V.
Methinks I hear in accents low
The sportive kind reply:
Poor moralist! and what art thou?
A solitary fly!
Thy joys no glittering female meets,
No hive have thou of hoarded sweets,
No painted plumage to display:
On hasty wings thy youth is flown;
Thy sun is set, thy spring is gone --
We frolic, while it is May.
ODE on the Death of a Favorite CAT, Drowned in a Tub of Gold Fishes.
By the Same.
I.
'TWAS on a lofty vase's side,
Where China's gayest art had died
The azure flowers, that blow;
Demurest of the Tabby kind,
The pensive Selima reclined,
Gazed on the lake below.
II.
Her conscious tail her joy declared;
The fair round face, the snowy beard,
The velvet of her paws,
The coat that with the tortoise vies,
Her ears of jet, and emerald eyes,
She saw; and purr'd applause.
III.
Still had she gazed: but 'midst the tide
Two beauteous forms were seen to glide,
The Genii of the stream;
Their scaly armour's Tyrian hue
Through richest purple to the view
Betrayed a golden gleam.
IV.
The hapless nymph with wonder saw:
A whisker first and then a claw
With many an ardent wish,
She stretched in vain to reach the prize.
What female heart can gold despise?
What cat's averse to fish?
V.
Presumptuous maid! with looks intent
Again she stretched, again she bent,
Nor knew the gulf between;
(Malignant Fate sat by and smiled)
The slippery verge her feet beguiled,
She tumbled headlong in.
VI.
Eight times emerging from the flood
She mewed to every watery god,
Some speedy aid to send.
No Dolphin came, no Nereid stirred:
Nor cruel Tom, nor Susan heard.
A favorite has no friend!
VII.
From hence, ye beauties undeceived,
Know, one false step is never retrieved,
And be with caution bold.
Not all that tempts your wandering eyes
And heedless hearts, is lawful prize;
Nor all, that glisters, gold.
A MONODY On the DEATH of Queen CAROLINE.
By RICHARD WEST, Esquire Son to the Chancellor of Ireland, and Grandson to Bishop
BURNET.
I.
SING we no more of HYMENEAL lays,
Nor strew the land with myrtles and with bays:
The voice of joy is fled the BRITISH shore,
For CAROLINE'S no more:
And now our sorrows ask a sadder string;
Come, plaintive goddess of the Cyrrhan spring,
Pour thy deep note, and shed thy tuneful tear,
And, while we lose the memory of pain
In thy oblivious strain,
-- Ah! drop thy cypress on yon mournful bier!
Begin: nor more delay
The sacred meed of gratitude to pay:
Begin: whatever immortal song can do,
To the dear name of CAROLINE is due:
Who loves the Muse, deserves the Muse's love:
Then raise thy numbers high,
Sound out her glory to the throne of Jove,
Spread the glad voice through all the ambient sky,
From the dull marble vindicate her praise,
And waft it down to lighten future days.
II.
Ye bards to come, the song of truth attend:
This, this is she, the Muse's judge and friend!
The royal female! whose benignant hand
Throughout fair ALBION'S land
Dealt every useful, every decent part,
Each MEMPHIAN science, and each ATTICK art:
Within the Muse's bower
She often was wont to lose the vacant hour,
Or underneath the sapient grot reclined,
Her soul to contemplation she resigned,
And for awhile laid down
The painful, envied burden of a crown:
Mean time thy rural ditty was not mute,
Sweet bard of MERLIN'S cave!
Though rude, thy ditty was of her, who gave
Thy voice to sing, and tuned thy oaten flute
In strains unwonted to the ear of swain:
As when the lark, ambitious of the skies,
Quits the low harvest of the golden plain,
Taught by the sun's inspiring warmth to rise,
Sublime in air he spreads his dappled wings,
Mounts the blue ether, and in mounting sings.
III.
But whither wanders the licentious song?
Such joyous notes to happier days belong!
Ah me! our happier days are now no more: --
Return, sad Muse: see pale BRITANNIA weep,
See all the sisters of the subject deep
Their sovereign's loss deplore!
See fond IERNE gives her sorrows vent,
And as she tunes her brazen lyre to woe,
Indulge her grief to flow! --
See even the northern ORCADES lament!
Nor ends the wailing here:
Wherever beneath our flag wild Ocean roars,
From farthest ORIENT to HESPERIA'S shores,
From torrid AFRIC to the world's cold end,
The BRITISH woes extend:
And every colony has dropped a tear.
IV.
O honored flood! with reeds Pierian crowned,
ISIS! whose argent waters glide along
Fair BELLOSITE'S Lycaean shades renowned,
Now aid my feeble song;
And call thy chosen sons, and bid them bring
Their lays of DORICK air,
With lenient sounds to steal awhile from care
The inconsolable King:
O! sooth his anguish, and compose his pains
With artful unimaginable strains,
According sweetly to the golden lyre,
Such as might half inspire
The iron breast of HADES to resign
Our lost, loved CAROLINE.
V.
These are thy glorious deeds, almighty Death!
These are thy triumphs over the sons of men,
That now receive the miserable breath,
Which the next moment they resign again!
Ah me! what boots us all our boasted power,
Our golden treasure, and our purpled state?
They cannot ward the inevitable hour,
Nor stay the fearful violence of Fate:
-- Virtue herself shall fail:
Else now, if virtue ever could prevail,
Death had not dared to violate the throne,
Nor had BRITANNIA heard her sovereign groan.
-- Ye nymphs! recall the song:
For heaven-born virtue does to heaven belong,
And scorns the meanest of her sons should die,
But opens him a passage to the sky;
Her rod ay-pointing to the eternal goal,
From the brute earth she frees the ardent soul;
Swift from the vulgar herd aloft she springs,
Spurns the moist clay, and soars on azure wings,
VI.
Then hence with sorrows vain:
Ye Theban Muses! elevate the strain:
Search over the records of immortal fame,
And high refulgent on the female line,
Imblaze in starry characters the name
Of BRITISH CAROLINE:
While sacred story rings with SHEBA'S praise,
While BERENICE'S virtues still inspire
The CYRENEAN lyre,
And GLORIANA blooms in SPENSER'S lays;
Thy name, great Queen, shall glow in every page,
Shall dwell in every clime, and live in every age.
When GEORGE shall go, where WILLIAM went before,
And all the present world shall be no more;
When the fond factions of unjust mankind,
The mean, the mad, the envious, and the blind,
Shall turn to worms and dust;
Then Time, impartial judge, that states the price
Of each man's virtue, and of each man's vice,
From thy bright fame shall clear the cank'ring rust;
And O! the Muses ever shall be just.
VII.
But lo! what sudden radiance gilds the skies?
It Is Gratitude descending from above,
Known by the sweetness of her dove-like eyes,
Daughter of truth and universal love!
To HENRY'S sacred dome she wafts along,
And on thy tomb she pours
Celestial sweets and aramanthine flowers:
The old, the young, the rich, the wretched crowd
Numerous around her, and with accents loud
Raise the mixed voice, and pour the grateful song:
"Hail Queen adorned by nature and by art!
"Thine was each virtue of the head and heart;
"Thy people blessed thee, and thy children loved,
"And thy King honored, and thy God approved,"
VIII.
But here my labors cease:
It Is time the foaming courser to release.
And thou, O royal shade,
Forgive the Muse that these vain honors paid;
A Muse as yet unheeded and unknown;
That dares to sacrifice to truth alone,
Not prone to blame, not hasty to commend,
No foe unjust, no mercenary friend,
No sensual bosom, no ungenerous mind,
And though not virtuous, virtuously inclined.
A PIPE of TOBACCO In Imitation of Six Several AUTHORS.
IMITATION I. A NEW YEAR'S ODE.
RECITATIVO.
OLD battle-array, big with horror is fled,
And olive-rob'd peace again lifts up her head.
Sing, ye Muses, TOBACCO, the blessing of peace;
Was ever a nation so blessed as this?
AIR.
When summer suns grow red with heat,
TOBACCO tempers Phoebus' ire,
When wintry storms around us beat,
TOBACCO cheers with gentle fire.
Yellow autumn, youthful spring,
In thy praises jointly sing.
RECITATIVO.
Like NEPTUNE, CAESAR guards VIRGINIAN fleets,
Fraught with TOBACCO'S balmy sweets;
Old Ocean trembles at BRITANNIA'S power,
And BOREAS is afraid to roar.
AIR.
Happy mortal! he who knows
Pleasure which a PIPE bestows;
Curling eddies climb the room,
Wafting round a mild perfume.
RECITATIVO.
Let foreign climes the vine and orange boast,
While wastes of war deform the teeming coast;
BRITANNIA, distant from each hostile sound,
Enjoys a PIPE, with ease and freedom crowned;
Even restless faction finds itself most free,
Or if a slave, a slave to liberty.
AIR.
Smiling years that gayly run
Round the zodiac with the sun,
Tell, if ever you have seen
Realms so quiet and serene.
BRITISH sons no longer now
Hurl the bar, or twang the bow,
Nor of crimson combat think,
But securely smoke and drink.
CHORUS.
Smiling years, that gayly run
Round the zodiac with the sun,
Tell, if ever you have seen
Realms so quiet and serene.
IMITATION II.
LITTLE tube of mighty power,
Charmer of an idle hour,
Object of my warm desire,
Lip of wax, and eye of fire:
And thy snowy taper waist,
With my finger gently braced;
And thy pretty swelling crest,
With my little stopper pressed,
And the sweetest bliss of blisses,
Breathing from thy balmy kisses.
Happy thrice, and thrice again,
Happiest he of happy men;
Who when again the night returns,
When again the taper burns;
When again the cricket's gay,
(Little cricket, full of play)
Can afford his tube to feed
With the fragment INDIAN weed:
Pleasure for a nose divine,
Incense of the god of wine.
Happy thrice, and thrice again,
Happiest he, of happy men.
IMITATION III.
O Thou, matur'd by glad Hesperian suns,
TOBACCO, fountain pure of limpid truth,
That looks the very soul; whence pouring thought
Swarms all the mind; absorpt is yellow care,
And at each puff imagination burns:
Flash on thy bard, and with exalting fires
Touch the mysterious lip that chaunts thy praise,
In strains to mortal sons of earth unknown.
Behold an engine, wrought from tawny mines
Of ductile clay, with plastic virtue formed,
And glazed magnifick over, I grasp, I fill.
From PAETOTHEKE with pungent powers perfumed
Itself one tortoise, all, where shines imbibed
Each parent ray; then rudely ram'd illume,
With the red touch of zeal-enkindling sheet,
Marked with Gibsonian lore; forth issue clouds,
Thought-thrilling, thirst-inciting clouds around,
And many-mining fires: I all the while,
Lolling at ease, inhale the breezy balm.
But chief, when Bacchus wont with thee to join,
In genial strife and orthodoxal ale,
Stream life and joy into the Muse's bowl.
Oh be thou still my great inspirer, thou
My Muse; oh fan me with thy zephyrs boon,
While I, in clouded tabernacle shrin'd,
Burst forth all oracle and mystic song.
IMITATION IV.
CRITICS avaunt; TOBACCO is my theme;
Tremble like hornets at the blasting steam.
And you, court-insects, flutter not too near
Its light, nor buzz within the scorching sphere.
POLLIO, with flame like thine, my verse inspire,
So shall the Muse from smoke elicit fire.
Coxcombs prefer the tickling sting of snuff;
Yet all their claim to wisdom is -- a puff:
Lord FOPLIN smokes not -- for his teeth afraid:
Sir TAWDRY smokes not -- for he wears brocade.
Ladies, when pipes are brought, affect to swoon;
They love no smoke, except the smoke of town;
But courtiers hate the puffing tribe, -- no matter,
Strange if they love the breath that cannot flatter!
Its foes but show their ignorance; can he
Who scorns the leaf of knowledge, love the tree?
The tainted templar (more prodigious yet)
Rails at TOBACCO, though it makes him -- spit.
CRITONIA vows it has an odious stink;
She will not smoke (ye gods!) -- but she will drink:
And chaste PRUDELIA (blame her if you can)
Says, pipes are used by that vile creature Man:
Yet crowds remain, who still its worth proclaim,
While some for pleasure smoke, and some for fame:
Fame, of our actions universal spring,
For which we drink, eat, sleep, smoke -- every thing.
IMITATION V.
BLESSED leaf! whose aromatic gales dispense
To templars modesty, to parsons sense:
So raptured priests, at famed DODONA'S shrine
Drank inspiration from the steam divine.
Poison that cures, a vapor that affords
Content, more solid than the smile of lords:
Rest to the weary, to the hungry food,
The last kind refuge of the WISE and GOOD.
Inspired by thee, dull cits adjust the scale
Of Europe's peace, when other statesmen fail.
By thee protected, and thy sister, beer,
Poets rejoice, nor think the bailiff near.
Nor less the critic owns thy genial aid,
While supperless he plies the piddling trade.
What though to love and soft delights a foe,
By ladies hated, hated by the beau,
Yet social freedom, long to courts unknown,
Fair health, fair truth, and virtue are thy own.
Come to thy poet, come with healing wings,
And let me taste thee unexcis'd by kings.
IMITATION VI.
BOY! bring an ounce of FREEMAN'S best,
And bid the vicar be my guest:
Let all be placed in manner due,
A pot wherein to spit or spue,
And London Journal, or Free-Briton,
Of use to light a pipe, or * *
* * * * * * * * *
* * * * * * * * *
This village, unmolested yet
By troopers shall be my retreat:
Who cannot flatter, bribe, betray;
Who cannot write or vote for *.
Far from the vermin of the town,
Here let me rather live, my own,
Doze over a pipe, whose vapor bland
In sweet oblivion lulls the land;
Of all which at Vienna passes,
As ignorant * * Brass is:
And scorning rascals to caress,
Extol the days of good Queen BESS,
When first TOBACCO blessed our isle,
Then think of other Queens -- and smile.
Come jovial pipe, and bring along
Midnight revelry and song;
The merry catch, the madrigal,
That echoes sweet in City Hall;
The parson's pun, the smutty tale
Of country justice over his ale.
I ask not what the French are doing,
Or Spain to compass Britain's ruin:
Britons, if undone, can go,
Where TOBACCO loves to grow.
ODE to the Hon. C. Y.
By the Same.
CHARLES, son of York, who on the mercy-seat
Of justice states the bounds of right and wrong;
Not like the vulgar law-bewilder'd throng,
Who in the maze of error, hope to meet
Truth, or hope rather to delude with lies
And airy phantoms, under truth's disguise.
Some wrapped in precedents, or points decreed,
Or lop or stretch the laws to forms precise:
Some, who the pedantry of rules despise,
Plain sense adopt, from legal fetters freed;
Sense without science, fleeting, unconfined,
Is empty guess, and shifts with every wind.
But he, thy sire, with more discerning toil,
Ranged the wide field, sagacious to explore
Where lay dispersed or hid the precious ore;
Then formed into a whole the gathered spoil,
Law, reason, equity, which now unite,
Reflecting each on each a friendly light.
Blessed in a guide, a pattern so complete,
Tread, as thou do his footsteps; for not rude
Thy genius, not uncultur'd, unsubdu'd.
Yet there are intervals and seasons meet,
To smooth the brow of thought; nor thou disdain
Fit hour of vacance with the Muse's train.
Let meaner spirits, cast in common mould,
Who feed on husks of learned lore, refuse
To hear the lessons of the warbling Muse;
Nor know that bards, the lawgivers of old,
By soothing song to moral truth beguiled
Man, till then fierce, a lawless race, and wild.
What means the lyre, by which the fabled sage
Drew beasts to listen, and made rocks advance
Around him as he played, in mystic dance?
What, but the Muse? who softened human rage.
Parent of concord, she prepared the plan
Of social life, and man attun'd to man.
She taught the sphere to move in fair array,
Each in their orbits heark'ning to her strain;
Else would they wander over the etherial plain
Licentious, but that she directs their way:
She awed to temper, by her magic spell,
The warring elements, and powers of hell.
They err, who think the MUSES not allied
To THEMIS; both are of celestial birth:
Both give peace, order, harmony to earth;
Both by one heavenly fountain are supplied;
And men and angels hymn, in general quire,
What law ordains, and what the NINE inspire.
From CAELIA to CLOE.
By the Same.
I Rural life enjoy, the town's your taste,
In this we differ, twins in all the rest.
Yet when the dog star brings diseases on,
And each fond mother trembles for her son;
Now when the Mall's forlorn, the beaux and belles
All for retirement crowd to Tunbridge-Wells;
Say, will not CLOE for awhile withdraw
From dear Vaux-hall and charming Ranelagh?
Sure at this homely hutt one may contrive
Awhile not only to exist, but live;
For not dull landscapes here my thoughts engross,
Woods, lawns, and rills, and grottoes green with moss.
No, the same appetite that courts infuse,
Haunts in retreat, and to the shade pursues.
Here all my care are to receive and pay
Visits, my studies a romance or play.
And then to pass the live-long Sunday off,
Walks or a ride, nay church serves well enough.
At church, one has a chance to see cockades,
Lured thither in pursuit of country-maids:
Or tall Hibernian smit with fond desire
To wed the only daughter of a squire.
Cards have their turn, to kill a tedious hour,
If balked of whist, piquette is in my power;
For often the captain, fresh from town, bestows
A friendly week upon his friend my spouse.
Then gaily glide the days on downy feet,
For sure the captain has prodigious wit;
O I could hear his sweet discourse for ever,
Of all that is done, and who and who is together,
Often far and wide for new delights I range,
True sex, and constant to the love of change.
Is there within ten miles a troop reviewed,
An auction of old goods, an interlude
By strolling players, an horse-race, or a ball!
There to be seen I have an urgent call.
The labors of the plough are then forgot,
And THOMAS mounts the box in liv'ry coat.
Scenes odd as these, if CLOE can endure,
(And yet these scenes are town in miniature)
Come, and reflect on Ranelagh with scorn,
Content even here, at least till routs return.
ON A FIT of the GOUT.
By the Same.
WHerefore was man thus formed with eye sublime,
With active joints, to traverse hill or plain,
But to contemplate nature in her prime,
Lord of this ample world, his fair domain?
Why on this various earth such beauty poured,
But for thy pleasure, man, her sovereign lord?
Why does the mantling vine her juice afford
Nectareous, but to cheer with cordial taste?
Why are the earth and air and ocean stored
With beast, fish, fowl; if not for man's repast!
Yet what avails to me, or taste, or sight,
Exiled from every object of delight?
So much I feel of anguish, day and night
Tortured, benumbed; in vain the fields to range
Me vernal breezes, and mild suns invite:
In vain the banquet smokes with kindly change
Of delicacies, while on every plate
Pain lurks in ambush, and alluring fate.
Fool not to know the friendly powers create
These maladies in pity to mankind;
These abdicated reason reinstate,
When lawless appetite usurps the mind;
Heaven's faithful centries at the door of bliss
Placed to deter, or to chastise excess.
Weak is the aid of wisdom to repress
Passion perverse; philosophy how vain!
Against Circe's cup, enchanting sorceress;
Or when the Siren sings her warbling strain.
Whatever or sages teach, or bards reveal,
Men still are men, and learn but when they feel.
As in some free and well-pois'd commonweal
Sedition warns the rulers how to steer,
As storms and thunders rattling with loud peal,
From noxious dregs the dull horizon clear;
So when the mind imbrutes in sloth supine,
Sharp pangs awake her energy divine.
Cease, then, ah cease, fond mortal, to repine
At laws, which nature wisely did ordain;
Pleasure, what is it? rightly to define,
It Is but a short lived interval from pain:
Or rather each alternately renewed,
Give to our lives a sweet vicissitude.
HORACE, Ode 14. Book I. imitated in 1746.
By the Same.
O Ship! shall new waves again bear thee to sea?
Where, alas! art thou driving? keep steady to shore.
Thy sides are left without an oar,
And thy shaken mast groans, to rude tempests a prey.
Thy tackle all torn, can no longer endure
The assaults of the surge that now triumphs and reigns,
None of thy sails entire remains,
Nor a GOD to protect in another sad hour.
Though thy outside bespeaks thee of noble descent,
The forest's chief pride, yet thy race and thy name,
What are they but an empty name?
Wise mariners trust not to gilding and paint.
Beware then lest Thou float, uncertain again,
The sport of wild winds; late my sorrowful care,
And now my fondest wish, beware
Of the changeable shoals where the Rhine meets the Main.
The Female Right to LITERATURE, in a Letter to a young Lady from FLORENCE.
By --
WHilst you, ATHENIA, with assiduous toil
Reap the rich fruits of learning's fertile soil;
Now search whatever historick truth has shown,
And make the wealth of ages past your own;
Now crop the blossoms of poetic flowers,
And range delighted in the Muses bowers;
Say, will the sweetest of her sex attend
To lines by friendship, not by by flattery penned;
To lines which tempt not worth with empty praise;
But to still greater height that worth would raise;
To lines which dare against a world decide,
And stem the rage of custom's rapid tide!
Come then, ATHENIA, freely let us scan
The coward insults of that tyrant, man.
Self-prais'd, and grasping at despotick power,
He looks on slavery as the female dower;
To Nature's boon ascribes what force has given,
And usurpation deems the gift of heaven.
See the first-peopled East, where ASIA sheds
Her balmy spices over her fertile meads:
There, while the ASSYRIAN stretched his wide domain
From distant Indus to the Cyprian main,
All nature's laws by impious force were broke;
The female sex to slav'ry's galling yoke
Bowed their fair necks: from social life confined,
And all the exertions of the enlightened mind,
Closed in a proud Seraglio's wanton bowers,
The dalliance of a tyrant's looser hours.
By kings' examples subjects form their lives,
Dependent satraps had their train of wives;
Proportioned power each petty tyrant craves,
And each poor female was the slave of slaves.
When PERSIA next o'erturn'd the Assyrian throne,
Destroyed her tyranny and fixed its own;
The fair distressed no milder treatment saw,
This was indeed the unalterable law.
In future times, whatever masters came,
Tyrants were changed, but tyranny the same:
At length to accumulate the female woes,
The grand impostor MAHOMET arose;
Swollen with prophetic lies, he laid his plan
On the firm basis of the pride of man;
"Women, the toys of men, and slaves of lust,
"Are but mere moulds to form man's outward crust;
"The heavenly spark, that animates the clay,
"Of the prime essence that effulgent ray,
"The immortal soul is all to man confined,
"Not meanly squandered on weak womankind."
Accursed wretch! by hell's black council driven
Thus to debase the fairest work of heaven.
And could Religion rear her sacred head
Fraught with such doctrines? could such errors spread
From western TANGIER, and the sunburned Moor,
To the cold TARTAR'S ever-frozen shore?
Even GREECE too not exempt, GREECE, once the seat
Where Sense and Freedom held the reins of state;
Where Force was Reason's handmaid; where the bands
Of Love and Friendship joined the wedded hands;
Where flourished once, and flourish still in fame
The ATHENIAN matron, and the SPARTAN dame.
In ROME too Liberty once reigned, in ROME
The female virtues were allowed to bloom,
And bloom they did: when CANNAE'S fatal plain
Was heaped with mountains of the Roman slain,
Was there a matron wept her children dead?
Was there a matron wept not those that fled?
Then when each rumor seemed the voice of fate,
And spoke the victor thundering at their gate,
Was there one mentioned peace? did they not pour
Their wealth, their jewels to the public store,
In emulous haste all pressing to be poor?
Alas how changed! how are the mighty sunk,
From the firm Patriot to the whining Monk!
Where Industry secured the public good,
Where censors, consuls, and dictators plough'd.
Now lazy zealots batten on the spoil,
And consecrated Sloth devours the farmer's toil.
But oh still worse! where Love and Friendship shone,
Domestic Tyranny has fixed his throne,
With all his train of monsters: at his side
Swollen with self-flatteries sits stiff-neck'd Pride;
Two twin-born fiends his other ear engage,
Heart-canker'd Jealousy, and fire-ey'd Rage;
In front, his empire's sole support and source,
Rattling chains, bars and locks, stalks brutal Force;
Whilst pale and shrivel'd, crouch'd beneath the chair,
Lies sneaking, conscious Worthlessness; and near
Squint-eyed Suspicion lurks, with self-distracting Fear.
Hail, happy BRITAIN, dear parental land,
Where Liberty maintains her latest stand!
Oh while amidst tyrannick realms I rove,
Enamored let me pour my filial love
Into thy bosom. When the raven wings
Of darkness hover over me, when the springs
Of every outward sense are shut, my soul
Thee often revisits, often without control
Ranges thy fields delighted, and inhales
Friendship's pure joys, and Freedom's healthful gales.
But say, BRITANNIA, do thy sons, who claim
A birthright liberty, dispense the same
In equal scales? Why then does Custom bind
In chains of Ignorance the female mind?
Why is to them the bright etherial ray
Of science veiled? Why does each pedant say,
"Shield me, propitious powers, nor clog my life
"With that supreme of plagues a learned wife.
"'It Is man's, with science to expand the soul,
"And wing his eagle-flight from pole to pole;
"'It Is his to pierce antiquity's dark gloom,
"And the still thicker shades of times to come;
"'It Is his to guide the ponderous helm of state,
"And bear alone all wisdom's solid weight.
"Let woman with alluring graces move
"The fondling passions and the baby love;
"Be this our only science, be her doom
"Fixed to the toilette, the spinnet and loom."
Tongue-doughty pedant, was ATHENIA'S soul
Formed for these only? Bring the exactest rule
Of judgment to the trial, prove that ever
Thy school-proud tribe engrossed a greater share
Of mental excellence; though vernal Youth
Justs swell her lovely bosom, yet blessed Truth,
Offspring of Sense and Industry, has there
Long fixed her residence; and taught the fair
Or wisdom's deep recesses to explore,
Or on invention's rapid wings to soar
Above the Aonian mount; and can thou think
That virtues, which exalt the soul, can sink
The outward charms? must knowledge give offense?
And are the graces all at war with sense?
Say, who of all the fair is formed to move
The fondest passions, most ecstatick love,
More than ATHENIA? in her gentle eye
Soft innocence and virgin modesty
Incessant shine, while still a newborn grace
Springs in each speaking feature of her face.
Her sprightly wit no forward pertness spoils:
No self-assuming air her judgment soils;
Still prone to learn, though capable to teach,
And lofty all her thoughts, but humble all her speech.
Proceed, ATHENIA, let thy growing mind
Take every knowledge in of every kind:
Still on perfection fix thy steady eye,
Be ever rising, rise thou never so high.
But oh reflect, that in the adventurous flight,
Thou mount'st a glorious, but a dangerous height:
When every science every grace shall join,
When most thy wit, when most thy beauties shine,
When thickest crowds enamored press around,
When loudest every tongue thy praise shall sound,
When verse too offers incense to thy shrine,
And adoration breathes in every line,
Then let my friendly Muse express her care,
Then most will danger spread her viewless snare:
Then let this truth possess thy inmost soul,
"One drop of Vanity may spoil the whole."
Not self-secure on earth can Knowledge dwell,
Knowledge the bliss of heaven and pang of hell,
Alike the instrument of good and evil,
The attribute of God and of the Devil.
Without her, Virtue is a powerless Will;
She, without Virtue, is a powerful ill;
Does she then join with Virtue, or oppose,
She proves the best of Friends, or worst of Foes.
O! be they once in happiest union joined,
And be that union in ATHENIA'S mind.
On SHAKESPEARE'S Monument at Stratford upon Avon.
By the Same.
GREAT HOMER'S birth sev'n rival cities claim,
Too mighty such monopoly of Fame;
Yet not to birth alone did HOMER owe
His wondrous worth; what EGYPT could bestow,
With all the schools of GREECE and ASIA joined,
Enlarged the immense expansion of his mind.
Nor yet unrivaled the MAEONIAN strain,
The Milton.
British Eagle, and the Mantuan Swan
Tower equal heights. But happier STRATFORD, thou
With incontested laurels deck thy brow:
Thy Bard was thine unschool'd, and from thee brought
More than all EGYPT, GREECE, or ASIA taught.
Not HOMER'S self such matchless honors won;
The Greek has Rivals, but thy SHAKESPEARE none.
A SONG.
By the Same.
I.
WHEN fair SERENA fair I knew,
By friendship's happy union charmed;
Incessant joys around her slew,
And gentle smiles my bosom warmed.
II.
But when with fond officious care
I pressed to breathe my amorous pain,
Her lips spoke naught but cold despair,
Her eyes shot ice through every vein.
III.
Thus in ITALIA'S lovely vales
The sun his genial vigor yields,
Reviving heat each sense regales,
And plenty crowns the smiling fields.
IV.
When nearer we approach this ray,
High on the Alps' stupendous brow,
Surpised we see pale sunbeams play
On everlasting hills of snow.
CHISWICK.
By the Same.
THE potent Lord, that this bright villa planned,
Exhibits here a Paradise regained;
Whatever of Verdure have Hills, Lawns, or Woods,
Whatever of Splendour, Buildings, Flowers, or Floods,
Whatever of Fruits the Trees, of Birds the Air,
In blissful union are collected here:
All with such harmony disposed, as shows,
That in the midst the Tree of Knowledge grows.
The INDIFFERENT.
From the Italian of Metastasio.
THANKS, CLOE, thy coquetting art
At length has healed my lovesick heart,
At length thy slave is free;
I feel no tyrant's proud control,
I feel no inmate in my soul,
But peace and liberty.
No longer now a fierce desire
In anger masks its amorous fire,
And fiercer burns suppressed,
I blush not when thy name I hear,
I meet thee suddenly, and fear
No fluttering in my breast.
In dreams I every trifle see,
Yet very rarely dream of thee:
I wake, nor think about thee:
When absent I never wish thee near:
And when you are present I not fear,
Nor pray to be without thee.
I think, hear, talk about thy charms,
Nor stoop the head, nor fold the arms;
Nay even my wrongs sit easy.
And when my favored rival's near
And eyes me with insulting leer,
His triumphs never teaze me.
Put on thy looks of cold disdain,
Or speak respectful, it is in vain,
Nor frowns nor smiles can move.
Those lips no more have words that bind,
Those eyes no more have light to find
The path that leads to love.
Seasons, which wont to take their dye
Of foul or fair, from CLOE'S eye,
Now their own livery wear.
This place I hate, and that I love,
The fen's a fen, the grove's a grove,
If absent thou, or there.
Judge if I speak like one sincere,
Still I confess your face is fair,
But so are twenty faces;
And if plain truth will not offend,
You Have now some features I could mend,
Which once appeared all graces.
Nay more, I own, when from my heart
I strove to tug the fatal dart
I cut my heart in sunder:
But to relieve a constant pain,
And to retrieve one's self again,
What would one not go-under?
The fluttering bird in viscous snare
Entangled, willingly will spare
For liberty a feather;
In time again the feather grows,
And wise by danger made, he knows
To shun the snare for ever.
But still I hear you smiling say,
It Is sign you have flung their chains away,
You take such pains to show 'em.
Why, CLOE, there is a fond delight
Our former dangers to recite,
And let our neighbors know 'em.
After the thunder of the wars,
The veteran thus displays his scars,
And tells you of his pains;
The galley-slave, enslaved no more,
Shows you the shackles which he wore,
And where their mark remains.
I talk, 'cause talking gives delight,
I please myself not GLOE by it,
Nor care if she believe;
And when myself she deigns to name,
Whether she praise my song or blame,
I neither joy nor grieve.
For me I quit a fickle fair,
CLOE has lost a heart sincere,
Who first should sing Te deum?
You Will never find so true a swain;
But women full as false as vain,
By dozens one may see 'em.
The TRIUMPH of INDIFFERENCE.
Being the same ODE, imitated by an unknown Hand.
I.
THANKS, dear coquet! indulgent cheat!
Kind heaven, and your more kind deceit,
At length have set me free;
No more I sigh, and dote, and pine,
All ease without, and calm within,
In peace and liberty.
II.
Cupid no more has power to scorch,
Time sure has robbed him of his torch,
Never was a cooler creature:
That name no more has such eclat,
No more my heart goes pit-a-pat
At sight of each dear feature.
III.
I sleep at night, and sometimes dream,
Nor you the fond vexatious theme;
I wake, nor think about you:
I meet, I leave you, meet again,
But feel no mighty joy or pain,
Or with you, or without you.
IV.
Now with indifference I chat
Of eyes, lips, bubbies, and all that,
And laugh at former follies:
Joke with my rival when we meet,
What eye so keen! what lips so sweet!
What skin so soft as Molly's!
V.
Leave then those little torturing arts,
You practice on complying hearts;
They Are all in vain, believe me:
Whether those eyes look kind or weep,
The pouting, or the smiling lip,
Will neither please, nor grieve me.
VI.
From those despotick looks, no more
(Once tyrants of each sickle hour)
I date my grief and joy:
May, though you frown, looks sweetly clad;
And dull December's mighty sad,
Though you stand smiling by.
VII.
Yet still (for I am quite sincere)
You're mighty pretty, -- true, my dear,
But, like your pretty sex,
You Have here and there, and now and then
A failing; for like other men,
I now can spy defects.
VIII.
Yet once with coward fondness cursed,
My poor weak heart I feared would burst
At thought of separation:
But now despise my feeble chain,
And bless the salutary pain
That cured me of my passion.
IX.
Impatient of his iron cage,
The bird thus spends his little rage,
And escapes with shattered wings:
But soon with new-sledg'd pinions soars,
And hastening to his native bowers,
A joyful welcome sings.
X.
Fond female vanity will say,
These long harangues they sure betray
A heart that is hankering still:
This passion so proclaimed in song,
This tale so pleasing to the tongue,
Does it not touch the will?
XI.
Lovers like soldiers, Molly, dwell
With pleasure on the horrid tale,
When all the danger's over:
Like other slaves from setters free,
We smile with anxious joy, to see
The chains which once we wore.
XII.
In kind indulgence to a heart,
Engaged in so severe a part,
This sweet revenge I write:
Rail, weep, be woman all, for I
Lulled in indifference, defy
Your fondness or your spite.
XIII.
A frail false maid I lost, but you
A man, fond, generous, and true;
Which fortune is the worse?
Try all love's mighty empire round,
A faithful lover's seldom found;
A jilt's a common curse.
The SHEPHERD'S FAREWELL to his LOVE. Being the same ODE.
Translated by Mr. RODERICK.
PHoebe, thank thy false heart, it has fixed my repose,
The gods have had pity at length on my woes;
I feel it, I feel my soul loose from its chain,
And at last freedom comes, often dreamed of in vain.
The flame is burned out, and each passion at rest.
Under which love disguised still might lurk in my breast;
No more, when you are named, the warm blushes arise,
No more slutters my heart, when I meet with your eyes.
In my sleep now no longer thy image I see,
Nor the first of my thoughts, when I wake, is of thee*
When from thee, no more of thy absence I plain,
When with thee, I feel neither pleasure nor pain.
My heart without fondness can muse on thy charms,
My past pains I recount, yet no passion alarms;
Discomposed I Am no longer, when towered me you move,
And at ease with my rival I talk of my love.
Whether haughty thy frown, whether gentle thy strain,
In vain thy proud looks, thy fond speeches in vain;
Thy false tongue to beguile me no more has the art,
No more thy keen eye knows the way to my heart.
Whether pensive or cheerful, no longer to you
For this are my thanks, or for that my blame due:
The gay prospect now pleases, though you are away,
And your presence no more can make dreariness gay.
Believe me, I still can allow that you are fair,
But not that no fair-one can with thee compare;
And though beauteous I own thee, yet still in thy face
I can now spy a fault, which I once thought a grace.
When first the fixed arrow I plucked from my heart,
Oh, methought I should die! so severe was the smart:
But from power so oppressive to set myself clear,
Torments greater than dying with patience I Would bear.
When lim'd the poor bird thus with eagerness strains,
Nor regrets the lost plume, so his freedom he gains;
The loss of his plumage small time will restore,
And once tried the false twig, it can cheat him no more.
The old flame, never flatter yourself to believe,
While it dwells on my tongue, in my heart still must live;
Our dangers, when past, with delight we repeat,
What in suffering was pain, to remembrance is sweet.
It Is thus when the soldier returns from the wars,
He fights over his old battles, and vaunts of his scars:
With pleasure the captive his liberty gained
The fetters thus shows, which once held him enchain'd.
Thus I talk, and I still will talk on while I may,
Nor heed I, though you disbelieve what I say:
I ask not that Phoebe my talk should approve,
Let her too, if she can, talk at ease of my love.
An inconstant I leave, a true lover you lose;
Which first of us two will have comfort, who knows?
This I know -- Phoebe never such a true love will find;
I can easily meet with a fair as unkind.
RIDDLE.
By the Same.
THrough the close covert of the shady grove,
One summer's day it was my chance to rove,
Where, shrouded from the sun's too scorching ray,
Stretched at her ease, half-slumbering Cloe lay.
Occasion so inviting, who could miss?
Softly I stole, and snatched a sudden kiss.
Startled at first, the rising blush displayed
The quick resentment of the ruffled maid;
Lively displayed -- for soon it over past;
Such blushing anger never long did last!
Quick reconcilement must to rage succeed,
Where wrongs ideal solid pleasures breed.
Submissive looks my pardon soon obtained,
And pardoned love as soon new boldness gained.
Offending thus, forgiving thus, we lay,
Long time entranced with the alternate play;
'Till warned, too soon, by envious night, we part:
The thrilling joy still flutters round my heart;
Thought still, though fainter, paints the glowing bliss,
On fancy's lip still cleaves the rapturous kiss.
But mark the sad effects of casual love,
And tread with caution in the shady grove.
In due time, Cloe at my doors appears,
A fixed composure on her brow she wears;
And guess the cause: close in her lap concealed
A lovely twin in either hand she held;
And take, she cried, these pledges of our love,
These fruits you planted in the shady grove.
Soft as the downy bloom on Cloe's check,
Smooth as the polished ivory of her neck,
Warm as her bosom, white as was her arm,
So smooth were they and white, so soft and warm,
Pleased I received them for the giver's sake,
Heedless what censures strait-lac'd prudes might make.
Compliant to my forming hand they grew,
And with their size increased obedience due,
As I direct they take the appointed bent,
With every motion, every beck, consent,
Whatever I want, they reach with ready hand,
Wherever I go, they wait at my command.
Now at ease one in my bosom lays;
While by my side the other wanton plays;
Now this my hand embraces; to other free,
Takes his full swing and plays at liberty.
Before me hand in hand sometimes they move,
Emblems of friendship, and united love;
Sometimes behind my leading steps they trace
Still closely knit in brotherly embrace;
Anon on either side as guards attend,
At once adorn me, and at once defend.
Still more and more my love they thus engage,
Thus still shall cherish my declining age;
And when the appointed hour of fate shall come,
They Will follow still attendant on my tomb.
More lasting far than man's soon fading breath,
Their love extends beyond the vale of death;
They Will hang for ever over my much-loved bust,
Till they themselves, like me, are turned to dust.
RIDDLE.
-- Mortalis in unum
Quodque caput, vultu mutabilis, albus an ater.

By the Same.
TORN from the fruitful spot on which I grew,
Me innocent unnumber'd pains pursue;
Pains more afflicting, as from man they flow,
From parent man! for birth to man I owe.
Sometimes on spikes of steel my nerves they rend,
Sometimes asunder split from end to end;
In boiling cauldrons now immersed I lie,
Now doomed the rage of drying fires to try:
There while in double torment scorched and drowned,
Fast tied I writhe the rigid stake around.
Last their fierce hate its utmost effort tries
With all Barbarian pomp of sacrifice.
The purple fillet round my temples wreathes,
From every part the scented unguent breathes;
Over my white locks the sacred flower is spread
Whilst on the fatal block is placed my head.
Yet with fixed constancy I bear my doom;
And constancy at last will overcome.
From all my trials I return at length,
My worth increased, my beauty, and my strength.
The suffering martyr thus in torment dies,
In sainted state more glorious to arise.
And now I reassume my native state,
My torturers now beneath their burden sweat,
Slaves in their turn to me, and think it pride
If on their subject necks I deign to ride.
Yet still my filial duty I retain,
Unchanged by honors, as unmoved by pain.
Still to mankind a friend, I daily shed
My warmest blessings on his parent head;
Around him still with fond embraces twine,
As round the elm her tendrils curls the vine.
Nor quit him ever till he to rest repairs,
And every morn renew my constant cares.
Ready alike on rich and poor to wait;
I suit myself to every different state.
With priest in whitish dress arrayed I shine,
Emblem of purity and truth divine.
His solemn face the doctor owes to me,
His solemn face, to which he owes his fee.
At bench, or bar, I add a dignity
To the upright sentence, or rhetoric plea;
Hence without me no judge explains the laws,
Nor coifed council pleads the puzzling cause:
In fullest floods my bounty showers on them
Profuse, descending to the garment's hem.
Gorgeous in silken garb I grace the beau;
And all around ambrosial fragrance throw;
Nor less decorous, though with dust overspread,
When to the camp the valiant warriors lead,
Gorgonian terrors to each mien I add,
And still their weakest part with care I shade.
RIDDLE.
By the Same.
MY size is large, my shape's uncouth,
I have neither limb nor feature;
Men's hands have formed my skin so smooth:
My guts were made by nature.
Nor male nor female is my sex,
You Will scarce believe my troth;
For when I Have told you all my tricks
You Will swear 't must needs be both.
For often my master lies with me,
His wife I often enjoy;
Yet's she is no whore, no cuckold he,
And true to both am I.
My clothes nor women fit, nor men,
They Are neither coat nor gown;
Yet often both men and maidens, when
They Are naked, have them on.
When I Am upon my legs, I lie,
Yet legs in truth I Have none;
And never am I seen so high
To rise as when I Am down.
What Is often my belly, is often my back,
And what my feet, my head;
And though I Am up, I have a knack
Of being still a-bed.
Audivere, Lyce, etc. HOR. Book 4. Ode 13. IMITATED.
By the Same.
LYCE, at length my vows are heard,
My vows so often to heaven preferred;
Welcome, thy silvered hairs!
a In vain thy affectation gay
To hide the manifest decay,
In vain thy youthful airs.
-- a fis anus, et tamen
Vis formosa videri
Ludisque --

If still thy cheeks preserve a blush,
With b heat of wine, not youth they flush,
c Unamiable stain!
If still thou warblest, harsh the note
When d trembling age shakes in the throat
The involuntary strain.
Think thou can these my love prolong?
(Ungrateful blush! untuneful song!)
Or rival Hebe's charms?
Hebe melodious, Hebe fair,
For e judgment swells her rapturous air,
For f youth her blushes warms.
The rosy cheek, the forehead smooth,
Those native ornaments of youth,
Once lost, are lost for aye.
No art can smooth g, no paint repair
The furrowed face; h no diamond's glare
Give luster to decay.
-- et b bibis impudens.
Cantu d tremulo b pota Cupidinem
c Lentum solicitas --
-- f virentis et
e Doctae psallere Chiae
Pulchris excubat in genis.
Nec g Coae referunt jam tibi purpurae,
Nec h clari lapides, tempera quae semel
Notis condita fastis
Inclusit volucris dies.

What now of all which once was thine,
i Feature, k Complexion, l Mien divine,
Remains the sense to charm?
m Why now command they not my love?
Once could they -- n even though Cloe strove
Their empire to disarm,
Cloe! -- alas, thou much-loved name!
o Thou, full of beauty, full of fame,
Found'st an untimely urn!
p Whilst Lyce, reft of every grace
TO enrich the mind, to adorn the face,
Still lives, the public scorn. The contemptuous satire at the conclusion of
the original, is preserved in the English, but a graver turn is given to it,
instead of the more ludicrous one of Horace. Whether judiciously or no, may be
better determined by any body, than by the author.

Quo i Venus fugit, ah! quo k color decens,
Quo l motus? quid habes illius
Quae spirabat amores?
m Quae me surpuerat mihi?
n Faelix post Cynaram.
-- o sed Cynarae breves
Annos fata dedere:
Sevatura diu p parem
Cornicis vetulae temporibus Lycen.

A SONNET. Imitated from the Spanish of LOPEZ DE VEGA. Menagiana tom. iv. p.
176.
By the Same.
CAPRICIOUS W* a sonnet needs must have
I never was so put to it before: -- a Sonnet!
Why, fourteen verses must be spent upon it;
It Is good however to have conquered the first stave.
Yet I shall never find rhymes enough by half,
Said I, and found myself in the midst of the second.
If twice four verses were but fairly reckoned,
I should turn back on the hardest part and laugh.
Thus far with good success I think I Have scribbled,
And of the twice seven lines have clean got over ten.
Courage! another 'll finish the first triplet.
Thanks to thee, Muse, my work begins to shorten.
There Is thirteen lines got through driblet by driblet.
It Is done! count how you will, I warr'nt there is fourteen.
SONNETS.
By T. E.
SONNET I.
O*, whom virtue makes the worthy heir
Of **'s titles, and of*'s estate,
Blessed in a wife, whose beauty, though so rare,
Is the least grace of all that round her wait,
While other youths, sprung from the good and great,
In devious paths of pleasure seek their bane,
Reckless of wisdom's lore, of birth, or state,
Meanly debauched, or insolently vain;
Through Virtue's sacred gate to Honor's fane
You and your fair associate ceaseless climb
With glorious emulation, sure to gain
A meed, shall last beyond the reign of Time:
From your example long may Britain see,
Degenerate Britain, what the great should be.
SONNET II.
WIsely, O C*; enjoy the present hour,
The present hour is all the time we have,
High God the rest has placed beyond our power,
Consigned, perhaps, to grief -- or to the grave.
Wretched the man, who toils ambition's slave;
Who pines for wealth, or sighs for empty fame;
Who rolls in pleasures which the mind deprave,
Bought with severe remorse, and guilty shame.
Virtue and knowledge be our better aim;
These help us Ill to bear, or teach to shun;
Let friendship cheer us with her generous flame,
Friendship, the sum of all our joys in one;
So shall we live each moment fate has given;
How long, or short, let us resign to heaven.
SONNET III.
To F. K. Esquire
O Sprung from worthies, who with counsels wise
Adorned and strengthened great Elisa's throne,
Who yet with virtuous pride, may well despise
To borrow praise from merits not thy own.
Often as I view the monumental stone
Where our loved H***'s cold ashes rest,
Musing on joys with him long past and gone,
A pleasing sad remembrance fills my breast. --
Did the sharp pang we feel for friends deceased
Unbated last, we must with anguish die;
But nature bids its rigor should be eased
By lenient time, and strong necessity:
These calm the passions, and subdue the mind
To bear the appointed lot of human kind.
SONNET IV.
C**s, I hoped the little heaven shall spare
Of my short day, which flits away so fast,
And sickness threats with clouds to overcast,
In social converse often with thee to share.
Ill-luck for me, that wayward fate should tear
Thee from the haven thou had gained at last,
Again to try the toils and dangers past
In foreign climates, and an hostile air:
Yet duteous to thy country's call attend,
Which claims a portion of thy useful years,
And back with speed thy course to Britain bend.
If, ever again we meet, perchance should end
My dark'ning eve, thou wilt pay some friendly tears,
Grateful to him, who lived and died thy friend.
SONNET V. On a FAMILY-PICTURE.
WHEN pensive on that portraiture I gaze,
Where my four brothers round about me stand,
And four fair sisters smile with graces bland,
The goodly monument of happier days;
And think, how soon insatiate death, who preys
On all, has cropp'd the rest with ruthless hand,
While only I survive of all that band,
Which one chaste bed did to my father raise;
It seems, that like a column left alone,
The tottering remnant of some splendid fane,
'Scap'd from the fury of the barbarous Gaul,
And wasting Time, which has the rest overthrown,
Amidst our house's ruins I remain,
Single, unprop'd, and nodding to my fall.
SONNET VI.
R**, who well have judged the task too hard,
Of this short life throughout the total day
To follow glory's false bewitching ray,
Through certain toils, uncertain of reward;
A prince's service how should we regard;
As service still -- though decked in livery gay,
Disguised with titles, gilded over with pay,
Specious, yet ill to liberty preferred.
Bounding thy wishes by the golden mean,
Nor weakly bartering happiness for show,
Wisely thou'st left the busy bustling scene,
Where merit seldom has successful been,
In C**'s shades to taste the joys, that flow
From calm retirement, and a mind serene.
SONNET VII.
C**e, with whom, my pilot and my guide,
Pleased I have traversed thy Sabrina's flood,
Both where she foams impetuous soiled with mud,
And where she peaceful rolls her golden tide.
Never, O never let ambition's pride
(Too often pretexted with our country's good)
And tinsel'd pomp, despised when understood,
Or thirst of wealth thee from her banks divide.
Reflect how calmly, like her infant wave,
Flows the clear current of a private life;
See the wide public stream by tempests tossed,
Of every changing wind the sport, or slave,
Soiled with corruption, vexed with party strife,
Covered with wrecks of peace and honor lost.
SONNET VIII. On the CANTOS of SPENSER'S Fairy Queen, lost in the Passage from
Ireland.
WOE worth the man, who in ill hour assayed
To tempt that western frith with venurous keel,
And seek what heaven, regardful of our weal,
Had hid in fogs, and night's eternal shade.
Ill-starr'd Hibernia! well art thou repaid
For all the woes, that Britain made thee feel
By Henry's wrath, and Pembroke's conquering steel,
Who sacked thy towns, and castles disarray'd:
No longer now with idle sorrow mourn
Thy plundered wealth, or liberties restrained,
Nor deem their victories thy loss or shame;
Severe revenge on Britain in thy turn
And ample spoils thy treacherous waves obtained,
Which sunk one half of Spenser's deathless same.
SONNET IX.
PEACE to thy ashes, to thy memory fame,
Bright paragon of merit feminine,
In forming whom kind nature did inshrine
A mind angelick in a faultless frame;
Through every stage of changing life the same,
How did thy bright example ceaseless shine,
And every grace with every virtue join
To raise the virgin's and the matron's name?
In thee religion cheerful and serene
Unfour'd by superstition, spleen, or pride,
Through all the social offices of life
To shed its genuine influence was seen;
This thy chief ornament, thy surest guide,
This formed the daughter, parent, friend, and wife.
SONNET X. To the Author of Observations on the Conversion and Apostleship of
St. PAUL.
O***, great meed shall thou receive,
Great meed of fame, thou and thy learned compeer,
Who against the sceptic's doubt, and scorner's sneer,
Assert those heaven-born truths, which you believe.
In elder time thus heroes wont to atchieve
Renown, they held the faith of JESUS dear,
And round their ivy-crown, or laurell'd spear,
Blushed not religion's olive branch to weave.
Thus Raleigh, thus immortal Sidney shone
(Illustrious names) in great Elisa's days.
Nor doubt his promise firm, that such who own
In evil times, undaunted, though alone,
His glorious truth, such he will crown with praise,
And glad agnize before his Father's throne.
SONNET XI.
YOung, fair, and good! ah why should young and fair
And good be huddled in untimely grave?
Must so sweet flower so brief a period have,
Just bloom and charm, then fade and disappear?
Yet our's the loss, who ill alas can spare
The bright example, which thy virtues gave;
The guerdon thine, whom gracious heaven did save
From longer trial in this vale of care.
Rest then, sweet saint, in peace and honor rest,
While our true tears bedew thy maiden hearse,
Light lie the earth upon thy lovely breast;
And let a grateful heart with grief oppressed
To thy dear memory consecrate this verse,
Though all too mean for who deserves the best.
SONNET XII.
W*, whose dear friendship in the dawning years
Of undesigning Childhood first began,
Through Youth's gay morn with even tenor ran,
My noon conducted, and my evening cheers,
Rightly do thou, in whom combined appears
Whatever for Public Life completes the Man,
With active Zeal strike out a larger plan,
No useless friend to Senators and Peers:
Me moderate talents and a small estate
Fit for Retirement's unambitious shade,
Nor envy I who near approach the throne;
But joyful see thee mingle with the Great,
See thy deserts with due distinction paid,
And praise thy lot, contented with my own.
SONNET XIII. To the Right Hon. Mr. --, with the foregoing SONNETS.
THOU, who successive in that honored seat
Presid'st, the feuds of jaring Chiefs to 'swage,
To check the boisterous force of Party rage,
Raise modest worth, and guide the high debate,
Sometimes retiring from the toils of State,
Thou turn'st the instructive Greek or Roman page,
Or what our British Bards of later age
In scarce inferior numbers can relate:
Amid this feast of Mind, when Fancy's Child,
Sweet SHAKESPEARE, raps the soul to virtuous deed,
When SPENSER warbling tunes his Doric lays,
Or the first Man from Paradise exiled
Great MILTON sings, can aught my rustic reed
Presume to sound, that may deserve thy praise?
INDEX to the Second Volume.
THE Progress of Love. In four Eclogues Page 1 Soliloquy of a Beauty Page 16
Blenheim Page 19 Epistle to Dr. Ayscough Page 25 Epistle to Mr. Poyntz Page 31
Verses under Mr. Poyntz's Picture Page 34 Epistle to Mr. Pope Page 35 Epistle
to my Lord *** Page 38 Advice to a Lady Page 41 Song Page 46 Song Page 47 Damon
and Delia Page 49 Ode in Imitation of Pastor Fido Page 51 Part of an Elegy of
Tibullus Page 52 Song Page 55 Verses written at Mr. Pope's Page 56 Epigram Page
57 To Mr. West at Wickham ibid. To Miss Lucy F -- Page 58 To the same, with
Hammond's Elegies ibid. To the Same Page 59 To the Same ibid. A Prayer to Venus
in her Temple at Stowe Page 60 To the Same. On her pleading want of Time Page
61 To the Same Page 63 To the Same ibid. To the Same with a new Watch Page 64
An Irregular Ode writ at Wickham in 1746 Page 65 To the Memory of the same
Lady. A Monody Page 67 Verses, making Part of an Epitaph on the same Lady Page
79 On the Abuse of Traveling. A Canto in Imitation of Spenser. By Mr. West
Page 80 The Institution of the Order of the Garter. By the Same Page 105
Epistle to Lord Cornbury Page 166 An Epistle Page 185 Epistle to a Lady Page
198 Epistle to Mr. Pope Page 205 Epistle to Pollio Page 207 Ode to William
Pultney, Esquire Page 210 Ode to Lord Lonsdale Page 213 Ode Page 215 Ode Page 217
Ode Page 218 Ode to Mankind Page 220 Verses to Camilla Page 228 To Clarissa
Page 230 An Inscription on a Tomb Page 234 Epigrams ibid. The Danger of Writing
Verse. By W. Whitehead, Esquire Page 240 To the Honorable * * * Page 251 To Mr.
Garrick Page 253 Nature, to Dr. Hoadly Page 257 The Youth and the Philosopher
Page 259 Ode to a Gentleman on his pitching his Tent, etc. Page 261 On a
Message Card Page 263 The Je ne scai Quoi Page 265 Ode on a distant Prospect of
Eton College. By Mr. Gray Page 266 Ode Page 270 Ode on the Death of a favorite
Cat Page 272 Monody on the Death of Q. Caroline, By R. West, Esquire Page 274 A
Pipe of Tobacco, in Imitation of six several Authors Page 280 Ode to the Hon.
C. Y. Page 287 From Caelia to Cloe Page 289 On a Fit of the Gout Page 291 An
Ode of Horace Page 293 The Female Right to Literature Page 294 On Shakespeare's
Monument at Stratford upon Avon Page 300 A Song Page 301 Chiswick Page 302 The
Indifferent, from the Italian of Metastasio ibid. The Triumph of Indifference,
an Ode Page 306 The Shepherd's Farewell to his Love Page 309 Riddles 312, 314,
Page 317 Audivere, Lyce, etc. Page 318 A Sonnet, imitated from the Spanish of
Lopez de Vega Page 321 Sonnets Page 322
The END of VOL. II.

