EPISTLE TO ADMIRAL KEPPEL.

[Price One Shilling.]

EPISTLE TO ADMIRAL KEPPEL.

INFAMIA INTACTUM, INVIDIA QUA POSSUNT URGENT. LIVY. LONDON: PRINTED FOR
FIELDING AND WALKER, PATER NOSTER ROW.

M. DCC. LXXIX.

ERRATA.
Page 16. Line 10. read Who coarse of thought, and coarse of language cry.

Page 18. Line 3. read and instead of or.

EPISTLE, etc.
SWIFTLY ye Spirits of the sea and air!
Who viewless make this generous Isle your care,
Guardians of honor, and of injured worth!
Spread the glad tidings round the listening Earth!
Truth shines triumphant over insidious Craft;
Defeated Slander drops her feeble shaft:
While Justice, gazing on the sphere of Fame,
Points with fond pride to KEPPEL'S cloudless name;
Emerging like the Sun, with double light,
From the dark transit of the orb of night.
What shouts, re-echoed from our naval host,
Fill the wide air, and shake the crowded coast!
The spreading transport circles round our shore,
As if the foes of Britain were no more.
Waked by these shouts from scenes of hallowed rest,
And to the Muse's eye alone confessed,
Departed Naval Chiefs, an airy band,
To share this triumph hover over the strand. --
Forth from that oozy bed, and coral cave,
Where the great Seaman found his watery grave,
Comes Drake Sir Francis Drake and Sir John Hawkins, were institutors of that
noble fund the Chest at Chatham. -- For the personal history of these great
men, and most of those mentioned with them, see Campbell's Lives of the
Admirals.
, -- whose flag, by Glory's hand unfurled,
Traced the first circle round the astonished world --
With Hawkins; names, by Charity confessed
The generous founders of her naval chest!
The great chastisers of invading Spain:
Howard, the leader of that patriot train:
Monson, whose pen his own bright labors crowned:
And Blake, for Roman discipline renowned:
Monk, at whose tomb both Earth and Ocean weep,
Great in the field, and greater on the deep:
Then the first S ****, who, self-doom'd to die,
Fixed to his burning ship, disdained to fly;
Frowning just wrath he comes, and scorns to own
An heir, succeeding to his name alone:
Undaunted Ayscue: Sprag, by Dryden sung:
Russel, whose arm the bolts of Freedom flung
On that proud Gallic fleet, which dared to bring
A tyrant's aid to an apostate king:
Herbert, to whom the worn-out seaman owes
A public refuge, and well-earn'd repose:
Benbo, whom wounds but animate to fame,
Whose great soul triumphed over his shattered frame:
Cloudesly ill-starr'd! with him Sir George Rooke.
, whose deeds remain
'Grav'd on the conquered rock of humbled Spain:
And the great Seaman of our later days,
Anson, who born a sunk marine to raise,
Reformed our fleets, and sent them to proclaim
Around the globe, familiar with his name,
His guiding genius, and his country's fame:
These Chiefs -- and with them an extended line
Of names, that bright in naval annals shine --
These to thy triumph with delight repair,
And thus salute thee as they float in air:
"Hail! gallant Seaman, on whose solid fame
"Envy's wild rage, reduced to silent shame,
"Falls like the threatening wave, whose furious shock
"Ends but in foam against the unshaken rock!
"Hail to thee, KEPPEL! Hail, from perils saved,
"Worse than thy courage on the deep has braved!
"Trying the hour, when by the whirlwind's breath
"The billow teems with darkest forms of death;
"Trying, when England's dauntless sons oppose
"The shattered ship against her trebled foes;
"But far more trying is Detraction's dart,
"And the dark stab of ministerial art:
"By these our glory, and Iberia's dread,
"Brave injured name! the accomplished Raleigh bled:
"A still superior name, and Ocean's pride,
"By these oppressed, the great Columbus died.
"But in thy cause, solicitous to heal
"The wounds of honor with parental zeal,
"Justice and Freedom glory to defend,
"From these detested foes, their injured friend;
"Our souls responsive join their joyous cry;
"Give thy untarnish'd flag again to fly!
"Confessed the Guardian of a grateful land,
"Late be Thou numbered with our sainted band,
"Rich in thy gathered fame, and graced with long command."
To thee, O KEPPEL! while the Muse conveys
These hallowed accents of no mortal praise,
May she with glory all thy wrongs repay!
May her bright subject consecrate her lay!
It Is hers, all furious party rage above,
The faithful herald of a nation's love,
With naval oak to twine her laurel leaf,
And crown the temples of her favorite Chief:
It Is hers, while warm her indignation glows,
Hurling contempt on thy defeated foes,
With an impartial and avenging hand,
The blushing front of Calumny to brand. --
Worst of all evils, of all pests the chief,
Diffusing general, or domestic grief;
Pernicious child of a corrupted state,
With private horror marked, and public hate,
False Accusation stands: whose serpent tooth
Delights to fasten on distinguished Truth.
In Greece, in Rome, when guardian freedom fled,
On noblest blood this fatten'd monster fed:
There every bribe, that could allure the slave,
All that distinction once to virtue gave,
Debased by tyrants to the villain's pay,
Tempted this lurking fiend to brave the open day,
O! P******* the Muse disdains to think
A naval son of England ever could sink
To sell his fame, and as an hireling rend
The unsuspecting bosom of a friend:
No! 'twas wild passion; pride and spleen combined
To rob of reason thy disordered mind;
Which, while delirious dreams its powers enthrall,
Mistook a statesman's smile for honor's call:
At length awaking, Freedom, like the Sun,
Shows thee the fatal course thy frenzy run;
And that of all by public hatred cursed,
The baffled False Accuser ranks the first.
In Sir Lewis Stuckley, Vice Admiral of Devonshire, and the kinsman of Raleigh,
whose design of escaping he perfidiously betrayed, was surprised in Whitehall,
clipping the gold bestowed on him as a reward of his treachery; and being
condemned for that crime, and reduced to the necessity of stripping himself to
his shirt, to raise money to purchase a pardon, withdrew himself from the odium
of mankind to the island of Lundy, in the Severn Sea, where he died mad, 1620,
in less than two years after Raleigh.

Birch's Life of Sir W. Raleigh.
Stuckley's end their dreadful fate we view,
Whose plots the ruin of the brave pursue:
Stuckley! that knight of perfidy! who sold
The blood of Raleigh for a tyrant's gold:
Full on himself his own dire arts recoiled;
First of the wages of his sin despoiled,
Then justly doomed his head abhorred to hide,
In frantic penury the traitor died;
Worst of bad men! -- Yet see a name appear,
Which deeper brands of detestation sear;
Whose soul would rob, by basest passion led,
The brave of honor, and the poor of bread:
Who, placed the stream of Charity to guide,
And over her hallowed temple to preside,
In darkness entering at a private door,
Profanes, with vile abuse, her sacred store:
O! if our Isle, who boasts a generous race,
Could rear a being of a soul so base,
May public vengeance all his guilt proclaim,
And injured honor execrate his name!
While in full day his deepest crimes are seen,
Give him to feel, how wide the space between
Th eself-perplexing wiles of courtly art,
And the clear conduct of a KEPPEL'S heart:
That generous heart, with public virtue fraught,
Of private vengeance will despise the thought:
For thy Accuser, KEPPEL! still retain
Silent abhorrence, and a brave disdain!
Whatever his motives, if of envy born,
(Disease of little minds!) they merit scorn:
If sprung from public zeal, with passion blind,
They claim the pity of thy nobler mind;
Thy mind! which scorned to play the accuser's part,
Or doubt the courage of an English heart,
Even in those galling hours, when reared in vain
Thy warlike signal called a tardy train;
And disobedience joined with envious night
To rob thy valor of the promised fight. --
Full often have Chiefs, disgusted with command,
Abjured the service of a thankless land;
Untaught "to bear the wrongs of base mankind,
The last, and hardest conquest of the mind!"
May thou, O KEPPEL! every wrong forget!
And pay thy Country still a Briton's debt!
Clear as thy own may England's honor grow,
Proved by the voice of each applauding foe!
Though speculation, in dark visions tossed,
Has long pronounced her mighty Empire lost.
There are, who over the fancied ruin sigh,
Who course of thought, and course of language cry,
"That England fell, in that disastrous hour,
When the Scotch serpent climbed the tree of power;"
Who, hid in government's perplexed machine,
Yet lives malignant, and corrodes unseen: --
Thus, while the imperial ship sublimely rides
In awful splendour on the subject tides;
Beneath her keel a foe insidious lurks;
Through the strong oak the mining mischief works:
The lofty fabric, though in semblance firm,
Sinks the proud victim of a foreign worm.
Whatever this voice by skeptics may be found,
Faction's false cry, or Truth's prophetic sound,
Let every Briton, with bold Blake, proclaim,
His ruling passion is his Country's fame!
What men so'er her seats of counsel fill,
The brave must feel, she is their country still:
Let them for her the worst of perils dare,
And never, never of the state despair!
Not even, when doomed with darkness to overspread
The sacred glory round Britannia's head,
The evil genius of the pale ****
Prompts the weak pause, or plans the dire campaign,
The curse of Minden's field, or Saratoga's plain!
Yet dare to hope, that built by Freedom's hand,
The splendid pile of Britain's fame shall stand;
Though her weak statesmen ill sustain its weight,
Mere mouldering vain pilasters of the state!
Yet British Virtue, theme of noblest song!
Strong in her fleets, and in her armies strong,
Like the firm cement of an ancient tower,
Desies the rage of time, and every hostile power.
This Virtue still, the Bard's peculiar care!
Shall prompt the patriot song, and martial prayer:
"Thou! God of hosts! whose sacred breath imparts
Valor's unclouded flame to British hearts;
Whose hand has spread our triumphs round the globe,
And dressed the Queen of Isles in glory's gorgeous robe:
May thy protecting spirit, still the same,
Sustain her tottering on the throne of Fame! --
But if prepared the avenging Angel stand
To pour thy wrath on this devoted land;
If her brave sons their forfeit lives must pay,
Grant them to perish in the face of day!
For Britain perish 'mid the combat's clang,
Where Honor's smile endears the dying pang!
Let Courage, when ensnared by Falshood's breath,
Still burst the toils of ignominious death!
And Justice prove, that Truth will never depart
From her firm seat, the genuine Sailor's heart.
O ye! our Island's Pride! and Nature's boast!
Whose peerless valor guards and gilds our coast,
Ye gallant Seamen! in this trying hour,
Remember union is the soul of power!
Nor let dissension, with infectious hand,
Shake the firm strength of your fraternal band!
Your injured country bids you join to throw
Avenging thunders on your common foe:
Let anger scorn the rancorous debate,
The low and little jars of private hate,
And nobly sacrifice each selfish aim,
On the bright Altar of Britannia's Fame."
FINIS.

