The MONUMENT: A POEM Sacred to the IMMORTAL MEMORY of the Best and Greatest of
Kings, William the Third King of Great Britain, etc.

Quo nihil majus meliusve Terris
Fata donavere, bonique Divi;
Nec dabunt, quamvis redeant in Aurum
Tempora Priscum.
Horat. Carm. Lib. 4. By Mr. DENNIS.

LONDON; Printed for D. Brown at the Black-Swan and Bible without Temple Bar,
and A. Bell at the Cross-Keys and Bible in Cornhil: MDCCII.

TO THE Most Noble and Mighty PRINCE, WILLIAM Duke of DEVONSHIRE, Lord STEWARD
of Her Majesty's Household, AND Knight of the most Noble Order of the GARTER,
etc.
MY LORD,
IF the following POEM had been written by a Person who had a Genius equal to
the Subject, it would in a peculiar manner have belonged to Your Grace: For to
whom should a Poet sooner address the Praises of a King, who will be eternally
Glorious for the Restoring and Maintaining our Liberties, and the common
Liberties of Europe, than to Your Grace, who has always appeared so Great a
Defender of them, and has ventured, and done, and suffered for them more than
any Subject in England? The ardent Love of Liberty and of Your Country, are
some of the many Heroic Qualities which You have inherited from Your Noble
Ancestors, and some of the many which Your Grace has the Happiness to see
derived from Your Noble Self by the other Hope of Your August Family. The
Wisdom, Foresight, Resolution, and Greatness of Soul that the Brave Lord
Candish so constantly showed in the last Parliaments of K. Charles the Second,
will never be forgotten as long as an Englishman remains alive. Even then when
it was esteemed by some an unpardonable Crime to be thought one, even then Your
Grace and that Illustrious Friend, whose Memory shall always be Dear to all the
faithful Lovers of their Country, both of You heroically dared to appear at the
Head of Englishmen resolved to assert their Privileges. He gloriously sealed
the Love of his Country with his Blood; but even after the Loss of the best of
Friends, Your Grace persever'd with an undaunted Spirit in the Noble Cause of
Liberty. Nor could the just Grief which You paid to his Memory, hinder You from
paying that Duty which You owed to Your Country, which has always deservedly
been Your first Affection. If some other Persons at that time would have entered
into the Wisdom of both Your Counsels, You your selves had saved us without the
Help of the King; Your Noble Friend, as Your Grace's Self, had been one of the
living Ornaments of Your delivered Country, and there had been no need of the
Revolution, nor perhaps of the long War that succeeded it. It was neither His
nor Your Grace's Fault that You were not then sufficiently seconded, and
consequently that You did not save these Nations all that Blood and Treasure
which the War has cost them. But when afterward things were brought to that
Extremity that a Revolution was absolutely necessary, no Man did more than Your
Grace toward the bringing it about, and working our Deliverance that way. Your
Grace was then the most Glorious Instrument of establishing the best of Kings
upon the Throne of England, and defending her present Majesty at so dangerous a
Juncture as that of the Revolution. She wisely thought that She could have no
where recourse to a better Place for Her Safety, than where Your Grace was
known to direct by Your Counsels, and to animate by Your Courage the Brave
Assertors of Liberty.

I have a long time designed to lay something of mine at Your Grace's Feet,
that it might live, and grow and flourish under so Illustrious a Patronage. But
the Awe that I stood in of the Force of Your Judgment, and the Fineness of Your
Discernment, made me wait for this Opportunity: For I know very well, that I
either ought never to approach You this way at all or to do it when I can be
most secure of my self. And tho what I offer You now is far from meriting so
High a Protection, yet I have less Mistrust of it than of any thing I have done
in Poetry. Besides, the Design and the Immortal Subject may supply in some
measure the Weakness of my Performance: For I am confident that Your Grace will
not refuse to grant that Protection to the Vindication of the King's Memory,
which the King at Your Grace's Request granted to the Rights and Privileges of
every Englishman. I am,

MY LORD, Your Grace's most Humble; most Dutiful, and most Obedient Servant,
John Dennis

THE PREFACE.
THE following Poem was writ without any manner of Design of obliging or
offending a Party. For in all my Lifetime I never designed either to please or
offend any, and was always of Opinion that he who makes his Court to any, is
sure to do it to the wrong; for if all Men were for the Public Good, there
never could be any Party, because a Patriot designs the Good of his Country,
but one of a Party intends his own.

THE following Poem was writ with an Intention to do what Service I could to my
Country at this Conjuncture; which, as Mr. Waller, has truly observed, is a
Duty incumbent upon the Muses Friend.

THE Muses Friend unto himself severe,
With silent Pity looks on all that err.
But if a great, a public Action shines,
That he rewards with his* Immortal Lines.
Whether it be in Council or in Fight,
His Countries Honor is his chief Delight:
Praise of great Acts he scatters as a Seed,
Which may the like in coming Ages breed.
THIS is certain, that the late King delivered us from a deplorable State. Now
we who were once in a condition to want Deliverer, may hereafter be in such a
Condition again; for who has happened may happen. But since, as Mr. Waller
observes most Heroes are incited to the noble Acts they perform by a Desire of
Praise, who will be at the Trouble to save or defend People so ungrateful as to
refuse them that?

I DESIRE that the Reader would take two Cautions along with him: The one that
he would not interpret that Love of Libety which will be found in the following
Poem, for an Aversion Monarchy; for Liberty is as consistent with the
Government of One as with that of a Thousand. The other is, that he would by no
means mistake the Reflections upon the Army which he Dutch had in 1672. for a
Satyr upon the Nation in general. For I have a long time known the Dutch to be
a Vaiant, a Wise and a Great People, and their Country to be one of the
strongest Bulwarks of the Liberties of Europe.

IF any one happens to wonder that I have employed so many Verses in describing
the Battle of Seneffe, without dwelling afterward upon any other of the
Glorious Actions of the King, as the Battle of Mons, or that of the Boyn, or
the Siege of Namur: I desire him to consider that in Descriptions of all
Fights, there is something resembling; and by consequence, that one such
Description for so short a work is enough; and that from among all the Actions
of the King I chose the Battle of Seneffe, because of the Brave Army opposed to
Him, and the Great Prince of Conde who headed them; and because it is the
greatest of all the Actions in which the King, or perhaps any other Captain
ever has been engaged; and above all* because the Success of the Allies was
undeniably due to the King's Valor and Conduct.

THE following Poem was writ with a Design of showing the King and not my self,
and written in the Language not of the Head but the Heart. It Is written in
Blank Verse, and not in Ryme, not only because I thought that the former would
give me the more Liberty, but for several other Reasons which will offer
themselves immediately to all who are Judges of Poetry, and which signify
nothing to the rest. I will only put the Reader in mind that Mr. Milton looked
upon Ryme as a Bondage, and my Lord Roscommon and Mr. Dryden as a Barbarity.
Mr. Milton tells us in his Preface to Paradise lost, that Ryme is trivial to
Judicious Ears, and of no true Musical Delight; and Mr. Dryden in his Verses
before the Essay upon translated Verse, that Poetry flourished in Greece and
Rome, Till barbarous Nations and more barbarous Times,
Debased the Majesty of Verse to Rymes.
Mr. Dryden threw it off in Dramatick Poetry, as Mr. Milton had done in
Heroic, and as my Lord Roscommon would have done, if he had lived to write any
more; of which the following Lines in the Essay upon translated Verse, may be
sufficient to satisfy us.

OF many Faults Ryme is perhaps the Cause,
Too true to Ryme we slight more useful Laws;
For that in Greece or Rome was never known,
Till by Barbarian Deluges o'erflown,
Subdued, undone, they did at last obey,
And change their own for their Invaders Way.
I GRANT that from some Mossy Idol Oak,
In double Rymes our Thor and Woden spoke;
And by Succession of unlearned Times,
As Bards began, so Monks rung on the Chimes.
BUT now that Phoebus and the Sacred Nine,
With all their Beams on our blessed Island shine;
Why should not we their ancient Rites restore,
And be what Rome or Athens were before?
O MAY I live to Hail the Glorious Day,
And sing loud Peans through the crowded Way,
When in Triumphant State the British Muse,
True to herself, shall barbarous Aid refuse,
And in the Roman Majesty appear,
Which none no better, and none come so near.
FROM what has been said it is plain, that three of our Poets, who have been
deservedly celebrated for the Fineness of their Ears, have condemned and
exploded Ryme, not only as an Enemy to Art, and a Clog to Genius, and a Debaser
of the Majesty of Verse; but as a thing of barbarous Sound, and contrary to
true Musical Delight. And I am confident, that those three Gentlemen, if they
had been alive, would have been pleased to have seen in the following Poem, an
attempt to second that generous Design, which the first of them began, and
which the two others approved of; a Design to shake off a barbarous Custom, and
to show the Harmony of our Mother Tongue (contrary to Vulgar received Opinion)
above that of our Neighbors the French, which is utterly incapable of
producing any thing like Poetical Music without the assistance of Ryme.

The MONUMENT: A POEM Sacred to the IMMORTAL MEMORY OF William the Third.
WHAT sudden Damp has seized upon my Soul?
Why are my Spirits chilled, my Nerves unbent?
Why am I sad, as is the mournful Grave?
As if I never should know Comfort more.
Sure conscious Nature gives Presage that Death.
The Tyrant whom she most abhors, draws near.
Ah woe! it is now too plain; for a worse Death
Has happened than alas thou fondly thought,
A Death in which the ruined World's concerned,
A Death attended with the Fate of Nations.
Too plain, alas, I hear the doleful Sound,
The Good, the Great, the Godlike WILLIAM's dead.
Gone is his mighty Mind, for ever flown,
And naught but his Immortal Name remains:
Gone is Great Providence's Watchful Viceroy,
Gone the Great Soul that watched the Christian World,
As the good faithful Shepherd does his Sheep
Against the Prowlings of the nightly Wolf.
Who shall now guard us from the bloody Foe?
Mourn then, my Soul, the irreparable Loss,
And with thee summon Human Kind to mourn,
With them too summon even the Immortal Powers.
Thou first and chief, forlorn Britannia, mourn,
And with thee let thy faithful Sons keep time;
For thou and they, and all have lost in him
A Champion, Benefactor, Father, Friend.
THOU next, Batavia, fallen Batavia, mourn,
O let thy Eyes dissolve into a Stream,
For thou have lost -- (O what have thou not lost?)
Thy Bulwark, thy Defense, thy lofty Mound
That kept out lawless Arbitrary Power,
Which, like the Ocean, now surrounds thy Towers,
With dreadful Inundation threatn'ng all.
EVROP A Beautiful, in sadness mourn!
Thy Father, thy Defender's from thee torn,
And now the Lustful Bestial God once more
Has loudly threatened thee with shameful Rape.
With thee let all thy Royal Sons lament,
Those martial Sons that were with WILLIAM joined
In the Great Cause of Godlike Liberty:
Who shall your several Interests now unite?
AND thou, Celestial Charmer, LIBERTY,
Daughter of Wisdom, and of Supreme Jove!
Sister of Reason, and of Sovereign Law;
Now Goddess beat thy beauteous Breasts, and rend
The flowing Ringlets of thy golden Hair,
To mourn thy Mighty Benefactor's Fate;
For WILLIAM's Fate, O Liberty, was thine:
Thou and Religion here have room no more.
AND thou the darling Daughter of the Skies,
Divine RELIGION, thou whose melting Eyes
Have always like perpetual Fountains streamed
To mourn the Offenses of a sinful World,
O let them pour a Deluge now of Tears
To wail the dismal Consequence of Sin,
To mourn Great WILLIAM's and thy Flight to Heaven.
He was thy Lover, and thy best beloved,
He was thy Champion, and thy sole Defense
Against the Tyrants both of Earth and Hell.
His flaming Zeal, O Goddess, roused thy Friends,
His charming Accents gained thy very Foes
To fight, O Goddess, and to die for thee,
AND ye, O ANGELS and ARCHANGELS all,
Guardians of mighty Kingdoms, and of Kings,
Who could your Cares on WILLIAM's Breast repose,
Who could your several Charges all to him
Resign, while happily aloft ye tower'd,
And cut with golden Wings your blissful Heaven;
Now mourn his Flight to the pure Realms of Day,
And mourn your own Return to a bad World;
For he is to your upper Regions flown,
Who equal to your selves your Cares below supplied.
THEN mourn, O EARTH, and mourn, ye HEAVENS your Spheres
To Melting Airs y' Intelligences tune;
His Godlike Soul's for ever from us flown,
Whose Zeal could the divided Earth unite,
Whose wondrous Zeal united Earth and Heaven,
BUT let there be such Lamentation here
As never was known for any Fate before,
And let the Grief be general, as the Loss;
For Human Kind has lost by WILLIAM's Death,
His People most, his first and chiefest Care.
He was the tender Father to his People,
A Friend and Brother to the rest of Kings;
(Alas, few Kings are Friends, or meet with Friends)
A Benefactor to the Race of Men.
Sure 'twas some Angel who forsook the Skies,
And out of wondrous Love to wretched Men
Vouchsaf 'd to dwell in Human Shape below.
For all his Lifetime, he from Place to Place
Removed, dispensing Benefits to all;
And from their Gates the grand Destroyer drove.
For that alone he moved, he spoke, he thought.
As if the important Business of his Life
Had been to sacrifice his own Felicity
To that of wretched Men, his Great Design
Extended to his most inveterate Foes:
He blessed even them, and would have done them good,
Because his Foes were still his Fellow Creatures,
From one Divine Original derived.
His Foes his Justice and his Mercy knew;
And his inviolable Faith as firm
As are the unchangeable Decrees of Fate.
For tho the wondrous Goodness of his Soul
Made him still sympathize in all our Joys,
And mourn and suffer in the Woes we feel;
Tho. He found something in his godlike Mind,
That answered to the Cries of the Distressed,
And gave him Anguish, till they found Relief,
Which was the Source of all his wondrous Deeds,
And which distinguished his Heroic Life,
And set him far above all vulgar Heroes;
Yet was his Word so sacred and so sure,
He would not break it to preserve a World.
BUT when your vulgar Heroes we survey,
We find them the abhorred Reverse of this.
They, by the Fever of Ambition fired,
Run frantickly about the frighted World,
And think to grow by mighty Mischiefs great,
While Horror marches in their dreadful Van,
And Death and Slaughter in their bloody Rear.
Whole Towns they plunder, lay whole Countries waste,
With grinding Want they make vast Kingdoms pine,
But their own Kingdoms into Deserts turn,
Where Famine lords it in its wild Domain:
For their own Kingdoms loudest cry to Heaven,
And loudest under their Oppression groan.
If they make doubtful Peace or hollow Truce,
It Is but for time to wage more dangerous War,
To weaken and divide their thoughtless Foes,
And lull them by Security to Fate.
To Friends deceitful, faithless to Allies,
Perfidious, perjured to their in-born Slaves;
Revengeful, cruel, bloody to Mankind:
A Sea of guiltless Blood they spill, a Sea
Of helpless Widows and of Orphans Tears,
Destroy their Enemies, their Subjects more:
Their Subjects chiefly feel their barbarous Hands;
For mad with Rage, their Enemies they tear,
But their poor Subjects coolly they destroy.
O fruitless Labor of fantastic Pride!
For while they thus would more than Men appear,
Their Breach of Faith, the Wrongs they do each Hour,
Their hateful Violences make them less;
Only by Fools and Impious Men admired,
Abhorred by God, by all good Men despised.
Too faithful Copies of their proud Original,
The great Destroyer, and the Foe of Men,
The first and grand Artificer of Fraud;
The powerful Prince of all the infernal Powers;
Mighty to act, sagacious to contrive,
Who with capacious comprehensive thought
Sits brooding over his dark and damned Design
Of captivating all the Race of Men,
And fixing Universal Monarchy,
Which he sometimes with Violence and Rage,
Sometimes with Lies and Hell-born Arts pursues:
His Foes sometimes with open Force invades,
But most with secret Practice undermines,
And sows Dissensions to divide their Strength.
A dreadful and a dangerous Foe to all;
But sure Perdition to his fastest Friends:
And his Allies are lost, as are his Slaves;
Who in Infernal Pains for ever howl.
THUS earthly Heroes copy him of Hell,
Those Tyrants whom the thoughtless World calls Heroes:
Such was not happy WILLIAM, but a Friend
To Men, and Servant of the most Supreme.
The chief and godlike Purpose of his Soul,
Was the restoring Quiet, Order, Peace,
And Universal Happiness to Men;
And like a faithful Servant to advance
His Master's universal great Design.
His Master would have all his Creatures blessed,
He loves the miserable Sons of Men;
And with a Love so ardent and so high,
As never can be thought be finite Man.
Next his was WILLIAM's Love to all his Kind,
For Fiends and Tyrants only were his Foes;
And Tyrants he esteemed no longer Men,
As cursed Fiends are Angels now no more,
Fallen from their Natures and their Names by Pride.
He hated both, to both a mortal Foe,
Because they dared to impeach his godlike Purpose.
For they make wretched all whom they make Slaves;
For what can be so dismal as to see*
Our Lives, our Fortunes, nay our every Action,
Nay even our Virtue and Divine Religion,
All in a feverish frantic Tyrant's power,
And to his boundless Passions all exposed.
He looked with Indignation and Disdain
Upon the aspiring, vain, presumptuous Wretch,
Who thought it great t'enslave his Fellow Creatures:
Dogs were not made to be controlled by Dogs.
Nor Horses over Horses to insult,
They rule not one another; nor ought Man
To control Man; but God is to command,
Who governs still by Reason and by Law.
He loves the Sons of Men, and leaves them free,
As free as is his own Almighty Power.
For he himself makes Reason still his Guide,
And swerves not from his own Eternal Laws.
Since our Great Maker then has left us free,
On whom we so immediately depend,
In whom we live, and move, and even exist,
Kings who are God's Vicegerents too must leave
Those who are under their Subjection, free;
And govern them by Reason and by Law.
For tho like Gods they are honored, they are Men,
And they must die like Men: So WILLIAM ruled,
And looked with Anger and with just Disdain
Upon the vain, the mortal, dying Wretch,
Who dares to make them Slaves whom God makes free;
Who by his lawless boundless Passions sways,
And sacrifices to his Lust of Power
A thousand greater worthier than Himself.
(For such are all the Good and truly Wise)
Which is renouncing Reason's sacred Rule,
Subverting the Awful Government of God,
Deposing even the World's Perpetual King,
As far as lies within a Mortal's Power,
TO assert the direful Government of Hell.
For if good Kings are God's Vicegerents, sure.
A Tyrant is Hell's Viceroy, and as such
A Christian's bound by his Baptismal Vow
Against him to denounce perpetual War.
So WILLIAM did, and seemed designed by Fate
TO assert the awful Government of God,
And Liberty of Man; and never did Heaven
Nor Fate do more for mortal Man than Him,
In giving him the Will to undertake,
And Power to execute the vast Design.
AND never was it known that mortal Man
More Noble, more Heroic Deeds performed,
Than WILLIAM in the Cause of God and Liberty*
The glaring Actions which the World calls Great,
From Passion chiefly, not from Virtue flow;
And of all Passions from Ambition most.
Pride which such dangerous Ravage wrought in Heaven
Among the Immortal Spirits of the Blessed,
May well destroy our frail Felicity,
May well cause dreadful Revolutions here.
To Pride the Illustrious Romans owed their Fame,
Their Quarrels still were specious, seldom just;
Yet not the greatest, first of Romans, Caesar,
Darling of Story, Paramour of Fame,
Of whom she doting talks and never is tired,
To satisfy Ambition e're performed
Deeds which displayed such Greatness in the Man,
As what Great WILLIAM did for Liberty.
METHINKS, ye Friends to Arbitrary Sway,
At this great Paradox I see you smile;
But hear, ye wretched Slaves to Opinion, hear,
And then determine this important Cause.
CAESAR acquired his greatest Share of Fame
Against the Gauls, who were our WILLIAM's Foes:
But Caesar fought with them divided, weak,
Doubtful in Counsel, and in Action slow,
False to each other, Traitors to themselves,
And the great Cause of dying Liberty.
No Captain at their Head like mighty Coesar,
Versed in the Noble Science of the Field,
The dexterous Art of Fortifying Camps,
Or Ranging numerous Armies in Array;
No brave experienced Officers to form
Their Troops, undisciplined and rude to War;
Their Soldiers and Commanders all grown faint,
Dejected, spiritless with frequent Routs;
All dead and senseless to that Noble Fire
That to Illustrious Acts inflames the Brave.
UNDER these Disadvantages lay France,
In what Condition was great Caesar then?
Mature in Years, by long Experience Wise,
Awful for Eloquence and Martial Deeds;
Leading the Flower of Rome's Victorious Legions,
Backed and supported by the Conquered World;
Valiant his Soldiers, Skilful, Disciplined;
Experienced their Commanders, Wise and Brave;
And Soldiers and Commanders, Romans all:
Inured to Dangers, made by Custom bold,
Exalted, spirited with long Success,
All eager in the burning Chase of Fame,
All faithful and united under Caesar,
And He Supreme and Absolute over all.
Yet with all these Advantages Great Caesar
Ten tedious Years consumed in Conquering France;
And now the Glory of his Conquest shares,
If the Distributors of Fame are just,
With his Wise, Valiant, his Victorious Friends,
Nay and with Fortune, with his very Foes.
For False and Traitors to the Common Cause,
Their Country basely they betrayed and sold.
WE 've shown what Caesar did for Pride, behold
What WILLIAM for Fair Liberty performed,
And the Actions in an equal Balance lay.
'TWAS in the fatal and recorded Year,
In which Batavia, the Defense and Mound*
Of Faith, of Right, of sinking Liberty;
Batavia like the native Land of Jove,
Proud of a hundred Formidable Towns,
Whose Lofty Bulwarks, and whose Stately Towers
Are to the Storms of Arbitrary Power,
What its Digues are to the Tempestuous Main:
For the wild roaring Torrent they restrain,
Which else would deluge all the Christian World,
And leave the Earth depopulate and bare:
'Twas in the Year in which forlorn Batavia
Invaded was, defenseless and surpised,
And by two potent Enemies attacked,
Britannia thundering on them from the Main,
And faithless Gallia lightning on the Shore;
While at the Horror of the Noise and Sight,
The Belgic Lion trembling and aghast,
Faint in his Roar, and with unsinew'd Paws,
Flew for Protection to the stormy Main,
Whose unrelenting Rage he most abhors:
'Twas in that fatal Year in which the States
(Their Country lost to the insulting French,
Their strongest Bulwarks forced, or else betrayed)
Were turned irresolute, distracted, wild;
The Crowd desponding all, divided, faint,
Astonished and amazed, and stupid grown,
In dreadful expectation of their Fate.
'Twas at this fatal Juncture that the Prince,
Like the Offspring of the Gods, a Hero born,
Without the advantage of a long Experience,
Without the influence of an awful Fame,
Without courageous or instructed Troops;
With naught on which he could depend but Heaven;
His vast Capacity and dauntless Soul,
Magnanimously undertook to save
His sinking Country and expiring Liberty.
HERE I Am in Rapture and Amazement lost!
What shall I first admire, his dauntless Soul
In that amazing Hurricane of Fate,
Ever scarce the Bloom of Youth proclaimed him Man,
When all the Heavens looked black, and all the Main
Looked dismal, when the frantic Billows raged,
The Tempest roared, the forky Thunder rolled,
And loudly bellowed over the dreadful* Deep;
The skilful'st Mariners confounded, foiled,
The boldest trembling, dying with the Fright;
The sinking Vessel motionless and dead,
Those at the Helm desponding, desperate,
Abandoning to Winds and Waves their Care;
He who had never plough'd the Deep before
Alone unterrify'd, and undismayed,
And dauntless in that dangerous Extreme,
As is a God by destiny secured;
As is the God of the tempestuous Deep,
When in some Storm that threatens general Wrack;
He lifts above the Waves his sacred Head
To calm his troubled Empire of the Main,
And give the laboring Universe Repose?
OR his great Conduct shall I first admire,
Without the advantage of Experience, wise,
Exact, profound, unfathomably deep,
Designed him by Foreknowledg, given by Fate
To countermine the dark Designs of Hell?
CAN ye behold Him, ye ungenerous Foes
To his Great Memory, his Deathless Name,
Without extolling to the Stars his Fame,
When ye discern him in that dreadful Hour,
Appearing at the Head of shameful Troops,
A wretched Handful, antiquated most,
Rusty with Peace, and listless with Disuse,
The rest a vile tumultuous Crowd, in haste,
By sad Necessity, not Choice, enrolled,
Rude and untaught, and barbarous to War,
Unfit by Nature, and untrain'd by Art;
By numerous ill Successes abject made,
Dejected, drooping, infamously base,
The mere Reverse of all that is Great and Brave:
Their Leaders the base Scum of all the rest,
And for that only reason uppermost;
Raised by the boiling Ferment of the State,
Only for factious Discontent advanced,
And inbred Hatred to their Great Defender?
Can you behold him at the Head of these,
Informing, moving, animating all,
Changing their very Natures like a God;
His Bravery kindling thousands with its Fire,
His Spirit working like the World's Great Soul,
And spreading beauteous Order through them, where
Trouble, Confusion, Chaos reigned before?
Can you see this, and not be wrapped with Wonder?
Can you behold the conquering Gauls at Bay
Already on his first Appearance stopped
In their precipitated wild Career,
Already meditating their Retreat?
Can even his most inveterate Foes see this,
And not exalt such wondrous Worth to Heaven?
WHAT a Man is to hearten fainting Hounds,
To rouse their Vigor on the lifeless Chase,
And guide them through the Mazes of the Field,
That to his drooping Countrymen was He;
Something between Divinity and them;
A more Exalted, a Superior Being;
Their Guardian Genius, and their God of War.
His vast Capacity supplied their Heads,
His martial Bravery inflamed their Hearts,
And raised their abject and their groveling Souls
To Noble Thoughts, and to Immortal Deeds,
Above the Fear of Death, or foul Retreat.
So Pallas to the fainting Greeks appeared,
Shook her invincible, her dreadful Shield,
And spread Celestial Vigor through the Field.
BEHOLD him by a Conduct, which surpised
The most Illustrious and the Oldest Chiefs,
The most experienced in the Art of War;
Like the young Roman Hero so renowned,
Forsaking his poor Country to preserve it,
And save the sinking Freedom of the World.
Behold upon fair Bona's lofty Towers
The Guardian Angels of a hundred Forts,
A hundred Towns, sit gazing to receive,
And with loud Welcomes hail their Great Defender:
For Bona taken set Batavia free,
And rent in twain the opprobrious Bonds, prepared
To bind the Christian World; yet, under Heaven,
That favored him with such peculiar Grace,
He ows the Immortal Glory to Himself,
Not to the Valor of his fainting Troops,
Nor to the Skill of their unwarlike Leaders.
Their Bravery was his, for he inspired it,
And his their Conduct, which from him they drew:
Nor ows his Fame to Weakness of his Foes,
Or their Divisions, or their Want of Skill;
But the Profoundness of his vast Designs,
And his High Courage raised above Compare.
THE Gauls had all the advantage over Nassau
That Caesar manifestly had over Gaul.
Behold them strong, united, numberless;
Their warlike Chiefs experienced and renowned;
Their well-provided Squadrons, skilful, brave,
All flushed and spirited with long Success,
All eager in the burning Chase of Glory.
Yet WILLIAM at the Head of wretched Troops,
Wretched at least, till raised and fired by Him,
In little more than one revolving Year
Forced his dread Foes to leave his Country free:
When Caesar with the Flower of Roman Legions,
In the large Compass of Ten rolling Years,
Scarce conquered barbarous divided Gaul.
EVEN Fortune claims no share in his Renown,
Fortune that bears so visible a part
In Human Actions, ruling all below,
Which Providence has wisely ordered, lest
Frail Dust should grow intolerably vain,
And cry, upon Success, It Is due to me.
But he so highly favored was of Heaven,
That still He brought about his vast Designs,
While she was known to assist his mortal Foes.
The great Discerner of all Human Hearts
Knew that his Noble Soul was truly Great,
As far above presumptuous Pride as Fear;
So conscious of its Origin Divine,
It never could ought but its Great Maker fear,
Never own a Man superior to it self.
But then so mindful of its frail Condition,
And its Creator's high Omnipotence,
That its Dependence it could never forget,
That him it would with trembling still approach,
And with profound Humility adore,
And by that Lowliness and aweful Fear
Confirm its Greatness, and its dauntless Courage.
THUS Fortune and the Gauls were WILLIAM's Foes,
Both He resisted, and He conquered both,
And brought about his great and just Designs;
But cruel was the Conflict first, and long,
And often the Goddess seemingly prevailed,
And often at once collecting her whole Might,
Took all Advantages of Time and Place,
Prepared to crush him at a blow, when He
With wondrous Art eludes that dreadful Blow,
And with fresh Force disputes the doubtful Day:
While Heaven serene looked down with all its Eyes,
Charmed with the greatest, noblest Sight that Earth
Can offer to the Skies; and that is a Man,
A mortal Man, a Match for Fortune's Power.
Her Power, great Arbitress of all below,
Till his Invincible, unshaken Soul,
With Wisdom, Patience, Resignation armed,
And with a thousand Virtues that have Force
To conquer Gods, compelled her to submit,
And own her glorious Conqueror at the last.
NOR were her Smiles more powerful over his Soul:
For upon him the faithless Goddess smiled
Even in the worst of Times, that dreadful Hour,
When raving as a Bacchanal, and wild,
She to new Slaughter lashed on limping Fate,
And led the Gauls to extirpate lost Batavia.
She offered him a Kingdom for a Bribe,
A Kingdom with a hundred powerful Towns,
In Wealth exhaustless, numberless in Men;
Which he rejected with a Brave Disdain,
And chose to perish with his Country free,
Rather than found an Empire on its Bonds.
O Greatness, to be found on Earth no more!
Exalted far above all Royalty,
And far above the Rule of Fortune's Power.
For when long after he embraced a Crown,
Justly conferred by free Consent of those
Over whom He was to reign; the Acceptance them
Was necessary for the World, not Him,
And for the World H' embraced it, not himself.
To him 'twas all Increase of Toil and Care:
He wanted not a Crown to make him Great;
His Soul possessed a Greatness of its own,
Not like the short-lived Pomp of Fortunes Power,
But durable, Immortal as it self;
Placed like it self above the Force of Fate.
His Towering Soul it self was Greatness all,
All vast Intelligence and solid Virtue,
The things which make even God and Angels Great.
A FALSE and borrowed Luster He despised,
Derived from Scepters and Imperial Crowns,
His Soul with native Luster, native Flame
Shone out, as glorious as the Eternal Fire,
Which rolls his Sovereign Globe along the Sphere,
Rapid, yet firm in the Refulgent Course,
That the Great Mover taught him at the first,
And whose Excess of Glory darkens all
The rest of God's Vicegerents in the Skies.
Thus while vain Pomp and tinsel Glory serve
TO amuse the gazing and inconstant Crowd,
He charmed the bravest, wisest Men on Earth;
Angels looked wondering on his Virtue down,
And the Great Maker pleased, his Masterpiece surveyed.
THUS He, despising Royalty, acquired
A more extended and a Nobler Power.
Imperial Crowns, who saw to what a Height
Above all Human Greatness He was raised,
How far above all little selfish Thoughts,
Acting as if he thought he had been born
For all the World except himself alone;
Anxious about the Safety of the World,
But utterly regardless of his own;
And hazarding his own for that of all.
Imperial Crowns convinced of this, confessed
An Excellence superior to their own;
And Kings themselves grew subject to his Sway.
Him with Esteem and Wonder they beheld,
Champion of God and his most Sacred Truth,
Defender of the Liberties of Men,
And Great Protector of the Rights of Kings:
And they who gave to mighty Nations Laws,
Received them first from him, and justly thought
That only He who of Mankind took care,
By Nature was designed the Lord of All.
What but the Head takes care of every Part?
What but the Soul? What but the informing Soul,
What runs through all, that animates them all,
And in continuous Union all maintains;
Union, their Cause of Spirit, Health, and Force,
And which dissolved, to all brings Fate or Woe?
NOW He the Councils of those Kings collects,
And all their different Interests reconciles;
Of all their thwarting, selfish, low Designs,
One Common, Noble, Vast Design he makes,
That seemed impossible to all but Him.
But his rare Genius sure Expedients finds
To calm their Jealousies, and sooth their Pride;
And all at least are satisfied in him,
The Tie and Bond of Union to them all.
And now behold him marching at the Head
Of all their Squadrons, German, Spanish, Dutch;
Now see them filing through thy narrow Ways,
Till then inglorious and obscure Seneffe,
Now shining in the bright Records of Fame*
Among the Glories of the Eternal Roll:
And lo the Germans and the Dutch have passed,
And the Proud Spaniard now prepares to pass,
When lo Great Conde with his headlong Troops
Comes pouring on them like a sounding Flood,
That by Destruction makes its noisy Way.
Upon the Wings of Fear the Spaniards fly,
And many a Furlong leave their Pride behind;
For Conde's Image haunts them in their Flight,
His awful Form still urging on their Speed,
More dreadful to them than his Numerous Host;
His awful Form presented to their View,
To their Remembrance calls his glorious Acts,
Their Friends defeated, and Themselves overthrown.
When e're Great Conde's Image they behold,
The bloody Plains of Lens are in their View;
And thou, O Friburg, with thy dismal Cliffs,
And the dire Fields of Norlingue and Rocroy,
A thousand Victories and High Exploits
Encompass him with dreadful Glory round;
About him like a Guard of Terrors march,
And arm him with Eternal Majesty.
These Fantoms goad the Spaniards in their Flight,
And now the Fury of that shameful Flight
Proves fatal to the Forces of their Friends,
And the Battalions breaks and overwhelms.
That WILLIAM swiftly sends to their Relief,
The French drive on and no Resistance find,
Or else Triumphant force their way through all:
Outrageous as a Flame that is driven by Winds,
And fiercer, stronger by Obstruction grown.
But now Heroic WILLIAM thundering comes
To turn the Fortune of the bloody Day;
Behold with what a Noble-Rage h' attempts
TO arrest his Squadrons in their headlong Flight:
For his own Squadrons first He Is sorc'd to attack.
With what a matchless Bravery he meets
Routed Battalions panting over the Plain!
Then with his flaming Sword in their Career
He stands, his Person to them all exposed,
His Thundering Arm opposing to them all.
Now by the Torrent overborn, overwhelmed,
Now stemming with a dauntless Breast the Tide,
And now with desperate Vehemence turning all,
The Base with Blows corrects, with Words the Brave;
And some the sparkling Glories of his Eye,
And some his Looks, and some his Voice inflames;
O whither run ye? O return, return!
O ye who had the Looks of Soldiers once,
I see ye always had the Hearts of Slaves,
The worst of Slaves, from Slaves themselves ye run;
You Cowards in defending Liberty,
They in augmenting their own Thraldom Brave.
For me my own right Hand, or else my Foes,
My Freedom and my Glory shall secure;
For Death or Victory bring both alike.
Ye few Great Souls, who Liberty and Fame
Prefer to wretched, shameful, slavish Life.
Come on, be Death or Victory the Word.
THIS said, he breathing an Heroic Air,
As great as if Eternal Fame appeared,
And to High Actions called her darling Sons.
And now their Shame prevails upon their Fear,
And now he leads them furious to the Charge,
Firmly resolved to die a thousand Deaths,
And to forsake the World ever such a Leader.
Now at their Head with a resistless Rage
He through the firmest French Battalions breaks,
And charging through and through their Squadrons mows,
Their Squadrons now concealed in smoaky Clouds,
And now revealed in blazing Sheets of Fire,
And now the French grow fiercer by Despair:
And with redoubled Voice Bellona raves,
With shriller Notes the Cornets vex the Air,
Death's Bugles in the dismal Chase of Blood,
The Trumpets kindle Mars with fiercer Sounds,
And the tempestuous Drums with thicker Strokes
Alarm the Foe of Nature. All the Heavens,
And all the Air appears conflicting Fire,
And now the joining Squadrons rend the Skies,
And riding at full Stretch upon the Plain,
With hideous Outcries on each other rush,
And make one ghastful Charnel of the Field;
The rattling Plain with murdring Vollies rings,
And to the thundering Cannons mortal roar,
The Hills rebellow with a dreadful Sound,
That the dire Consort seems to deaf the World.
WILLIAM, the glorious Spirit of the War,
Is every where where Danger most prevails,
Correcting Fortune, and confronting Fate.
Like Mars himself, Fierce, Valiant, Raging, Young,
Among the thickest Foes his thundering Steed
He spurs, then brandishes his fatal Sword;
Terror severely sparkling in his Eyes,
Death like a Faulcon perched upon his Arm,
Watching the certain Signal of his Blow,
And then like Lightning darting at his Prey.
WILLIAM the desperat'st Champion of the Field,
In Feats of Arms and mortal Rage excels,
Surpassing in amazing Actions all
Whom Glory urges, or whom dire Despair,
The meanest Sentry less exposed than he.
Frequent amidst the hottest of the Fire,
And often surrounded, covered over with Flames;
And yet in Conduct oldest Chiefs excels,
To best Advantage every Motion makes,
Always exactly present to himself,
Spite of his furious executing Arm,
Spite of the Smoke, the Tumult, and the Noise:
The raging Trumpet and the storming Drum,
The Muskets Din, and thundering Cannons Roar;
Nay spite of Death, whom all his dreadful Guard
Of purple Terrors through the Field attends,
Who painting hideously his ghastful Face
With Dust and Blood, and leaping his pale Steed
Over slaughtered Heaps, rides dismal through the Plain.
THUS all the Day the God of Battle raged;
And the Sun sat in Horror and in Blood;
And then the laboring Moon beheld a Sight
That troubled her above Thessalian Charms,
And made old Night look hideous to her View.
NOW in their turns the mangled French recoil,
And doubt the Fortune of the dreadful Day;
And well they may recoil, and well may doubt;
When their Great Chief the Heroic Conde doubts.
Now Rage, Disdain, and Grief to Madness wrought,
And the tormenting Conscience of his Worth,
Disturb his Generous Breast, and wrack his Soul:
He raves, He cannot bear the stabbing Thought
Of yielding to a beardless Chief the Field.
But this is what torments and stings him most,
That He, who now for thirty Glorious Years
Has with successive Victories been crowned,
Been used to all the Wonders of the Field;
Himself the Noblest Wonder of them all,
Should see this Godlike Youth perform such things;
As force even him to admire; O mortal Shame!
He cries aloud, O Death to my Renown!
'Twas He, it is manifest, 'twas none but He
That turned the Fortune of the Wondrous Day.
Thou my Divinity, Eternal Fame,
And Victory, thou Darling of my Soul:
My Mistress, that for Thirty Glorious Years
Have still been constant to my Noble Fire!
Will ye desert me for a Boy at last?
Is not my Deathless Passion still the same?
Is not my Great Aspiring Soul the same?
The same my Conduct, and my Nervous Arm?
Have I for Nassau courted you thus long?
For him were all the desperate Fields I fought,
For him my accumulated Triumphs all;
Which with my Loss of Quiet, and of Blood,
With Restless Days, and Sleepless Nights I won?
O never, never let it be pronounced!
First let me perish, let me perish all!
The very Name of Conde be forgot;
Be the cursed Syllables never mentioned more;
And ye vain Monuments of my Renown,
Lens, Norlingue, Friburg, St. Antoine, Rocroy!
O let Seneffe complete the Illustrious List;
Or may ye all neglected be by Fame,
And never shine in her Eternal Roll!
THIS said, He leads the French to certain Fate,
For now the Allies Invincible are grown,
Dauntless their Minds, Impregnable their Posts,
Such is their Hero's Conduct and his Fire:
And now they pour a Storm of Iron Hail,
Whose Fury makes whole Squadrons fall, while they
Covered with Dust, and horrid all with Blood;
The slaughtered French in Ghastful Heaps behold,
And take new Spirit from that dismal Sight.
Conde resolves his Men shall perish all,
Resolves himself to perish at their Head;
And all had fallen a Victim to Despair,
If the descending Goddess of the Night
Had not just then withdrawn her Sickly Beams,
And Night her blackest Mantle over them thrown.
And now the Rage and Din of Battle cease,
Nor Noise nor Silence in the Field prevails,
But a low, hoarse and undistinguished Sound,
A sullen hollow grumbling strikes their Ears;
The dreadful Murmurs of declining Rage,
And the last doleful Accents of Despair.
And now the Freneh concealed in Night retire,
And to Victorious WILLIAM leave the Field;
And in the Height of Anguish and Despair
Praise his great Conduct and his matchless Fire.
HERE meanly his ungenerous Foes enquire,
Were all his Battles thus with Conquest crowned?
What if they were not? they deserved it all,
And that was more than Victory to him:
He nobly chose to merit Victory,
Rather than have it poorly undeserved:
And from the Height of his exalted Soul.
Descend to Triumph by inglorious Ways:
Greater and more exalted in Distress
Than the great Monarch in his happier Hours,
Looking with Scorn on Fortune and his Foes,
And all who prosper'd by ignoble Arts.
His Conquests all were Glorious, all were Just,
All fairly gained in the broad Eye of Heaven,
And gained while Heaven and Earth looked wondering on.
Conquests indeed, not Robberies nor Fraud,
Nor Purchases nor Thefts, a Conqueror he!
No Trafficker for Countries and for Towns,
Nor double Dealer in the Trade of War,
Nor sordid Turner of his Gold for Gain.
He conquered at Seneffe, had 'ere his Foes
A braver Army, or a nobler Chief?
A Chief with such Experience, such Renown,
And so much Conduct joined with so much Fire;
So wondrous when the God of Battle raged?
He who against great Conde found Success,
Could never have missed it against meaner Chiefs;
Had he not by their Numbers been oppressed,
Or by the Falseness of his own betrayed;
For to himself he always owed Success,
To his high Conduct, and his great Example,
His Losses to the Falsehood, or the Sloth,
Or Impotence, or Factions of his Friends.
But yet whene're he lost the uncertain Day,
He lost but what was Fortune's, not his own.
The towering Greatness of his Soul was His,
And that he never lost, that was Himself;
His very self; his Troops have been subdued,
But never He, He gained by their Defeat.
Since adverse Fortune showed him more himself
Of deeper Conduct, and more towering Mind,
More watchful Care, and more unwearied Toil;
Of Resolution never to be broke,
Of Constancy that triumphed over Fate,
And kept Proud Fortune in severest Awe.
'Twas this that terrified his happier Foes,
Made Lewis in the Fields of Valenciennes
Poorly the Glorious proffered Fight refuse,
Afraid to trust his far more numerous Troops,
More Skilful, more Victorious, more Renowned;
Doubting if they with Fortune's stronger Power
Could guard him all from WILLIAM's great Revenge.
This made the Proud and Haughty Monarch stoop,
And after all the Advantages he gained,
With Prudence doubt the last Event of War,
And in our Hero's Country sue for Peace.
AND now the World in faithless Peace lies lul'd,
Which more than War advances boundless Sway;
Fair Liberty sleeps on, and never dreams
That to her Heart her Murderer's Hand's so near,
Till it is too late to fear, too late to dream:
For now they seize and bind Her strongest Friend,
That they may surely give the fatal Blow.
Now the Crowns totter on a hundred Heads,
And Europe's nodding Powers expect to fall;
For lo where bound forlorn Britannia lies,
Pinioned her Arms that once the Balance held,
And in due Poise sustained the ponderous World.
Bound to her Rocks like Andromede she lies;
Fair Liberty shreeks out aloud for Aid;
When WILLIAM on the Wings of all the Winds,
Like Perseus, nobly to their Rescue flies;
While the admiring World attentive stands,
Trembling in Expectation of the Event,
For WILLIAM's Fate the General Fate decides:
When with Success above what Caesar found,
(But Caesar came to enslave, and He to free)
The Happy Hero came, and conquered e're he saw.
O CONQUEST worthy Men and Angels praise!
How poor's the Triumph for extended Sway,
Compared to this? This Conquest over Hearts,
This Triumph over Souls, which leaves them free,
And makes the Vanquished happier than the Victors.
The Britons who were wretched Slaves before,
Who 'ad lost even Hope, and who expected naught
But Life in Miseries, or Death in Flames,
When he approached grew Happy, Free, Secure:
So Happy that their Raptures knew no Bounds!
For hark how their tumultuous Joy grows loud!
Hark how their stormy Shouts ascend the Skies
To unknown Worlds, transporting VVILLIAM's Fame!
Still, still the Sounds are in my ravished Ears,
And still methinks I hear the Nation's cry,
Hail thou Defender of unspotted Faith!
Renowned Restorer of lost Freedom, hail!
Great Patron of the Christian World, all hail!
At thy Approach fierce Arbitrary Power,
And bloody Superstition disappear.
At thy Approach fair Liberty returns,
And smiling darts a lovely Glance so sweet,
As charms at once the Hearts of Gods and Men:
While Piety looks modestly assured,
And lifts its moving melting Eyes to Heaven;
O Happy, Happy above Millions, Thou,
Who have made Millions blessed; Thee Times to come,
Thee Nations yet unborn shall Happy call:
For the diffusive Good which flows from Thee
To every Age and Nation must extend.
But we the ungrateful'st and the worst of Men,
Should we ever cease to celebrate thy Praise,
Should we forget the boundless Debt we owe.
Then raise thy Voice, O Happy Island, raise,
Let thy tempestuous Raptures tower to Heaven,
Till Angels catch our Great Deliverer's Praise;
Tune it, ye Angels, to your deathless Lyres,
And let all Heaven attend the enchanting Song,
For ye have Voices for the lofty Theme.
Ye Angels, an Immortal Glorious Crown
To recompense the Immortal Act, prepare!
But may he wear it late, and long be ours,
May ye impatiently expect him long,
Long may he deign to wear this earthly Crown,
Which now we place upon his Sacred Head,
A poor and mean Return for what we owe.
THIS was the assembled Nation's general Sense,
In these warm Sounds they 'xpress'd their Gratitude,
And pleased the Godlike Hero with their Joy.
Yet scarce the inconstant Moon renewed her Orb
(O may it never mentioned be by Fame,
Or never be believed by Times to come!)
Before they changed their more inconstant Minds,
And murmured at their Great Deliverer.
Some envied even the Crown they had bestowed,
And some, regretting their old Thraldom, cried
For Egypt and its Vegetable Gods.
Others would be preserved, but not by Him;
Alas unfortunate, mistaken Men!
Who could preserve you possibly but He?
Hark how Hibernia rends with Shreeks the Air,
And to Britannia cries aloud for Help.
In vain Great Schomberg marches to her Aid,
With his Brave Officers, his dauntless Troops,
With his own wondrous Skill in Feats of Arms;
For Superstition and wild lawless Power,
Stood both insulting by, and saw those Troops
Consumed insensibly without a Blow.
But VVILLIAM's Presence on the wondering Boyn,
Made his Foes tremble, cheered his fainting Friends,
Revived them like their Universal Soul,
And quickly changed that hapless Island's Fate;
As when the Sun above the Horizon mounts,
And with his Blaze of Glory fills the World:
Goblins, and Ghosts obscene, and Spirits damned,
That revel'd by the Stars uncertain Light;
Or the pale Glimpses of the Silver Moon,
Revere the Effulgence of the Lord of Day,
And disappearing take their Flight to Hell,
So when the Light of all the Christian World
Mounted in Glory over the Banks of Boyn,
Unbounded Power soon took its headlong Flight,
And frighted Superstition quickly shrunk
Its hated Head within its gloomy Cell.
Hibernia rescued by her Martial King,
Made thee, Britannia, more securely free.
Why do thou murmur then, ungrateful Isle?
What, do thou envy to the Best of Kings
That Happiness which waits upon a Crown
That thou thy self so freely have bestowed,
So justly fixed upon his Sacred Head?
Is that thy Cause of envious Discontent?
Alas, the Happiness is all for Thee,
And all the Toil and Misery for him!
For thee, and not Himself He wears that Crown.
The very best of Fathers and of Kings
Contentedly supports a wretched Life,
That He may make his much-loved Children blessed:
For William in his Kingdoms is Himself
The only Man whom his Auspicious Reign
Constrains to bear intolerable Care.
Not all the Rolls of Fame can show a King
Who labored under such a Weight before.
Abroad behold a formidable Foe!
Surpassing in his Numbers and his Strength
The whole Alliance which our Hero formed;
Then that Alliance difficult to form,
And wondrous difficult to be maintained;
Some Weak, some Slow, some Jealous, Factious all,
And thwarting in their contrary Designs.
He was the only Man upon the Globe
Who could at once resist the Common Foe,
And could enforce the Weakness of his Friends,
Quicken their Sloth, enrich their Poverty,
Cool their Mistrusts, their Factions reconcile.
At the same time at home, amongst his own
Lurked his most mortal and most dangerous Foes,
Those Sons of Darkness, who concealed in Night,
Sat brooding over their damnable Design
To take away the very Life of Liberty.
In the mean while his faithful'st Friends at home,
His loyal'st Subjects too divided were,
Too factious grown to take just care of Him,
More eager most each other to destroy,
Than Him their common Safety to defend.
How few, alas, he found entirely true!
How few in whom he could entirely trust,
Upon whose faithful Breasts he could discharge
Some part of his intolerable Load!
For some had groundless Jealousies conceived,
And others of themselves had too much care
To be sollicitous about their King.
Never had Prince such Hardships to surpass;
For in eternal Toil He past his Hours,
Wasted with Action, or consumed with Thought,
And twenty times He past the Stormy Main,
While We in Peace securely slept at home;
Past it against his Health, against his Life,
Past it for Us against his very Self:
It Is what his tender Body never could bear;
In every Passage he almost expired,
Profuse of his inestimable Life,
To save and to defend ungrateful Men.
And when the wearying Toils of hard Campagns
Were overcome, alas He came not home,
Like other Conqu'rors, to indulge Himself
In soft repose, or to enjoy the Fame,
Or the fair Conscience of his Noble Acts.
For always He returned to endure new Toils,
And bear almost insufferable Pains;
Contending with the envious Rage of some,
The causeless, groundless Jealousies of more,
And with the fierce Divisions of us all.
And when with Godlike Patience he had born,
Beyond what Nature suffered him to bear,
The weary Marches, and the hard Fatigues
Of a laborious and a long Campagn,
At his return he always something found
More difficult and grievous to be born,
Unjust Reproaches, undeserved Affronts
From those whom with the hazard of his Life,
Whom with the loss of Rest and Health he served;
And yet with Patience He supported all,
Because He knew his Just Resentment shown
Would have confounded all his Great Designs.
Therefore that just Resentment pent within,
Like a devouring Flame that wants a Vent,
Consumed and preyed upon his Noble Heart,
Exhausting the best Spirits of his Blood,
And richest Purple of the Royal Flood.
BEHOLD Him (and then murmur, if thou can
O thou Repining and Ungrateful Tribe!)
Laboring beneath this Weight, this World of Care,
Which his frail Body could endure no more:
He knew it, yet undauntedly went on,
Devoting his Inestimable Life,
And offering his Hearts-blood a Sacrifice
For the Felicity of wretched Men;
Firmly resolved, as far as fleeting Life
Would give him leave, in spite of even our selves
And all our foolish and our factious Rage,
To finish the great Work He had begun.
IN this the Roman Decii He surpassed;
They for their Country too themselves devov'd,
But what they did was probably the effect
Of wild Enthusiasm and of frantic Rage,
And sudden the Resolve, and short the Pain.
But WILLIAM's Action was the effect of Thought,
Of a deliberate and long Design;
For sensibly his Life consumed away,
And sunk beneath the Pressure of Affairs;
Yet He with indefatigable Soul,
And with almost Divine Resolve, went on,
And knowing He or Liberty must die,
By his eternal Care, eternal Toil,
To support that exhausted his Best Blood,
And saved it at the expense of even his Life.
AND if Success (O fond mistaken Men,
That judge of Human Actions by Success!)
Was sometimes wanting to his Great Designs;
Yet he deserved it still, and that is enough,
And greatest, when he missed it, still was found;
For then his firm and comprehensive Soul
In all the Luster of its Virtue shone.
Yet he is unjustly said to want Success,
Who by his matchless Conduct, in despite
Of Fortune's Favor, ruined his great Foe,
And near Perfection brought his own Designs;
In spite of Losses made his Kingdom thrive,
While France with all its Fortune was undone:
For by Himself, and not by Fortune Great,
Great WILLIAM found us wretched, left us blessed
In spite of all her Malice, all her Rage:
But ill that King deserves the Name of Great,
Who found his Subjects wealthy, easy, blessed,
And will be sure to leave them poor, starved, cursed,
In spite of false Success and false Renown.
AND thus to bless Mankind our Hero lived,
'Twas the sole Business of his Godlike Life,
And great Employment of his dying Hours.
He knew he never could better die employed
Than He had lived; he knew the very Best,
The Greatest, Holiest of Mankind were they
Who of their Maker most resemblance bear;
And that they best resemble the most High,
Who to Mankind do most diffusive good,
And who for future Ages best provide.
Nor could the King of Terror's awful Face
Turn his Attention from his Grand Design:
The grizly King no Terrors had for Him;
Calmly they met, and kindly they embraced,
As friendly Monarchs on their Frontiers meet.
His mighty Soul was so remote from Fear,
That He showed nothing like what is falsely Brave,
And nothing like what is falsely Good He showed,
No earnest vehement Devotion paid,
The effect of Terror and Astonishment;
But calm, resigned, and charitably meek,
Briefly and mildly offered up that Soul
To the Great Judge of Kings who knew his Heart,
And the main Spring of all his Actions saw.
That done, again he of the World took care;
For his Religion in his Actions lay,
And not in fruitless Words and empty Sounds:
He looked upon himself as sent by God
TO advance the Happiness of Human Kind;
And as He past his whole Heroic Life,
He died performing his Great Master's Will;
And as He knew no Fear, so Pain it self
Could not divert him from his Great Design.
If we give Credit to the Sons of Art,
His latest Hours in sharpest Pains were spent,
And yet he showed no smallest Sign of Pain,
Uttered no loud Complaint, nor piercing Groan;
No Mark of Torment on his Face appeared,
Only a more compassionating Look
For his loved People whom he left behind,
The best of Fathers for his Children felt,
But for himself appeared insensible.
Yet his no fruitless vain Compassion was,
But made him eager to complete those Acts
That dire impending Mischiefs might prevent,
And might our future Happiness secure.
O GREATNESS, never known to Man before!
Too great to be conceived by Human Thought!
Behold a Man, who dies in sharpest Pain,
In his own Height of Misery intent
Upon providing Happiness for all,
Which makes the sole Employment of a God,
In perfect Ease and full Felicity:
As much concerned for the World's Liberty,
As if his Business ceased not with his Life,
As if our Guardian Angel had assumed
That Royal Shape, and would not leave his Charge,
But only disappear to Mortal Eyes.
NOT the least Trouble or Concern He showed,
That his Great Maker called him at a Time,
When the expecting World had all its Eyes
Intent on Him, the Darling Theme of Fame;
When all his vast Designs were just reduced
Within a certain Prospect of Success;
When humbled Gaul, and the delivered World
Had all advanced his Fame to such a height,
As never Human Glory rose before.
Not in the least concerned at being snatched
From the transporting Joy, the vast Applause*
Of all the Nations happy made by Him.
The Hero meekly bore it, tho He knew
That the World judges by the last Event;
But the World's Praise was what he could contemn.
He like a faithful Servant had performed
What his Great Master destined him to do;
And so died, pleased with this Heroic Thought,
That had that Master's absolute Decree
Allotted him a thousand times as much,
He would with Cheerfulness have done it all.
OF all about him in that dreadful Hour
He was alone serene, the mournful rest
Felt all the fiercest Pangs of Grief and Fear,
Of ghastful Horror, and of wild Despair;
Their bloodshot Eyes, and their distracted Looks
Declared the inward Torments of their Souls;
They all like Wretches on the Rack appeared,
Like the compassionate Spectator He.
At last one hearty Sigh he gives for all,
A Sigh that ended his Heroic Toils,
And brought that Rest which Virtue could not bring.
And now in loud and lamentable Wails
They vent their lawless Grief that knows no Bounds:
Some for their Royal Patron wring their Hands,
Their Benefactor some aloud deplore;
Some their Wise, Brave, Undaunted General;
Their Great Deliverer and Defender some;
Their Father, like poor helpless Orphans, all.
But turn thy View, my Soul, from that vast Grief,
Whose mortal Prospect is enough to blast
Thy strongest and thy noblest Faculties.
Yet whither must I fly to avoid that Grief?
All Europe catches the contagious Woe:
The Greatest Men on Earth his Fate deplore,
Those dauntless Souls who always scorned their own
Kings for that Loss not only grieve, but die.
But cease your Lamentations, O ye Kings;
Your loud Laments, y' afflicted Nations cease;
It Is for your selves this vast Excess of Woe,
And not for Him, for He is surely blessed.
Never a greater Subject was of Woe;
But still excessive Grief some Weakness shows,
But lofty Praise declares a Noble Mind,
The best Return for mighty Benefits,
And worthy to be offered up to Gods,
And to good Kings, who most resemble Gods.
Then change your Voices all with one accord,
Y' afflicted Nations, change your mournful Notes,
And praise your mighty Benefactor's Name;
Lift up your Voices all with one accord,
For the Great Theme requires your noblest Flights.
WILLIAM the Great, the Good, the Just is gone;
Yet never, never shall He die entire,
But his Immortal Memory shall last
As long as Gratitude remains in Men,
As long as lovely Liberty remains.
For WILLIAM was the Greatest, Best of Kings,
That ever was sent from Heaven to rule the Earth,
Or will be sent when Golden Times return:
Who, persecuted and oppressed by Fate,
Outpower'd, outnumber'd by the common Foe,
Deserted by some Friends, betrayed by some,
Ill seconded by more, almost alone,
Did by a Conduct Matchless and Divine
Deliver lost Batavia, Belgia save,
New imp'd the Roman Eagles soaring Wings,
To take a stronger and a nobler Flight;
Britannia he restored, Hibernia He reduced;
He Superstition's bloody Progress stopped,
And checked the Rage of Arbitrary Sway;
Religion reestablished, Right maintained,
Supported Freedom, Property secured,
And made Oppression tremble when he frowned;
Was born and lived for the World's Happiness:
In every Part of his unequaled Life
A Hero still confessed to all the World,
And died at last as greatly as he lived;
Whose dying Arm for Liberty did more
Than if the noblest Conquest he had gained:
And who, to sum all Praises up in one,
Maintains even dead the Freedom of the World,
Both by his Conduct, which Confederate Powers,
By Him combined in mutual League, pursue;
And by the Wisdom of that Mighty Queen,
Who now adds Luster to the Imperial Crown:
Her Wisdom and her Virtues are the Gifts,
Which He upon these Happy Realms bestowed.
Had it not been for his Heroic Toils,
The Golden Scepter She so mildly sways,
Had been in bloody Hands an Iron Rod.
And can we owe this Happiness to Him,
And yet refuse our Benefactor's Praise?
Where is our Honor? Where our Gratitude?
And where our boasted Loyalty to Her?
Can we be Foes to his Immortal Name,
Who gave us Her, who all his wondrous Steps
Persues, and seconds all his vast Designs?
And may she second all, till she attains
The Happy Glorious End which He proposed.
FINIS.

