Mr. DENNIS'S LETTERS FAMILIAR, MORAL, and CRITICAL.

ORIGINAL LETTERS, FAMILIAR, MORAL and CRITICAL.

By Mr. DENNIS.

In TWO VOLUMES.

VOLUME the FIRST.

LONDON: Printed for W. MEARS, at the Lamb without Temple Bar. MDCCXXI.

PREFACE.
I Here present the Reader with a Volume of Letters writ upon very different
Occasions, at very different Times. They are far from being all of them equal,
but I hope their Variety will make amends for their Inequality. I make no doubt
but that upon perusal of the Critical part of them, the old Accusation will be
brought against me, and there will be a fresh Outcry among Thoughtless People,
that I am an Ill-natured Man. It Is very odd that I should have that Character
only from Persons who never knew me, and who never were once in my Company. But
there are People in the World who imagine that Criticism must be the Effect of
Ill nature. These Persons know not what is meant by either of the Terms, either
Criticism or Ill Nature; otherwise they would be convinced that a good
Criticism is the best-natur'd thing in the World. For by Goodness of Nature
must be meant something that comes up to the true Nature of Man; else it would
be a Term of Reproach, instead of Commendation. But the true Nature of Man is a
Reasonable and a Social Nature. And a good Criticism, is both Reasonable and
Social. It detects Error, illustrates Truth, advances Art, and consequently has
a direct Tendency to the Advancement of the national Honor. If this last is
true of good Criticism in general, it must be most true of a just Criticism
upon the Tragedy of Cato. That Tragedy met with Success which never any other
did. It was acted for a Month together. It has been translated into French, and
into Italian, which never happened to any of our Dramatick Poems before. And
it is plain to all the Judges of Poetry, that it has a Thousand shameful Faults,
and very few natural Beauties. What must the Knowers in France and Italy say,
upon reading these Translations? Must they not Discourse after this Manner? The
English Nation boast much of their Poetry; they extol to the Skies, their
Shakespeare, their Ben Johnson, their Milton: But yet they applaud nothing so
loudly as this Tragedy of Cato. They have got it translated both into French
and Italian, and have sent it to us as a Masterpiece to Insult us. Else why
has this Tragedy only been translated? And yet this Tragedy, at the same time
that it has a Thousand Faults, and most of them very gross ones; has very few
Beauties, and those which it has are perhaps not of British Growth, but are
derived from Lucan and Seneca. What then must we think of those other Poets,
their Shakespeare, their Ben Johnson, their Milton, whom they formerly so much
extolled, but not half so much as Cato? Must we not conclude, that these
Islanders are very indifferent Poets, and more indifferent Judges?

I appeal to the reasonable and impartial Reader, if this must not be the Sense
of all the knowing French and Italians who have seen these Translations. Let
the reasonable and impartial Reader judge then, if a just Criticism upon Cato
was not absolutely necessary, both for the Advantage of Dramatick Poetry, to
which the undeserved Success of this Tragedy has done infinite Harm, and for
the Vindication of the National Honor; let the Reader judge, if it was not
necessary, that a Man who owns that he admires the noble Genius of Shakespeare,
admires the unparalleled Sublimity of the Paradise Lost of Milton, that he is
infinitely pleased with the Masterpieces of Ben Johnson, and exceedingly
delighted with several of our other Comic Poets, should give his Reasons to
all the World why he has no Esteem for Cato?

If what I have said is not sufficient to appease the Fury of a Headlong Cabal;
but they will still cry out that the Critical Letters in this Volume upon the
Tragedy of Cato, are the Effects of Ill Nature, I must beg leave to exclaim in
my turn, that those Persons, let them be who they will, show a deplorable want
of public Spirit, who can prefer the Reputation of one Man, and a Reputation
which he does not deserve to possess, before the Advantage of a noble Art, and
the Honor of their Country.

But perhaps it is not the Author of Cato that these Persons are so much
concerned for, it is themselves. It Is themselves and their own Satisfaction,
which they prefer to the Prosperity of the Commonwealth of Learning, and to the
Good and Honor of their Country. There are in the World very vain Persons, who
are resolved to maintain the good Opinion which they have of themselves, at the
Expense of every thing, and utterly detest the Man who shall dare to disturb
them in the Possession of it, by showing them that they have passed a very
foolish Judgment.

If any are disgusted that these Observations are published after the Death of
the Author of that Tragedy, I can assure them, that they were writ in two long
Letters to a Friend immediately after the REMARKS which were printed. By what
Artifice those two Letters were got out of my Hands, by what Fortune I
recovered the Substance of them, and how it came to take the form which it now
has, I shall not here declare; not the first, through regard to the Memory of the
Dead; nor the two latter, through Respect to the precious Time of the Living.

Before I take my leave of this Subject I think my self obliged to do Justice
to the Memory of Mr. ADDISON, who was certainly a Learned and very Ingenious
Man: And several of the Tatlers and Spectators which were writ by him deserved
the Applause which they met with.

I hope that what I have said will suffice to satisfy every reasonable
Impartial Reader, who is a true Lover of His Country. For the rest, I have long
since learnt to esteem their Censures according to their just Value.

TABLE.
A.
ADDISON, the Sentiments of his Tragedy of CATO examined. Vol. 2. p. 303.
ARGYLE (Duke of) Letter to his Grace, written in the Name, and at the Request
of Mr. Penkethman the Comedian, when he was a Prisoner in the King's Bench, and
just recovering from a fit of Sickness. Vol. 1. p. 21. To her Grace the
Duchess, upon the same Occasion. Vol. 1. p. 152.
B.
BLACKMORE (Sir RICHARD) Letters to him. Vol. 1. p. 1, 154. BUCKINGHAMSHIRE
(late Duke of) a Letter to his Grace. Vol. 1. p. 55. To the same, sent with the
Lives of the English Poets in 2 Volumes lately Printed. Vol. 1. p. 206.
C.
CATO, Letters upon the Sentiments of that Play. Vol. 2. p. 303. CHARLTON (J.
Esquire) a Letter to him. Vol. 1. p. 150. COLLIER (JEREMIAH, M. A.) Letter to him
containing a Defense of a Regulated Stage. Vol. 2. p. 228. CROMWELL (HENRY Esquire)
a Letter to him on the Vis-Comice. Vol. 1. p. 13. Of an Expression in
Shakespeare, and of the Comedy of the Nonjuror. Vol. 1. p. 138, 166. Vol. 2. p.
303. CROWN (Mr. JOHN) Author of Sir Courtly-Nice) some Passages of his Life.
Vol. 1. p. 48.
D.
DRYDEN, of an Attempt to lessen his Reputation. Vol. 2. p. 289.
E.
EXAMINER, Remarks on that Paper. Vol. 2. p. 296.
F.
FREE THINKERS, our Constitution endangered by their Pernicious Principles.
Vol. 1. p. 36. Vol. 2. p. 461, 468. The present Corruption, the necessary
Consequence of their own Conversations, and Writings, and the natural Effect of
their undermining the Christian Religion. Their true Character. Vol. 2. p. 481.
G.
GODOLPHIN (late Lord Treasurer) Letter to him concerning the Proposal for the
Security of Commerce. Vol. 1. p. 119. GRANVILLE (GEORGE, Esquire) now Lord
Lansdown, upon his being made Secretary of War. Vol. 2. p. 363. GUARDIAN,
Letter upon the first publishing that Paper. Vol. 2. p. 284. GREENWOOD (Mr.)
Letter to him. Vol 2. p. 457.
H.
HALIFAX (Earl of) Letter to him. Vol. 2. p. 358. HORACE, Book 2. Satire 7. A
new Translation of it. Vol. 2. p. 439. HUNGERFORD, Letter to him. Vol. 2. p.
280.
I.
Judicium, of the Different Senses, in which the Classick Authors have used
that Word. Vol. 2. p. 457.
L.
LANSDOWN (Lord) see Granville. LEITH-HILL (in Surrey) the Prospect from thence
described. Vol. 1. p. 30.
M.
MANSELL (the Reverend Mr.) Letters to him. Vol. 1. p. 45. 146. MARLBOROUGH
(Duke of) Letter to his Gracee. Vol. 1. p. 26. MOYLE (WALTER, Esquire) Letters to
him. Vol. 1. p. 159, 211.
N.
NORTON (RICHARD of Southwick, Esquire) Letter to him. Vol. 1. p. 115.
P.
POEM, an Epick one, of its Moral and Conclusion. Vol. 1. p. 1. PRETENDER, a
Letter to a Lady upon the News of his Landing. Vol. 1. p. 58. -- Some Queries
concerning him. p. 414. PRIOR (MATTHEW, Esquire) Letter to him. Vol. 2. p. 430.
PUBLICK-TASTE, on the Degeneracy of it. Vol. 1. p. 70. PENKETHMAN (the
Comedian) a Letter to him. Vol. 1. p. 112. PARKER (Lord Chancellor) a Letter to
him. Vol. 1. p. 148. POETICAL-COMPOSITIONS, of Simplicity in them. Vol. 1. p.
166. PACK (RICHARDSON, Esquire) Letter to him, occasioned by his Memoirs of Mr.
Wycherley. Vol. 1. p. 21.
Q.
QUACKS, Ecclesiastical ones, an Account of them. Vol. 1. p. 134.
R.
ROW (NICHOLAS, Esquire) on his being made Surveyor at the Custom-House, and his
Marriage. Vol. 1. p. 19. RUMOR, on the Deceitfulness of it. Vol. 1. p. 35
RELIGION, the Establish'd-One of every Country, the Basis of the Constitution
of that Country. Vol. 2. p. 491.
S.
SATIRISTS, Roman Ones, an Account of them. Vol. 2. p. 430. SHAKESPEARE, of his
Genius and Writings. Vol. 2. p. 371. SERGEANT (Mr.) Letters to him. Vol. 1. p.
30, 93, 129, 163, 197. STEEL (Sir RICHARD) Letters to him. Vol. 1. p. 28, 81,
103. STAGE, the present State of it. Vol. 1. p. 61. STAGE, a Regulated One
Defended. Vol. 2. p. 228. STOCK-JOBBING, Letter in behalf of one who was lately
ruined by it. Vol. 1. p. 67. STOCK-JOBBERS, all of them Slaves. Fol. 1. p. 93.
SEWELL (Mr.) On the Preface to a Comedy called the Masquerade Vol. 1. p. 122.
SPECTATOR, Remarks on it. Vol. 1. p. 166. Vol. 2. p. 407, 417. SUCCESSFUL
Pyrate, a Tragedy, Letter to the Master of the Revels upon the acting it. Vol.
1. p. 194.
T.
TONSON (Mr. JACOB, Sen.) Letter to him, in Defense of Mr. Dryden. Vol. 2. p.
289.
V.
VIRGIL, Remarks upon Two Verses of that Author. Vol. 1. p. 154.
W.
WALLER, of his Verses to my L. Roscommon. p. 293. WEST (Mr. WALTER) Letter to
him. Vol. 2. p. 287. WYCHERLEY, his Country Wife defended. Vol. 1. p. 37.
WYCHERLEY, Some remarkable Passages of his Life. Vol. 2. p. 214.
ERRATA.
Page 23. Line 2. read, for thee. Page 58. Line 7. for Gueores, read Ge^^res.
Page 199. Line 18. read, it is.
LETTERS Familiar, Moral, and Critical.
December. 5. 1716.
TO Sir RICHARD BLACKMORE.
On the Moral and Conclusion of an Epick Poem.
SIR,
WHEN I sent you my Observations, upon the Two first Acts of the Play, I sent
you so many Reasons which obliged me to differ from you, with respect to the
Encomium, which you give to that Tragedy, in your Essay upon Epick Poetry. And
whenever you think fit to lay your Commands upon me, I shall lay before you the
Reasons, for which I dissent from you, with regard to the Commendation which
you give to a late Translation. At present I shall pass to Things more general,
and consequently of far great Importance.

IN the Chapter which treats of the Moral, you are pleased to affirm two
Things; The first is, That one who writes an Epick Poem, need not in his first
Intention, pitch upon some considerable Moral, and then contrive his Fable
suitable to that Design; The Second Thing is, That there is no occasion that an
Epick Poem should end Fortunately with regard to the Principal Character.

BUT, Sir, before I give my Reasons for dissenting from you, with regard to
these Two Points; the first of which is of Consequence, and the Second of the
utmost Importance: I desire that you would give me leave to enumerate some
Things, in which we perfectly Agree; that by this Method, we may facilitate an
Agreement in Things in which we Differ.

We agree then, Sir, in the following Points.

1. That there must be a Fable. Essay. p. 37. 2. That there must be an Action.
Ess. p. 47. 3. That the Action must be one. p. ibid. 4. That there must be a
Moral. p. 76. 5. That the Fable and the Action must be only for the Moral.
Ibid. and p. 34. 6. That the Moral must be the genuine Result of the Fable and
the Action. p. 77. 7. That Admiration ought to be the predominant Passion in
the narration of the Action. p. 33. 8. Nothing that is common or ordinary, can
excite Admiration. p. 34 and 35. 9. That there ought to be an Allegory. p. 41.
THESE, Sir, are Things in which we agree expressly: There are other Things in
which we agree implicitly, because if these last are false, they destroy the
Truth even of those in which we agree expressly; as that

1. The Moral must contain an undeniable Truth, or else it cannot be a Moral:
For Falsehood may delude, but only Truth can instruct. 2. That the Instruction
which the Poem gives, must be general; Moral Philosophy being the Law of
Nature, and consequently, instructive to Mankind. 3. That the Poetic Action
must remain general, even after the Imposition of Names; for if the Action is
particular, there can be no general Instruction deduced from it; the Conclusion
being false to generals from particulars. 4. That for the same Reason, the
Characters at the bottom must be general likewise, even after the Imposition of
Names. 5. That the Action and Characters being both general, even after the
Imposition of Names, they must be, consequently, both Allegorical.
LET us come now, Sir, to the two forementioned Particulars.

YOU say, That an Epick Poet is not obliged to have the Moral first in his
Mind: For, say you, no Author can form the Narration of any great and memorable
Action, but some Moral will arise from it, whether the Writer intends it or
not. Suppose this were true, a Poet is to Instruct by his Art and not by
Chance. But the very contrary of this is true, a Poet may form the Narration,
of a Hundred great and memorable Actions, if these Actions are Particular and
Historical, and not one Moral shall arise from them all; as the Battle of
Pharsalia, the Death of Brutus and Cassius, the Death of Cato, the Death of
King Lear, the Death of Hamlet, the Death of Harry the Fourth: And I defy any
Poet to form a general Action, and general Characters, but he must form them
upon a Moral, and consequently that Moral must be first in his Head. Can any
one believe, that Aesop first told a Story of a Cock and a Bull, and afterward
made a Moral to it? Or is it reasonable to believe, that he made his Moral
first, and afterward to prove it, contrived his Fable? Now I know no
difference that there is, between one of Aesop's Fables, and the Fable of an
Epick Poem, as to their Natures, though there be many and great ones, as to their
Circumstances. It Is impossible for a Poet to form any Fable, unless the Moral
be first in his Head.

YOU say that since Homer and Virgil does not expressly draw any Doctrine from
their Fables, it is not certain whether they designed any; and it is still more
uncertain, you say, whether they intended those particular Morals, which are
generally ascribed to them; which is as much as to say, that, though we can see a
Design, a good, a just, and a great Design in those admirable Poems, yet the
Authors of them saw none, and that, perhaps that is not their Design, which
appears to us and others, but something, which after so many Ages, has appeared
to no Man. Could Homer or Virgil, if they had studied a Thousand Years, have
contrived Morals, which would have been more the genuine result of all the
Parts of their Fables and of their Actions, than those which are generally
ascribed to them? Or can those Morals be made to appear the genuine result of
any other Poetic Actions, unless they are Copies of those?

YOU continue to say, That as from Pulpit Discourses on Divine Subjects, many
useful Inferences may be deduced by the Preacher; so in these superior Poems,
etc. But here, Sir, you appear not to consider, that the grand Moral of every
Sermon is the Text, which certainly is, or ought to be, first in the Mind of
every Preacher.

TO conclude my Remarks on this first Point; it appears to me evident, that
every Man who undertakes any great Action, has the chief Design which he
proposes by it, first of all in his Head; but you yourself are pleased to own,
p. 34. That the principal End of an Epick Poet, is to give Pleasure and
Instruction; and p. 76. That the Pleasure is only in order to the Instruction;
and p. 77. That the most important part of the Instruction ought to arise from
the whole Fable, because the Instruction that arises from the whole, must be
more important than that which arises from the Parts. By owning all which, it
is clear to me that you implicitly own, That the Moral of an Epick Poem must be
first in the Head of the Poet.

I now, Sir, come to the Second Point, concerning which we differ. You are
pleased to affirm, That it is not necessary, that an Epick Poem should end
happily, with relation to the Principal Character, but that the Poets and mere
Critics have laid down this Rule, without consulting Reason in the Case, being
led into it by the Iliad and Odysses of Homer, and the Aeneis of Virgil: And
here you deplore that servile Submission which the Poets and Commentators have
made to naked Anthority, by which they have advanced Maxims out of Reverence to
great Names, without any Discussion of the Subject, or entering upon any
Enquiry which supports their Assertion; because, say you, the End of the Epick
Poet may be equally attained, though the Event should be Unfortunate; into which
we are now to Enquire.

THE principal Character of an Epick Poem, must be either morally good or
morally vicious; if he is morally good, the making him end unfortunately, will
destroy all Poetical Justice, and consequently, all Instruction: Such a Poem
can have no Moral, and consequently no Fable, no just and regular Poetical
Action, but must be a vain Fiction and an empty Amusement. Oh, but there is a
Retribution in Futurity! But I thought that the Reader of an Epick Poem was to
owe his Instruction to the Poet, and not to himself: Well then, the Poet may
tell him so at the latter end of his Poem: Ay, would to God I could see such a
latter End of an Epick Poem, where the Poet should tell the Reader, that he has
cut an honest Man's Throat, only that he may have an Opportunity to send him to
Heaven; and that though this would be but an indifferent Plea upon an Indictment
for Murder at the Old Bailey, yet that he hopes the good-natured Reader will
have Compassion on him, as the Gods have on his Hero. But Raillery apart, Sir,
What occasion is there for having recourse to an Epick Poet to tell our selves
by the bye, and by occasional Reflection, that there will be a Retribution in
Futurity, when the Christian has this in his Heart constantly and directly, and
the Atheist and Freethinker will make no such Reflection? Tell me truly, Sir,
would not such a Poet appear to you or me, not to have sufficiently considered
what a Poetical Moral is? And should not you, or I Sir, be obliged, in order to
make him comprehend the Nature of it, to lay before him that universal Moral,
which is the Foundation of all Morals, both Epick and Dramatick, and is
inclusive of them all, and that is, That He who does good, and perseveres in
it, shall always be Rewarded, and he who does ill and perseveres in it, shall
always be punished? Should we not desire him to observe, That the foresaid
Reward must always attend and crown good Actions, not sometimes only, for then
it would follow, that sometimes a perseverance in good Actions has no Reward,
which would take away all Poetical Instruction, and indeed every sort of Moral
Instruction, resolving Providence into Chance or Fate. Should we not, Sir,
farther put him in Mind, that since whoever perseveres in good Actions, is sure
to be Rewarded at the last, it follows, that a Poet does not assert by his
Moral, that he is always sure to be Rewarded in this World, because that would
be false, as you have very justly observed, p. 60. and therefore never can be
the Moral of an Epick Poem, because what is false may Delude, but only Truth
can Instruct. Should we not let him know, Sir, that this universal Moral only
teaches us, That whoever perseveres in good Actions, shall be always sure to be
Rewarded either here or hereafter; and that the Truth of this Moral is proved
by the Poet, by making the principal Character of his Poem, like all the rest
of his Characters, and like the Poetical Action, at the bottom, Universal and
Allegorical, even after distinguishing it by a particular Name, by making this
principal Character at the bottom, a mere Poetical Phantom, of a very short
duration, through the whole extent of which duration we can see at once, which
continues no longer than the reading of the Poem, and that being over, the
Phantom is to us nothing, so that unless our Sense is satisfied of the Reward
that is given to this Poetical Phantome, whose whole duration we see through from
the very beginning to the end; instead of a wholesome Moral, there would be a
pernicious Instruction, viz. That a Man may persevere in good Actions and not
be Rewarded for it through the whole extent of his duration, that is neither in
this World nor in the World to come.

BUT though the principal Character of an Epick Poem is morally vicious, yet the
Poem ought not to end unfortunately with relation to that principal Character.
But here, Sir, I think my self obliged to explain my self: By a Character
morally vicious, I by no means mean a Villainous Character: Because a Villain
can never have greatness of Mind nor greatness of Capacity sufficient to
perform Things deserving to be admired. But Admiration is, as it were, the
Instrument by which the Poet works his End, which is Instruction, as has been
acknowledged.

BY a Character morally vicious then, I mean such a Character as is compounded
of good and bad Qualities, the good at the same time overcoming the bad, and
Hiding them as the Sun does Mercury, by the greatness of their Neighboring
Luster: Now a Poet is not to make an Heroic Poem end Unfortunately, with
relation to such a Character, because such an end would weaken and destroy that
Admiration which is requisite for the Poet's attaining his End, and destroy or
weaken it in the very place where its Influence is most requisite. For as the
greatest Impression that a Poem is to make, ought to be made at the end of it,
the reigning Passion of that Poem ought to predominate most there. As therefore
Terror and Compassion ought to be most violently moved, at the Catastrophe of
a Tragedy, and Laughter at that of a Comedy, Admiration ought to be raised to
its utmost height, at the end of an Epick Poem. But if that Poem should end
unfortunately, with relation to such a compounded Character, as we have just
mentioned above, it would cause great Indignation in some, and great Compassion
in others: Now as great Indignation and great Compassion are always attended
with Grief, Admiration is constantly accompanied with Joy. An Epick Poet
therefore, by exciting Compassion or Indignation at the latter end of his Poem,
instead of Admiration, would make that Poem throw off its Nature and assume
that of Tragedy, which is as directly contrary to its own, as Grief is to Joy,
or as Light is to Darkness.

NOR would such a prosperous End, in relation to such a Character, be in the
least a violation of Poetic Justice, though for the most part in Tragedy, it
would be a very great one; because the Hero of an Epick Poem always carries on
some good and great Design, for the Advantage of that Society, of which he is
the chief, or an illustrious Member, at least, it has been so, in all the Epick
Poems I have yet seen; though this is far from being always the Case in Tragedy;
now that public Virtue makes Compensation for all Faults but Crimes, and he
who has this public Virtue is not capable of Crimes. The ancient Romans and
Athenians, while Liberty flourished among them, would have looked very coldly
upon a Poet, who should have shown a great Patriot unfortunate, only for being
a great Patriot. In order to encourage public Virtue and public Spirit, and
the Love of their Country, they obliged their Epick Poets, to show those
Virtues crowned with Glory and Felicity. Nay, the Ancients made the very future
Happiness of their Heroes depend upon the Success of their good and great
Designs for the Welfare of their Country: Witness that famous passage in the
Fragment of Cicero, De somnio Ciceronis Sed, quo sis, Africane, alacrior. ad
Tutandam Rempublicam, sic Habeto: Oomnibus, qui patriam conservaverint,
adjuverint, auxerint, certum esse in caelo, ac Definitum locum, ubi Beati aevo
sempiterno fruantur.

FOR my part, I have no Notion, that a suffering Hero can be proper for Epick
Poetry. Milton could make but very little, even of a Suffering God, who makes
quite another Impression with his Lightning and his Thunder in Paradise Lost,
than with his Meckness and his Stoicism in Paradise Regained: That great Spirit
which Heroic Poetry requires, flows from great Passions and from great
Actions: If the suffering Hero remains insensible the generality of Readers
will not be much concerned for one, who is so little concerned for himself. The
Greatness of his Mind may, perhaps, be admired by a few, who are themselves
magnanimous, but the Author of an Epick Poem ought to write to Mankind, and not
only to the Age wherein he lives, but to remotest Posterity. If the Hero of an
Epick Poem should not appear insensible in his Sufferings, his Sensibility will
be attended with Passions, which are not only incompatible with that
Admiration, which ought to be moved through the Poem, but which will sink its
Spirit, and debase its Majesty.

LET us then, Sir, leave the Virtues of Patience and long Suffering to be
taught by Priests: They will not fail to inculcate such Doctrines frequently,
as being at once consistent with their Duty and their Craft: But never fear
that they will entrench upon your Province, and recommend public Virtue and
public Spirit, and the Love of their Country, to a People, whom they have
shown too clearly, that it is their Design to enslave. But for your part, Sir,
that you may deserve more and more of your Country and of Mankind, make Choice
of a Hero, whose every Action may flow from those noble Principles, and Reform
a degenerate Age, which seems so fond of Slavery. Let his great Actions be
crowned with Glory and Victory, with the Joyful Acclamations of the People,
whom he has made happy by his Heroic Conduct and Virtue, and with such
transcendent Felicity, as may raise the highest Admiration in the Breast of
every Reader, inflame every one of them with the love of his Country, and with
a burning Zeal to imitate what he admires.

October 11. 1717.
TO Henry Cromwell, Esquire
On the Vis Comica.
SIR,
WHEN I had the favor of a Visit from you the other Day, I was in a great deal
of Pain, and had been so for a Day and a Night before you saw me, and continued
so for the same space of Time after you left me, and then I voided a Stone
about the bigness of a Pea, and so thanks be to God, have been ever since at
Ease.

BUT what perhaps may surprise you, is this, That in the midst of all this
Misery, I read over four Comedies of Terence, viz. The Eunuch, the
Heautontimorumenos, the Adelphi, and the Phormio. These I read over in the two
Evenings ofmy Illness, in the Cambridge Quarto Edition, a very convenient one
for a Person of my gravity, in a Winter's Evening, though he who had the Care of
the Edition, understood nothing of the Stage. In the two Mornings of my
Illness, I read over Mrs Dacier's Comment upon the Four Comedies, and upon the
Life of Terence writ by Suetonius. I have told you more than once, that when
the Commentators had sometimes led me into a Bog, my own Common Sense had
helped to guide me out again. You may guess what a deference I pay to the Herd
of Commentators, when you will see by what follows, that I have the Assurance
to contradict Monsieur Le Fevre and Mrs. Dacier his Daughter, for whose
Learning, Judgment, and fine Discernment I have always had a singular Regard
and Esteem.

YOU know very well, Sir, that Suetonius in the latter end of his Life of
Terence, has mentioned some Verses of Julius Caesar, in which that Emperor
calls Terence a Demi Menander, and complains that the Vis Comica was wanting to
that Comic Poet.

Tu quoque, Tu in summis, O dimidiate Menander
Poneris, and merito, puri Sermonis Amator;
Lenibus atque utinam scriptis adjuncta foret vis
Comica, ut aequato virtus polleret Honor
Cum Graecis, neque in hac despectus part jaceres
Unum hoc maceror, and Doleo tibi deesse Terenti.
Mrs. Dacier in her Remarks upon that part of the Life, says, That it was the
Opinion of her Father Monsieur Le Fevre, that by the Vis Comica, Caesar meant
the Passions, from which Opinion the Daughter dissents for the two following
Reasons. First, Because the Passions are natural and essential to Tragedy, and
but incidental to Comedy. Secondly, Because it is impossible to preserve the
Characters, as Terence has admirably done, without making them Speak upon
occasion with as much Passion as that occasion requires; which is not only
justly, but very finely observed. And, Indeed we find that the Passions in
Terence, upon great surprises are extreme lively and strong. And when Horace
tells us in his Art of Poetry, that Comedy sometimes usurps upon Tragedy, and
has Passions which are next to Tragical, He brings his Example from the
Heautontimorumenos of Terence.

Interdum tamen, and vocem Comoedia tellit,
Iratusque Chremes tumido Delitigat ore.
But the Explication which Mrs. Dacier her Self, gives of the Words of Caesar,
is not a jot better than her Father's. For by Vis Comica, says she, Caesar
meant the Vivacity of the Action, and the tying and solving the Knot of the
Intrigue; which is wrong, for two Reasons. First, Because these both belong to
Tragedy as nearly as they do to Comedy. And, Secondly, Because, if Caesar had
understood by his Vis Comica, what Mrs. Dacier thinks he did, he could never
have called Terence a Demi Menander. For Terence, having the Business of two of
Menander's Comedies in one of his, and the Grecian Comedy being of as great a
length as the Roman; Terence must consequently have more Intrigue, and a
greater Vivacity of Action than Menander, and consequently, if Caesar, by his
Vis Comica, had meant the Intrigue, and the vivacity of Action, He would have
nominated Terence, a Double, instead of a Demi Menander.

But since I have Declared my self not at all satisfied with either the
Father's or the Daughter's Explication, you may perhaps expect that I should
give my own. I shall do it with Submission, but upon this Condition, that if I
am in the wrong, you and your Commentators shall set me right.

I am apt to believe both from the Terms, and the Reason of the Thing, that by
the Vis Comica, must be meant something Comical and peculiar to Comedy. For the
chief Force of any kind of Poem, must consist in that which makes the
Characteristick of it, and which distinguishes it from all other Poems. As the
chief Force of Tragedy must proceed from the moving Compassion and Terror
strongly, and the Chief Force of Epick Poetry from the exciting Admiration,
Powerfully, so the chief Force of Comedy must consist in exciting Laughter. By
the Vis Comica, then can never be meant the bare Vivacity of the Action, and
the tying and solving the Knot of the Intrigue, which is common to both kinds
of Dramatick Poetry, as has been observed above, but the lively Ridicule
resulting from the Intrigue; the Ridicule of the Incidents, and especially of
the Catastrophe, which yet is but a part of the Vis Comica, for there is
likewise the Ridicule of the Characters proceeding from their several Humors,
and the Pleasantry of the Sentiments and of the Dialogue. When Caesar therefore
says, that Terence is but a Demi Menander, what does he say, but that Terence
had turned four or five of Menander's Comedies into Latin, and lost half the
Ridicule and the Pleasantry of that Athenian Poet, in Translating him. That
this was Caesar's Meaning is plain to me, not only from the Reason and the
Nature of the Thing, which has been shown above, but from the great Delight
which Caesar took in the Ridiculum, and the great Encouragement which he gave
to the Mimes of Laberius and Publius Syrus, which were low Farces, composed on
purpose only to make People Laugh; as likewise from the Method which Terence
took in his Versions: For taking two of Menander's Plays into one of his, he
must of Necessity leave a great part of his Dialogue behind him, and by
consequence, a great part of his Pleasantry: So that the same thing happened to
Menander formerly, which has befallen Moliere in our Days. Several English
Authors have translated Parts of him, but not one of them has entered into that
naiuete which is the purest Source of his Pleasantry, (as indeed it is of
Pleasantry in general) for what the French call naiuete, which is a charming
Simplicity, dictated by pure Nature, is almost always Original: For there is
something in it so easy, so free, so flowing and so natural, as ^ies the
restraint of a Copy. I do not pretend to say, that there was none of the
naiuete of Menander in Terence; but I may venture to say after Caesar, that
there is not above half of it, and consequently, not above half his Pleasantry;
though at the same time, I believe that there is more of this Quality in Terence,
than ever there was in a Copy; and if the God of Laughter does not always
attend upon Terence, Venus and the Graces never leave him. It Is my humble
Opinion, that there is no Dialogue extant in any Language, which has half the
Charms of the Terentian Dialogue; what comes nearest to it, is that of Etherege
in Sir Fopling Flutter. I, who have been acquainted with Terence above forty
Years, am now more delighted with him than ever: And sure that Beauty must be
no common Charmer, in whom Time shall discover new Graces, and whom long
possession, renders more desirable.

THUS have I given you my Sentiments: If what I take to be the Sense of Caesar,
be not your own, I desire you would set me right.

I am, etc.

TO N. ROW, Esquire
On his being made Surveyor at the CUSTOM-HOUSE, and His MARRIAGE.
SIR,
I Have been for several Weeks together, endeavoring to wait on you: But I
have lately had an Intermitting Fever, and several Fits of the Stone, which
have brought me very low: So that I can only congratulate you thus by Letter
upon your New Post in the Custom-House. I was very much surpised when I saw it
in the Public News. For knowing it to be only a Warrant Place, and
consequently, a Place which a Man cannot supply by Proxy, I did not understand
how it could be compatible either with your Pleasures or with your other
Business. However, if you are pleased, I am so likewise, and once more I
Congratulate you.

BUT, Sir, I had almost forgot myself; Instead of Congratulating you, upon one
Office, I should wish you Joy of Two. You are become a Husband since I saw you
last, as well as a Land Surveyor. Jesu! What Alteration must not those two
Offices have made in the Life of a Gentleman, who loved to lie in Bed all Day
for his Ease, and to sit up all Night for his Pleasure. I must confess, you are
not so much a Novice in the former of these Employments, as you are in the
latter. I think you were heretofore several Years in the former. But is not the
Business and Duty of a Husband such, that a Man grows less and less Qualified
to Discharge it, the longer he has been in the Office? An Office, in which the
Incumbent grows incapacitated, by too much, and too long an Experience:

I am, Sir, Your, etc.
Whitehall, Saturday October. 5. 1715.
To His GRACE the Duke of ARGYLE,
Written in the Name and at the Request, of Mr. PENKETHMAN the Comedian, when
he was a Prisoner in the King's Bench, and Just Recovering from a great Fit of
Sickness.
MY LORD,
SINCE I had the Honor to play the Fool before your Grace here, it has been my
Misfortune in the same Place to Act a very Melancholy Part, for which your
Grace knows very well that Nature has not adapted me; and for which, I can
assure your Grace, that I have not the least Inclination. But the Part that I
have been forced to act to the Life, and almost to the Death, has had so much
Tragedy in it, that the Spectators thought more than once, that I would have
gone quite off the Stage in an ill Humor.

I have, may it please your Grace, passed the beginning of this Winter in
Southwark, as my old Patron, and your Grace's old Friend Phoebus, passed it in
Greenland. I have never Risen 'till Twelve, and after I have been up little
more than an Hour, have been forced to go to Bed again; have, like him, looked
very Pale and Wan, all the Time I have been up, and have been for the most part
of that Time, as I may say, under a Cloud; and it has been constantly expected,
when like my old Patron, I should have gone under the Horizon for a long time
before I rose again.

BUT while I was thus between Life and Death, and in sore Tribulation, my old
Patron came to me by Night, at the Time when he disappeared to all the other
Mortals of this Hemisphere? and giving me a swinging lug by the Ear, that has
made one side of my Head Sore ever since, Pinky quoth he, be of good Cheer, I
have found a way to free thee from all thy Troubles. I have put my Old and
Valued Friend in Mind of thee, who has promised me to talk with Colonel
Churchil, about Ways and Means to release Thee. What Friend said I, may it
please thy Godship* With that, he directly named your Grace to me; he did, my
Lord as I hope once more to be a merry Fool, instead of a sour Melancholy
Sage, as I at this Instant am. My Old and valued Friend, quoth he, has a
Kindness for all my Domestics, who do their Business so as to please him and
me. His Star and mine, shall Shine in benign Conjuction thee, I will heal thee.
His Grace and the Colonel will order a Contribution for thee; and thou shall
shortly act a ridiculous Squire in Drury, instead of a sullen dying Sophister
in the Borough.

But quoth I, to my old Patron, may I put his Grace in Mind of this, and will
not he take it ill? Thou may put him in Mind of it, answered he, and I will
pawn my Divinity on it, that he will not take it ill.

THUS, my Lord, depending on his Divinity, and on your Grace's Humanity, I have
presumed to send you this; and if your Grace takes it otherwise than it was
meant, which was to bespeak your Favor, and to Entertain you, I will never for
the future believe in Phoebus, and will have no more dependence on him, than
has a small Poet, who tires successively four Pair of Horses, to engage Persons
of Quality to come to his third Night.

I am, My Lord, Your Grace's most humble and most dutiful Servant, W.
Penkethman.
POSTSCRIPT.
MY LORD,
SINCE I had the Honor to Write what is above, to your Grace, Phoebus has
appeared again to me, and by another Lug, made the other side of my Head Sore.
Pinky, quoth he, thou know that we great Wits, have often bad Memories. I
quite forgot to order thee to remind his Grace of the Method which he has
resolved to use, in working thy Deliverance. His Grace is resolved in a
numerous Assembly, to put a Guinea into a Green Purse, and throwing it down
upon the Table, to cry, that is for Pinky's Deliverance. That Action and those
Words will have Magic in them; for strait upon the Pronuncing them, every
Man's Guinea, will, of its own accord, fly from his Pocket to the Table, and
will run rolling toward the Green Purse, 'till it has joined and Saluted his
Grace's, under which, when they are united in a firm Confederacy, they will
march in a Body to the King's Bench, to deliver Pinky from Bondage. Thus will
Guineas answer the End of their Creation, which was to promote Liberty, as
Louis d'ors were Coined on Purpose to work Bondage. The Scoundrel who Arrested
thee, had two Louis d'ors for his Labor. The Mischief that Lewis his Image did
thee, King William's shall undoc. This be assured of, and I command thee to
send this with my Respects by Way of Postscript to his Grace.

Borough Southwark, Nov. 16. 1714.


To His GRACE the Duke of Marlborough.
MY LORD,
ON the 24th of December last, I had the Honor to Receive a Letter from Your
Grace, Directed to Mr. Walpole, and enclosed in one from Mr. Hodges to me. I
returned Your Grace that very Night my humble Acknowledgment, for the
extraordinary Favor you had done me, and if I have not yet had the Honor to
acquaint you with the Effect it had, it is because I have been in Daily
Expectations of the Event, which is still Depending. But notwithstanding this
Delay, my Lord, I am not yet like a Man without Hope. It seems to me
impossible, that the Duke of Marlbrough's Recommendation can ever come in Vain.
It would be hard that he who has turned the Fortune of Europe, should nor be
able to alter mine, and that Your Grace should receive that Repulse from one of
your Friends, which a hundred Thousand of your Enemies assembled in a Body,
have never been able to give you.

I am, MY LORD, Your Grace's most humble and most obedient Servant, J. DENNIS.

TO Captain STEEL.
July 28. 1710.
SIR,
I Sent a Letter on the 28th to your House, Directed to Captain Steel, and
desiring to see himthat Night, that I might have his Advice upon a Business of
Importance, softly intimating at the same Time, that it was not in my Power to
wait upon him. But having neither seen him nor heard from him, I fancy that my
old Friend is departed, and some Gentleman has succeeded him in the old House,
with the same Name, and the same Martial Title; a Chance that happens oftener
in the World than some People imagine. How should I have been surpised, in
Case I had gone my self, expecting from the Similitude of Name and Title, to
have seen my old Acquaintance? How should I have been surpised to have found a
Man with quite another Mind, and quite another Countenance? My old Friend, as I
thought at least, had Civility, had Humanity, had a good and engaging
Officiousness, and as I did not take him to want good Nature, so he had what
the French call a good Countenance, that is, the Countenance of one who is
pleased with him who talks to him. But I suppose I should have found nothing of
all this in the noble Captain who succeeds him. You will say, perhaps, that you
had no Reason to make a Visit to one whom you know not, and are resolved not to
know. But then, Noble Captain, you ought to have sent back my Letter, and to
have given me to understand, that you are not the Person that I took you for;
that you should have enough to do, if you were obliged to own all the
Acquaintance of the Captain, your Predecessor; That I am not the first Man who
have made this Mistake, and shall not probably be the last. Had you done this,
I had had no Replication to make to so equitable an Answer. I should only
perhaps have advised you, in order to the preventing some troublesome Visits,
and some impertinent Letters, to cause an Advertisement to be inserted in
Squire Bickerstaff's next Lucubrations, by which the World might be informed,
That the Captain Steel, who lives now in Bury-Street, is not the Captain of
the same Name, who lived there two Years ago, and that the Acquaintance of the
Military Person who inhabited there formerly, may go look for their old Friend,
even where they can find him.

I am Your, etc.

TO THO. SERGEANT, Esquire
Upon the Prospect from LEITH-HILL in Surrey.
SIR,
I Have ever since I saw you last, been either in Motion, or in Places where
Ink is a Liquor more precious than Tockay. But though I have ever since the
Beginning of July, been in the Country, I have enjoyed small Satisfaction, if
you except what the sight of the Country itself affords me, which is indeed an
Entertainment, of which I can never be weary.

I never in all my Life time left it without Regret, and always returned to it
with Joy. The Sight of a Mountain is to me more agreeable than that of the most
pompous Edifice; and Meadows and natural winding Streams, please me before the
most beautiful Gardens, and the most costly Canals: So much does Art appear to
me to be surpassed by Nature, and the Works of Men by the Works of God. But
here I desire you to believe, that I speak of the Mechanic Works of Men. For
as to the Productions of Human Mind, the more Art some of them have, as
particularly some sorts of Poetry, the more lovely they are, and more
estimable; because, the more they have in them of true Art, the more they have
of Nature; whereas, in the Mechanic Works of Men, the contrary of this is
seen; for the more consummate an Art appears in them, the more they recede from
plain and simple Nature.

BUT thither to return from whence I digress'd; as the Sight of the Country has
been always more pleasing to me than that of the Town, so, in a late Journey
which I took into the Wild of Sussex, I passed over a Hill which showed me a
more transporting Sight than ever the Country had shown me before, either in
England or Italy. The Prospects, which in Italy pleased me most, were that of
the Valdarno from the Apennins, that of Rome and the Mediterranean, from the
Mountain of Viterbo; of Rome at Forty, and of the Mediterranean at Fifty Miles
distance from it, and that of the Campaign of Rome, from Tiuoli and Frescati;
from which two Places, you see every Foot of that famous Campaigne, even from
the Bottom of Tiuoli and Frescati, to the very Foot of the Mountain of Viterbo
without any thing to intercept your Sight. But from a Hill which I passed in my
late Journey into Sussex, I had a Prospect more extensive than any of these,
and which surpassed them at once in Rural Charms, in Pomp and in Magnificence.
The Hill which I speak of is called Leith Hill, and is about five Miles
Southward from Darking; about six from Box-Hill, and near twelve from Epsom. It
juts its self out about two Miles beyond that Range of Hills which terminates
the North Downs to the South. When I saw from one of those Hills, at about two
Miles distance, that side of Leith Hill which faces the Northern Downs; it
appeared the beautifullest Prospect to me I had ever seen. But after we had
conquered the Hill it self, I saw a Sight that would transport a Stoic, a
Sight that looked like Enchantment and Vision, but Vision Beatifick. Beneath
us, lay open to our View, all the Wilds of Surrey and Sussex, and a great Part
of that of Kent, admirably Diversifyed in every Part of them, with Woods, and
Fields of Corn, and Pastures; those Fields of Corn and Pastures, being every
where adorned with stately Rows of Trees.

This beautiful Vale, is about thirty Miles in Breadth, and about sixty in
Length, and is terminated to the South, by the Majestic Range of the Southern
Hills and the Sea. And it is no easy matter to decide, whether these Hills
which appear at thirty, Forty, Fifty, Miles distance, with their Tops in the
Sky, appear more Awful and Venerable, or the Delicious Vale between you and
them more inviting. About Noon in a serene Day, you may at thirty Miles
Distance see the very Water of the Sea through a Chasm of the Mountains. And that
which above all makes it a noble and a wonderful Prospect, is, that at the same
time that at chirty Miles Distance you behold the very Water of the Sea; at the
same time that you behold to the South the most delicious Rural Prospect in the
World; at that very time, by a little turn of your Head toward the North, you
look full over Box Hill, and see the Country beyond it between that and London;
and over the very Stomacher of it, see St. Paul's at five and twenty Miles
Distance, and London beneath it, and Highgate and Hampstead beyond it. It may
perhaps appear incredible to some, that a Place which affords so great and so
surprising a Prospect, should have remained so long in Obscurity; in so great
Obscurity, that it is unknown to the very Frequenters of Epsom and Box Hill.
But, alas! we live in a Country more fertile of Great Things, than of Men to
admire them. Who ever talked of Cooper's Hill, till Sir John Denham made it
Illustrious? How long did Milton remain in Obscurity, while twenty paltry
Authors, little and vile if compared to him, were talked of and admired? But
here in England nineteen in twenty like by other Peoples Opinions, and not by
their own. That Fools by their Approbation should draw in Fools, as Sheep leap
after Sheep, is no great matter of Wonder: But that Fools by their Numbers
should prove so powerful as to influence Men of Sense, and engage them to
approve of what they would otherwise utterly have contemned, is what I have
often wondered at, but never could yet account for; but such unnatural
monstrous Things as these, make the Town more odious and the Country more
agreeable.

I am, etc.
Hampstead, Aug. 27. 1717.
Oct. 3. 1718.
TO S^ T^ Esquire
On the Deceitfulness of RUMOR.
SIR,
IT was always my Opinion, that Judgment is a cool and a slow Faculty, and no
more constantly attends a Man in the warmth of Wine and of Conversation, than
in the Fury and Rapture of a Poetical Composition. If I had in the least
doubted of this, what past at your House, on the first of this Month, would
have perfectly convinced me of it; where, for want of Coolness to consider
Things, I betrayed my own Cause and that of my departed Friend Mr. Wycherly. I
shall say but a Word or two of my own, but I desire to be a little longer about
his.

I then declared it to be my Opinion, that Free-thinking would at one time or
other endanger our Constitution; That it invalidates the very Things which are
the greatest Security both of Princes and People, and those are the Oaths which
the Subjects of Great Britain take either as Subjects or Witnesses. To which a
Gentleman in the Company answered, that the Oaths derived their binding Force
from the very Law of Nature, as well as from the Christian Religion; with which
Answer, for want of Coolness and Time to consider, I remained at that instant
satisfied.

But as soon as I bad Coolness and Time to consider, I found that a double
Reply might justly be made to that Answer of your Friend. For in the first
Place, the Free-thinkers are divided into Atheists and Deists. Now the former
of these cannot be at all influenced by the Law of Nature. For to them to whom
there is no God, there can be no Law of Nature. And as for the latter, though
Theists are influenced by the Law of Nature, yet we ought to consider, that the
Oath which an Englishman is obliged to take as a Subject or a Witness, derives
its most binding Force, and its most sacred Solemnity, from that which
distinguishes it from all other Oaths, and that is the laying Hands upon the
Bible and kissing it; which Ceremonies are certainly not deduceable from the
Law of Nature, but are wholly derived from that Revelation which the Theists do
not believe. Freethinking then is the Cause, why both Atheists and Theists, by
contemning those Ceremonies, and disbelieving the Revelation from whence they
are derived, are come slightly to regard the very Oath it self: Yes,
Free-thinking is the Cause that at this time of day we have so many brave
Knights-Errant of the Post, both Spiritual and Secular,

That eat perfidiously their Words,
And swear their Ears through two-inch Boards;
Can own the same thing and disown,
And perjure booty pro and con;
Can make the Gospel serve their turn,
And help them out to be forsworn,
When it is laid Hands upon and kissed,
To be betrayed and sold like Christ.
Thus have I spoke to my own Cause in as few Words as I could. I desire to
dwell a little longer upon my late Friend Mr. Wycherly's. A Gentleman in the
Company was pleased to say, that the Comedy of the Country Wife had not a just
Foundation, because, said he, it was not practicable for Horner to make himself
pass for an Eunuch. How! not practicable, when he himself was at the bottom of
the Design, and had taken so many Precautions to make it succeed? I am so far
from being of your Friend's Opinion, that I would lay fifty to one, if I were
but capable of suborning half a dozen Rascals, who should warmly and
industriously spread the Report, that I would make either you or your Friend
pass for Free-thinkers, with a considerable part of the Town, in spite of your
utmost Attempts to undeceive them. How can that be, you will say, when there
would be neither Truth nor Probability in such a Report? But have Truth or
Probability any thing to do with the Entertainments of public Rumor? When my
Lord Rochester said, There Is not a Thing on Earth that I can name
So Foolish and so False as Common Fame;
did he banter, do you think? or speak it from a thorough Knowledge of the
World and of Mankind? There is another of our Poets, who knew Mankind perfectly
well, who will tell you the same thing in Terms that are something stronger.

The World is naturally averse
To all the Truth it sees or hears;
But swallows Nonsense and a Lie,
With Greediness and Gluttony.
Butler. Part 3. Cant. 1. It Is true indeed, if the Rabble and Scum of Mankind,
of whose Voices public Rumor is composed, had but so much true Sense as a
sober Beast, why then the Rule that Horace has laid down for the Tragic Stage,
might do pretty well for the Stage of the World.

Segnius irritant animos demissa per aures,
Quam quae sint oculis subjecta Fidelibus and quae
Ipse sibi tradit Spectator.
But since the case is far otherwise, and so many Idiots will believe that they
See what they only Hear; (where as no Dog, no Horse, nay no Ass is Fool enough
to let his external Sense be imposed upon by his beastly Imagination;) Butler
has been so far from thinking that Horace's Rule for the Tragic Stage is
proper for the Stage of the World, that he has laid down for the Latter, one
which is the very Reverse of the other.

For, like the World, Men's Jobber-noles
Turn round upon their Ears, the Poles;
And what they are confidently told
By no Sense else can be controlled.
What my Lord Rochester and the Author of Hudibras have declared in their
Verses, our Dramatick Poets have endeavored to show upon the Stage, viz. That
the Eyes of the Rabble of Mankind are downright Cullies to their Ears, and that
they easily believe that they actually See what they are only impudently Told
of: Witness what passes between Vindicius and old Brutus, in the Junius Brutus
of Lee; and between Hamlet and Polonius, in the Hamlet of Shakespeare, which
seems to be the original of the other. And has not Ben, Learned Ben, who is so
great a Master of his Art, and consequently of Human life and nature, shown us
the very reverse of this in the Catastrophe of his admirable Alchimist, viz.
shown us Persons who what before they had actually seen, are made to believe
that they only vainly imagined, and for no other Reason but because they are
impudently told that they only vainly imagined it.

I tell you then again and again, that I would undertake, if I could but be
brought to use the Means, to make both you and your Friend pass for Eunuchs, in
spite of the Testimony of Twenty Females, who might cry out in Mrs.
Pinchwife's Language, they will not see poor Mr. Horner abused, for to their
certain knowledge -- For though that perhaps might undeceive a few, the general
Opinion would still remain. For why may it not be as practicable to geld you
and your Friend, as it has been to burst one of your old Acquaintance, in
spite not only of Truth, but of all manner of Probability; in spite of his
own solemn Asseverations to the contrary, of the continual vigorous Exercises
both of Riding and Walking, which he has used of late; and lastly, in spite of
ocular and manual Proof to the contrary given to eminent Surgeons and
others? when neither Truth, nor reasonable and strong Presumption, nor Evidence
of Sense that has been given to several, have been able to undeceive the many,
but the Rupture has still remained in the empty Heads of a thousand Fools, who
have still endeavored to propagate the senseless Error.

For Fools are stubborn in their way,
As Coins are hardened by the Allay;
And Obstinacy's never so stiff,
As when it is in a wrong Belief.
Hudib. If any thing that I have said about this last Affair may happen to
surprise you, the Surprise I suppose will still be greater, when you are told
that the two Apostles of this new Doctrine, like those of Mahomet, are
downright Ass and Widgeon.

The gross of Mankind have infinitely more Propensity to censure than to
praise. They generally praise through Interest, and they censure by Inclination.
And yet the Poison of false Praise has more than once grown epidemically
contagious, by the Error and Imbecility of a few, and the Conspiracy of a false
Report. You cannot have forgot what happened to that ugly Beau Bovey in the
Time of King Charles the Second:

Bovey's a Beauty, if some few agree
To call him so; the rest to that degree
Affected are, that with their Ears they see.
You may remember that something like this has happened upon the Representation
of several of our Dramatick Performances, when blundering sustain Tragedies, or
trifling insipid Comedies, have, by the Conspiracy of a Cabal, and their
concerted Applauses, been cogg'd upon the Town for Masterpieces, to the
Dishonor of our Country and Disgrace of the British Poetry. Some Persons, who
have been in these Conspiracies, knew, or ought to have known, better Things.
But one unaccountable Effect of Vanity, among many others, is, that some
Persons, though they do not want Understanding, yet, at the Expense of the
Reputation of their Common-Sense, are fond of showing their Power; are fond of
showing their Power to Fools, at the Expense of the Reputation of their
CommonSense with the thinking part of the World.

How often has something like this happened among our Statesmen? How often have
they topp'd White for Black, and Black for White, upon the thoughtless Rabble?
How often have they who Yesterday were thought Heroes, and Patriots, and
Demy-gods, to Day been looked upon as Villains, and Thieves, and Robbers; and
they who Yesterday were held Villains and Traitors, have to Day been regarded
as Heroes, and Saints, and Patriots? Have not our Politicians more than once
turned the Rehearsal out of Ridicule, by turning the whole State topsy turvy in
a Morning, only by the Artillery of false Reports, without so much as striking
a real Blow? and by that means proving to all the World, that one might take
Mr. Bays for a Politician; that Mr. Bays's Politics were good and sound, and
that his quondum Grace of Bucks was out, when he pretended to make a Jest of
them.

But in short, and Raillery apart, the Prevalency of false Reports, concerted
by five or six dark Sophisters, has more than once made some of the best and
greatest Men in the Kingdom, who but just before were approved, applauded,
admired and cherished by all the Lovers of their Country, become all at once
the very Hatred and Scorn of the Rabble, which I believe neither ever did, or
could have happened any where but in England; either as to the Excess of Malice
in the Inventors, or the Excess of Credulity in the Believers and Propagators
of those false Reports. For that which makes England the most splenetick
Country in the Universe, makes it the chief and residentiary Seat of Slander.
For there never was a very splenetick Man, unless he was a Man of an
extraordinary Understanding, but he was at the same time a Slanderer. And the
same virulent Humor, that causes so many noble Britons to hang, and poison,
and drown themselves, causes them likewise to do their utmost to murder the
Reputation of their Neighbors; and the same Humor that in some degree caused
the Invention of the Slander at first, causes likewise the Propagation of it,
and the Credulity of its Believers. Judge then, if in such a Country as this,
even an improbable false Report be not a just Foundation for a Comedy. But the
Report of Horner's Impotency, since he himself invented it, and prepared the
Way for it, is so highly probable, that a Man must be very Hypercritical, who,
upon that account, censures my late most ingenious Friend. I have a great deal
more to say upon this Subject, but I want Time at present.

I am, etc.

To the Reverend Mr. MANSELL Rector of COSGRAVE.
SIR,
YOURS of the 22d of the last Month came to my Hands in due time. I had sooner
returned you Thanks for the favor of it, and had sooner congratulated you upon
the return of your Health, upon which so many Healths depend, and which under
God has been so often the cause of the Recovery of mine; if I had not been
engaged in an Important Business which took up all my Hours. I likewise return
you my hearty thanks for setting the Affair between me and my Brother-in-Law in
a true light, though I perceive by what you write that there are Persons who
continue to believe him. But I would fain ask those Persons what Motive they
have to restrain them from doing an unjust or a base thing, which I have not in
a much greater Degree. They will say, perhaps, that they have got a great deal
more Money than I have. But, Sir, is not their getting a great deal a sign of
their great Love for it? And if I have all my life time had but a little, do
they believe it has proceeded from my Incapacity of getting it, or from my
Contempt of it? And which is most like to secure any one from doing Injustice;
the Love of Money, or the Contempt of it? Have their Purses been more
constantly open to the Occasions of their Friends and Acquaintance? Have they
discovered more magnanimous Thoughts, and more exalted above Selfishness? Have
they more Understanding to discern their true Interest, and to know that no Man
can live happily without living reputably? Have they had a more liberal
Education, or a more generous Conversation? I was till five and forty plunged
in the Conversation of the great World, and was every Day in company with
Gentlemen, who are universally known to be Men of no ordinary Merit, who wanted
no Discernment to know me, and who have several of them given public proofs of
their Esteem for me. Now if I mistake not, before the Age of forty five the
Manners of Men are unalterably formed. For these last fifteen Years I have
retired from the World, and confined my Conversation to three or four of my old
Acquaintance who are publicly known to be Men of Men of Honor and
Understanding. Can any reasonable Man then believe, that I, who while I was
conversant in the World kept my Reputation clear, should retire to be a Villain
in Solitude? If I refused to answer a Demand which my Brother-in-Law pretended
he had upon me, it is because he had no title to any thing from me but his want
of it. If he had asked me to give him the Money which he said I owed him, I had
certainly given it him. But I could not think without Indignation, that an
ungrateful Wretch, to whom I had endeavored at the expense of my Time and
Interest to do the most Important Services, should pretend to extort it from me
by Insults and Brutality. What those Services are, I shall let you know in my
next; but I am weary at present, and so without doubt are you.

I am, SIR, Your most Humble Faithful Servant, JOHN DENNIS.
Aug. 6. 1720.
June 23, 1719.
TO Mr. * * *
In which are some Passages of the LIFE of Mr. JOHN CROWN, Author of Sir
Courtly Nice.
SIR,
I Shall now, in compliance with the repeated Requests you have made to me, say
something concerning the Education of Mr. JOHN CROWN, and the most remarkable
Passages of his Life. Mr. CROWN was bred under his Father, an Independent
Minister, in that part of Northern America, which is called Nova Scotia. But
the Vivacity of his Genius made him soon grow impatient of that sullen and
gloomy Education, and soon obliged him to get loose from it, and seek his
Fortune in England. But it was his Fate, at his first Arrival here, to happen
on an Employment more formal, if possible, than his American Education. His
Necessity, upon his first Arrival here, obliged him to become a Gentleman Usher
to an old Independent Lady. But he soon grew as weary of that precise Office,
as he had been before of the Discipline of Nova Scotia. One would think that
these were but indifferent Preparatives to the commencing polite Author. But
neither these nor his Poverty, which was great, could oppress his aspiring
Spirit, aspiring to Reputation and Distinction, rather than to Fortune and
Power. His Writings soon made him known to the Court and Town: Yet it was
neither to the Favor of the Court, nor of Wilmot Lord Rochester, one of the
shining Ornaments of it, that he was indebted for the Nomination which the King
made of him for the writing the Mask of Calypso, but to the Malice of that
noble Lord, who designed by that Preference to mortify Mr. Dryden. Upon the
breaking out of the two Parties, after the Discovery of the Popish Plot, the
Favor that he was in at Court, the Gayety of his Youth, and his being
unacquainted with true political Principles, engaged him to embrace the Party
of the Tories. About that time he writ The City Politics, on purpose to
Satyrize and expose the Whigs; a Comedy so agreeable, that it deserved to be
writ in a much better Cause: But after he had writ it, he met with very great
Difficulties in the getting it acted. Bennet Lord Arlington, who was then Lord
Chamberlain of the King's Household, and who had secretly espoused the Whigs,
who were at that time powerful in Parliament, in order to support himself
against the Favor and Power of the Lord Treasurer Danby, who was his declared
Enemy, used all his Authority to suppress it. One while it was prohibited on
the account of its being Dangerous, another while it was laid aside on the
pretense of its being Flat and Insipid; till Mr. Crown at last was forced to
have Recourse to the King himself, and to engage him to give his absolute
Command to the Lord Chamberlain for the acting of it; which Command the King
was pleased to give in his own Person. For that Monarch loved a Comedy above
all Things, (excepting one Thing) and had no mean Opinion of Mr. Crown's
Qualifications to succeed in it. While he was thus in Favor with the King and
the Court, I have more than once heard him say, that though he had a sincere
Affection for the King, he had yet a mortal Aversion to the Court. The Promise
of a Sum of Money made him sometimes appear there to solicit the Payment of it:
But as soon as he had got it, he vanished, and continued a long time absent
from it, of which, he told me, the Duchess of Portsmouth took once Occasion to
complain to the King; whose way of answering that Complaint, puts me in mind of
a Passage in Boileau's Epistle to Lamoignon.

Hier de vous on parla chez le Roy,
Et d' attentat Horrible on traita la Satire,
Et le Roy que dit il. Le Roy se prit a rire.
It was at the very latter End of King Charles's Reign, that Mr. Crown being
tired with the Fatigue of Writing, and shocked by the Uncertainty of Theatrical
Success, and desirous to shelter himself from the Resentments of those numerous
Enemies which he had made by his City Politics, made his Application
immediately to the King himself; and desired his Majesty to establish him in
some Office, that might be a Security to him for Life. The King had the
Goodness to assure him, he should have an Office, but added that he would first
see another Comedy. Mr. Crown endeavoring to excuse himself, by telling the
King, that he plotted slowly and awkwardly; the King replied, that he would
help him to a Plot, and so put into his Hands the Spanish Comedy called Non
pued Esser. Mr. Crown was obliged immediately to go to work upon it; but, after
he had writ three Acts of it, found to his Surprise, that the Spanish Play had
some time before been translated, and acted, and damned, under the Title of
Tarugo's Wiles, or the Coffee-house. Yet, supported by the King's Command, he
went boldly on and finished it; and here see the Influence of a Royal
Encouragement.

Mr. Crown, who had once before obliged the Commonwealth of Learning with a
very agreeable Comedy in his City Politics, yet in Sir Courtly Nice went far
beyond it, and infinitely surpassed himself. For though there is something in the
part of Crack which borders upon Farce, the Spanish Author alone must answer
for that. For Mr. Crown could not omit the Part of Crack, that is of Tarugo,
and the Spanish Farce depending upon it, without a downright Affront to the
King, who had given him that Play for his Groundwork. But all that is of
English Growth in Sir Courtly Nice is admirable; for though we find in it neither
the fine Designing of Ben. Johnson; nor the general and masculine Satyr of
Wycherly; nor that Grace, that Delicacy, nor that Courtly Air which make the
Charms of Etherege; yet is the Dialogue so lively and so spirited, and so
attractively diversified and adapted to the several Characters; four of those
Characters are so entirely new, yet so general and so important, are drawn so
truly and so graphically, and opposed to each other, Surly to Sir Courtly and
Hothead to Testimony, with such a strong and entire Opposition; those Extremes
of Behavior, the one of which is the Grievance, and the other the Plague of
Society and Conversation; excessive Ceremony on one side, and on the other side
Rudeness and Brutality, are so finely exposed in Surly and Sir Courtly; and
those Divisions and Animosities in the two great Parties of England, which have
so long disturbed the public Quiet, and undermined the public Interest, are
so happily represented and ridiculed in Testimony and Hothead, that though I have
more than twenty times read over this charming Comedy, yet I have always read
it, not only with Delight but Rapture. And it is my Opinion, that the greatest
Comic Poet that ever lived in any Age, might have been proud to have been the
Author of it.

The Play was now just ready to appear to the World; and as every one that had
seen it rehearsed was highly pleased with it; every one who had heard of it was
big with the Expectation of it; and Mr. Crown was delighted with the flattering
Hope of being made happy for the rest of his Life, by the Performance of the
King's Promise; when, upon the very last Day of the Rehearsal, he met Cave
Underhill coming from the Playhouse as he himself was going toward it: Upon
which the Poet reprimanding the Player for neglecting so considerable a Part as
he had in the Comedy, and neglecting it on a Day of so much Consequence, as the
very last Day of Rehearsal: Oh Lord, Sir, says Underhill, we are all undone.
Wherefore, says Mr. Crown, is the Playhouse on Fire? The whole Nation, replys
the Player, will quickly be so, for the King is dead. At the hearing which
dismal Words, the Author was little better; for he who but the Moment before
was ravished with the Thought of the Pleasure, which he was about to give to
his King, and of the Favors which he was afterward to receive from him, this
Moment found, to his unspeakable Sorrow, that his Royal Patron was gone for
ever, and with him all his Hopes. The King indeed revived from his Apoplectick
Fit, but three Days after dyed, and Mr. Crown by his Death was replung'd in the
deepest Melancholy.

Thus, Sir, have I given you a short Account of the Education of Mr. John
Crown, and of the most remarkable Circumstances of his Life, to the Death of
King Charles the Second. I shall, as soon as I have Opportunity, continue this
Relation from the Death of King Charles to the Death of Mr. Crown.

I am, SIR, Your, etc.

To his Grace the Duke of BUCKINGHAM.
My LORD,
NOT being able to wait on your Grace by reason of an intolerable Headache, I
humbly desire that you would order the Letter which you have done me the Honor
to write for me, to be delivered to the Bearer.

I humbly desire your Grace to believe, that if you had given me no Caution, I
had by no means done any thing, which might cause me to forfeit your good
Opinion of me. So far were my Thoughts from that, that I never yet resolved to
publish those Remarks. It Is very likely, that after your Grace, and my Lord
Hallifax, and Two or Three more have perused them, I may send them to the
Author, and content my self, with letting him know my Power.

BUT, my Lord, as I would not be thought to do a Barbarous thing, I desire your
Grace to believe, that I had powerful Motives to engage me to write these
Remarks. I was attacked in the (...), in the very second or third, and in
several others. Since your Grace is of opinion that the Author of the Tragedy
did not write those particular Papers, I am very willing to believe it. But he
was in Partnership with those who did. He went share in the Profits, and more
than share in the Reputation. And Mr. (...) durst not have provoked me, without
his Approbation, or at least his Consent. My Lord, with submission to your
Grace's Judgment, I am apt to believe, that what Mr. (...) did in this Case was
the Action of Mr. (...)* If a Man who is in Partnership wrongs me in Trade, all
the Partners are involved in the Guilt, unless they disclaim it, and signify
their Abhorrence of it to the Person injured. The Law of England allows of no
Accessaries in Murder; all who are concerned in it are Principals. And Reason,
upon which the Law of England is founded, says, that the Case is the same in
the assassinating a Man's Reputation. My Lord, I appeal to your Grace, if the
attacking me in the (...), was not only an Assassination, but one of the
blackest sort. It was done in the dark, no Provocation in the least given, no
Name to the Paper, and no Author known; when at the very same Time they openly
professed Friendship to me. I may add to this, that it was done at a time when
they basely took advantage of the great Misfortunes I lay under. My Lord, I
appeal to your Grace, if mine is not a more generous Proceeding. I do not
attack, but retort; I proceed frankly and openly, and I who am in Adversity,
engage one who is in high Prosperity.

Yet, after all, my Lord, the Satyr of this Criticism (for Reason is the
severest Satyr in the World, when it is terribly against a Man) does not fall
most heavily upon the Author of the Tragedy, it falls most severely upon this
partial and tastless Town. The writing a foolish Play, is a Piece of Ridicule
that we have long been used to: But the gaining a general violent Applause to a
foolish Play, is something new to us: it is the reviving a Farce that had been
acted but once before since King Charles the Second's Time.

My Lord, I am afraid of tiring your Grace's Patience by too long a Letter, or
I would proceed to the other Motives, which prevailed upon me to write these
Remarks. But I hope to have the Honor of acquainting you with them another
time.

I am, My Lord, Your Grace's, etc.
Whitehall, June 19. 1713.
TO Mrs. * * *
Written upon the News of the Landing of the Pretender.
Madam,
I Have lately read over the famous Process between the Marquis De Gueores and
Mademoiselle de Mascranny, with which I have been agreeably entertained, and
which I here send you by the Bearer, because a Lady of your Apprehension may
easily discern, that you may produce an Argument from it sufficient to convert
your Friend Mrs. (...) that termagant Stickler for divine, unalienable,
indefeasible Right; for can there be any Right to any Government so divine, so
unalienable, so indefeasible as that of a Husband to the Government of his
Wife? Yet if this Monarch, by Right Divine, appears unqualify'd to govern her
well; if he cannot answer the Ends of Government; if he keeps not the original
Contract, which is on his part the giving due Benevolence, she endeavors to
depose her Sovereign immediately; that is, she sues out a Bill of Divorce, and
chooses another King. The original Contract between a limited Monarch and a free
People, is, that he shall govern them by Laws of their own making, and that
they shall obey him as long as they are so governed. Now will your Friend Mrs.
(...) murmur, at our Sexes enjoying that Privilege, which you have always
claimed your selves? We have already deposed one Popish King for breaking this
originnl Contract, and can she expect that we will set up another, who we know
is not able to keep it? Would she accept of one for a Husband, whom she knew
beforehand to be in a State of Impotence? How then can she pretend that we
should accept of such a Governor? Is not a Popish Pretender as much
unqualify'd to govern a freeborn Protestant People, as one in a natural State
of Impotence is to give due Benevolence? Are not both Pretenders equally
impotent as to what they pretend to? Then pray, Madam, acquaint your Friend
Mrs. (...) that since our Sex is assistant to yours in throwing off your evil
Governors, when you find upon Heartbreaking Disappointments that you cannot
be happy under them, it is altogether unreasonable in her to pretend that we
ought to establish any one Ruler over us, who is utterly incapable of rendering
his Subjects happy. Desire her to lay aside her Notions of Divine Right and
Arbitrary Power. She wrongs her self and her whole Sex by these fantastical
Opinions. No Power on Earth but that of Beauty can justly pretend to Right
Divine; for Beauty has its Power from Nature, and consequently from God.

I am, Madam, Yours, etc.
London, Jan. 10. 1715/6.
TO JUDAS ISCARIOT, Esquire
On the present State of the Stage.
SIR,
I Have been about to write to you every Post for these ten Days, but one
Accident or other has still diverted me; but I shall now make more than amends,
for Ingentem tibi Epistolam Impingam.

If I had had the greatest Inclination imaginable to accept of the Invitation
which you sent me by your Familiar; yet something has happened which would have
been a Just, though a Ridiculous Impediment. For I had given my word to go
another way, in order to pull a certain Beast out of a Ditch, who had fallen
into it, through a more than Bestial Stupidity, which engaged him to look upon
things above him, instead of grazing and following the Instinct of Nature. But
to speak plain English, and return to your Invitation; who could have expected
any such thing, from one who had so barbarously abandoned his old Acquaintance,
who had never so much as once in Twenty Years missed an opportunity of serving
him, and abandoned him contrary both to Friendship and Politics. For a Man who
deserts his Friend in an Affair in which it is reasonable that he should espouse
him, does two Things at once to his own Disadvantage. For first, he shows the
World that he has no Body's Interest at heart but his own, which Indifference
the World, as soon as it perceives it, will be sure to return in Kind:
Secondly, he gives a pretty convincing Proof, that he has not Capacity enough
to understand his own Interest; for he who in any Point that is reasonable is
deaf to his Friend's Interest, is certainly blind to his own. Now what
Dependence can I have on a Person who makes it evident to me, that he neither
cares for my Interest, nor understands his own? If you had laid aside the
Alteration of Coriolanus for better Plays, there had been a plausible Apology
for your Breach of Promise. But to sacrifice me to Fools, was Impudent as 'twas
Barbarous. I have read the noble Stuff which you have acted this Winter, all
but Busiris, which was not published when I left the Town. But some Persons,
whom I have seen in this place, tell me there is a Rape in it. If that is true,
it has a Fault in it for which nothing can make Atonement. A Rape is the
peculiar Barbarity of our English Stage. Neither Greecians nor Romans would
suffer it, nor can the French at present bear it. The very Apprehension of a
Rape, though the thing did not follow it, damned the Theodore of Corneille;
which, if you will believe Monsieur Hedelin, is one of his best Tragedies. I
would fain know from you, who have had a twenty Years Experience of the Stage,
for what Reason the Women, who will sit as quietly and passively at the
Relation of a Rape in a Tragedy, as if they thought that Ravishing gave them a
Pleasure, for which they have a just Apology, will start and flinch like
unback'd Fillies, at the least Approach of Rem to Re in Comedy, unless that
Approach happens to be made in the House of Bondage. I have been sometimes apt
to entertain a Suspicion, that it is not the luscious Matter which disturbs them
in Comedy, but the secret implicit Satire upon the Sex. For a Woman in Comedy
never grants the last Favor to one to whom she is not married, but it
proclains the Man's Triumph and her Shame. It always shows her Weakness and
often her Inconstancy, and sometimes her Fraud and Perfidiousness. But a Rape
in Tragedy is a Panegyric upon the Sex: For there the Woman has all the
Advantage of the Man. For she is supposed to remain innocent, and to be pleased
without her Consent; while the Man, who is accounted a damned Villain,
proclaims the Power of Female Charms, which have the Force to drive him to so
horrid a Violence. But to return to the other Plays, which you acted this last
Winter. I have read two Comedies without one Jest in them. But you will say,
perhaps, that the Playhouse was thronged for eight or ten Days together at the
Representation of these Comedies; perhaps so. But then, if it was so thronged
at the Representation of damned Plays, I hope my Ears will no more be stunned
with the Noise of the Improvement of a general Taste, and that for the future
no Consequence will be drawn from the Numbers of an Audience to their Capacity.
For the very same Reason that the Builder's Trade, the Carpenters and the
Joyners are so very much improved; for the very same Reason that so many fine
Houses, so many beautiful Streets, so many stately Squares, and, as it were,
whole Towns are building in your North-West Suburbs; for that very same Reason
is your Theater crowded. A Penetration that comes far short of Conjuration, may
suffice to show, that the Numbers of the Nobility and Gentry of the Town, and
consequently of their Dependants, are exceedingly augmented by some great
Events which have happened of late Years, viz. the Revolution, the Union with
Scotland, the Return of our Armies from the Continent, and the King's Accession
to the Crown. But as for the Improvement of a general Taste, it is so great a
Blunder, that it could never be thought of among considerate People. It Is
improved indeed with a vengeance, it is refined in a glorious manner! improved
as the Taste of a Green Sickness Girl, who leaves palatable Meat for Charcoal;
refined as the Taste of an Hysteric Woman, who is cherished by a Stink, and
sickens at a Perfume; or as the Taste of a modern Letcher, who, like a Swine,
prefers a Sirreverence to the finest thing in the World. The ingenious
Diversions, which they followed this Winter, their Masquerades, their Italian
Farces, and their French Tumblings, cannot choose but show the great Refinement
of their Taste. If the general Taste were improved, two things would certainly
follow, good Plays would be writ, and damned ones would not be endured. But
Shakespeare's Plays you will say were crowded, and Tom. D'Urfey's neglected this
Winter. Be it so. I shall show you in my next, that the Generality of an
Audience, in spite of their Practice, have it both in their Heads and their
Hearts, to value Tom. D'Urfey, and to despise Shakespeare.

I am, Your, etc.
Hampton Court, April 3. 1719.
LETTER written in behalf of one who was lately ruined by Stock-Jobbing, to his
Father-in-Law who would not see him.
SIR,
THIS is the third Letter which I have writ to you, without the Satisfaction of
receiving an Answer, which has been a great Accession to the Calamity which I
labored under before; and I have felt the Frowns of Fortune the more severely,
because they have been attended with yours. It Is hard, that it should be in her
Power to alienate not only our Possessions, but even the Hearts and Souls of
our dearest and most valued Friends. As we learn from her hourly Inconstancy,
that there is no Man secure from her Power, methinks it should be the common
Interest of Mankind to alleviate her Strokes by using their Fellow Creatures
gently, while they are under her Disgrace; especially since long Experience has
taught us, that she is often the most barbarous to those who deserve her
Cruelty the least; so that her Persecution being for the most part directly
contrary to Reason, should least of all be abetted by reasonable Men like you.
My Intentions have been very good, though the Event has not been answerable to
them; and methinks when we pass a Judgment upon our Neighbors, not by their
Intentions, but by Events, we pass a severe Law against ourselves, because our
Intentions are in our Power, but Events are not; and no Man can foresee the
future. My very Enemies must confess, that my Calamity has proceeded not from
any Extravagance of Temper, or a luxurious Life, but only from the too eager
Desire of Getting; which, if it be a Fault, who at present is guiltless? Sure
no Man ever was justly blamed for catching a Distemper, whose Infection was
epidemical. And yet that very eager Desire of Getting has not proceeded from
any sordid Avarice, but only from my Excess of Love to your Daughter, and an
earnest Zeal to secure her Happiness before I should be prevented by Sickness
or Death, or that usual Change which attends on Human Affairs. So that my
Eagerness to make your Daughter happy, has been the very thing that has made
her miserable by bringing under her Father's Displeasure one for whom she
believes it her Duty to be concerned So that what she suffers by your
Displeasure causes it to be more grievous to me, and makes me more passionately
and impatiently desire that you would be reconciled to me. My Fault has been my
Error and not my Crime, and I have Youth, and Health, and Vigor of Mind enough
to retrieve my Fortune. And when I have retrieved her, I have Reason to
believe, that she will then be constant to me, because I have seen and
experienced the only Error which could have obliged her to leave me; and
therefore as soon as I am reestablished, I shall be more happy because more
secure than if I had never falln. In the mean while, Sir, to give you a
convincing Proof, that I prefer your Daughter's Happiness to my own, I am
willing to do any thing to secure her a Competency while my own Condition is
doubtful. I am willing to put it as much out of my Power, as it is contrary to
my Inclinations, to touch the other two thousand Pounds.

I am, SIR, Your, etc.
June 10. 1720.
TO JUDAS ISCARIOT, Esquire
On the Degeneracy of the Public Taste.
SIR,
ABout the middle of the last Month I sent you a long Letter, in which I
endeavored to show the Extravagance of that Opinion, that there is at this
time among us an Improvement of the general Taste, with relation to Poetry and
the Belles Lettres. And I promised in my next to show the Error or the Falacy
of those, who pretend to maintain that Opinion from the crowded Audiences at
the Representation of Shakespeare's Plays, and the thin ones at those which were
writ by Mr. D^y. I promised to show that notwithstanding this Practice of the
present Frequenters of the Playhouse, they have it both in their Heads and
their Hearts to value Mr. D'Urfey and to despise Shakespeare, that neither their
Approbation nor their Contempt is their own, but assumed and borrowed, and that
they approve by Vogue and by Fashion, as a late noble Poet has told us.

Their private Wish obey the public Voice,
'Twixt Good and Bad Whimsey decides, not Choice;
Fashions grow up for Taste, at Forms they strike,
They know what they would have, not what they like.
I promised to show, that the one of these Authors has been esteemed, and the
other contemned by Men of Sense so long, that the Approbation of the one, and
the Contempt of the other, is come at last to make an Impression on the Rabble;
when I mention that Word, I do not mean such a Rabble as you have sometimes on
the Stage at Julius Caesar or at Coriolanus, but such a Rabble as is but too
often beheld in your Pit and Side-Boxes.

A very great Part of those who pretend to be in Love with Shakespeare, if he
were now living, and his most celebrated Plays were to be acted De novo,
without a Cabal, without Character or Prepossession, would Hiss and Damn the
very Things of which they are now the fashionable Admirers, which seems plain
to me from this very Reason, because the modern Plays which they most approve
of, are the very Reverse of Shakespeare's, with respect either to his
Excellencies or his Faults.

Shakespeare is very justly celebrated for the Truth and Justness of his
Characters, for the Beauty of his Sentiments, for the Simplicity and Dignity of
his Dialogue, and for his moving the Passions powerfully by the mere force of
Nature. But the present Spectators of Tragedies approve of those most, in which
the Passions are moved least. They will endure no Modern Tragedy, in whose
principal Character Love is not the predominant Quality. Now Love predominating
in the principal Character, too often falsifies and confounds those Characters,
and by Consequence but too often destroys the Beauty of the Sentiments, because
no Sentiment can be beautiful, which is improper in him who speaks it. Besides,
there are not three of our modern Tragedies, which have any thing like those
Sentiments which abound in Shakespeare; Sentiments, which, at the same time that
they show Sagacity and Penetration, are easy, just, and natural.

The modern Readers and Spectators of Tragedies will endure no Tragedy which
has the Simplicity and naivete of Shakespeare's Dialogue; a Simplicity, wherever
the occasion requires it, attended with Force, and Dignity, and Pomp, and
Solemnity: Instead of that noble and natural Dialogue, they are for a flatulant
Style, in which the Poet puts the Change upon himself, and speaks almost always
himself, instead of making his Characters speak.

But as the Readers and Spectators of Modern Tragedies approve of those most,
which are the very reverse of Shakespeare's with respect to his Beauties and
Excellencies, so they declare very loudly against his Faults. The Faults of
Shakespeare, which are rather those of the Age in which he lived, are his
perpetual Rambles, and his apparent Duplicity in some of his Plays, or
Triplicity of Action, and the frequent breaking the Continuity of the Scenes.
The present Spectators declare against this, in appearance, but at the same
time approve of this Multiplicity of Action in some Modern Plays, concealed by
a Jumble and a Confusion which is incomprehensible and altogether
unintelligible. Another of Shakespeare's Faults is the Length of Time employed
in the carrying on his Dramatick Action. The present Spectators are extremely
shocked at this in a modern Tragedy, but at the same time approve of those in
which the Unity of Time is preserved by offending all Common Sense.

If a Modern Poet in one of his Tragedies should show any Thing like
Shakespeare's Rambles, should introduce a Tragedy upon the Stage, which should
begin in Europe and end in Asia, like the Moor of Venice, that Play would be
exploded and damned with very great Damnation. But the Modern Spectators of
Tragedies greatly esteem and are fond of those, in which the Unity of Place is
preserved, sometimes by whimsical comic Absurdities, and sometimes by dreadful
and prodigious Extravagancies.

From all this I conclude, as I said before, that the Spectators of modern
Tragedies, having the greatest Esteem for those, which have least of
Shakespeare's Excellencies, and declaring loudly against his Faults, would damn
Shakespeare, if living.

Nor can I believe that several who pretend to be passionate Admirers of
Milton, would treat him if living in any other manner for the following Reasons.

Because they are so fond of nothing as of that soft and effeminate Rhyme,
which makes the very Reverse of the Harmony, and of the manly, and powerful,
and noble Enthusiasm of Milton.

Because the Generality of Poets and Wits his Contemporaries did not esteem
him, though they were by no means inferior in Understanding to his pretended
living Admirers. Willmot Earl of Rochester never so much as mentioned him, in
his Imitation of the Tenth Satyr of the first Book of Horace. When he came to
imitate that Passage, Forte epos Acer, ut nemo Varius ducit, instead of Milton
he names Waller. And when that noble Peer was some Years ^erwards asked by Dr.
Burnet, since Bishop of Salisbury, for which of the Modern Poets he had most
Esteem, he answered without the least Hesitation, for Boileau among the French,
and Cowley among the English Poets. Mr. Rymer in his first Book of Criticism
treated the Paradise Lost with Contempt, and the generality of the Readers of
Poetry, for twenty Years after it was published, knew no more of that exalted
Poem, than if it had been writ in Arabic: Mr. Dryden in his Preface before the
State of Innocence, appears to have been the first, those Gentlemen excepted
whose Verses are before Milton's Poem, who discovered in so public a Manner an
extraordinary Opinion of Milton's extraordinary Merit. And yet Mr. Dryden at
that time knew not half the Extent of his Excellence, as more than twenty Years
afterward he confessed to me, and as is pretty plain from his writing the
State of Innocence. For Mr. Dryden, in that Poem, which is founded on the
Paradise Lost, falls so infinitely short of those wonderful Qualities, by which
Milton has distinguished that noble Poem from all other Poems, that one of
these two Things must be granted; either that Mr. Dryden knew not the Extent of
Milton's great Qualities, or that he designed to be a Foil to him. But they who
knew Mr. Dryden, know very well, that he was not of a Temper to design to be a
Foil to any one.

I hope I have said enough to convince you that the Approbations and Censures
of the Generality of an Audience are derived from Sentiments which are not
their own, and which are the Effects of Authority, and not of Reason. When Men
who are, and are esteemed, Persons of more than ordinary Judgment, have
declared themselves from time to time, during a Century, or half a Century,
concerning Poems Dramatick or others, those Declarations are the Cause, that
other Persons at length, being guided by the Light which is held out to them,
fondly imagine that it was kindled by that Particle of Heavenly Fire which they
fancy to be within them. But the numerous and violent Cabals, which are formed
to support or decry Dramatick Writings, may serve instead of a thousand
Arguments to convince the most obstinate, that there is no such thing as a
general Taste among us. It being absolutely impossible that great Numbers of
Persons of a fine Discernment and a true Taste should conspire to extol a
Blockhead at the Expense of a noble Art, at the Expense of their own Reputation
and the Reputation of their Country, and consequently at the Ex^ence, in a good
measure, of that Coun^ry's Power and Interest. You and your ^rethren, who are
the present Managers (...) the Playhouse, have of late very justly ^ewn the
extremest Contempt for the ge^eral Taste, pretending to set off damned ^lays,
by the glare of new Habits. Which ^onduct of you, the Emperors, and Kings, and
Princes of the Drama, recalls to my Re^embrance what Boccalin says of some
Princes of Parnassus. They had half ru^'d themselves, says that merry Italian,
by ^he Expense they had been at to preserve and perfume Sirreverences: Yet
still, says ^e, the more Cost they were at, and the more Sweets they bestowed
upon them the more damnably their Conserves stunk in ^he Nostrils of all who
had really Noses. Perhaps, if you take the Word in the most diffusive Sense,
there never was a general good Taste for Poetry, among any People in the World,
if you except the Athenians. But there never was so general a one in England as
there was in modern France and Italy, before the Opera and some other Things
debauched it in both those Countries.

There has not one great Poet appeared in France since the beginning of
Cardinal Richlieu's Ministry, but he has been protected and encouraged, and his
Merit, as fast as it could spread, has been generally acknowledged. I wish I
could as truly affirm the same thing of England. The great Qualities of Milton
were not generally known among his Countrymen till the Paradise Lost had been
published more than thirty Years. But when that admirable Poet was among the
Italians, the Greatness of his Genius was known to them in the very Bloom of
his Youth, even thirty Years before that incomparable Poem was writ, witness
the Epigram of Selvaggi, an Italian Poet, of which Dryden's Epigram which is
under Milton's Picture is nothing but a Paraphrase.

Graecia Maeonidem, jactet sibi Roma Maronem,
Anglia Miltonum, jactat utrique parem.
Nay, Salsiki, a Roman Poet, sacrifices the very Honor of his Country, that
is, of modern Italy to him, by preferring the Italian Poetry of Milton even to
that of Tasso:

Cede Meles, cedat depressa Moxeius urna
Sebetus Tassum desinatusque loqui.
At Thamesis victor cunctis ferat altior undas,
Nam per Te, Milto, partribus unus erat.
And Giovanni Baptista Manso, a Noble Neapolitan, who had been the intimate
Friend of Tasso, and the great Patron of Marino, while they were living, gives
extraordinary Commendations to Milton, though he was then but a Youth among them,
as appears by his Latin Verses addressed to that noble Italian,

Ergo ego Te Clius, and magni nomine Phoebi
Manse pater, jubeo longum salvere per aevum,
Missus Hyperboreo Juvenis peregrinus ab axe.
Milton had then been so far from writing the Paradise Lost, that he had never
so much as thought of that Subject, but had at that time determined, after his
Return to England, to write an Epick Poem upon the Exploits of Arthur and the
Knights of the Round Table, as appears by the same Verses to Manso.

Arthurumque etiam sub Terris bella moventem
Dicam, atque invictae sociali federemensae
Magnanimos Heroas, and (o modo spiritus adsit)
Frangam Saxonicas Britonum sub mart phalanges.
Thus, you see, the Italians, by his juvenile Essays, discovered the great and
growing Genius of Milton, whereas (...) Countrymen knew very little of him,
even thirty Years after he had published among them the noblest Poem in the
World.

But as the general Taste of England could be never said to be good, it was
never so bad as it is at present; a certain Proof of which, is, that Writings
both Dramatick and others, were never so infamous as they now are. And Taste
and Writing always keep Pace with each other. When Shakespeare first appeared
among us, the Generality of his Readers and his Spectators were much better
able to judge of him than they are at present. Because, as he was a very
natural Writer, and they were without Prejudice, without Prepossession, and
without Affectation, and without the Influence of a Coxcomical, Senseless
Cabal, they were at Liberty to receive the Impressions which Things naturally
made on their Minds.

Hampton Court, May 25. 1719.
TO Sir RICHARD STEEL.
Declaring the Reasons for which I published the two Volumes of SELECT WORKS.
SIR,
I Here send you by the Bearer, several Pieces in Verse and Prose, writ
formerly by me, and lately printed in two Volumes; but I send them not without
a double Design on you. For first, I desire that you would have the Goodness to
oblige your Managers to make me some Recompense this Winter for the Wrong which
they did me the last. Secondly, I desire that you will give me leave to say
something concerning ^he Pieces contained in these two Volumes, and more
particularly concerning the Motive which obliged me to write the chief of them
at the first, and to publish them lately together; which I shall do with
Pleasure to one who has done so much Good in the same Cause in which most of
them were writ.

Several of the Pieces in Verse and Prose, and three of the Plays, were writ in
the Cause of Liberty. The narrative Poems of greater Length were all of them
written upon Great and Public Occasions, and were designed as so many
Panegyricks upon those Illustrious Persons whoseGreat and Heroic Actions had
made them Benefactors to Great Britain and Liberty.

It has always been my Opinion, that a free Nation can never be too zealous in
maintaining their Liberties, because we have been taught by too many fatal
Events, that they have at last been often lost by the Security and Corruptions
of those who had for several Centuries enjoyed them. Witness the ancient
Grecians and Romans, and the ancient and modern Spaniards and French. But
whenever the Liberties of a great Nation are in manifest Danger, there all the
several Members of it, who are not abjectly base, will use their utmost Efforts
in defending them. The Liberties of Great Britain have in our own Memory been
in so much Danger, that they have been twice in thirty Years retrieved from
immediate Ruin, first by the Revolution, and secondly by the Accession of King
George to the Imperial Crown of this Island, but even now they by no Means
appear to me to be entirely secured.

Since the Revolution, things appear to have been strangely reverst in Great
Britain with regard to Liberty. In four or five Reigns immediately preceding
the Arrival of King William of Immortal Memory, the Court was for Arbitrary
Power, and the People appeared strenuous for Liberty. But since that time, the
Court has for the most part contended for Liberty, and the People, I mean too
great a Part of them, have declared for Slavery. Now, if ever we should come to
be under a King, who would ^acrifice his Protestant Dissenting Subjects (...)
the High-Church Clergy, we should ^uickly see whether the Liberties of a Na^^on
are most secure, when a considerable Part of the People (who are their natural
Guardians) are resov'd to defend, or deter^in'd to resign them. In the mean
time, (...), it must be acknowledged, to the im^ortal Honor of the present
King, that (...) endeavoring to secure the Dissenters ^^om such a Treatment in
time to come, he taking ^ the most effectual Method to im^ortalize Liberty.

Thus, Sir, have I acquainted you with (...) only Motive of writing the chief
of ^^ese Poems, which was the Apprehension ^had of the Danger, which the
Liberties (...) my Country were in, and consequently the Liberties of the
Christian World, of which ours are the strongest Bulwark. I wrote them not then
as one who espoused a Party, but as a Lover of my Country, and one zealous to
promote the Happiness of Great Britain. I have been so far from having any
ambitious Aims or any sordid Views of Interest, that I have been contented to
see several of the public Rewards engrossed by some who are lukewarm, and by
others who are Jacobites in Whig Clothing, while I have remained very poor in
a very advanced Age. But one Thing indeed I have sometimes been apt to think
exceeding hard, and that is, that these lukewarm Persons, and these Jacobites
in Whig Clothing, should be suffered to make use of the Power which they have
acquired by their Falsehood, to the utter Ruin of one who has behaved himself
all along with the utmost Sincerity in the noblest Cause of Liberty.

Thus, Sir, have I laid before you the Motive which engaged me to write the
greater part of the Pieces which are contained in the two Volumes. I shall now
show you, how the same Motive obliged me to use my Endeavors to preserve them*
if they should appear worthy of it, and consequently to publish them in the two
forementioned Volumes. It was in October 1716, that I desired a Bookseller to
collect them for me. I thought that after so much Time had passed since the
writing them, I should be capable of forming as true a Judgment my self of
them, as any other Person whatsoever, who has no better Judgment in Poetical
Matters than I have, or that the Precept of Horace, nonum prematur in annum,
must be false and vain.

Upon a very slow and deliberate Perusal of them, I could not but conclude,
that with all their Faults they were not altogether deprived of that noble
Fire, which alone can make them pleasing; nor of that Justness and Solidity
which alone can make them lasting. I believed that if they were published
together, they might be able one Day to do some Good to the public, and no
Discredit to me.

And I was the more encouraged to venture on this Publication, because, Sir,
you may be pleased to remember, that they had been favorably received by the
most illustrious Persons of both Parties for their Judgment in Poetry, and
their Knowledge of the Belles Lettres, by the late Earls of Godolphin and
Halifax, Mr. Maynwaring and others among the Whigs, and by the present Duke of
Buckingham and my Lord Lansdown among the Tories. And if any Temptation could
make me vain, it would be the favorable Opinions of the last two Noble
Persons, because as their Judgments in matters of Poetry are unquestioned, they
can never be supposed to be partial to one, who has all his Lifetime appeared
very zealous in contrary Principles to those of a Party, which they by some
have been supposed to favor. My Lord Lansdown, by making me a Present so
noble, as never has been made by a Subject to any Author now living,
sufficiently declared that what I had writ had not been altogether displeasing
to him. And it is to the warm Approbation which the Duke of Buckingham gave to
the Poem on the Battle of Blenheim, that I owe the Honor of being first known
to the late illustrious Earl of Godolphin, whose good and great Qualities, and
the Benefits which Great Britain received from his good and his wise
Administration, make me proud to own for the first and greatest of my
Benefactors.

Thus, Sir, I found Encouragement to preserve these Pieces, and especially the
Poems writ in the Cause of Liberty. But I was convinced at the same time, that
the only way to preserve them would be to publish them together. They were in a
great many different Hands, and some of them in the Hands of such who were
mortal Enemies to the Cause in which they were written. Some of them had been
very incorrectly printed. The very Subject which ought to recommend them to all
Englishmen, as well as the Harmony without Rhyme in several of the Poems, made
some of them for the present less pleasing to above half the Readers of Poetry.
Some of them that had once appeared with Applause seemed to have been forgot.
For all things of late Days have been managed by Cabal and Party; and there
seems to have been a Conspiracy in the Commonwealth of Learning, among Fools of
all Sorts, to exalt Folly at the Expense of Common-sense, and make Stupidity
triumph over Merit in the very Dominions of Wit, which has been one of the
Causes why Things are reduced to that deplorable State upon our British
Parnassus. Apollo and the Muses seem to have abandoned it; disdaining that
their Divinities should honor a Place with their Songs, where Fools and
Pedants, Buffoons, Eunuchs and Tumblers have so often met with Applause.

Who could have thought, if he had been told twenty Years ago, that he should
outlive Tragedy and Comedy, that he had been promised a Life of not quite
twenty Years? Yet it is very plain that the Promise had extended no further:
such is the Power of Cabal and Party.

I have all along had a great Aversion to the making a Party, or the entering
into a Cabal, and have sometimes looked upon it with Horror and sometimes with
Contempt. Who that has Common-sense can forbear laughing, when he sees a Parcel
of Fellows, who call themselves Wits, sit in Combination round a Coffee Table,
as Sharpers do round a Hazard Table, to trick honest Gentlemen into an
Approbation of their Works, and bubble them of their Understandings?

And yet I have all along known, that nothing in the greater Poetry can grow
immediately popular without a Cabal or Party. I have a long time been
convinced, that the more sublimely any thing is writ in Poetry, and the nearer
it comes to Perfection, the longer it will be before it grows popular, without
such a Cabal; because the more sublimely it is writ, and the nearer it comes to
Perfection, the more it is raised above the Apprehensions of the Vulgar. And
yet notwithstanding this Knowledge, I have all along resolved to have no
Reputation, or to owe it to my Writings.

Thus, Sir, you see the Reasons, why the Writings that make up these two
Volumes, or at least the greater Part of them, had been in danger of being
lost, if I had not taken Pains during my Lifetime to correct and publish them
together. There is one more Reason remaining, and that is, the Malice of those
People whom the World calls Poets, whose Hatred I have been proud to incur, by
speaking bold and necessary Truths in the behalf of a noble Art, which they
have miserably abused by their vile Poems, and their more vile Criticisms. And
yet it is from these People that the foolish Readers of Poetry, which are nine
Parts in ten, take their Opinions of Poets and their Works, little believing,
or once imagining, that these Persons are of all Mankind the very worst
qualified to judge of their own Art; as having neither the Capacity, nor the
Impartiality which are requisite for the judging truly. For it will be found,
generally speaking, that Poets, Painters, and Musicians, are capacitated less
than other Men to judge of Poetry, Painting and Music. This, I must confess,
may appear to some to be so bold a Paradox, that I shall endeavor to make it
out both by Reason and Authority, though I know very well at the same time, that
You can make no Doubt of it. The Generality of Poets, Painters and Musicians,
are such by the mere Power of a warm Imagination. And it is very rarely that a
strong Imagination and a penetrating Judgment are found in the same Subject. We
need go no further than Boileau to hear that a celebrated Poet is often a
contemptible Judge.

Tell excelle a Rimer qui Juge sottement,
Et tell s'est fait par ses Verse distinguer par la ville,
Qui jamais du Lucain n'a distingue Virgile.
As for what relates to Painters, I shall content my self with the Citation of
a Remark from the ingenious and judicious Author of the Observations upon
Fresnoy's Art of Painting, translated by Mr. Dryden. It Is the Fiftieth Remark,
upon these Words of Mr. Dryden's Translation, 'As being the 'Sovereign Judge of
his own Art.

This Word, Sovereign Judge or Arbiter of his own Art, pre-supposes a Painter
to be fully instructed in all the Parts of Painting, so that being set as it
were above his Art, he may be the Master and Sovereign of it, which is no easy
Matter. Those of that Profession are so seldom endowed with that supreme
Capacity, that few of them arrive to be good Judges of Painting: And I should
many times make more account of their Judgment who are Men of Sense, and yet
have never touched a Pencil, than of the Opinion which is given by the greatest
part of Painters. All Painters therefore may be called Arbiters of their own
Art, but to be Sovereign Arbiters belongs only to knowing Painters.

What is said by this ingenious Gentleman of Painters, is exactly true of
Musicians. For which I have the Opinion of more than one Master among them; and
as to the Truth of this Observation with relation to Poets, I have said enough
above.

But as Poets are not capable, so neither are they impartial Judges. I speak of
those who are only Rhimesters. For a great Master is for the most part as
impartial as he is knowing; but for the rest, the Readers of Poetry would do
well to consider, that if a Mistress who is courted by a great many passionate
Rivals, should ask any one of them his Opinion of the rest, it is ten to one
that he would prefer him most, whom he esteemed least, and whom he believed
^east capable of getting that Mistress from him.

Thus, Sir, have I acquainted you with the Motive which obliged me to write the
greater Part of these Treatises, and which afterward engaged me to publish
them in the two Volumes, which you will receive with this. I hope I shall not
be thought troublesome, if in a second Letter I say something in particular of
the Pieces both in Verse and Prose. However these two Letters will at least
convince you of the good Opinion which I have a long time entertained both of
your Discernment and your Impartiality.

I am, SIR, Your most Humble and most Obedient Servant, JOHN DENNIS
Sep. 4. 1719.
TO THO. SERGEANT, Esquire
That all Stock-Jobbers are Slaves.
SIR,
I Had sooner returned you my Thanks for the favor of your last, and the good
Advice in it, if I had not entertained some Thoughts of waiting on you; which I
had certainly done before now, if it had not been for the Reflection, that here
of late you are scarce any where to be found but in Exchange-Alley; and what
good Christian would go to a Place where he is sure to meet the Devil at every
Turn that he takes there? not indeed with his Infernal Equipage, his
Brow-antlers, his Saucer Eyes, his long Tail, and his cloven Feet: He wears
nothing of all this in Exchange-Alley, except sometimes his Horns. But then I
should meet him at every Turn in more frightful and more provoking Appearances,
as now in the Shape of a Roguish leering Broker, and anon like a ghastly ruined
Stock-Jobber; sometimes in the Shape of a young Lady who has lost both the
Modesty and the natural Desire of her Sex; and sometimes I should see him in
the same Shape in which he fell from Heaven, that is like a Star of the first
magnitude shining in an azure Sky. For that old Gentleman, who understands his
Interest better than any Mortal living, frequents no one Spot on the Globe so
much as ExchangeAlley: For there he constantly finds new Occasion to exercise
his old Talents, his Tempting, Lying, Deluding and Betraying.

I showed the Acclamation at the latter end of your Letter to a Friend, who was
with me when it came. Vive la Mer pacifique! What, says he, does this come from
a Sharper? I desired to know what made him ask that Question. You know, said
he, that there are two constant Hazard Tables or Wheels of Fortune that are
established by Authority in this wicked Town, not to mention a third, which is
sometimes at Guild Hall, but transitory and occasional; that one of these two
is in the neighborhood of White Hall, established by the Authority of the
Court, and the other near the Royal Exchange, established by another Authority.
Now the Table in the Neighborhood of White Hall is a fair and impartial one,
at which only Men of Honor play; at least they are Men of Honor while they
are there, whatever they may be when they are in other Places. But the Hazard
Table near the Exchange is frequented by the greatest Sharpers about this
tricking Town. There are Bullies to be seen every Day in Crowds with their
Boxes and their false Dice: sometimes they make use of High Runners, sometimes
of Low Runners, and sometimes of Doctors. And this their Sharping and their
Cheating is Christened forsooth their Being in the Secret. So that Being in the
Secret will shortly come to signify something more scandalous even than open
Infamy.

Well but, said I, even at that tricking Table, my Friend plays upon the
Square, and is in no Secret. But then, said he, let me ask you another
Question, Is your Friend a Lover of his Country? That is a stranger Question
than the other, said I. Every one is a Lover of his Country, or at least every
one pretends to be so. But, replied he, can any one who would be so much as
thought to love his Country approve so heartily of a Method, which if it is
practiced much longer will infallibly ruin it? For besides that Strangers run
away with vast Sums of our Money, who came in at Seventy perhaps, and go out at
Seven Hundred; is not our Trade by this Stock-Jobbing brought to a narrower
Compass? They who are ruined by it are unable to carry on their Commerce; and
they who have gained vast Sums by it, have been apt to think themselves above
their Professions, and laugh at the getting ten or twenty per Cent. by a long
Voyage, when in Exchange-Alley they can propose to gain fifty per Cent. in a
Morning. Now as our Trade decreases, continued he, our Seamen must decrease
proportionably, so that at last perhaps it will be impossible upon an exigence
to Man our Royal Navy: And then we may happen to become a Prey to the first
Invader. So that this Lover of his Country is heartily approving of a Method,
which may one Day bring this Island to be a conquered Province, and his own
Posterity to be wretched Slaves. As soon as I perceived that he paused, I told
him that this would have been more a propos, if he had spoke it before the late
Act of Parliament for the putting down of the Bubbles. But he answered they
being put down by the Wisdom of the Legislature, for this very Reason, least
any Prejudice should acrue to Trade from them, and Ram's and Onslow's Bubbles
being established by the same Wisdom, have not the Legislature plainly
declared, that Trade could receive no Damage from them; and that we may deliver
to the Winds our fears of Conquest and of Slavery? Ought not every one to
acquiesce in what they have done, and can any one be extravagant enough to
believe, that they would establish two Bubbles against the Public Good, only
for the sake of a little transitory Pelf, which is to come into particular
Hands? Very good, said my Friend but are not those Gentlemen who constantly
frequent Exchange-Ally actually Slaves already, as errant, as vile, as
miserable Slaves as those who row in the Galleys? Say thou so, my dear
Friend? said I: do but make that out, and thou shall to me be Apollo and all
the Muses. But this is a new Paradox. Not so new neither, said he. The whole
Sect of the Stoics embraced it. The Stoics, I told him, were fantastical
People. In some things he allowed they were so; but that, for the most part,
their Morality was more sound ^han that of any other Sect among ^he Heathens.
Horace, who was of no Sect, but who took from each of them what he thought was
just and solid, (and by the way he wanted no Judgment, no Discernment that
could enable him to make a right Choice,) made this Opinion ^is own, as you may
see by the Sixteenth Epistle of his First Book.

Qui melior Servo, qui Liberior sit Avarus,
Non video. Nam qui cupiet, metuet quoque: porro
Qui metuens vivet, Liber mibi non erit unquam.
But my dear Friend, said I, the Authority of a Roman Poet will hardly bring
the Gentlemen in Exchange-Alley off from their Stock-Jobbing. This is an
Authority, he replied, which carries Reason along with it. For thus he argues.
The Covetous Man desires; he who desires, of consequence fears; but he who
lives in continual Fear, must, in my Opinion, be always an errant Slave. But,
continued he, I will add my own Reasons to those of Horace. There are two sorts
of Liberties, said he, a Civil and a Philosophical Liberty. What we call Civil
Liberty gives us the command of our own Actions: What we call Philosophical
Liberty gives us the command of our own Thoughts. Now neither the Galley-slave
nor the Stock-Jobbe can be said to enjoy Civil Liberty, that is, neither the
one nor the other has the freedom of his own Actions: For a GalleySlave must
Row, and a Stock-Jobber must Stock-Jobb. And it signifies nothing to the
purpose, that the one, upon his Refusal or upon his Neglect, is corrected by a
Cat of Nine-tayls, and the other by the Stings of his own base Passion, since
they are both equally under Compulsion; and the Stock-Jobber, though never so
wealthy, is as much afraid of missing the Hours of Jonathan's or of Garroway's,
as the poor Galley-slave is of being wanting to his turn at the Oar. But now to
come to Philosophical Liberty, in that the Galley-slave has infinitely ^he
Advantage of the Stock-Jobber. For while the former is chained to his Oar, his
Thoughts may be as free as the Air, his Thoughts may wander over the Universe,
may wander through Eternity, and while his Body is in the utmost Agitation, his
Mind may be calm and composed. But ^e Stock-Jobber's Thoughts are more con^in'd
than the other's Body, confined to Dirt, and the sordid means of accumula^ng
it, and his Mind is often plagued by ^he most tormentiug Passions. The poor
Galley-slave may be a virtuous and an ex^ellent Man, but the wealthy
Stock-Jobber must always be in the number of pro^ligate Sinners.

Perdidit arma, locum virtutis deseruit, qui
Semper in augenda festinat and obruitur re.
Ep. 16. Lib. 1. That is, he who has his Thoughts in^ent upon the Means of
heaping up Mo^ey, has thrown away his Buckler, has deserted his Post, the noble
Post of Virtue where his General placed him, and which it was his Duty to
maintain at the Expense of Life it self. He has lost it, he has been beaten out
of it, by his base Passions and by his abject Vices, by his Fraud, his Desire,
his Hope, his Fear and his Rage. The Galley-slave may have it firmly in his
Mind and in his Will to do all the Duties of the best of Men; to be a faithful
Lover of his Country and to serve it to the utmost of his power; to be a good
Father, a good Son, a good Husband, a good Brother, he may be dear to all his
Friends and Relations, and have the heartiest kindest Wishes of all. But as the
miserable Stock-Jobber cares only for himself, he is dear to himself alone, and
contemptible and hateful to all besides; and one may say to him, in the Words
of Horace,

Non uxor salvum te vult, non filius* omnes
Vicini oderunt, noti, pueri, atque puellae.
Miraris, quum tu argento post omnia ponas,
Si nemo praestet, quem non merearis, amorem?
For a true Stock-Jobber will sacrifice Wife, Father, Child, Brother, and his
Country it self, for Gain. He who sacrifice^ the latter will sacrifice the
rest. And have we not a thousand Instances every Day that a Stock-Jobber will
sacrifice his Country?

But there is still another thing in which the Galley-slave has by much the
Advantage of the Stock-Jobber. The former is a redeemable Slave, but the latter
is in Chains for his Life. Fortune or Time may release the Slaves who are at
Algiers or Tripoli, but Fortune and Time are both the Stock-Jobbers Foes.
Length of Days will certainly augment his Avarice and make his Captivity ruder.
And the more Wealth there shall chance to flow in upon him, the more will he
desire, the less will he enjoy, and still the more abject a Slave will he be to
the base Lust of Gold. But, my dear Friend, said I, who had heard him hitherto
with Patience, Thou certainly believ'st that thou art in a Pulpit, for it is
there that, right or wrong, a Man has the Privilege of talking for an Hour
without being interrupted. Sir, said he, I stand corrected, but I did not
deserve this Remonstrance only for complying with your own Desire. You know
very well that it is not my custom to talk all, and that I have more than once
suffered you to Preach in your turn. No Man, he continued, has a worse Opinion
than I have of an eternal Talker. That which makes him so insufferable, is,
that though he is for the most part a very empty Coxcomb, yet he implicitly
declares that, into what Company soever he lights, he alone has more
Understanding than all the rest of the Company together; that Nature has
qualified him to prescribe to others, and that God who made him created him
perpetual Dictator. But as I know you, continued he, to be sometimes an errant
Wag, with a very grave Countenance, I am perhaps very much in the wrong to take
what you say seriously. I leave you to ruminate on what I have told you, and
shall expect to know your Opinion of it the next time I see you. So we parted.
But before I give him my Opinion I desire to know yours.

I am, SIR, Your etc.
White Hall, June 22. 1720.
TO Sir RICHARD STEEL,
Patentee of the Theater in Drury Lane.
SIR,
THOUGH at the time of writing this, I am almost overwhelmed both with Sickness
and Grief, yet I cannot forbear making a just Complaint to you for your being
the Occasion of both these, either by actually breaking your Word with me, or
being perfectly passive while your Managers broke it; which, if it has not
reduced me to immediate Necessity, yet has brought me within the Danger of it,
and consequently within the Apprehension of it, which is as grievous almost as
the Thing. And that this Complaint is but too justly grounded, you your self
will acknowledge, when I have laid my Case before you, which I shall do in as
few Words as I can.

It was upon the 27th of February, 1717/8, that I received a Letter from Mr.
Booth by your Direction, and the Direction of the Managers under you, desiring
me to dine at your House on the 28th, and after Dinner to read the Tragedy of
Coriolanus to you, which I had altered from Shakespeare. You cannot but
remember, Sir, that upon reading it, the Play with the Alterations was approved
of, nay and warmly approved of, by your self, Mr. Cibber, and Mr. Booth, (the
other Manager was not there) and that Resolutions were taken for the acting it
in the beginning of this Winter. Now I appeal to your self, if any Dramatick
Performance could be more seasonable in the beginning of a Winter, when we were
threatened with an Invasion from Sweden on the North, and from Spain on the
West, than a Tragedy whose Moral is thus expressed in the last Lines of the Play.

-- They who through Ambition or Revenge,
Or impious Interest join with Foreign Foes,
TO oppress or to destroy their native Country,
Shall find, like Coriolanus, soon or late
From their perfidious Foreign Friends their Fate.
I am sure, Sir, I need not tell one of your Understanding, that this Moral is
so apparently the Foundation of the Dramatick Action, and must appear to every
Spectator and Reader to be so truly the genuine Result of it, that if I had not
said one Word of it, every Reader and Spectator would have been able to have
suggested so much to himself.

Well, Sir! when the Winter came on, what was done by your Deputies? Why,
instead of keeping their Word with me, they spent above two Months of the
Season in getting up All for Love, or the World well lost, a Play which has
indeed a noble first Act, an Act which ends with a Scene becoming of the
Dignity of the Tragic Stage. But if Horace had been now alive, and been either
a Reader or Spectator of that Entertainment, he would have passed his old
Sentence upon the Author.

Infelix operis summa quia ponere totum
Nesciet.
For was ever any thing so pernicious, so immoral, so criminal, as the Design
of that Play? I have mentioned the Title of it, give me leave to set before you
the two last Lines:

And Fame to late Posterity shall tell,
No Lovers lived so great, or died so well.
And this Encomium of the Conduct and the Death of Anthony and Cleopatra, a
Conduct so immoral, and a Self-murder so criminal, is, to give it more Force,
put into the Mouth of the High Priest of Isis; though that Priest could not but
know, that what he thus commended, would cause immediately the utter
Destruction of his Country, and make it become a Conquered and a Roman
Province. Certainly never could the Design of an Author square more exactly
with the Design of White Hall, at the time when it was written, which was by
debauching the People absolutely to enslave them.

For, pray Sir, what do the Title and the two last Lines of this Play amount to
in plain English? Why to this, that if any Person of Quality or other shall
turn away his Wife, his young, affectionate, virtuous, charming Wife (for all
these Octavia was) to take to his Bed a loose abandoned Prostitute, and shall
in her Arms exhaust his Patrimony, destroy his Health, emasculate his Mind, and
lose his Reputation and all his Friends, why all this is well and greatly done,
his Ruin is his Commendation. And if afterward in Despair, he either hangs or
drowns himself, or goes out of the World like a Rat, with a Dose of Arsenick or
Sublimate, why it is a great and an envied Fate, he dies nobly and heroically.
It is, Sir, with extreme Reluctance that I have said all this. For I would not
be thought to affront the Memory of Mr. Dryden, for whose extraordinary
Qualities no Man has a greater Veneration than my self. But that all
Considerations ought to give Place to the Public Good, is a Truth of which
you, of all Men, I am sure, can never doubt.

And can you believe then, after having recommended Virtue and Public Spirit
for so many Years to the World, that you can give your Subalterns Authority to
preach up Adultery to a Town, which stands so little in need of their Doctrine?
Is not the Chastity of the Marriage Bed one of the chief Incendiaries of
Public Spirit, and the Frequency of Adulteries one of the chief Extinguishers
of it; according to that of Horace

Foecunda culpae secula, nuptias
Primum inquinavere, and Genus, and Domos,
Hoc Font derivata clades
In patriam populumque fluxit.
For when Adultery's become so frequent, especially among Persons of Condition,
upon whose Sentiments all Public Spirit chiefly depends, that a great many
Husbands begin to believe, or perhaps but to suspect, that they who are called
their Children are not their own; I appeal to you, Sir, if that Belief or that
Suspicion must not exceedingly cool their Zeal for the Welfare of those
Children, and consequently for the Welfare of Posterity.

As I had infinitely the Advantage of All for Love in the Moral of Coriolanus,
I had it by Consequence in the whole Tragedy; for the Coriolanus, as I have
altered it, having a just Moral, and by Consequence at the Bottom a general and
allegorical Action, and universal and allegorical Characters, and for that very
reason a Fable, is therefore a true Tragedy, if it be not a just and a regular
one; but it is as just and as regular as I could make it, upon so irregular a
Plan as Shakespeare's: Whereas All for Love having no Moral, and consequently no
general and allegorical Action, nor general and allegorical Characters, can for
that Reason have no Fable, and therefore can be no Tragedy. It Is indeed only a
particular Account of what happened formerly to Anthony and Cleopatra, and a
most pernicious Amusement.

And as I had the Advantage in the Merit of Coriolanus, I had it likewise in
the World's Opinion of the Merit and Reputation of Shakespeare in Tragedy above
that of Mr. Dryden. For let Mr. Dryden's Genius for Tragedy be what it will, he
has more than once publicly owned, that it was much inferior to Shakespeare's,
and particularly in those two remarkable Lines in his Prologue to Aurenge-Zebe.

And when he hears his Godlike Romans rage,
He in a just Despair would quit the Stage.
And in the Verses to Sir Godfrey Kneller.

Shakespeare, thyGift, I place before my Sight;
With Awe, I ask his Blessing ere I write;
With Reverence look on his majestic Face,
Proud to be less, but of his Godlike Race.
And the same Mr. Dryden has more than once declared to me, that there was
something in this very Tragedy of Coriolanus as it was writ by Shakespeare, that
is truly great and truly Roman; and I more than once answered him, that it had
always been my own Opinion. Now I appeal to you and your Managers, if it has
lost any thing under my Hands.

But what is more considerable than all this, your Deputy Lieutenants for the
Stage have ten times the Opinion of the Advantage which Shakespeare has over Mr.
Dryden in Tragedy, than either I or the rest of the World have. Ever since I
was capable of reading Shakespeare, I have always had and have always expressed
that Veneration for him, which is justly his due; of which I believe no one can
doubt, who has read the Essay which I published some Years ago upon his Genius
and Writings. But what they express upon all Occasions, is not Esteem, is not
Admiration, but flat Idolatry.

And lastly, I had the Advantage of the very Opinion which those People had of
their own Interest in the Case. They knew very well that it was but twelve
Years since All for Love had been acted. And they were likewise satisfied, that
from its first Run, as they call, to the beginning of this last Winter, it had
never brought four Audiences together. At the same time there was no Occasion
to tell them, that the Coriolanus of Shakespeare had not been acted in twenty
Years, and that when it was brought upon the Stage twenty Years ago, it was
acted twenty Nights together.

And now, Sir, I shall be obliged to you, if you will acquaint me, for what
mighty and unknown Reason, the Coriolanus, notwithstanding yours and their warm
Approbation of it, notwithstanding your Words solemnly given to act it, as soon
as it could conveniently be brought upon the Stage this Winter, notwithstanding
the Merit of the Play it self, I speak of Shakespeare's part of it,
notwithstanding the World's and their own Opinion of the superior Merit of
Shakespeare to Mr. Dryden in Tragedy; and their very Opinion of their own
Interest in the Case, nay notwithstanding the exact Seasonableness of the Moral
for the Service of King George and of Great Britain, which above all things
ought to have been considered by those who call themselves the King's Servants,
and who act under his Authority: I say, Sir, I should be extremely obliged to
you, if you would tell me what powerful Reason could so far prevail over all
those I have mentioned, as to engage them to postpone the Coriolanus, not only
for All for Love, but likewise for that lamentable Tragic Farce Caezar Borgia,
from which no Body expected any thing but themselves; and a Comedy after it
called the Masquerade, from which they themselves declared they expected
nothing.

I am, etc.
March 26. 1719.
TO Mr. PENKETHMAN.
I Had certainly called upon thee at Richmond before now, if it had not been
for the Easterly Winds, which made the coming by Water impracticable to one who
is indisposed, by reason of the cold attending them. But thou have no reason to
be concerned at my Delay. For this is no time to write waggish Letters to his
Grace. In the mean while I have thought of a Project for thee, which will
certainly do thy Business. Thou shall even turn Author, and write a Play. Thou will tell me perhaps that thou art not qualified. For that very Reason thou
shall write one, because for that very Reason thou will certainly succeed. But
perhaps thou will tell me that thou shall write a very damned Play indeed. A
stronger Reason still for thy Writing. For the more damnable thy Play happens
to be, the greater and more flaming will thy Success be. And so, like a modern
Author, or a modern Female Beggar, thou shall supply thy own infinite Wants, by
the infinite Wants of thy Offspring. But why art thou not qualified, Friend
Pinky? There are nowadays but three Qualifications requisite for the
succeeding upon the Stage. The first is the want of that same. For thou know
the Belly is Ingenii largitor. The second Qualification is, that as modern
Critics when they come to a new Play are never without a Cat-call, a modern
Poet who writes such a Play should never be without a Fool-call. He must have
the knack of jugging Fools into a Pit, as a Country Squire does Partridges into
a Trammel. The third Qualification, and which is necessary for the enforcing
the other two, is what they call a Stock, a very great Stock; not a Stock of
Silver, nor yet of Gold, but of a Metal more powerful than either, and which
commands them both. Now upon the Foot of these three Qualifications, who the
Devil is half so well qualified for the writing a Comedy as thou art? Is it
Proctor John Little-wit, or Scribble Dash the Inns of Chancery Bard? Or the
Czar's old Soldier? Friend Pinky, thou art never modest but in the wrong Place.
Why none of these are worthy to carry thy Cloak after thee, and hardly worthy
to carry thy Friend Tom (...)'s. For where as thou art a living breathing
Comedy, they are a leash of dull Devils who are Tragedy all over. Their very
Jests are deep Tragedy. They never endeavor to make us laugh but they move
Terror and Compassion. Their very Offer at a Jest moves Terror, and it is no
sooner out, but it moves Compassion. But as for thee, thou have nothing to do
but to write a long Part for thy self, and then, if thou have no Jest in thy
Chit Chat, thou will have a perpetual one in thy Person, and that will do thy
Business.

I am, Thy very Humble.
March 14. 1718/9,
To RICHARD NORTON of Southwick, Esquire sent to him by Mr. BOOTH, when the Players
went last down to act at his House.
SIR,
I take this Occasion of Mr. Booth's going down to Southwick to acquaint you,
that I have been several times to wait on you ^his Summer in Bloomsbury, with
four Acts of Appius and Virginia, in Obedience to a Summons which I received
from you by Colonel B^ And I would take this Opportunity to wait on you at
Southwick instead of writing to you, if some Business of Consequence did not
absolutely oblige me to be nearer the Town. But as soon as ever I have finished
this Tragedy, Appius shall wait upon you in my stead. You, Sir, have been
always one of those whom I have been proud to please. But it would give me a
very particular Satisfaction, to find this Tragedy, which was written in the
Cause of Liberty, agreeable to one who has always shown himself so good a
Patriot and so great a Judge. I make no doubt, Sir, but that you do me the
Justice to believe, that though Fortune denies me the Happiness of going down to
Southwick, my Heart and Soul will be there. If we had not a more than common
Esteem and Respect for you, we should certainly envy you, for drawing down into
the Country the noblest Diversion of the Town. Nature has combined with Fortune
to make you completely happy. You have it in your Power, and you have it in
your Will, to set before your Eyes, even in the midst of Solitude, the most
agreeable Conversation both of the Court and Town; and to join the reasonable
Delights of these, with the Sweets of your own charming Retirement. Thus you
enjoy the Town in your Absence from it, free from the Plagues that allay the
Delights of it here. And those Fools and Knaves, that are always in our way to
perplex us, and disturb us here, appear at Southwick only to give you Joy:
While the Calamities of Courts, and the Follies and Villainies of great Towns
set before you, recommend the Security, the Charms and the Innocence of so
sweet a Retreat the more to you. While most of the People of great Quality, and
of great Estates, entertain their Neighbors and their Acquaintance either with
unprofitable empty Amusements, or with pernicious Diversions, which drown their
Understandings and debase their Souls; you please them with the noble Delights
of Reason, such as, rightly made use of, will enlarge their Understandings,
direct their Wills, and exalt their Minds. Good God! How must they blush who
spend great Estates, or at least the Incomes of them, in turning Men into
Beasts; while you with all the Economy of Conduct have the Satisfaction of
improving Beasts into Men! As all Men who are capable of thinking right,
approve the Judgment of your Choice, so we who are passionate Friends to the
Stage think it our Duty to return you Thanks for the timing it. For at the very
time that several Persons, of the greatest Quality and the greatest Interest,
have been endeavoring to banish the Drama from this Town and Island, and to
introduce instead of it an effeminate Music to emasculate the Minds of Men, to
metamorphose the British Nation, and with Songs like those of the Sirens to
change our very Kinds; you have generously made Choice of that very Time, to
appear the great Encourager of the Dramatick Muses, and to afford them a
Refuge, and a Retreat so charming, that while they are at Southwick they may
not regret Parnassus. So generous a Proceeding has obliged all the hearty
Friends to the Stage, and has added one more sensible Obligation to those which
you have been formerly pleased to confer upon,

SIR, Your most Humble and most Obedient Servant, JOHN DENNIS.
London, Aug. 10. 1708.
To the Right Honorable the Earl of GODOPHIN, Lord High Treasurer of GREAT
BRITAIN.
Concerning the Proposal for the Security of Commerce.
My LORD,
I Have here the Honor to send Your Lordship the Abstract of that Proposal,
which I laid before you about the middle of the last Sessions of Parliament. I
did not think fit to remind Your Lordship of it before, because though you might
have approved of it, it was then too late for the Parliament to go through it,
and besides I had some Apprehension that that Parliament would not enter into
it.

My Lord, at present I humbly conceive, with all imaginable Submission to your
Lordship's Judgment, that the bringing this Proposal to Practice would be
highly convenient, and perhaps necessary; absolutely necessary, if the War is
like to be of any long continuance, and highly convenient though it should be
like to have a speedy end: Because in this last Case, I humbly conceive that we
should have a better and more solid Peace than we should have without it. For
nothing, with Submission to your Lordship's Judgment, would more alarm the
French than the reducing this Proposal to Practice. For since they have but two
ways of succeeding in their Designs against these Nations, which are the
Dividing us at Home, and the ruining our Commerce Abroad; they would lose the
very Hope of Success, if they should see themselves prevented in both, to which
the bringing this Proposal to Practice would contribute not a little. I have
been told by so many understanding People, that the general Insurance, which is
a part of this Proposal, would bring in such considerable Sums into the
Exchequer as would make it equivalent to almost any other Tax, that I can
hardly doubt of it. My Lord, I humbly conceive that it would have some
Advantages above all other Taxes. For as far as I am able to make a Judgment
upon a four Years scrutiny, it is a Tax that is very much desired even after so
long a War, and which is remarkable, it is most earnestly desired by those who
are to pay the Money, because by this Tax something would be done for them
preferably to the the rest of the People, which cannot be said of any other
Tax; and whereas perhaps by all other Taxes both Trade and the ordinary
constant Revenue are considerably diminished, they would not only be both
improved and augmented by this, but the national Stock increased, and the whole
Confederacy strengthened and bound indissolubly. I shall have the Honor of
waiting on your Lordship suddenly to know your Pleasure in this Affair. If your
Lordship encourages me to lay this Proposal before the House of Commons, I
shall prepare an Appendix, by which I believe I can satisfy that Honorable
House, that the Advantages mentioned both in the Proposal at large, and in the
Abstract, will really accrue to us from putting that Design in Practice.

I am, My LORD, Your Lordship's, etc.
June 10. 1706.
TO Mr. GEORGE SEWEL,
On the Preface to a Comedy called the MASQUERADE.
SIR,
I Have lately read over the Preface to a certain comical Rhapsody, with an odd
mixture of Laughter and Indignation, upon which I shall here send you some
Remarks that were made in a cursory manner. He pretends to turn your own Canon
upon you, but he has done it to so fine a purpose that it has recoiled with
violence upon himself, and quite demolished the paltry Works he has raised. For
what confounded Sot will read any thing of an Author who is capable of writing
such a Preface? Mr. Dryden tells us in his Preface to the Medal, that upon his
writing Absalom and Achitophel, he met with just such Adversaries. What
Reflections he makes upon that notable way of proceeding, you will find in the
foresaid Preface. But to return to that of our Author.

He has very little Inclination, he says, to write Prefaces; because, I
suppose, it is not so easy to steal Prefaces as Plays. However, as difficult as
it is, he has brought it about. He has boldly seized upon yours, and boasts of
it as Plunder instead of Theft.

He neither commends nor defends the Play; which would be to waste his Breath,
in commending Shirly and Taverner: But he spends his borrowed Preface in
commending the Actors, who vouchsafed to be the Receivers and Venders of his
stolen Goods. His Masquerade, he says, owes all his Success to them. And here
the Panegyric which others bestow upon some one substantial Patron, he is for
retailing among a Company of Actors, which he distributes among them at so
surprising a rate, that not a Mortal of them can pretend to any Share of it.
For first, the Success of this Play is owing to the just Performance of the
Players in general; then it is particularly owing to the Grace, which, with her
usual Excellence, Mrs. Oldfield gave to her Part. Indeed no one who has had the
Happiness to know Mrs. Oldfield, can in the least doubt of her being qualified
whenever she pleases to give extraordinary Pleasure by her Parts. But now to
show that Fools as well as Children are for Boys Play, this Person the very
next Moment resumes the Commendation which he so very generously granted to the
Company in general, and so very justly to Mrs. Oldfield in particular; and to
show his old Inclination to Arbitrary Power, pretends to make a fresh Grant of
it for the sole use of Master Robert Wilks. The Success of this Comedy, says
he, is owing entirely to Master Robert. Well! I have read many a gross,
fulsome, flattering Fool, but I never read any one before, who was Fool enough
to own, that he flattered grossly and fulsomly. For when he tells Mr. Robert
Wilks, that the Success of the Play is entirely due to him, and in the same
Breath tells the whole Company it is due to them, and in the same Breath tells
Mrs. Oldfield that it is very particularly due to her; what does he do but laugh
in Master Robert's Face, and tell him, that he takes him for the errantest Baby
that ever was bit at Bob-cherry. But now to show that this Fellow is more Fool
than Knave, and that he does not flatter on this Occasion so much as he thinks
he does, and owns that he does, I will venture to bring him off a little; nay I
will venture to show, that when he says the Success of the Play is entirely due
to Mr. Robert Wilks, he does not flatter at all. For I have heard a grave Bird
sing, that if it had not been for him alone, the Masquerade had never ^een
acted, the rest of the Managers having ^^e last Contempt for it. Some of the
^layers told a Gentleman of my Acquain^^nce, that the Cause of this Author's
being Master Robert's Favorite, is, because he ^oes carry himself like a true
Poet to him, ^^o' not to the rest of the World. For in ^rder to please Master
Robert and entire^y to gain his Affections, he does not fail ^^om time to time
to entertain him with ^ertain quaint Inventions, with certain in^enious
Fictions; while Master Robert, ^^ke other Auditors and Spectators, being
willing to be deceived in order to be perfect^y pleased, supposes all this to
be true. They ^dded, that Master Robert was so exceed^ngly delighted with
Entertainments of this nature, that the other Managers paid for ^is Pleasure of
this kind very dearly; it ^tanding them in, at least, five hundred Pounds a
Year. I shall tell you things when I see you which are not fit to be writ.

I am, Your, etc.
Hampstead, March 10. 1718/9.
TO THO. SERGEANT, Esquire
SIR,
I Remember very well, that before I went out of Town in June last, I promised
in a short time to give you some Account of the late (...). I make no doubt but
that you have long before this time accused me of Breach of Promise. But if you
did but know what charming Places I have been in, since I saw you last; and
what damnable Company, for the most part, I have kept in them; how my Life has
been checkered between Rapture and Chagrin, and consequently unable to turn it
self to Business; did you but know this, I am confident you would not blame me.
Besides, I considered that Authors as well as Pettifoggers ought to have long
Vacation, and that it was but reasonable that the World should once a Year
enjoy an Interval from being plagued with either; that it was highly expedient,
that Minds sometimes should lie Fallow as well as Fields, as well as those
Human Bodies which they inform; that they who are too often in the Act of
Generation, produce but weak and puny Offsprings, and peradventure none; and
that the Scriblers and common Whores of that vile Town seldom beget any thing,
unless something by Chance, that, like a Dutch Sooterkin, is at once frightful
and contemptible, as all Monsters are. Besides, I thought it a Duty to my self,
to recruit those Spirits, by a pleasing Indolence, which a long Misfortune had
almost exhausted. And if at any time, in spite of these reasonable
Reflections, I resolved to set heartily about the Performance of my Promise, I
immediately started at the Thought of what I was about to undertake. For to
make Remarks upon this (...) (Death and Hell!) a Man must read it. And who that
has Quails and Burgundy before him, would leave them for Porter and Ram Mutton?
Besides, the Faults in it are so frequent and so gross, that every Fool may
find them; and a Man cannot value himself, or expect that the reasonable Part
of the World should value him for his Sagacity or Penetration, on the account
of exposing them. I flatter my self, that you who have had a fourteen Years
Experience of my Sincerity, will believe that I speak my Sentiments; at least I
can assure you, that I have taken all imaginable Care, and have kept the most
watchful Guard upon my self, that I might neither endeavor to deceive you
through Malice, nor be my self deceived through Prejudice. But since perhaps you,
or somebody to whom you may show this Letter, may be of another Opinion, I
shall send you in a Day or two some Observations upon the first; which little
may be enough to show all the Beast. For a Lion is not better descried by his
Claw, than an Ass is known by his Ear.

I am, SIR, Your, etc.
Hanworth, Sept. 20. 1716.
TO THO. SERGEANT, Esquire
SIR,
I Wrote to you about a Week ago, and designed to write again by the next Post.
^ut that Raskal Appius has lately taken (...) so much of my Time, that he will
not ^^ffer me to be in good Humor enough (...) entertain my Friends. Besides,
the very House where I am is sanctified to that de^ree, that it is a mortal
Enemy to Gayety; ^^nctified to the very Names of the Persons ^ho inhabit it.
The Name of the elder ^on is Aminadab, of the younger Amos; of ^^e elder
Daughter Jemina, of the second ^ezia, and of the youngest Keren-Hap^ch, which
you know are the Names of ^he three Daughters of the most patient Man. And you
may take it on my word, that Master Aminadab and Madam Keren-Happuch are two
very extraordinary Perons.

In this House, you must know, Sir, is (...) old Fanatical Pettifogger, who has
lately married a young Wife. There being not Room enough to receive her here,
she lives at present with her Father, in a Village about seven Miles off. And
the old Pettifogger ambles to her in his Gambadoes once a Week to pay his
natural Tax: And then literally returns to see his Uncle who is the Master of
the House where we lodge. It happened about a Month ago that some Business
obstructed his Journey; but having procured a Barrel of Oysters, he ordered
them with a Letter to be sent in his stead. The Letter was delivered to a
Market-Man, who came from the Village; and he was ordered to go to the Stable,
and to take a Sack which he should find there, (in which the Oysters it seems
were wrapped) which he was ordered to deliver to Spouse, with the Letter. In the
mean while, as the Devil would have it, another Countryman had laid another
Sack there, which the former Countryman, who knew nothing of the Freight, took
instead of that with the Oysters, carried it to the Village, and delivered it
to Spouse with the Letter, which was to this Effect.

My Dear,
BUsiness will not permit me to be happy in your Embraces Tonight. But I
intend to be with you on Monday. In the mean time I have sent you something to
supply my Place, with which I hope you will enjoy your self in my Absence.

Your, etc.


Spouse was very well pleased with the Letter, orders the Sack to be
immediately opened, and greedily pulls out of it -- Half a dozen Bunches of
Carrots. And so you have the Piece of rural Waggery, which I promised you in my
last.

I am, SIR, Your, etc.
Newport, Oct. 8. 1707.
To Mr. * * *
My good Friend,
I Who in Town was great as Caesar,
Am here reduced to Nebuchadnezzar.
That is, I have been for these three Weeks at Grass with mere white Cattle,
and have not so much as seen three reasonable Creatures, since I left the
neighborhood of Whitehall. When I arrived at this Place, I had the
Mortification to find that of my two Landlords in whose Houses I had here
formerly passed so many delicious Hours, the one was gone to live at Epsom, and
the other was run quite away. Upon enquiry, I found that there were but two
Houses to lodge at, a common boarding House, or my Barber's. I considered that
by going to the common boarding House, I should give up a good part of my
Liberty, which is the principal Thing that makes the Country so charming. For
there might be Women at that House, or they might come the very Day after me,
who, though old and ugly, might expect as much Ceremony as if they were young and
beautiful. Now that Ceremony which passes hourly among some People, is founded,
like Law, on a mutual Agreement between them, to give up part of their natural
Liberty for the Benefit of Society. But though there is a sort of Necessity for
an Observance of Forms and Ceremonies in great and Capital Towns; yet when a
Man retires into the Country, he is desirous to be, for a while at least, like
the Woods and Hills which he ranges, in the State of Nature. I must consess
that even in great Towns I have always had a very indif^erent Opinion of a
great deal of Ceremony, and have been always apt to beieve, that as ubi
plurimae leges pessima ^espublica, so where there is the most Ce^emony, there
is always the worst Soci^ty. Another Reason which inclined me (...) the
Barber's, was a Desire to know ^he Nature of this Place. For though I ^ave been
ten times here, yet as my for^er Lodgings had the finest Meadows and Streams in
the World behind them, (...) scarce ever came into the Village, (...) that till
this last Arrival, I knew no^^ing of the People of Cobham; of whom (...) my
next I shall give you some Account.

I am Yours.
Cobham, ^^ly 24. 1717.
TO Dr. * * * at Shrewsbury.
Of Ecclesiastical Quacks.
SIR,
I Return you Thanks for your agreeable Relation of the Progress of the
Itinerant Doctor, who travels, it seems, like one of those foolish Fires, which
lead People into Bogs and Ditches, whose Misfortune it is to come in the way of
their false and delusive Light. Upon the Receipt of your entertaining Letter, I
made the following Queries to some of his gross Admirers.

Whether some People who practice Divinity, though they are called Doctors, are
not really Quacks; and whether Mountebanks Ecclesiastical as well as Secular,
are not distinguished from true Professors by the following Marks.

First, Whether the true Physician both of Soul and Body is distinguished from
the Mountebank, not by wearing an Academical Bonnet, but by Wisdom, Learning,
and a long Experience in the Art of Heal^ng; and whether he who through want of
^hese continually mistakes the Distemper of ^is Patient, and by Consequence
admini^ters Poison to him, prescribes Opiates in (...) Lethargy or Brandy in a
Calenture, is not (...) ridiculous contemptible Empirick, though (...) has been
dubbed both Bachelor and Do^tor at Oxford?

Secondly, Whether the true Physician ^oth of Soul and Body does not consult
the ^aie, and design the Health of the whole ^ody politic and the whole Body
natural, (...) which it is his Fortune or Duty to admi^^ster? Whereas the Quack
of both kinds ^ever fails like the Tinker to make two ^oles, while he is
employed in mending of ^^e. For Example, the true Physician, of ^^e Body
natural, purges and cleanses the ^hole Mass of Blood in order to the heal^^g an
Ulcer in the Pudenda; whereas the ^mpirick, by giving a sudden Check to it,
^rows it up into the nobler Parts: And ^^e Spiritual Physician of the Body
Poli^^ck, is for saving every Soul of that Body (...) which he happens to be a
Member; ^hereas the Ecclesiastical Empirick, as if (...) were the first Plenipo
of Heaven, is for ^^ing some and damning others with an ^^solute Power.

Thirdly, Whether the true Physician does not keep his Station, and confine his
Practice to his Neighborhood; whereas Folly and Imposture, by remaining
constantly with the same People, would suffer too much through too long an
Inspection. And therefore the Mountebank finds his Account better in being
Itinerant. And when he has cheated the Fools of one Majoralty both of their
Health and their Money, seeks for fresh Cullies and fresh Idiots in a new
Corporation.

Fourthly, Whether the true and the sound Physician is not satisfied with the
Approbation of his own Conscience, and of those who have common Sense? whereas
the Mountebank makes it his Business to be the Idol of the Rabble, and
therefore has much more numerous Aplauders than the true Physician. For Rabble
is a most comprehensive Word, Doctor, and includes not only pitiful poor
Mechanics, and wretched Rogues in Rags, but many, nay very many Persons, who
are distinguished by Fortune and dignified by Princes. This comprehensive Word,
Doctor, includes all who want Understanding and Virtue. And so for Example the
Rabble round the Wrekin includes not only the Butchers, the Tinkers, the
Weavers and the Tailors of the adjacent Towns and Counties, but often likewise,
too often, the Mayor, the Sheriff, the Alderman and the Doctor, I mean the
Mountebank both Spiritual and Secular; for every one who seeks the Applause of
Rabble is himself most certainly Rabble; but how Emphatically, Doctor, are they
Rabble, who are the Admirers and the Applauders of Rabble!

Thus has your Letter drawn Queries from me instead of an Answer; which I hope
you will look upon as an Equivalent, and read with Candor and with Indulgence,
as coming from

Your, etc.

TO HENRY CROMWELL, Esquire
Of an Expression in Shakespeare; and of the Comedy of the Nonjuror.
SIR,
I Wrote to you this Morning for your more deliberate Opinion concerning the
Passage of Phaedrus. I now send this to you to consult you about an Expression
in the Othello of Shakespeare, which (...) long ago occasioned a great Dispute
at (...) Coffee-House, between the Wits there and the Manager of the Playhouse
who acts the Part of Othello. The Wits asked the Player how he liked this
Expression in his own Part, Excellent Wretch! to which the latter answered,
that he liked it so ill, that he always left it out. Upon which they
immediately extolled it to the Skies, and looked upon the Player with great
Contempt. Though that Tragedian has no more Judgment in Tragedy than an Ass has
in Music, I am apt to believe that he was this once in the right. I know
indeed very well, that miser and misellus were sometimes among the Romans Terms
of Tenderness. I find that miser is in that Sense in the Eunuch of Terence, Act
the third Scene the last, where Chaerea gives Antipho an Account of his
enjoying Pamphila.

Chapter Edicit, ne vir quisquam ad eam adeat; et mihi ne ahscedam, imperat,
In interiore part at maneam solus cum sola. Adnuo,
Terram intuens modeste. An. Miser!
Which Madam Dacier has translated pauvre Garcon! But are there not two sorts
of Tenderness, a Comic and a Tragic Tenderness? Now though miser was sometimes
used by the Romans, to express both the one and the other Tenderness, yet, in
my Opinion, it can never be translated into English by the Word Wretch in any
but the Comic way; Wretch in a serious Sense being always, if I am not
mistaken, a Term of Reproach or Contempt: And consequently the Terms Excellent
Wretch, being inconsistent and contradictory, make the meaning absurd, and the
Expression Nonsense. This is my Opinion at present, but I know not how long it
will be so, because I have not as yet heard yours.

But that is not the only Point in which I desire it. I am told lately by one
of my Acquaintance, that I have been too severe upon the Understanding of
another of the Managers, and that is of Cibber. And the Reason that was given
me was, that Cibber writ the Fool in Fashion, which, says my Friend, you have
often said is a good Comedy. To which I answer, that it is true, I have often
said it is a good Comedy, but I had always much ado to believe that Cibber writ
it, and that since I have seen the Nonjuror and the Heroic Daughter I do not
believe it at all. For which I shall give my Reasons, and afterward desire to
know from you how convincing they appear to you.

When the Fool in Fashion was first acted, Cibber was hardly twenty Years of
Age. Now could he at the Age of twenty write a Comedy with a just Design,
distinguished Characters, and a proper Dialogue, who now at forty treats us
with Hibernian Sense and Hibernian English? Could he, when he was an arrant
Boy, draw a good Comedy, from his own raw uncultivated Head, who is now at
forty able to do nothing but what is poor and mean, when he is supported by two
such Masters as Moliere and Corneille?

I have often observed to you, that there is not in his Heroic Daughter one
Spark of the Force and noble Spirit of Corneille. As for Moliere, I am
satisfied that he knows nothing of him, but that he built his Non^uror upon
some spiritless dull Translation of him. When I heard that a Play with that
Title was to be acted, I wished it as much Success as Cibber did, upon account
of the Cause in which it was writ. But I ^efus'd to see it acted, because
knowing Moliere's Play to be a Masterpiece, I was ^fraid I should be asked
some Questions by my Friends which I should not care to an^wer. I heard an
advantageous Character of it, from some with whom I conversed, and what I heard
I imparted to others, but (...) coming from my Friends and not from my self.
After the Play was printed, I would not read it till it had been published
(...) Month, during which time I was asked a hundred Questions about it. When I
saw that the Curiosity of the World was pretty well over, I sent for the Play
and read it. Upon the reading it, I was soon confirmed in some of my former
Thoughts, that Persons of a very good Understanding might be imposed upon at a
Representation by the Liveliness and Grace of Action, and that the Excellence
of the Actor often makes amends for the Imperfections of the Author. I soon
found that there was little in the English Comedy of the Beauties of Moliere.
For Moliere's Characters in his Tartuffe are Masterpieces, marked,
distinguished, glowing, bold, touched with a fine yet a daring Hand; all of
them stamped with a double Stamp, the one from Art and the other from Nature:
No Phantoms but real Persons, such as Nature produces in all Ages, and Custom
fashions in ours. His Dialogue too is lively, natural, graceful, easy, strong,
adapted to the Occasion, adapted to the Characters. In short, it is by this
Comedy and by the Misantrope that Moliere perhaps has born away the Prize of
Comedy from all Persons in all Ages, except Ben. Johnson alone. But the
Characters of the English Comedy are most of them daubed and bungled, and the
Dialogue nothing but mere Fribble. Now is it barely possible that this bungling
Imitator can be the Author of the Fool in Fashion? Is it barely possible that
he should have known Mankind and the Stage, and the English Tongue when he was
an errant Boy, who is grossly ignorant of them all at forty? But Cibber's Name
is prefixed to the Fool in Fashion. They know nothing of Mr. Cibber, who in the
least wonder at that. He who, now he is turned of Forty, sets his Name, without
any manner of Scruple or Ceremony, to what all the World knows was writ by
Fletcher and Dryden, could not his Vanity, when he was a Boy, prevail upon him
to own what an unknown though a very ingenious Gentleman writ? Thus have I given
you my Reasons, why I cannot believe that The Fool in Fashion was writ by. Mr.
Cibber. But I desire to know, as I told you above, how convincing these Reasons
appear to you.

I am, SIR, Your, etc.
June 14. 1720.
TO Mr. * * *
SIR,
YOU desire me to send you some Arguments to convert your Neighbor from
Jacobitism, who, you say, is a Man of good Sense and a good Christian, and good
Protestant. I have sent you the following Queries to present to him, and am of
the Opinion, that if he is what you say, they may have some Influence on him.

I. Whether it is possible that the Pretender should be settled here, without
the Subversion of our present Constitution, and the Establishment of Absolute
Power.

II. Whether the Establishment of Absolute Power under a Popish Prince, will
not extirpate the Protestant Religion from Great Britain and Ireland.

III. Whether the Extirpation of the Protestant Religion from these Islands,
will not in all Human Appearance be followed by the utter Destruction of it
throughout the Christian World.

IV. Whether the Destruction of the Pro^stant Religion throughout the Christian
World, will not in all human Appearance (...) followed by the utter Destruction
of Christianity it self.

V. Whether, since these Things are ^sily proved, as I my self will undertake
to love any of the foresaid Consequences, (...) who professes himself a
Christian and (...) Protestant, can have the Heart to wish (...) Conscience to
promote a Design which will be the Ruin of that Religion, on which (...)
believes that all his Happiness depends.

I am, etc.
^ept. 1711.
TO The Reverend Mr. MANSELL.
SIR,
THE last of July I had the Honor to return an Answer to your most obliging
and ingenious Letter. I have since had the Curiosity to enquire after the
Priests whom you mention, but have been able to get no Intelligence; from which
I conclude, that the Priests whom you mention must be two or three scandalous
Jacobite Curates in your Neighborhood. But whatever Ill they may say of me, I
will presume that they do not call me Fool, which implies all other Infamies.
For as Rochefoucault says, a Fool has not Stuff enough to be good. I will
presume they do not say of me, that every Word, that every Action of my Life is
a Contradiction to common Honesty, and to common Sense; that though I am most
sordidly interested and most ridiculously proud, I am endeavoring with Might
and Main to make my self most miserable and most despicable; that I am
laboring with all my Might and with all my Strength to bring in a Tyrant in
order to secure Liberty, and the Pope to secure Religion and my spiritual
Property; that I desire and endeavor nothing so vehemently, as to bring my
Wife and Children to Infamy and Beggary, and to make of my self either a vile
Vagabond or an execrable Apostate; and that I have been all along laboring at
this so strenuously, that I have made my self a most perjured Villain in order
to bring it about, and scandalous enough to bring fresh Disgrace upon a Pillory
or the Whipping-post.

These, Sir, are things which I presume they do not say of me, because these
are Encomiums which are only worthy of them, and which they have made upon
themselves by their Actions. But because what they (...) say of me, they have
in all Likelihood from that Monster J^ S^, I desire that in my next you will
give me Leave, Sir, to say a Word concerning that Wretch, to show you how I
resented the Prank which he would have played me in Northamtonshire. I took the
Will for the Deed, and most religiously observed the Law of Retaliation with
him, upon the very first Opportunity.

I am, etc.
London, Aug. 14. 1717.
To the Right Honorable the Lord PARKER, Lord High Chancellor of GREAT BRITAIN.
My LORD,
AT a Time when so many Persons are showing, by the Presents they make your
Lordship, the Veneration which they have for your great Qualities, and their
Acknowledgments for the Benefits which they receive from them, I humbly desire
your Lordship to accept of the two Volumes which I here present to you, which
are no small part of the Labors of thirty Years in the Cause of Liberty and of
Great Britain. In presenting them to your Lordship, I have the Satisfaction of
offering them to a just and clear-sighted Judge of Art, as a discerning and
righteous one of Equity. May your Lordship's Glory and Happiness increase as
your Years are multiplied, that the Glory and Happiness of Great Britain may be
proportionably augmented with them.

I am, My LORD, Your Lordship's, etc.
Jan. 1. 1719.
TO J. CHARLTON, Esquire
SIR,
THE Honor which I formerly had of being personally known to you, (though but a
little) gives me Encouragement at this time of New Year's Gifts, to make you a
trifling Present of the Books which you will receive with this; which are no
small Part of the Labor of thirty Years in the Cause of Liberty and of your
Country. If I should tell you that I send them without any Design, I am sure,
Sir, would not believe me. I will therefore freely own that I have a Design,
but it is a just and innocent one; which will put you to no Expense, and but to
a very little Trouble. I shall beg Pardon for the Trouble, when I acquaint you
with the Design, which will be in a few Days. In the mean time, Sir,
Inclination as well as Custom engages me to wish so good and so great a Patriot
a long and a happy Life. It Is the Interest of all the Lovers of their Country,
that such (...) you should long be serviceable to it; and (...) wishing for the
Happiness of those few who resemble you, they certainly wish for their own.

I am, SIR, Your, etc.
^an. 2. 1718.
Written in the Name and at the Request of WILL PENKETHMAN, the Comedian, to
her Grace the Duchess of (...)
THE Humourous Lieutenant being shortly obliged to tread the Stage for the
Benefit of your Grace's most humble Servant; to whom ought I sooner to have
Recourse to encourage it, than to your Grace, who, upon my last Benefit, made
such an Appearance for me, as showed your Power to be great as your Goodness or
as my Acknowledgments? And I make this humble Request to your Grace with the
less Despondence of obtaining it, because ^ am assured from your noble Nature,
that I am far from offending you, in giving you an Occasion to exert your
Beneficence. My Success depends in so great a measure upon your Grace's Favor,
that without it, the Humourous Lieutenant is like to be a sad Fellow; and the
Rural Theater in your Grace's Neighborhood, is like to give a melancholy
Lesson to Mortals of the Instability of Humane Affairs, and the short Duration
of the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World. For that very Fabric which was
metamorphos'd from its original Form, and adorned for the Entertainment of
Nobility, Wit and Beauty, will relapse and dwindle into a Barn, and fodder Cows
and Horses.

That your Grace may be always both here and hereafter completely happy as
those blessed Beings, whom you resemble and whose Examples you imitate, is the
constant Wish and the zealous Prayer, whenever I do happen to pray, of,

Madam, Your Grace's Most Humble, and most Obliged, Obedient Servant, W. P.
April 3. 1719.
TO Sir RICHARD BLACKMORE,
On Two Verses in VIRGIL.
SIR,
I Desired in my last that you would be Arbitrator in a Dispute, which I lately
had with Mr. Row concerning some Verses of Virgil. The Passage is in the 3d
Eclogue.

Malo me Galatea petit lasciva puella,
Et fugit ad salices, and se cupit ante videri.
Now, Sir, Mr. Row affirmed that the Nymph in acting and the Shepherd in
relating, meant nothing but Boys and Girls Play. My Opinion is, that such an
Interpretation renders the Passage wholly flat and insipid, and fit to please
none but Children; that the Nymph by throwing the Apple, and then running away
to the Willows, but at the same time taking care that the Shepherd should see
her before she got to them, designed Man's and Woman's Play. Now, Sir, you are
left to judge which of the Explications is most worthy of Virgil, and which
comes nearest up to that Molle and that Facetum which at that time of Day
composed the Character of Virgil, if we will take the Opinion of a very
judicious Critic, and that was his Friend Horace;

Molle atque Facetum
Virgilio annuerint gaudentes Rure Camaenae.
For where is the Molle and the Facetum in these Verses, if the Nymph and the
Shepherd, like Boys and Girls, were only at hide and seek? I could as soon
believe that when Silenus in the Sixth Eclogue says, speaking of Aegle, Huic
aliud mercedis erit, he only intended to present her with a Pair of Gloves. I
know indeed very well, that Ruaeus interprets Lasciva by Jocosa Puella. But it
ought to be considered, that Ruaeus was a Priest and that the Dauphin was
young, and that it was the Business and Duty of the Jesuit to conceal from his
young Pupil the Lubricity of the Poet's meaning. Nor is Lasciva used upon this
occasion, though it is taken in the common Sense so very different from Jocosa
Puella, if we consider that Homer, whenever he has occasion to mention Venus,
calls her the Laughterloving Goddess. Besides, my Antagonist does not seem
enough to consider either the Nature of Women in general, or of the Italian
Women in particular, or of the Season when this was supposed to happen, which
was High Spring, (which is the Season of High Desire) as Palaemon gives us to
understand a little before this Passage in three Verses, the two last of which
are beautiful as their Subject.

Dicite; quandoquidem in molli consedimus herba.
Et nunc omnis ager, nunc omnis parturit arbos:
Nunc frondent Sylvae, nunc formosissimus annus.
Now when we consider all these Things, can we believe that Virgil, who was so
judicious, so wise, and who followed Nature so closely, meant nothing but Hide
and Seek by his se cupit ante videri. That which makes this one of the
beautifullest Passages of all the Eclogues, is, that there is a very wanton
Meaning expressed in very modest Words, and consequently occasion given to the
Reader to show his Discernment by piercing the Veil which the Poet has thrown
over the Nudity; which puts me in mind of a fine Passage of Montaigne. Essay
Lih. 3. Chapter 5.

The Verses of these two Poets ( meaning Lucretius and Virgil) treating with so
much Discretion and so much Reservedness of Lasciviousness, as they treat of
it, do, as it were, discover more of it, and show it in a better and nearer
Light. Our Ladies cover their Breasts with a Veil, as our Priests do their
sacred Things, and Painters shadow their finest Draughts in order to give them
Luster. They say, likewise, that the Rays of the Sun and the Strokes of the
Mind are more forcible by Reflection than when they come directly. It was a
wise Answer of the Egyptian to him who asked him, What do thou carry
concealed there under thy Cloak? I carry it concealed thus under my Cloak,
because thou should not know what it is. But there are certain other things
that are concealed only on purpose to be shown. Ovid is a great deal more bold,
but therefore a great deal weaker than the other two. And when he says plainly

Et nudam pressi corpus adusque meum.
Methinks he makes an errant Capon of me, by his barefaced Lewdness. He who
says all satiates and disgusts us; whereas he who expresses himself with
Reserve and Caution, draws us in to imagine more, even than he could have
expressed. There is, as it were, Treachery in this kind of Modesty, since it
slyly opens so inviting a Path to a wanton Imagination.



Thus far Montaigne. When he speaks of the Modesty of Lucretius, he means, I
suppose, that Modesty which he shows in his Invocation, where indeed in very
modest Terms he treats of a very wanton Subject.

I could say more upon this Subject, but I am afraid that I have already tired
you as well as my self.

I am, etc.
Feb. 6. 1717/8.
TO WALTER MOYLE, Esquire
At Bake near Loo in Cornwall.
SIR,
TWenty tedious Years have now been past, since I had the Honor either to see
you, or hear from you, or write to you. Though I had many a time done the latter,
if you had not prevented it by your unkind Prohibition, when, the last time I
saw you, you declared among a great number of your Friends, that you would keep
Correspondendence with no one. But though, by reason of that unkind Declaration,
we have a long time reckoned you dead and buried to the World and us, yet we
have been far from forgetting you, so very far from it, that we have had the
more lively Remembrance of you, because we have seen no body since you left us,
who, by resembling you, could put us in mind of you. Which recalls to my mind
something that past at the Funeral Ceremonies of a great Lady in the Time of
Tiberius Caesar. The Images of her Ancestors were carried in Procession upon
that Occasion, but, says Tacitus, eo praefulgebant Cassius at que Brutus quod
eorum Imagines non visebantur.

At length, after twenty Years Silence, I am obliged to write to you, in order
to do you Service and my self Justice. D^ the Printer was with me Yesterday,
and had the Folly or the Impudence to show me a Letter from you, by which I
found that that Scoundrel had arrogated to himself the little Present which I
ordered him to make you last May was twelvemonth, and to make it pass for his
own Act and Deed. I ordered him to send you the two Volumes, which he printed
for me, before they were published, and to send them in the large Paper, which
he ought to have done for his own Sake, because then you would have seen a Book
very beautifully printed. I ordered him likewise to send them as handsomely
bound as the skilfull'st Workman could bind them. But upon the bringing in his
Account, I found that that Wretch, who has not Soul enough to do a handsome
thing, though he is sure it will cost him nothing, had sent the common Paper
without any binding at all.

D^ had as much forgot you, before I mentioned you to him, as if he had never
known you, unless by Sight and by Chance. But upon his enquiring whose the
Anonymous Letters were, which were printed (...) one of the two Volumes, I said
enough to him of the Author, and of the Expectation which I had of the
Translation of Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, to fire his dull Mass with the greedy
desire of Gain.

I am interrupted, but I shall the very ^ext Post, without fail, say something
to you of that Translation and of the Pre^ace, which is got into the Hands of a
^riend of your Brother's and mine, who, I hope and believe, has too much Ho^our
ever to print it without your Con^ent. I am obliged to take my leave of ^ou
till the next Post. In the mean time (...) desire you to judge of the Respect,
the Esteem and Affection which I have, and ^ave always had for you, since I had
first ^he Honor to know you, by what I am ^oing to tell you, that for twenty
Years together I have never so much as once ^en any of our common Acquaintance
without mentioning you in such a man^er as showed that I very sensibly
regret^ed your leaving us. Sir George Mark^am can tell you something of this,
and (...) can Mr. Congreve, Mr. ^ein, and Mr. Welbye. But most of the rest,
alas, are vanished like a Morning's Dream.

I am, SIR, Your most Humble and Faithful Servant, JOHN DENNIS.
London, Jan. 16. 1719-20.
TO THO. SERGEANT, Esquire
SIR,
I Have been not a little concerned at my not being able to keep Touch with my
Appointment to Day. But multa cadunt ^nter calicem supremaque Labra. Many
things have fallen out between my Lips and the Cups of Punch which I designed
to drink with my Friend Mr. Sergeant to Day. My only Associates in this Place
are the same that the ingenious Don Quixote had at the famous La Manche, viz.
the Barber and the Curate. Now the Disappointment that I had from the former,
and the too great Punctuality of the latter, have been the Occasion of my
Misfortune. For the Barber, who should have come on Saturday at Three, came not
till Sunday at Eleven, so that there was a Necessity of dining before I went.
After Dinner in comes the Curate; and invites me to take part of an
Ecclesiastical Collation in the Afternoon. Now Gentlemen of his Complexion are
so hearty and so frank in their spiritual Hospitality, that if you do not
comply with their pressing Invitations you disoblige them for ever. The Sorrow
which oppressed me for being disappointed of the Conversation of a Gentleman
whom I esteem so much, has been in some measure alleviated by the following
Considerations. First, the Author whom I have at present under Consideration
has served me as he deserves to be used himself, and has nailed my Ears to his
Book so fast, that I could not without Pain unclinch my self. The second
Alleviation is the Consideration of my Health. For though the Goddess smiles
upon me here, she has as great an Aversion to old Sodom as Hugh Clodpate of
merry Memory, and might for ought I know shake Hands with me at my Entrance
into that damned Town. I begin to be quite another thing than I was while I
staid in the Tower, and there is as much difference between me on my Hill here,
and me in my Den at John Richardson's, as there is between a Lion on a Mountain
in Africa, and one near the Spur-Guard. Another Comfort that I had was the
extraordinary Beauty of the Day. For it fared between me and the Day, without
Vanity be it spoken, as it does between a Pimp and a Lady whom he has in his
Power. If she is but tolerably handsome he gives her to his Friend, but if she
is charmingly fair, he is willing to enjoy her himself.

This is the third Letter which I have writ to you since I heard from you; I
hope the other two came to your Hands. I desire that you would have the
Goodness to send me word, in what Posture my Affairs are. I shall be unwilling
to see the Town till the latter end of this Week, unless there is a Necessity
for it.

I am, SIR, Your, etc.
Jan. 18. at Night. 1713.
To H^ C^ Esquire
Of Simplicity in Poetical Compositions, in Remarks on the 70th Spectator.
SIR,
BY your last of the 26th you desire to know my Opinion of the notable Critic
upon Chevy Chase in the Spectator of the 21st and that of the 25th of this
Instant; that is, you desire to know whether I believe the Author of those two
Papers to be in Jest or in Earnest. To which I answer, that he is neither in
Jest nor in Earnest; not in Earnest, because he does not believe what he says;
nor in Jest, because he does strenuously endeavor to convince the Reader of
the Excellence of that old Dogrel. His Design is to see how far he can lead his
Reader by the Nose. To give my Reasons for this Opinion, I shall send you an
Examen of those two Spectators in as little Compass as I can.

When I traveled, says he, I took a particular Delight in hearing the Songs
and Fables that are come from Father to Son, and are most in Vogue among the
common People of the Countries through which I passed; for it is impossible that
any thing should be universally tasted and approved by a Multitude, though they
are only the Rabble of a Nation, which has not in it some peculiar Aptness to
please and gratify the Mind of Man.

Now is there any thing that has the least Air of a Jest? On the other side, do
you think that the Author could be capable of meaning and thinking what he
pretends to affirm here? Is it not plain by the last Words which I have quoted,
viz. the Mind of Man, that he intended a Fallacy? For to affirm this of the
Mind of Man, as it is cultivated and instructed, is not only absurd and
ridiculous, but contradictory of himself. Has not he himself observed in the
134th Tatter, that there are Exercises and Diversions which universally please
the Rabble, which yet Men of Quality or Education either despise or abhor? Such
are the Shrove-Tuesday and Bear-Garden Diversions, which he there
particularizes. I have known a Country Fiddler who has been the Delight of three
Counties, though he could never play the Truth of one Tune; and a Sign-Post
Painter, who has been the Admiration not only of the Rabble, but even of most
of the Squires of the North of England. I appeal to the Booksellers, who in
this Case ought to be Judges without Appeal, whether more of the common People
do not approve of Quarles and Bunyan than esteem Chevy Chase. Therefore it is
plain that Author could not design that the Period abovementioned should run
thus,

For it is impossible that any thing should be universally tasted and approved
of by a Multitude, though they are only the Rabble of a Nation, which has not in
it some peculiar Aptness to please and gratify the Minds of Men of Quality and
Education.

And less can he design to make it run as follows: For it is impossible that
any thing should be universally tasted and approved of by a Multitude, though
they are only the Rabble of a Nation, which has not in it some peculiar aptness
to please and gratify the Minds of the Rabble. For to mean this would make, not
only what he says, but what he is, a Jest. So that the Author, by the Mind of
Man, meaning neither the Mind of Man as it is rude and untaught, nor the Mind
of Man as it is cultivated and instructed, can mean nothing in the World but to
try how far he can impose upon his Reader. But he goes on.

Human Nature is the same in all reasonable Creatures, and whatever falls in
with it, will meet with Admirers among Readers of all Qualities and Conditions.
Moliere, as we are told by Boileau, used to read all his Comedies to a little
old Woman, who was his Housekeeper, as she sat at her Work by the Chimney
Corner, and could foretell the Success of his Play in his Theater, from the
Reception it met at the Fire Side. For he tells us the Audience always followed
the old Woman, and never failed to laugh in the same Place.

Now can you, Sir, or any Man of good Sense believe that the Author does not
know better what belongs to a Jest, than to take false Reasoning for one; and
that he does not know better what belongs to false Reasoning than to mean what
he says here? Can he be so dull and so absurd as not to know how to distinguish
between what Human Nature is, and what Human Nature should be? Human Nature was
Human Nature before the Fall, and it is Human Nature now it is degenerated from
that perfect Virtue and that unclouded Knowledge, which it enjoyed before. It Is
the Business and Design of Education to endeavor to retrieve in some measure
the Loss that Human Nature has sustained by the Fall; and to recover some
Measure of Knowledge and Virtue. Now Heroic Poetry is an Imitation of Human
Nature exalted, and Comedy is an Imitation of Human Nature depraved. What can
be more absurd than to conclude, that because the Rabble, that is, such as
never had any Education, are tolerable Judges of Human Nature depraved, that
therefore they are Judges of Human Nature exalted, of which none can be Judges
but they who have had the best Education? And therefore not only the Rabble,
but an universal Nation has been mistaken in their Judgments of Poets and
Poetry, when the Judgments have been made, before that Nation came to be
sufficiently cultivated.

Recte necne crocum floresque perambulet Attae
Fabula, sidubitem: clament periisse pudorem,
Cuncti pene patres, ea quum reprehendere coner,
Quae gravis Aesopus, quae doctus Roscius egit;
Vel quia nil rectum, nisi quod placuit sibi, ducunt:
Vel quia turpe putant parere minoribus, and, quae
Imberbes didicere, senes perdenda fateri.
Hor. Ep. 1. L. 2. So that we see it was the Opinion of Horace, that the People
of Quality were sometimes mistaken as well as the Rabble; nay, that both Rabble
and People of Quality were sometimes mistaken even in their Judgments of Comedy.

At nostri proavi Plantinos and numeros, and
Laudavere sales; nimium patienter utrumque
Ne dicam stulte, mirati: si modo ego and vos
Scimus inurbanum lepido seponere dicto
Legitimumque sonum digitis callemus, and aure.
Horat. de Art Po. And to show you that it is impossible the Spectator can mean
what he says here, Horace declares in the very Verse which the Spectator has
chosen for the Motto of his Paper, that the Multitude is as often mistaken as
it is in the Right.

Interdum Vulgus rectum videt, est ubi peccat.
And he says particularly, that they are often mistaken in their Judgments of
Verses which have been writ by their Forefathers.

Si veteres ita miratur laudatque poetas,
Ut nihil anteferat, nihilillis comparet, errat.
Si quaedam nimis antique, si pleraque dure
Dicere credit eos, ignave multa fatetur,
Et sapit, and mecum facit and Jove judicat aequo.
Now is not here a Motto very judiciously chosen? For from these Verses of
Horace, we may justly make this Observation, that a Man by his real Approbation
and Impertinent Commendation of superannuated Rhimes, not only puts himself
upon an equal Foot with the Rabble, but even of the most injudicious and
foolish part of the Rabble?

In fine, Horace was so far from being of Opinion, that the universal
Approbation of the Multitude was the Taste and Touchstone of good Poetry, that
in the last Satyr of his first Book, he advises the Poet of his Formation to
take no manner of Care about pleasing them.

-- Neque Te, ut miretur turba labores
Contentus paucis lectoribus.
Now this Advice of Horace must either be impertinent and wrong, or the
Approbation of the Multitude is a Sign of an ill Poem. But it is time to see how
this judicious Author goes on.

I know nothing that more shows the essential and inherent Perfection of
Simplicity of Thought, above that which I call the Gothic manner in writing,
than this, that the first pleases all kinds of Palates, and the latter only
such as have formed to themselves a wrong artificial Taste upon little fanciful
Authors and Writers of Epigrams. Homer, Virgil, or Milton, so far as the
Language of their Poems is understood, will please a Reader of plain common
Sense, that would neither relish nor comprehend an Epigram of Martial, or a
Poem of Cowley; so on the contrary, an ordinary Song or Ballad that is the
Delight of the common People, cannot fail to please all such Readers as are not
unqualified for the Entertainment by their Affectation or their Ignorance, and
the Reason is plain, because the same Paintings of Nature which recommend it to
the most ordinary Reader, will appear beautiful to the most refined.

Now, Sir, can any thing be more plain, than that the Spectator here cannot
mean what he says? Because it is impossible for a Man of common Sense, much less
for one of his notable Parts, to be guilty of so many Absurdities as there are
in this little Paragraph. I will make no Objection at present about the Gothic
Taste. I think I have called it somewhere so my self, though it is certain that the
pointed conceited way of Wit was in Fashion long before the Goths were either a
Name or a Nation. For you find it not only in Florus, in Martial, in Seneca, in
Tacitus, but even in some of the Writers of Augustus Caesar's Age, as Ovid and
Paterculus. But here are more Important Errors to be taken Notice of. For
first, the Spectator would make us believe that all People are Judges of
Simplicity of Thought, and that the Rabble are better Judges of it, than they
who have had a generous Education. That more People comprehend the Excellency
of Homer, and Virgil, and Milton, than the Beauties of Martial and Cowley, though
perhaps there are not ten Persons living who know all the Merit of Virgil, and
Milton's Paradise Lost had been printed forty Years before it was known to the
greatest Part of England, that there barely was such a Book. He would further
insinuate, that all those Songs or Ballads, which are the delight of the
Rabble, cannot fail to please all such Readers as are not unqualified for the
Entertainment by their Affectation or their Ignorance; as if Men of Education
in Great Britain were more ignorant than the Rabble, or it required an
extraordinary Stock of Knowledge to comprehend the Excellence of old Dogrel.
The Reason which he gives for this, and which he says is plain, is, because the
same Paintings of Nature which recommend it to the most ordinary Reader, will
appear beautiful to the most refined; as if some faint and imperfect Touches of
Nature might not recommend a thing to those by reason of their Ignorance or
their Stupidity, know not how far an Author ought to go in such a Case to
express the Truth of Nature, which faint and imperfect Strokes would by no
means satisfy those who are able to judge of that Truth.

Sir, the Spectator imagines here, that there is nothing contrary to Simplicity
of Thought, but that pointed conceited way of writing which we mentioned above,
whereas Simplicity of Thought, is Thought which naturally arises from the
Subject, Ideas which bear a just Proportion to the Things they represent, and
which the Subject seems of it self as it were to offer to us, instead of our
obtruding them upon that. If we truly consider what Simplicity of Thought in
Poetry is, we shall find that there are three things which are equally distant
from it, and those are, Imbecility, Affectation and Extravagance; Imbecility,
when a Man wants Force to come up to the Truth of Nature; Affectation, when a
Man goes beside it, through Error, Luxury and Wantonness of Soul; and
Extravagance, when a Man goes beyond it, through a false and ^ll-tim'd Effort to
show his Strength and Excellence. We shall find too that Simplicity of Thought
is not sufficient to make what we call Meter Poetry; that there must be
likewise a Simplicity of Expression; that a Simplicity of Expression is an
Expression which is according to Nature, that is an Expression proportioned to
the Ideas, as they are to the Things, and that consequently then the Expression
in great Subjects, and in great Thoughts is simple, when it is passionate,
figurative, sounding and harmonious; and that an Author, who in great Subjects
and in great Thoughts shows an Expression, which comes short of this, shows not
a Simplicity but an Imbecility of Expression. In short, as all the Heroic
Virtues are compatible with Simplicity of Heart, so all the Magnificence of the
most pompous Eloquence is on some Occasions consistent with Simplicity of
Style. But now let us see a little how the Spectator goes on.

The old Song of Chevy Chase, says he, is the favorite Ballad of the common
People of England; and Ben Johnson used to say, he had rather have been the
Author of it, than of all his Works. Sir Philip Sidney, in his Discourse of
Poetry, speaks of it in the following Words. I never heard the old Song of
Piercy and Douglas, that I found not my Heart more moved than with a Trumpet,
and yet it was sung by some blind Crowder with a Voice as rough as his Style,
which being so evil apparrelled in the Dust aad Cobweb of that uncivil Age,
what would it work trimmed in the gorgeous Eloquence of Pindar? For my own
part, says the Spectator, I am so professed an Admirer of this antiquated Song,
that I shall give my Reader a Critic upon it, without any further Apology for
so doing.

Now, Sir, as I showed you before by his Sophistry, that the Spectator is not
in earnest; so here it may appear by the Authorities he brings that he is not
in Jest. I am so very well convinced of the solid Judgment of Ben. Johnson,
that if Ben. ever talked at that rate, (which I will not absoutely pretend to
deny, though I very much doubt it) he only did it to laugh, and to ridicule some
of the sottish Admirers of that obsolete Song. As for Sir Philip Sidney, do but
observe the Expression which that noble Gentleman uses; he tells us not that
his Heart was moved by the Song of Piercy and Douglas as often as he read it,
or heard it read, but as often as he heard (...) sung, nay, though it was sung by
an old Crowder. I shrewdly suspect that there were some martial Notes in this
old Gothic Tune, which very much contributed to the working that Effect upon
Sir Philip Sidney. But instead of affirming that Sir Philip Sidney has gone too
far, he pre^nds to insinuate that he falls too short; for the Spectator
vindicates the very Expres^ion of Chevy Chase, in which one thing, I,ust
confess, he does seem to me to come something near to a Jest, and to make a ^ne
ironical Ridicule upon Sir Philip Sidney. But be these things as they will,
besides that through the whole Course of this Criticism I have and shall oppose
greater Authorities to these, I shall confound them by invincible Reason,
before which no Authority could ever stand; and by showing he Nature of Poetry,
and what it is that constitutes the Difference between that and Prose, shall
make it appear that the Writer of this old Song, in spite of the Applause of
so many Ages, never knew what Poetry was. In order to which, let us give very
near the same Account of it that we formerly did in the Grounds of Criticism in
Poetry.

Poetry then is an Art, by which a Poet excites Passion, (and to that very end
entertains Sense) by a bold and figurative Language, and by measured harmonious
Periods, in order to satisfy and improve, to delight and reform the Mind, and
so to make Mankind happier and better.

Poetry therefore is Poetry, because it is more passionate and sensual than
Prose. A Poet has two ways of exciting Passion. The one by the Figurativeness,
and the other by the Harmony of his Expression; but the Figures contribute more
to the exciting of Passion than Harmony. A Discourse that is writ in smooth and
tolerable Numbers, if it is not figurative can be but measured Prose; but a
Discourse that is every where bold and figurative, and consequently every where
extremely pathetick, is certainly Poetry without Numbers. Beside^ this alone is
a convincing Proof that a Figurative Expression is more essential (...) Poetry
than Harmony, viz. that Harmony (...) self, if it is any thing perfect, depends
upon a figurative Expression; there being no Example among the Ancients
themselves of a Ravishing Poetical Music, without figurative Language. But as
the Language of Poetry in general is to be bold and figurative, the Language of
great and exalted Poetry is to be very bold and figurative. The Doctrine of
Horace is exactly answerable to this.

Primum ego me illorum, dederim quibus esse poetas,
Excerpam numero: neque enim concludere versum
Dixeris esse satis; neque siquis scribat, utinos,
Sermoni propiora, putes hunc esse poetam.
Ingenium cuisit, cuimens divinior, atque os
Magna sonaturumi des nominis hujus honorem.
Idcirco quidam, Comaedia necne poema
Esset, quaesivere: quodacer spiritus, ac vis,
Nec verbis, nec rebus inest: nisi quod pede certo
Differt sermoni, sermo merus.
For he tells us here three things in a very conspicuous manner. First, that
poetical Measures are not sufficient to constitute a Man a Poet.

-- Neque enim concludere versum
Dixeris esse satis.
Secondly, that there must be great Passion, and a bold and a figurative
Language, nay very bold and very figurative.

Ingenium cui sit, cui men's divinior, atque os
Magna sonaturum: des nominis bujus honorem.
And Thirdly, That it was to be questioned whether any thing but the great and
exalted Poetry was properly Poetry.

Idcirco quidam, Comaedia necne poema
Esset quaesivere: quod acer Spiritus, ac vis,
Nec verbis, nec rebus inest.
Boileau is exactly of the same Opinion, and has in his Ninth Satyr as it were
interpreted part of this Passage of Horace.

Mais Repondez un peu, qu'elle verve indiscrete
Sans l'aveu des neuf soeurs vous a rendu Poet?
Senties vous dites moy ces violence transports,
Qui d un Esprit Divin, font mouvoir les ressorts.
And in his Eighth Reflection upon Longinus, he tells us plainly that Monsieur
Perrault having translated the beginning of the first Ode of Pindar without
Figures, has translated it without Poetry.

Rapin is exactly of the same Mind in his Twenty Ninth Reflection upon Poetry
in general. For having told us that Virgil in ^he Fourth of his Georgicks,
speaks of the Bees every where in the metaphorical Terms of Court, Legions,
Armies, Combats, Fields of Battle, Kings, Captains, Soldiers, that by this
figurative and lofty manner he may exalt the Lowness of his Mat^er; he adds,

C'est ainsi qu'un grand Ouvrier comme Virgile, ne dit presque rien dans le
propre, and c'est en quoy consiste le grand art de la Poesy, de dire
Figurement presque tout ce ^u'elle dit. Car d' ordinaire les Figures ^urnissent
des plus grands images que les ^hoses memes. Enfin le Poet doit scavoir (...)
toutes chooses, ce que l' Eloquence a d' art and de method pour les Figures. Ce
n'est ^ue par les Figures qu'il done de la Force ^ux Passions, de l' eclat aux
Discourse, du ^ids aux Raisons, and de l' agreement a tout (...) qu'il dit. Et
ce n'est que par les Figures (...) plus vives de l' Eloquence, que tous les
^ovemens de l' ame deviennent ardens and ^assionnez. Which is in English thus.

Thus a great Master like Virgil scarce ^ys any thing in plain Language; and
the ^reat Art of Poetry consists in saying almost every thing that is said
figuratively. For the Figures generally supply us with Images greater than the
Things themselves. In short, a Poet ought to be possessed of all that Art and
that Method in which Eloquence is designed to instruct us with regard to the
Figures. They are the Figures that enable him to give Force to the Passions,
Brightness to the Diction and to the Periods, Weight to his Arguments, and
Charms to all that he says. And it is only by the liveliest Figures of Eloquence
that all the Motions of the Soul become ardent and pathetick.

As for Simplicity, of which the Spectator boasts so much, the foresaid Rapin
has remarkably told us, in his Twenty Seventh Reflection, that the Simplicity
of Thought and even Simplicity of Expression in great Subjects is not
incompatible with the greatest Pomp and Magnificence. For Simplicity of Thought
and Simplicity of Expression is nothing but such Thought and such Expression,
as Nature in such and such Cases voluntarily suggests and dictates to us.

La Troisieme qualite de la Diction, says Rapin, est qu'elle soit naturelle,
sans affectations, selon les Regles de la Biensance and du bon sens. Les
Phrases trop etudiees, un Style trop fleury, les Manieres trop compassees, les
Beaux mots, les terms trop recherchees, and toutes les Expressions
extraordinaries, sont insupportable a la veritable Poesy. La seule Simplicite
luy convient, pourv^^^ qu'elle sait soutenue de noblesse and le grandeur:
maiscette simplicite n'est con^ue que des grandes ames. C'est le chef l' oeuvre
de la Poesy, and le caractere de Homere and de Virgile. Les ignorans y
cherchent de l' Esprit and des Beaux Sentimens, parce qu'ils sont ignorans. La
Diction doit etre relevee and eclatante, c'est sa quatrieme qualite: Car tout
ce qui est com^un and ordinaire dans les Terms, ne luy (...) pas propre. Il
faut des paroles, qui ^ayent rien de Bas, and de Vulgaire; une Diction noble
and magnifique, des expressions arts, des couleurs vives, des traits har dis.
^^fin, il faut un Discourse qui puisse ega^r la grandeur des Idees d'un Ouvrier,
qui ^it etre le Createur de son ouvrage. La ^nquieme qualite de la Diction est
d'etre ^mbreuse pour soutenir cet air grand and Majesteux don't se sert la
poesy, and pour ^^primer toute la Force, toute la Dignite ^es grandes chooses
qu' elle dit. Il ne luy ^ut que des Terms propres a Remplir la ^ouche, and a
contenter les oreilles, pour ^enir a ce merveilleux, qu'elle recherche en
^^utes chooses. Mais ce n'est pas assez qu'il (...) a de la grandeur, and de la
magnificence ^ans l' Expression, il doit y avoir aussi, de (...) Chaleur, and
de la Vehemence, and il faut ^^r tout, qu'il regne dans les Discourse, un
^^rtain Air de Grace and de Delicatesse, qui (...) fasse le principal ornement,
and la Beauty la plus universelle. Which most remarkable Passage is rendered
thus.

The Third Quality of the Diction is that it ought to be natural, without any
manner of Affectation, according to the Rules of Decorum and of good Sense.
Phrases that appear too much studied, a Style that is too florid, a Manner that
is too nicely wrought, Things that are finely said, Terms that are too far
fetched, and all Expressions that are windy and swell Use, are insupportable to
the true Poetry. Only Simplicity can agree with it, provided that Simplicity be
sustained by Nobility and by Greatness. But that is a Simplicity with which
only great Souls are acquainted. It Is the Master-work of Poetry, and the
Character of Homer and Virgil. The Ignorant look for what they call Wit and
fine Thoughts, because they are ignorant. The fourth Quality of the Diction is,
that it be exalted and sonorous. For every thing that is vulgar in the
Expression is below it. It requires Words which have nothing that is base and
common in them, a Diction that is noble and magnificent, Expressions that are
strong, and Colors that are lively, and daring and audacious Strokes. It
requires, to say all, a Discourse that is able to come up to the Greatness of
that Workman's Ideas, who ought to be the Maker and Creator of his own Works.
The fifth Quality of the Diction is that it be harmonious, that it may maintain
that great and majestic Air, with which Poetry is wont to adorn it self, and
may express all the Force and the utmost Dignity of the great Things which it
utters. It ought to reject all Terms but those that are proper to fill the
Mouth and content the Ear, that it may attain to that Sublime and that
Wonderful, which it always and every where aims at. But it is not sufficient
that there be Greatness and Magnificence in the Expression, there ought to be
likewise Ardor and Vehemence, and there ought especially to reign throughout
the Discourse, a fine, a graceful, and a delicate Air, which ought to appear
its principal Ornament, and its most universal Beauty.

Now what one of these great Qualities has the old Ballad of Chevy Chase? Of
all the Lines which the Captain has quoted, it is remarkable, that there is but
one which has any thing like a Figure in it. Now though the Subject of that Song
is noble, yet there being nothing figurative in it, it is plain by consequence
that there is nothing great, nothing noble in it; no Magnificence, no
Vehemence, no Painting, no Poetry. To compare any of the Passages in it to
Virgil is ridiculous, and a Man may as well compare a dead Man to a living. For
Example, what manner of Comparison is there between these two Passages.

The Hounds ran swiftly through the Wood
The nimble Deer to take,
And with their Cries the Hills and Dales
An Echo shrill did make.
And that of Virgil,

-- vocat ingenti clamore Cithaeron
Taygetique canes, Domitrixque Epidaurus equorum
Et vox assensu nemorum ingeminata remugit.
What is there in the first but what is vile and trivial? What Ploughman, what
Tinker, what Trull is not capable of saying the like? But that of Virgil, where
he gives Voice to the Mountains, and Voice, Consent and Soul to the Words, is
so bold, so figurative, so pompous, so harmonious, that a Man must be Virgil
himself to say it. What can be more ridiculous, nay more monstrous, than to
find any thing resembling in the following abominable Dogrel,

Sir Charles Martell of Ratcliffe too,
His Sister's Son was he;
Sir David Lamb so well esteemed,
Yet saved could not be.
And the following Verses of Virgil,

-- Cadit and Ripheus, justissimus unus
Qui fuit in Teucris and servantissimus Aequi
Diis aliter visum.
Where the divine Harmony is the Result of uncommon Passion, and productive of
no vulgar Passion. Thus we see, that in spite of the pretended Resemblance,
the old Dogrel is contemptible, and Virgil is incomparable and inimitable. One
might with a great deal more Justice pretend, that there is a Resemblance
between the 148th Psalm of Sternhold, and that admirable Hymn of Milton in the
Fifth Book of Paradise Lost. And yet we need only transcribe them both, and
place them together here, to convince the Reader, that the one is bald, and
vile, and wretched, and the other great and exalted Poetry. Let us begin with
the Psalm of Sternhold.

Give laud unto the Lord
From Heaven that is so high,
Praise him in Deed and Word
Above the starry Sky.
And also ye
His Angels all,
Armies Royal,
Praise joyfully.
Praise Him both Sun and Moon,
Which are so clear and bright,
The same of you be done,
Ye glittering Stars of Night.
And ye no less,
Ye Heavens fair,
And Clouds of the Air,
His Laud express.
For at his Word they were
All formed as we see,
At his Voice did appear
All things in their Degree.
Which he set fast,
To them he made
A Law and Trade
Always to last.
Extol and praise God's Name
On Earth, ye Dragons fell.
All Deeps do ye the same,
For it becomes ye well.
Him magnify,
Fire, Hail, Ice, Snow,
And Storms that blow
At his Decree.
The Hills and Mountains all
And Trees that fruitful are,
The Cedars great and tall
His worthy Praise declare.
Beasts and Cattle,
Yea Birds flying,
And Worms creepiug
That on Earth dwell.
Thus have we laid before the Reader the contemptible Dogrel of Hopkins; a
Version which is despicable Dogrel in spite of its being figurative. For every
Line here is a different Apostrophe. But these are Figures which are another
Person's, which the Transverser repeats like a Parrot, without understanding
them, and without being moved by them, and which consequently have neither
Passion nor Sublimity to sustain them. For it is a just Observation which is
made by Longinus, that as the Figures support the pathetick and the sublime,
they are wonderfully supported by each of them. Let us now see how the Force of
Milton's Genius hides and conceals the Assistance of Art, while these lofty
Figures, at the very time that they raise and transport his exalted Soul, are
lost in his Enthusiasm and his Sublimity, as the glittering of numberless Stars
is swallowed and lost in the blaze of Day, and that golden Deluge of Light
which on every side overwhelms them. The following Hymn is spoken by our first
Parents, in the Morning, at what time they first come out of the Bower in
Paradise, and survey the Works of God which the springing Day has restored to
them.

These are thy glorious Works, parent of Good,
Almighty, Thine this universal Frame,
Thus wondrous Fair, Thy self how wondrous then!
Unspeakable, who sit'st above these Heavens
To us invisible, or dimly seen
In these thy lowest works, yet these declare
Thy Goodness beyond thought and power divine.
Speak, ye who best can tell, ye Sons of Light
Angels, for ye behold him, and with Songs
And Choral Symphonies, day without night
Circle his Throne Rejoicing, ye in Heaven;
On Earth join all ye Creatures to extol
Him first, Him last, Him midst, and without End.
Fairest of Stars, last in the Train of Night,
If better Thou belong not to the Dawn,
Sure pledge of Day, that crownst the smiling Morn
With thy bright Circlet, praise him in thy Sphere
While Day arises, that sweet Hour of prime.
Thou Sun, of this great World both Eye and Soul,
Acknowledge Him thy Greater, sound his Praise
In thy eternal Course, both when thou climbest,
And when high Noon have gained, and when thou fall'st.
Moon, that now meet'st the orient Sun, now flee'st
With the fixed Stars, fixed in their Orb that flies,
And ye five other wandering Fires, that move
In mystic Dance not without Song, resound
His Praise who out of Darkness called up Light.
Air and ye Elements, the eldest Birth
Of Nature's Womb, that in Quaternion run
Perpetual circle multiform, and mix
And nourish all things, let your ceaseless Change
Vary to our great Maker still new Praise:
Ye Mists and Exhalatious, that now rise
From Hill or steaming Lake, duskie or gray,
Till the Sun paint your fleecy Skirts with Gold
In Honor to the World's great Author rise;
Whether to deck with Clouds the uncolour'd Sky,
Or wet the thirsty Earth with falling Showers,
Rising and falling still advance his praise:
His praise ye Winds that from four Quarters blow
Breath soft or loud, and wave your Tops ye Pines
With every Plant, in sign of Worship wave:
Fountains and ye that warble as ye flow
Melodious Murmurs, warbling tune his Praise:
Joy^ Voices all ye living Souls, ye Birds
That singing up to Heavens Gates ascend
Bear on your Wings, and in your Notes his Praise:
Ye that in Waters glide, and ye that walk
The Earth, and stately tread, or lowly creep,
Witness if I be silent Morn or Even,
To Hill or Valley, Fountain or fresh Shades;
Made vocal by my Song, and taught his praise:
Hail universal Lord, be bounteous still,
To give us only Good, and if the Night
Has gathered ought of evil or concealed
Disperse it as now Light dispels the Dark.
Now I think nothing can be more plain than that notwithstanding the same Psalm
of David is the groundwork both of Milton and Sternhold, and notwithstanding a
vain Appearance which may delude those who are not able to distinguish, there
is no more Resemblance between the Hymn of Milton, and the Version of
Sternhold, than there is between Light and Darkness, Heat and Cold, Life and
Death, Heaven and Earth, the Graces and Deformity, no notwithstanding they both
make use of the very same Figures; but those Figures in Sternhold are dead, and
he himself seems dead: and while he pretends to give Life and Soul, and
Thought, and Spirit, and Motion, even to the insensible and inanimated Parts of
the Universe; he is himself without Spirit, or Life, or Soul, or Thought, or
Motion; while Milton's matchless Genius, animating the several Figures, appears
to give Life, and Soul, and Motion to their several Objects; and seems to equal
these several mighty Objects in their distinguishing Qualities, to be lofty as
the Heaven and solid as the Earth, firey as the Sun, and changing as the Moon,
swift as the Winds, and strong, and terrible, and sonorous as the Arms and
Mouths of the great Deep. Since then there is no manner of Resemblance between
the Hymn and the Version, which seem to have several things in common, what
Shadow of Likeness can there be between Virgil and English Dogrel, where there
is nothing common between them, nor Groundwork, nor Figure, nor Harmony; the
Dogrel being utterly destitute both of Figure and Harmony, and consequently
void of the great Qualities which distinguish Poetry from Prose.

I am, Your, etc.

TO The Master of the REVELS.
Writ upon the first acting of a Play called, the Successful Pyrate.
SIR,
I Have so much Concern for your Reputation, that I think it my Duty to
acquaint you, that you have been very severely censured for licensing the last
Play. Never, say they, was the Stage prostituted to so vile a degree before. It
has more than once been accused of promoting Vice, but was never taxed till now
with encouraging Villainy. And is the Man, say they, who is set over it to
restrain it from encouraging Vice, is he become instrumental in its promoting
Villainy? and such Villainy, such a Complication of contemptible Folly, and of
dreadful abominable Wickedness, as was never beheld upon any Stage before. Good
God! say they, was any thing wanting to the Extravagance of this degenerate
Age, but the making a Tarpawlin and a Swabber, and a living Tarpawlin and a
Swabber, the Hero of a Tragedy? who, at the same time that he is strutting in
Buskins here, is lolling at Madagascar with some drunken sunburned Whore over a
Can of Flip. The greatest Rogue and the most detestable Villain that ever the
Sun or Moon beheld, banished not only from his own but from all Countries,
declared the Pest of all Human Society, and pursued to Death as a devoted
Creature, odious and noxious to Mankind, the Stage of whose Tragedy, if he is
caught in England, will undoubtedly be at Wapping. Men of common Sense are in
Amazement, and ^^fting up their Hands and their Eyes, ex^aim, what could this
judicious Author ^ean, by introducing upon the Stage a Hero of Execution-Dock,
unless that a Character might be shown which should be ^ought adequate to the
Player, and that ^^e Hero of a Tragedy might at length (...) produced which
might be acted to the ^ery Life. And this Rogue is christened ^^rsooth the
Successful Pyrate. But sure, ^^y they, this pious Christian had most Pa^^
Godfathers. For is not this Name, say ^^ey, a Name of notable Instruction and
of ^^e Morality? Does it not speak plainly to (...) following Purpose? Men,
Brethren, (...) Children, if any of you have a mind to push on your Fortunes,
or supply your Luxuries by such vigorous Methods, as Fools call wicked and
violent, begin to be Rogues and prosper. We will encourage you to go on, and to
dispel the idle and vain Fears of Providence and Divine Vengeance, by showing a
greater Rogue than any of you can pretend to be, and showing him prosperous and
successful. And we here declare upon our Honors, that if any of you Gentlemen
of the Galleries have a mind to turn Robbers upon the high Seas, to plunder our
Ships, and to fill our Jayls with our Merchants, and our Hospitals with their
Wives and Children, we here declare that if he succeeds, rather than that
fortunate Rogue should not be celebrated we will not only act him, but write
him our selves according to the best of (...) damnable Talents. This, say the
Persons mentioned above, is the blessed Moral of this Play, which must needs
(...) wonderfully agreeable to a civilized (...) a trading People. As I said at
first, (...) thought it my Duty to acquaint y^^ with this.

I am, SIR, Your, etc

TO THO. SERGEANT, Esquire
Sent with a Cicero, which I had borrowed of him, in a very small Print.
SIR,
I Here send you back your Cicero; as I would return a Friend's Mistress to him
who had entrusted me with her, untouched, though much desired, and though very
willing. That I have an extreme Passion for Cicero is but Truth; but if I
should say of him, as a Spark did of a fair Lady, that I love him more than my
Eyes which made me love him, that would be Hyperbolical. Being willing then to
preserve my Eyes for all my Friends, for my mortal Friends in Cloth, and
Drugget, and Silk, and Crape, and Linsey Woolsey; and for my immortal Friends
in Leather, and for Cicero among the rest, though last not least beloved, I here
return him to you, and desire you to deliver Sir John Marsham into the Hands of
the Bearer. That is, indeed, as the Fable has it, to lay the Body of dead
Sphinx upon an Ass. But the Knight was a sort of an Antiquary, and an Ass you
know was a Beast respected by Antiquity.

I am, SIR, Your, etc.
Tower, Feb. 10. 1713.
TO Mr. * * *
SIR,
I Am not able to give you the Directions you desire, to find Mr. B^ R^, nor
have I seen him lately, nor will I ever see him more if I can help it. I hate a
Traitor who is always bragging of his Honor and Honesty. The Men of Honor and
Honesty never bragg. They let their Actions speak for them. I never in all my
Lifetime knew a Man who often bragged of his Honor, or a Woman who often
boasted of her Chastity, but the one was a true bred Whore, and the other a
Rascal vile enough to bring a Pillory into fresh Disgrace. When a Man boasts of
his own moral Virtues, is a sign for the most part that he is conscious of the
contrary Vices, and so has recourse to bragging to blind the Eyes of those with
whom he converses. But the very Trick, by which he cheats Fools, discovers him
to Men of common Sense; and so his Brains are like the Foxes Heels, by which
the Beast escapes from Mungrils, but is betrayed to the Hounds. The greatest
Coward boasts most of his Courage. The eternal talkative noisie Fool, of his
Sense. Even talking perpetually is implicit bragging. For why should a Man talk
always more than his Company, if he did not believe that Nature had given him a
Call for it, and made him a perpetual Dictator? One Hypocrite makes more Noise
and more Show of his Zeal than twenty real Saints. There are Bullies in Honor
and in Religion as well as there are in Courage. B^ R^ is a Bully in all three.
The Man who wants Gratitude can have no one Virtue whatever.

I am, Your, etc.
Whitehall, Oct. 3. 1716.
TO Mr. BRADLEY.
SIR,
SINCE among the rest of the Obligations which I have to you, you have been so
generous as to defend me from that Accusation of Ill Nature, which has been
brought against me by some who are so far from knowing me, that perhaps they
never saw me; I am animated by so friendly a Proceeding to send you my Thoughts
upon this subject, as they have from time to time come into my Mind, as well as
I am able to recollect them, in that ill State of Health under which I labor
at present.

As this Accusation is brought against me by those who are utter Strangers to
me, it must proceed from the Books which I have published, and particularly
from the Books of Criticism. But if in my Criticism I am in the right, my very
being so must be a sufficient Apology against that Accusation. For he who
accuses a Man of Ill Nature for writing a just Criticism, knows not what is
meant by either of the Terms, either by Ill Nature or Criticism. By Ill Nature
must be meant something that is contrary to the true Nature of Man, as by
Goodnature must be understood something that is agreeable to it, or the one
can be no Term of Reproach, nor the other of Commendation. But the true Nature
of Man must consist in Reason, which distinguishes him from all other
Creatures, and therefore no Discourse or Action that is reasonable can possibly
denominate him ill-natured.

But as the true Nature of Man is reasonable, it is likewise social; and Man is
therefore the most social of Creatures, because he is the most reasonable. Now
a just Criticism is perfectly agreeable to the Nature of Man considered as it is
social. For what does the good Critic design? he designs to detect and disgrace
Error, to disclose and honor Truth; he designs the Advancement of a noble
Art, and by it the Interest and Glory of his Native Country, which depend in no
small measure upon the flourishing of Arts.

If he has the greatest Goodness of Nature, who has the largest share of social
Virtue; if he has the largest share of social Virtue, who labors most for the
Happiness of the Society in which he lives, and of all his Fellow Creatures in
general; if the Happiness of ones Native Country, and of Humankind in general,
depend more, under God, upon the Maintenance of Liberty, than upon any other
thing whatsoever; who can justly pretend (not only of the Writers of the
present Age, but of the English Writers in general) to a greater Goodness of
Nature than my self, who have made it the constant Business of my Life to
defend and maintain Liberty? Who has taken more delight in praising her
Benefactor, or in branding and defaming her avowed and mortal Enemies? In
short, Sir, Liberty has been the continual Theme of my Pen, and the constant
Employment of my Life. And have I taken all this Pains for my self? No. I
wanted not common Sense to discern that the British Liberties would be of
longer continuance than my Life. But the growing Corruptions of my Countrymen
gave me too just grounds to apprehend that Liberty in Great Britain would not
last many Centuries. I therefore resolved to cast in my Mite toward the
rendering it perpetual in this Island. And yet I knew very well and foresaw,
that by this very Endeavor to serve them, I should draw upon me the Hatred of
a great part of my Countrymen, and by consequence a thousand different
Slanders. They have given me distempers of Body, and defects of Mind, of which
I have not the least Knowledge; and the Opinion of my Illnature has proceeded
as much from my Endeavors to maintain and prolong Liberty, and by consequence
to perpetuate Happiness to them and to their Posterity, as from my detecting
and exposing successful Poetasters. For which if I am sorry for my self, I am
more sorry for my Country, for a People so disposed can be free no longer than
their Rulers are willing they should be so. I am in so faint and languishing a
Condition, that I can proceed no further, though I have many things to say. But I
will certainly resume this Subject, if I ever retrieve my Vigor.

I am, etc.
March 20. 1720/21.
To the Right Honorable the Lord Treasurer GODOLPHIN.
My Lord,
I Here send your Lordship a Dramatick Poem, called Liberty Asserted, which I
wrote before I had the Honor to be known to your Lordship, and send upon
occasion of its being the first British Play that is acted; that is, the first
after the Accomplishment of this Happy Union, which has been so nobly brought
about by your Lordship's Wisdom, and which has asserted and ensured the
Liberties of Great Britain. My Lord, that this Play's being accidentally
revived at this extraornary Juncture, may prove of happy Presage to the
Prosperity of Great Britain, and to your Lordship's Fame, which must flourish
Eternally with this Island's Prosperity, is and shall be the zealous and
perpetual Wish of,

My Lord, Your Lordship's, etc.

To his GRACE The Duke of BUCKINGHAM.
Written in the Name and at the Request of one who designed to send him the
Lives of some of our celebrated English Poets.
My LORD,
THE whole Body of English Narrative Poets have here the Honor to wait on your
Grace, and to desire your Patronage; of whom the most celebrated, among such of
them as were your Contemporaries, have so often attended upon you separately to
implore your Protection. My Lord, those among them who are living look upon
themselves as Probationers for Fame, and cannot be assured of that Glory to
which they aspire, till your Grace has given Judgment concerning them. Few of
those who are dead, have been dead long enough for the World to be assur'^ of
their real Merit, and whether it will be great and lasting enough to pass to
our latest Posterity. The Opinions of the Public in Things of this nature are
variable and uncertain, and the Reputations of Authors are subject to strange
Reverses. Never any Poet left a greater Reputation behind him than Mr. Cowley,
while Milton remained obscure and known but to few. But your Grace knows very
well, that the great Reputation of Cowley did not continue half a Century, and
that Milton's is now upon the Pinnacle of the Temple of Fame. It Is hardly
possible that so many Ages should have remained in the dark with regard to
almost every thing that relates to Homer, if his Poems had, during his Life
time, been received with that vast, that universal Applause which they met with
after his Death. Fannius, an impertinent Roman Scribbler, yet found so much
Success in his own Time, and so general an Approbation, that both his Works and
his Picture were set up in the Library, which Augustus had consecrated in the
Temple of Apollo Palatine, while Horace complains that he was neither read nor
known, and yet your Grace knows very well that this happened at a time when the
Roman Poetry and the Roman Taste were in their Height of Excellence. But
length of Days distinguished justly between them, and satisfied the World of
the nice Judgment and the fine Discernment of Mecaenas and Augustus Caesar:
Length of Days, my Lord, consigned Horace to eternal Fame, and Fannius to
eternal Infamy.

The whole Body then of English Narrative Poets, considering this Uncertainty
and this Inconstancy of the People, proceeding from their Ignorance and their
want of Taste, here bring their Causes before your Grace to be tried by you in
the last Appeal, and depend no further on the fallible Decrees of the People,
than as they shall be affirmed by your Grace's Judgment, from which they expect
an Assurance of Fame and an Earnest of Immortality.

My Lord, it has been the common Custom of Authors on these Occasions to
publish a Panegyric on their Patron's Excellencies, a Custom from which at
present I am obliged to deviate, because nothing is less entertaining than
Stale News, let the subject matter of it be never so great and glorious. If I
should relate with how much Bravery in your early Youth you affronted Death in
the Cause of your Country, when at the same time you were possessed of every
thing that makes Mortals fond of Life, when at the same time you were crowned
with Honors, laden with Riches, and courted by Pleasure: If I should tell the
World how muc`h you were distinguished by your Gallantry and your Politeness,
in the most polite and most gallant Court that ever this Island saw; that you
have been always as penetrating and profound in the Cabinet, as you have been
active and brave in the Field; that in your Administration of the great Offices
of the Crown, you have shown your self equal to the greatest and the sublimest
Employments, and that you have been always one of the most shining Ornaments of
the most august Assembly in ^he World; the Reader would cry that this (...)
reprinting an old Gazette, and pretending to inform People of Actions and
Qualities that have been many a Year in the Mouths of all the World, and which
have been long since much better described, by ^he Pens of those very Gentlemen
of whose Actions and Writings this Volume is composed. As I should be
confounded with so ^ust a Reproach, I shall confine my self with returning
Thanks to your Grace for the Protection which you vouchsafe to grant (...) this
Account of the Lives and Writings of so many Men of Merit in Conjunction, and
for that Protection and Encouragement, by which you have several times
distinguished several of them. I shall content my self with wishing that your
Grace may ^ong continue to be the shining Ornament of your Country, and the
Protector of every generous Art; that you may live to see the Noble Marquess of
Normanby inherit his Father's great Qualities and copy his bright Example; to
see him rival in Sense, in Spirit and in Judgment the immortal Offspring of
your Mind; to see him rival your own Brutus in defending the Rights of his
Country and asserting the Liberties of Mankind, but defending the one and
asserting the other with that glorious Success, and that transcendent
Happiness, which ought always to attend the Champions of public Liberty.

I am, My LORD, Your Grace's, etc.

TO WALTER MOYLE, Esquire
Dear SIR,
I Was so very much tired the last Post with sending away several Letters, that
I was incapable of writing any thing that could have been agreeable to you,
though it had been never so short. I am sorry to hear of the Complaints you make
of the Effects of the Spleen. I desire you to pardon my plain-dealing, which
proceeds purely from that Esteem and Affection which I have always had for you
ever since I had the Honor to know you; before I venture to tell you, that a
Person of your Fortune and Understanding need not have the Spleen any longer
than he pleases. The Spleen is nothing but the Effect of Stagnation, and the
Motion of vigorous Exercise must and will cure it. Take a gentle trotting
Horse, and an honest careful Servant, and come up and see your old Friends and
this wicked Town but for one Fortnight, and if the Journey to this Town and
back again into Cornwall, and the strange Sights which you will see here, do not
remove the Spleen for one six Months, I will be contented to have it for
twelve. For you who have now been absent twenty Years, will find here a Town
entirely new; new Buildings, new Men, new Manners; Avarice, and Luxury, and
Profusion joined in a Triple League, and Liberty, Property and Religion engaged
in a Battle Royal. You will find here entirely new Setts of all Sorts of Men;
new Players at Chess, who never could yet see two Removes before them; new
Whigs without one Dram of Public Spirit; and new Wits and Poets without one
Grain of Common Sense. You will find a new Idol worshipped in the midst of a
Christian Country, a base, dirty, contemptible Idol, worshipped by all that once
was thought great and noble and estimable. You will find his Temple in the
midst of that Country's Metropolis, a Temple as dirty and despicable as its
Deity; a Temple without either Roof, or Door, or Desk, or Pew, or Altar, yet
its pragmatical Priests as proud as they are base and sordid; his Priests
composed of insolent Cits, and Pe^rs and Pr^es his humble Worshippers, who
humbly worship, nay abjectly adore both the Idol and his Priests; you will see
his Worshippers arrive in Crowds from Morning to the Evening, and mingled in
his Temple in as monstrous a manner as the Elements were in Chaos, where Fire
with Water, Earth with Air were blended and confounded. As all these Sights
will be new, I believe they will be very diverting; and what will be as new and
as diverting as all the rest, you will see in this Town old Friends with new
Shapes and Faces. For Example, you will find your old Friend Mr. W^ dwindled to
those narrow Dimensions in which you formerly beheld me, and your humble
Servant enlarged to his quondam noble Bulk and Proportions.

I am, etc.
London, May 24. 1720.
To the Honorable Major PACK.
Containing some remarkable Passages of Mr. WYCHERLEY's Life.
SIR,
I Have lately had the Satisfaction to read over your Memoirs of Mr. Wycherley,
which I had last Week from Mr. C^, and found the Relation very entertaining and
the Reflections just and pathetick. If I give you Hints of some particular
Passages which seem either to have slipped from your Memory, or to have escaped
your Knowledge, I flatter my self that you will receive them kindly, since they
are only sent with Intention to give you an Opportunity, whenever you have a
mind to retouch your Memoirs, to make them more complete, though they cannot be
more agreeable.

And now, Sir, to enter upon the Subject, without any more Ceremony. I never
could learn, either from Mr. Wycherley himself, or from Mr. Dryden, or Sir
Harry Sheer, or Mr. Walkeden, or from any of those who had been longest
acquainted with Mr. Wycherley, that he had ever resided at either of our
Universities. About the Age of Fifteen he was sent for Education to the Western
Parts of France, either to Saintonge or the Angoumois. His Abode there was
either upon the Banks of the Charante, or very little removed from it. And he
had there the Happiness to be in the Neighborhood of one of the most
accomplished Ladies of the Court of France, Madame de Montausier, whom Voiture
has made famous by several very ingenious Letters, the most of which were writ
to her when she was a Maid, and called Mademoiselle de Rambouillet. I have
heard Mr. W^ say, that he was often admitted to the Conversation of that Lady,
who used to call him the Little Hugenot; and that young as he was, he was
equally pleased with the Beauty of her Mind, and with the Graces of her Person.

Upon the writing his first Play, which was St. James's Park, he became
acquainted with several of the most celebrated Wits both of the Court and Town.
The writing of that Play was likewise the Occasion of his becoming acquainted
with one of King Charles's Mistesses after a very particular manner. As Mr.
Wycherley was going through Pall Mall toward St. James's in his Chariot, he met
the foresaid Lady in hers, who, thrusting half her Body out of the Chariot,
cried out aloud to him, You, Wycherley, you are a Son of a Whore, at the same
time laughing aloud and heartily. Perhaps, Sir, if you never heard of this
Passage before, you may be surprised at so strange a Greeting from one of the
most beautiful and best bred Ladies in the World. Mr. Wycherley was certainly
very much surprised at it, yet not so much but he soon apprehended it was spoke
with Allusion to the latter End of a Song in the forementioned Play.

When Parents are Slaves
Their Brats cannot be any other,
Great Wits and great Braves
Have always a Punk to their Mother.
As, during Mr. Wycherley's Surprise, the Chariots drove different ways, they
were soon at a considerable Distance from each other, when Mr. Wycherley
recovering from his Surprise, ordered his Coachman to drive back, and to
overtake the Lady. As soon as he got over against her, he said to her, Madam,
you have been pleased to bestow a Title on me which generally belongs to the
Fortunate. Will your Ladyship be at the Play to Night? Well, she replied, what
if I am there? Why then I will be there to wait on your Ladyship, though I
disappoint a very fine Woman who has made me an Assignation. So, said she, you
are sure to disappoint a Woman who has favored you for one who has not. Yes,
he replied, if she who has not favored me is the finer Woman of the two. But
he who will be constant to your Ladyship, till he can find a finer Woman, is
sure to die your Captive. The Lady blushed, and bade her Coachman drive away.
As she was then in all her Bloom, and the most celebrated Beauty that was then
in England, or perhaps that has been in England since, she was touched with the
Gallantry of that Compliment. In short, she was that Night in the first Row of
the King's Box in Drury Lane, and Mr. Wycherley in the Pit under her, where he
entertained her during the whole Play. And this, Sir, was the beginning of a
Correspondence between these two Persons, which afterward made a great Noise
in the Town.

But now, Sir, I shall proceed to remind you of something more extraordinary,
and that is, that the Correspondence between Mr. Wycherley and the foresaid
Lady was the Occasion of bringing Mr. Wycherley into favor with George Duke of
Buckingham, who was passionately in Love with that Lady, who was ill treated by
her, and who believed Mr. Wycherley his happy Rival. After the Duke had long
solicited her without obtaining any thing, whether the Relation between them
shocked her, for she was his Cousin-Germain, or whether she apprehended that an
Intrigue with a Person of his Rank and Character, a Person upon whom the Eyes
of all Men were fixed, must of Necessity in a little time come to the King's
Ears, whatever was the Cause, she refused to admit of his Visits so long, that
at last Indignation, Rage and Disdain took Place of his Love, and he resolved
to ruin her. When he had taken this Resolution, he had her so narrowly watched
by his Spies, that he soon came to the Knowledge of those whom he had reason to
believe his Rivals. And after he knew them, he never failed to name them aloud,
in order to expose the Lady, to all those who frequented him, and among others
he used to name Mr. Wycherley. As soon as it came to the Knowledge of the
latter, who had all his Expectations from the Court, he apprehended the
Consequence of such a Report, if it should reach the King. He applied himself
therefore to Wilmot Lord Rochester and to Sir Charles Sedley, and entreated
them to remonstrate to the Duke of Buckingham the Mischief which he was about
to do to one who had not the Honor to be known to him, and who had never
offended him. Upon their opening the Matter to the Duke, he cried out
immediately, that he did not blame Wycherley, he only accused his Cousin. Ay,
but, they replied, by rendering him suspected of such an Intrigue, you are about
to ruin him, that is, your Grace is about to ruin a Man with whose
Conversation you would be pleased above all things. Upon this Occasion they
said so much of the shining Qualities of Mr. Wycherley, and of the Charms of
his Conversation, that the Duke, who was as much in love with Wit, as he was
with his Kinswoman, was impatient till he was brought to sup with him, which
was in two or three Nights. After Supper Mr. Wycherley, who was then in the
Height of his Vigor both of Body and Mind, thought himself obliged to exert
himself, and the Duke was charmed to that degree, that he cried out in a
Transport, By G^ my Cousin is in the right of it; and from that very Moment
made a Friend of a Man whom he believed his happy Rival.

The Duke of Buckingham gave him solid sensible Proofs of his Esteem and
Affection. For as he was at the same time Master of the Horse to King Charles,
and Colonel of a Regiment; as Master of the Horse he made him one of his
Equeries, and as Colonel of a Regiment he made him Captain Lieutenant of his
own Company, resigning to him at the same time his own Pay as Captain, and all
other Advantages that could be justly made of the Company I remember that about
that time I, who was come up from the University to see my Friends in Town,
happened to be one Night at the Fountain Tavern in the Strand, with the late
Dr. Duke, David Loggen the Painter, and Mr. Wilson, of whom Otway has made
honorable Mention in Tonson's first Miscellany, and that after Supper we drank
Mr. Wycherley's Health by the Name of Captain Wycherley.

He was not long after this in such high Favor with the King, that that
Monarch gave him a Proof of his Esteem and Affection, which never any Sovereign
Prince before had given to an Author who was only a private Gentleman. Mr.
Wycherley happened to fall sick of a Fever at his Lodgings in Bow-street,
Covent Garden, during which Sickness the King did him the Honor to visit him,
when finding his Fever indeed abated, but his Body extremely weakened, and his
Spirits miserably shattered, he commanded him, as soon as he was able to take a
Journey, to go to the South of France, believing that nothing would contribute
more to the restoring his former Vigor, than the gentle salutiferous Air of
Montpelier during the Winter Season. At the same time the King was pleased to
assure him, that as soon as he was capable of taking that Journey, he would
order five hundred Pounds to be paid him to defray the Expense of it.

Mr. Wycherley accordingly went into France in the beginning of the Winter of
1678, if I am not mistaken, and returned into England in the latter end of the
Spring of 1679, entirely restored to his former Vigor both of Body and Mind.
The King received him with the utmost Marks of Favor, and shortly after his
Arrival told him that he had a Son, who he was resolved should be educated like
the Son of a King, and that he could make Choice of no Man so proper to be his
Governor as Mr. Wycherley; that for that Service he should have fifteen hundred
Pounds a Year paid him, for the Payment of which he should have an Assignment
upon three several Offices, whose Names I have forgot, to which the King added,
that when the Time came that his Office was to cease, he would take care to
make such a Provision for him as should set him above the Malice of the World
and Fortune.

And now, Sir, is it not matter of Wonder, that one of Mr. Wycherley's
extraordinary Merit, who was esteemed by all the most deserving Persons of the
Court of King Charles the Second, and in high Favor with the King himself,
should in a little time, after he had received these gracious Offers which seem
to have made and to have fixed his Fortune, be thrown into Prison for bare
seven hundred Pounds, and be suffered to languish there during the last four
Years of that Monarch's Reign; forsaken by all his Friends at Court and quite
abandoned by the King? It Is no easy matter, Sir, to find a more extraordinary
Instance of the Vicissitude of Human Affairs, and if the Cause of so strange an
Alteration is unknown to you, I dare promise my self that you are very desirous
to hear it.

It was immediately after Mr. Wycherley had received these gracious Offers from
the King, that the Water-drinking Season coming on, he went down to Tunbridge
to take either the Benefit of the Waters or the Diversions of the Place, when
walking one Day upon the Wells Walk with his Friend Mr. Fairbeard of
Grey's-Inn, just as he came up to the Bookseller's, my Lady Drogheda, a young
Widow, rich, noble, and beautiful, came to the Bookseller and inquired for the
Plain Dealer. Madam, says Mr. Fairbeard, since you are for the Plain Dealer,
there he is for you, pushing Mr. Wycherley toward her. Yes, says Mr.
Wycherley, this Lady can bear plain Dealing, for she appears to be so
accomplished, that what would be Compliment said to others, spoke to her would
be plain Dealing. No, truly, Sir, said the Lady, I am not without my Faults any
more than the rest of my Sex, and yet notwithstanding all my Faults, I love
plain Dealing, and never am more fond of it than when it tells me of my Faults.
Then, Madam, said Mr. Fairbeard, you and the Plain Dealer seem designed by
Heaven for each other. In short, Mr. Wycherley walked with her upon the Walks,
waited upon her home, visited her daily at her Lodgings, while she staid at
Tunbridge, and after she went to London, at her Lodgings in Hatton Garden,
where in a little time he got her Consent to marry her, which he did, by his
Father's Command, without acquainting the King; for it was reasonably supposed,
that the Lady having a great Independent Estate, and noble and powerful
Relations, the acquainting the King with the intended Marriage might be the
likeliest way to prevent it. As soon as the News of it came to Court it was
looked upon as an Affront to the King, and a Contempt of his Majesty's Offers.
And Mr. Wycherley's Conduct after his Marriage made this be resented more
heinously. For seldom or never coming near the Court, he was thought downright
ungrateful. But the true Cause of his Absence was not known, and the Court was
at that time too much alarmed, and in too much Disquiet to enquire into it. In
short, Sir, the Lady was jealous of him to Distraction, jealous to that degree,
that she could not endure that he should be one Moment out of her Sight. Their
Lodgings were in Bow-street, Covent Garden, over against the Cock, whither if
he at any time went with his Friends, he was obliged to leave the Windows open,
that the Lady might see there was no Woman in Company, or she would be
immediately in a downright raving Condition. Whether this outrageous Jealousy
proceeded from the excess of her Passion, for she loved her Husband with the
same Violence with which she had done her Lover, or from the great Things which
she had heard reported of his manly Prowess, which were not answered by her
Experience, or from them both together, Mr. Wycherley thought that he was
obliged to humor it, and that he could not be too indulgent to a Lady who had
bestowed both her Person and her Fortune on him. This, Sir, was the Cause that
brought Mr. Wycherley all at once into the utmost Disgrace with the Court,
whose Favor and Affection but just before he possessed in the highest Degree.
And these, Sir, are the Particulars of Mr. Wycherley's Life, which seem either
to have slipped from your Memory, or to have escaped your Knowledge.

I am, etc.
Sept. 1. 1720.

