THE WANDERER: A POEM. In FIVE CANTO's.

By RICHARD SAVAGE, Son of the late Earl RIVERS.

Nulla mali nova mi facies inopinave surgit.
Virg. LONDON: Printed for J. WALTHOE, over against the Royal Exchange, in
Cornhill. 1729. [Price Two Shillings.]

To the Right Honorable JOHN, Lord Viscount Tyrconnel, Baron Charleville, and
Lord Brownlowe: Knight of the Bath.
My LORD,
PART of this POEM had the Honor of your Lordship's Perusal when in
Manuscript, and it was no small Pride to me, when it met with Approbation from
so distinguishing a Judge: Should the rest find the like Indulgence, I shall
have no Occasion (whatever its Success may be in the World) to repent the
Labor it has cost me. -- But my Intention is not to pursue a Discourse on my
own Performance; No, my Lord, it is to embrace this Opportunity of throwing out
Sentiments that relate to your Lordship's Goodness, the Generosity of which,
give me Leave to say, I have greatly experienced.

I offer it not as a new Remark, that Dependence on the Great, in former Times,
generally terminated in Disappointment; nay, even their Bounty (if it could be
called such) was in its very Nature ungenerous. It was, perhaps, withheld
through an indolent, or wilful Neglect, 'till those, who lingered in the Want of
it, grew almost past the Sense of Comfort. At length it came, too often, in a
Manner, that half cancelled the Obligation, and, perchance, must have been
acquired too by some previous Act of Guilt in the Receiver, the Consequence of
which was Remorse and Infamy.

But that I live, my Lord, is a Proof that Dependence on your Lordship, and the
present Ministry, is an Assurance of Success. I am persuaded Distress, in many
other Instances, affects your Soul with a Compassion, that always shows itself
in a manner most humane and active; that to forgive Injuries, and confer
Benefits, is your Delight; and that to deserve your Friendship is to deserve
the Countenance of the best of Men: To be admitted into the Honor of your
Lordship's Conversation (permit me to speak but Justice) is to be elegantly
introduced into the most instructive, as well as entertaining, Parts of
Literature; it is to be furnished with the finest Observations upon human
Nature, and to receive from the most unassuming, sweet, and winning Candor,
the worthiest and most polite Maxims -- Such as are always enforced by the
Actions of your own Life. I could also take Notice of your many
publick-spirited Services to your Country in Parliament, and your constant
Attachment to Liberty, and the Royal, Illustrious House of our Most Gracious
Sovereign; But, my Lord, believe me, your own Deeds are the noblest and fittest
Orators to speak your Praise, and will elevate it far beyond the Power of a
much abler Writer than I am.

I will therefore turn my View from your Lordship's Virtues to the kind
Influence of them, which has been so lately shed upon me; and then, if my
future Morals and Writings shall gain any Approbation from Men of Parts and
Probity, I must acknowledge all to be the Product of your Lordship's Goodness
to me. I must, in fine, say with Horace, Quod spiro, and placeo (si placeo)
tuum est.


I am, with the highest Gratitude and Veneration,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most Dutiful And Devoted Servant, R. SAVAGE.

THE WANDERER. A VISION. In Five CANTOS.
CANTO I.
FAIN would my Verse, TYRCONNEL, boast thy Name,
BROWNLOW, at once my Subject, and my Fame!
Oh! could that Spirit, which thy Bosom warms,
Whose Strength surprises, and whose Goodness charms!
That various Worth! -- could that inspire my Lays,
Envy should smile, and Censure learn to praise:
Yet, though unequal to a Soul, like thine,
A generous Soul, approaching to Divine,
When blessed beneath such Patronage I write,
Great my Attempt, though hazardous my Flight.
Over ample Nature I extend my Views;
Nature to rural Scenes invites the Muse:
She flies all public Care, all venal Strife,
To try the Still, compared with Active Life;
To prove, by these the Sons of Men may owe
The Fruits of Bliss to bursting Clouds of Woe,
That even Calamity, by Thought refined,
Inspirits, and adorns the thinking Mind.
Come, CONTEMPLATION, whose unbounded Gaze,
Swift in a Glance, the Course of Things, surveys;
Who in Thy-self the various View can find
Of Sea, Land, Air, and Heaven, and human Kind;
What Tides of Passion in the Bosom roll;
What Thoughts debase, and what exalt the Soul;
Whose Pencil paints, obsequious to thy Will,
All thou survey'st, with a creative Skill!
Oh, leave awhile thy loved, sequestered Shade!
Awhile in wintry Wilds vouchsafe thy Aid!
Then waft me to some olive, bow'ry Green;
Where, clothed in white, thou show a Mind serene;
Where kind Content from Noise, and Court retires,
And smiling sits, while Muses tune their Lyres:
Where Zephyrs gently breathe, while Sleep profound
To their soft Fanning nods, with Poppies crowned,
Sleep on a Treasure of bright Dreams reclines,
By thee bestowed; whence Fancy colored shines,
And flutters round his Brow a hovering Flight,
Varying her Plumes in visionary Light.
The solar Fires now faint, and watery burn,
Just where with Ice Aquarius frets his Urn!
If thawed, full-issue from its Mouth severe,
Raw Clouds, that sadden all th'inverted Year.
When FROST and FIRE with martial Powers engaged,
FROST, northward, fled the War, unequal waged!
Beneath the Pole his Legions urged their Flight,
And gained a Cave profound, and wide as Night.
Over chearless Scenes by Desolation owned,
High on an Alp of Ice he sits enthroned!
One clay-cold Hand, his crystal Beard, sustains,
And sceptered One, over Wind, and Tempest, reigns;
Over stony Magazines of Hail, that storm
The blossomed Fruit, and flowery Spring deform.
His languid Eyes, like frozen Lakes, appear,
Dim-gleaming all the Light, that wanders here.
His Robe snow-wrought, and hoar'd with Age; his Breath
A nitrous Damp, that strikes pertific Death.
Far hence lies, ever-freez'd, the Northern Main,
That checks, and renders Navigation vain,
That, shut against the Sun's dissolving Ray,
Scatters the trembling Tides of vanquished Day,
And stretching Eastward half the World secures,
Defies Discov'ry, and like Time endures!
Now FROST sent boreal Blasts to scourge the Air,
To bind the Streams, and leave the Landscape bare;
Yet when far-west, his Violence declines;
Though here the Brook, or Lake, his Power confines;
To rocky Pools, to Cat'racts are unknown
His Chains! -- to Rivers, rapid like the Rhone!
The falling Moon cast cold, a quivering Light,
Just silvered over the Snow, and sunk! -- Pale Night
Retired. The Dawn in light-grey Mists arose!
Shrill chants the Cock! -- the hungry Heifer lows!
Slow blush yon breaking Clouds! -- the Sun's uproll'd!
Th'expansive Gray turns azure, chased with Gold;
White-glitt'ring Ice, changed like the Topaz, gleams,
Reflecting Saffron Luster from his Beams.
O Contemplation, teach me to explore,
From Britain far remote, some distant Shore!
From Sleep a Dream distinct, and lively Claim;
Clear let the Vision strike the Moral's Aim!
It comes! I feel it over my Soul serene!
Still Morn begins, and Frost retains the Scene!
Hark! -- the loud Horn's enlivening Note's begun!
From Rock to Vale sweet-wand'ring Echoes run!
Still floats the Sound shrill-winding from afar!
Wild Beasts astonished dread the Sylvan War!
Spears to the Sun in Files embattled play,
March on, charge briskly, and enjoy the Fray!
Swans, Ducks, and Geese, and the winged, Winter Brood,
Chatter discordant on yon echoing Flood!
At Babel thus, when Heaven the Tongue confounds,
Sudden a thousand different, jargon Sounds,
Like jangling Bells, harsh-mingling, grate the Ear!
All stare! all talk! all mean; but none cohere!
Mark! wiley Fowlers meditate their Doom,
And smoky Fate speeds thundering through the Gloom!
Stopped short, they cease in airy Rings to fly,
Whirl over, and over, and, fluttering, fall and die.
Still Fancy wafts me on! deceived I stand,
Estranged, adventrous on a foreign Land!
Wide and more wide extends the Scene unknown!
Where shall I turn, a Wanderer, and alone?
From hilly Wilds, and Depths where Snows remain,
My winding Steps up a steep Mountain strain!
Emers'd a-top I mark the Hills subside,
And Towers aspire but with inferior Pride!
On this bleak Height tall Firs, with Ice-work crowned,
Bend, while their flaky Winter shades the Ground!
Hoarse, and direct, a blustering North Wind blows!
On Boughs, thick-rustling, crack the crispid Snows!
Tangles of Frost half fright the wilder'd Eye,
By Heat often blackened like a lowering Sky!
Hence down the Side two turbid Riv'lets pour,
And devious Two, in one huge Cat'ract, roar!
While pleased the watery Progress I pursue,
Yon Rocks in rough Assemblage rush in View!
In form an Amphitheatre they rise;
And a dark Gulf in their broad Center lies.
There the dimmed Sight with dizzy Weakness fails,
And Horror over the firmest Brain prevails!
Thither these Mountain-streams their Passage take,
Headlong foam down, and form a dreadful Lake!
The Lake, high-swelling, so redundant grows,
From the heaped Store derived a River flows;
Which deep'ning travels through a distant Wood,
And, thence emerging, meets a Sister-flood;
Mingled they flash on a wide-opening Plain,
And pass yon City to the far-seen Main.
So blend two Souls by Heaven for Union made,
And strengthening forward, lend a mutual Aid,
And prove in every transient Turn their Aim,
Through finite Life to infinite the same.
Nor ends the Landscape -- Ocean, to my Sight,
Points a blue Arm, where sailing Ships delight,
In Prospect lessened! -- Now new Rocks, reared high,
Stretch a cross Ridge, and bar the curious Eye!
There lies obscured the ripening Diamond's Ray,
And thence red-branching Coral's rent away.
In conic Form there gelid Crystal grows;
Through such the Palace-Lamp, gay Luster, throws!
Luster, which, through dim Night, as various plays,
As play from yonder Snows the changeful Rays!
For nobler Use the Crystal's Worth may rise,
If Tubes perspective hem the spotless Prize;
Through these the Beams of the far-lengthen'd Eye
Measure known Stars, and new remoter spy.
Hence Commerce many a shortened Voyage steers,
Shortened to Months, the Hazard once of Years;
Hence HALLEY's Soul etherial Flight essays;
Instructive there from Orb to Orb she strays;
Sees, round new countless Suns, new Systems roll!
Sees God in All! and magnifies the Whole!
Yon rocky Side enriched the Summer Scene,
And Peasant's Search with Herbs of healthful Green;
Now naked, pale, and comfortless it lies,
Like Youth extended cold in Death's Disguise.
There, while without the sounding Tempest swells,
Incav'd secure th'exulting Eagle dwells;
And there, when Nature owns prolific Spring,
Spreads over her Young a fondling Mother's Wing.
Swains on the Coast the far-fam'd Fish descry,
That gives the fleecy Robe the Tyrian Dye;
While Shells, a scattered Ornament, bestow;
The tinctured Rivals of the show'ry Bow.
Yon limeless Sands, loose-driving with the Wind,
In future Cauldrons useful Texture find,
Till, on the Furnace thrown, the glowing Mass
Brightens, and bright'ning hardens into Glass.
When winter Halcyons, flick'ring on the Wave,
Tune their Complaints, yon Sea forgets to rave;
Though lashed by Storms, which naval Pride o'erturn,
The foaming Deep in Sparkles seems to burn,
Loud Winds turn Zephyrs to enlarge their Notes,
And each safe Nest on a calm Surface floats.
Now veers the Wind full East; and keen, and sore,
Its cutting Influence aches in every Pore!
How weak thy Fabric, Man! -- A Puff, thus blown,
Staggers thy Strength, and echoes to thy Groan.
A Tooth's minutest Nerve let Anguish seize,
Swift kindred Fibers catch! (so frail our Ease!)
Pinched, pierced, and torn, enflamed, and unassuag'd,
They smart, and swell, and throb, and shoot enraged!
From Nerve to Nerve fierce flies th'exulting Pain!
-- And are we of this mighty Fabric vain?
Now my Blood chills! scarce through my Veins it glides!
Sure on each Blast a shivering Ague rides!
Warned let me this bleak Eminence forsake,
And to the Vale a different Winding take!
Half I descend: My Spirits fast decay;
A Terrass now relieves my weary Way.
Close with this Stage a Precipice combines;
Whence still the spacious Country far declines!
The Herds seem Insects in the distant Glades,
And Men diminished, as at Noon their Shades!
Thick on this Top o'ergrown for Walks are seen
Gray, leafless Wood, and winter Greens between!
The red'ning Berry, deep-ting'd Holly shows,
And matted Misleto, the white, bestows!
Though, lost the Banquet of autumnal Fruits,
Though on broad Oaks, no vernal Umbrage shoots;
These Boughs, the silenced, shivering Songsters seek!
These foodful Berries fill the hungry Beak.
Beneath appears a Place, all outward bare,
Inward the dreary Mansion of Despair!
The Water of the Mountain-Road, half-stray'd,
Breaks over it wild, and falls a brown Cascade.
Has Nature this rough, naked Piece designed,
To hold Inhabitant of mortal Kind?
She has. Approached, appears a deep Descent,
Which opens in a Rock a large Extent!
And hark! -- its hollow Entrance reached, I hear
A trampling Sound of Footsteps hastening near!
A death-like Chillness thwarts my panting Breast:
Soft! the wished Object stands at length confessed!
Of Youth his Form! -- But why with Anguish bent?
Why pined with sallow Marks of Discontent?
Yet Patience, laboring to beguile his Care,
Seems to raise Hope, and smiles away Despair.
Compassion in his Eye surveys my Grief,
And in his Voice invites me to Relief.
Preventive of thy Call, behold my haste,
(He says.) Nor let warm Thanks thy Spirits waste!
All Fear forget -- Each Portal I possess,
Duty wide-opens to receive Distress.
Obliged, I follow, by his Guidance led:
The vaulted Roof re-echoing to our Tread!
And now, in squared Divisions, I survey
Chambers sequestered from the Glare of Day;
Yet needful Lights, are taught to intervene,
Through Rifts; each forming a perspective Scene.
In Front a Parlour meets my entering View;
Opposed, a Room to sweet Refection due.
Here my chilled Veins are warmed by chippy Fires,
Through the bored Rock above, the Smoke expires;
Neat, over a homely Board, a Napkin's spread,
Crowned with a heapy Canister of Bread.
A Maple Cup is next dispatched, to bring
The Comfort of the salutary Spring:
Nor mourn we absent Blessings of the Vine,
Here laughs a frugal Bowl of rosy Wine;
And sav'ry Cates, upon clear Embers cast,
Lie hissing, till snatched off; a rich Repast!
Soon leap my Spirits with enlivened Power,
And in gay Converse glides the feastful Hour.
The Hermit, thus: Thou wonder'st at thy Fare:
On me, yon City, kind, bestows her Care;
Meat for keen Famine, and the generous Juice,
That warms chilled Life, her Charities produce:
Accept without Reward; unasked 'twas mine;
Here what thy Health requires, as free be thine.
Hence learn that GOD, (who, in the Time of Need,
In frozen Deserts can the Raven feed)
Well-sought, will delegate some pitying Breast,
His second Means, to succor Man distressed.
He paused. Deep Thought upon his Aspect gloom'd;
Then He, with Smile humane, his Voice resumed.
I Am just informed, (and laugh me not to scorn)
By One unseen by thee, you are English-born.
Of England I -- To me the British State,
Rises, in dear Memorial, ever great!
Here stand we conscious! -- Diffidence suspend!
Free flow our Words! -- Did never thy Muse extend
To Grots, where Contemplation smiles serene,
Where Angels visit, and where Joys convene?
To Groves, where more than mortal Voices rise,
Catch the rapt Soul, and waft it to the Skies?
This Cave! -- Yon Walks! -- But ever I more unfold,
What artful Scenes, thy Eyes shall here behold,
Think Subjects of my Toil: nor wondering gaze!
What cannot Industry completely raise?
Be the whole Earth in one great Landscape found,
By Industry is all with Beauty crowned!
He, He alone explores the Mine for Gain,
Hues the hard Rock, or harrows up the Plain;
He forms the Sword to smite; He sheaths the Steel,
Draws Health from Herbs, and shows the Balm to heal;
Or with loom'd Wool the native Robe supplies;
Or bids young Plants in future Forests rise;
Or fells the monarch Oak; which, borne away,
Shall with new Grace the distant Ocean sway;
Hence golden Commerce views her Wealth increase,
The blissful Child of Liberty and Peace.
He scoops the stubborn Alps, and, still employed,
Fills with soft, fertile Mold the steril Void;
Slop'd up white Rocks, small, yellow Harvests grow,
And, green on terrass'd Stages, Vineyards blow!
By him fall Mountains to a level Space,
An Isthmus sinks, and sunder'd Seas embrace!
He founds a City on the naked Shore,
And Desolation starves the Tract no more.
From the wild Waves he won the Belgic Land;
Where wide they foamed, her Towns, and Trafficks stand;
He cleared, manured, enlarged the furtive Ground,
And firms the Conquest with his fenceful Mound.
Even Mid the watery World his Venice rose,
Each Fabric there, as Pleasure's Seat he shows!
There Marts, Sports, Councils are for Action sought,
Landscapes for Health, and Solitude for Thought.
What wonder then I, by his potent Aid,
A Mansion in a barren Mountain made?
Part thou have viewed! -- If further we explore,
Let Industry deserve Applause the more.
No frowning Care yon blessed Apartment sees,
There Sleep retires, and finds a Couch of Ease.
Kind Dreams, that fly Remorse, and pampered Wealth,
There shed the Smiles of Innocence, and Health.
Mark! -- Here descends a Grot, delightful Seat!
Which warms even Winter, tempers Summer's Heat?
See! -- Gurgling from a Top, a Spring distills!
In mournful Measures wind the dripping Rills;
Soft Cooes of distant Doves, received around,
In soothing Mixture, swell the watery Sound;
And hence the Streamlets seek the terrass Shade,
Within, without, alike to all conveyed.
Pass on -- New Scenes, by my creative Power,
Invite Reflection's sweet, and solemn Hour.
We entered, where in well-rang'd Order, stood
The instructive Volumes of the Wise and Good.
These Friends (said he) though I desert Mankind,
Good Angels never would permit behind.
Each Genius, Youth conceals, or Time displays,
I know; each Work, some Seraph here conveys,
Retirement thus presents my searchful Thought,
What Heaven inspired, and what the Muse has taught;
What YOUNG Satiric, and Sublime has writ,
Whose Life is Virtue, and whose Muse is Wit.
Rapt I foresee thy Author of a Poem, called, The Excursion.
MALLET's early Aim
Shine in full Worth, and shoot at length to Fame.
Sweet Fancy's Bloom in FENTON's Lay appears,
And the ripe Judgment of instructive Years.
In HILL is all, that generous Souls revere,
To Virtue, and the Muse for ever dear:
And THOMSON, in this Praise, thy Merit see,
The Tongue, that praises Merit, praises thee.
These scorn (said I) the Verse-Wright of their Age,
Vain of a labored, languid, useless Page;
To whose dim Faculty the meaning Song
Is glaring, or obscure, when clear, and strong;
Who in cant Phrases gives a Work Disgrace;
His Wit, an Odness of his Tone, and Face;
Let the weak Malice, nursed to an Essay,
In some low Libel a mean Heart display;
Those, who once praised, now, undeceived despise,
It lives contemned a Day, then harmless dies.
Or should some nobler Bard, their Worth, unpraise,
Deserting Morals, that adorn his Lays,
Alas! too often each Science shows the same,
The Great grow jealous of a greater Name:
Ye Bards, the Frailty mourn; yet brave the Shock:
Has not a STILLINGFLEET opposed a LOCK?
Oh, still proceed, with sacred Rapture fired!
Unenvied had ye lived, if unadmir'd.
Let Envy, he replied, all-ireful rise,
Envy pursues alone the Brave, and Wise;
MARO, and SOCRATES inspire her Pain,
And POPE, the Monarch of the tuneful Train;
To whom be Nature's, and Britannia's Praise!
All their bright Honors rush into his Lays!
And all that glorious Warmth his Lays reveal,
Which only Poets, Kings, and Patriots feel!
Though gay as Mirth, as curious Thought sedate,
As Elegance polite, as Power elate;
Profound as Reason, and as Justice clear;
Soft as Compassion; yet as Truth severe;
As Bounty copious, as Persuasion sweet,
Like Nature various, and like Art complete;
So fine her Morals, so sublime her Views,
His Life is almost equaled by his Muse.
O POPE! -- Since Envy is decreed by Fate,
Since she pursues alone the Wise, and Great;
In one small, emblematic Landscape see,
How vast a Distance 'twixt thy Foe, and Thee!
Truth from an Eminence surveys our Scene,
(A Hill, where all is clear, and all serene.)
Rude, earth-bred Storms over meaner Valleys blow,
And wandering Mists roll, black'ning, far below;
Dark, and debased, like them, is Envy's Aim,
And clear, and eminent, like Truth, thy Fame.
Thus I. From what dire Cause can Envy spring?
Or why embosom we a Viper's Sting?
It Is Envy stings our darling Passion, Pride.
Alas! (the Man of mighty Soul replied)
Why choose we Mis'ries? Most derive their Birth
From one bad Source; we dread superior Worth;
Preferred, it seems a Satire on our own;
Then heedless to excel, we meanly moan:
Then we abstract our Views, and Envy show,
Whence springs the Misery, Pride is doomed to know.
Thus Folly pain creates: By Wisdom's Power,
We shun the Weight of many a restless Hour --
Lo! I meet Wrong, perhaps the Wrong, I feel,
Tends by the Scheme of Things to public Weal.
I of the Whole am Part -- the Joy, Men see,
Must circulate, and so revolve to me.
Why should I then of private Loss complain?
Of Loss, that proves, perchance, a Brother's Gain?
The Wind, that binds one Bark within the Bay,
May waft a richer Freight its wished for Way.
If Rains, redundant, flood the abject Ground,
Mountains are but supplied, when Vales are drowned;
If, with soft Moisture swelled, the Vale looks gay,
The Verdure of the Mountain fades away.
Shall Clouds, but at my Welfare's Call descend?
Shall Gravity for me her Laws suspend?
For me shall Suns their Noontide Course forbear?
Or Motion not subsist to influence Air?
Let the Means vary, be they Frost, or Flame,
Thy End, O Nature! still remains the same!
Be This the Motive of a wise Man's Care,
To shun deserving Ills, and learn to bear.
The END of the FIRST CANTO.
THE WANDERER. A VISION.
CANTO II.
WHILE thus a Mind humane, and wise, he shows,
All-eloquent of Truth his Language flows.
Youth, though depressed, through all his Form, appears;
Through all his Sentiments the Depth of Years.
Thus He -- Yet farther Industry behold,
Which conscious waits new Wonders to unfold.
Enter my Chapel next -- Lo! here begin
The hallowed Rites, that check the Growth of Sin.
When first we met, how soon you seemed to know
My Bosom, laboring with the Throbs of Woe!
Such racking Throbs! -- soft! when I rouse those Cares,
On my chilled Mind pale Recollection glares!
When moping Frenzy strove my Thoughts to sway,
Here prudent Labors chased her Power away.
Full, and rough-rising from yon sculptured Wall,
Bold Prophets, Nations to Repentance, call!
Meek Martyrs smile in Flames! gored Champions groan!
And Muse-like Cherubs tune their Harps in Stone!
Next shadowed Light, a rounding Force, bestows,
Swells into Life, and speaking Action grows!
Here pleasing, melancholy Subjects find,
To calm, amuse, exalt the pensive Mind!
This Figure, tender Grief, like mine, implies,
And semblant Thoughts, that earthly Pomp despise.
Such penitential Magdalene reveals:
Loose-veil'd, in Negligence of Charms she kneels.
Though Dress, near-stor'd, its Vanity supplies,
The Vanity of Dress unheeded lies.
The sinful World in sorrowing Eye she keeps,
As over Jerusalem, Messiah weeps.
One Hand, her Bosom smites; in One appears
The lifted Lawn, that drinks her falling Tears.
Since Evil outweighs Good, and sways Mankind,
True Fortitude assumes the patient Mind:
Such proved Messiah's, though to suffering born,
To Penury, Repulse, Reproach, and Scorn.
Here by the Pencil mark his Flight designed;
The wearied Virgin by a Stream reclined,
Who feeds the Child. Her Looks a Charm express,
A modest Charm, that dignifies Distress.
Boughs over their Heads with blushing Fruits depend,
Which Angels to her busied Consort bend.
Hence by the smiling Infant seems discerned,
Trifles, concerning him, all Heaven, concerned.
Here the transfigur'd Son, from Earth, retires:
See! the white Form in a bright Cloud aspires!
Full on his Foll'wers bursts a Flood of Rays,
Prostrate they fall beneath the o'erwhelming Blaze!
Like Noontide Summer-Suns the Rays appear,
Unsuff'rable, magnificent, and near!
What Scene of Agony the Garden brings;
The Cup of Gall; the suppliant King of Kings;
The Crown of Thorns; the Cross, that felt him die;
These, languid in the Sketch, unfinished, lie.
There from the Dead Centurions see him rise,
See! but struck down with horrible Surprise!
As the first Glory seemed a Sun at Noon,
This casts the Silver Splendour of the Moon.
Here peopled Day, th'ascending God surveys!
The Glory varies, as the Myriads gaze!
Now softened, like a Sun at Distance seen,
When through a Cloud bright-glancing, yet serene!
Now fast-encreasing to the Crowd amazed,
Like some vast Meteor high in Either raised!
My Labor, yon high-vaulted Altar, stains
With Dies, that emulate etherial Plains.
The unequal Glass, which in that Opening glows,
Mid circling Rays a pictured Savior shows!
Bright It collects the Beams, which, trembling All,
Back from the God, a show'ry Radiance, fall,
Lightning the Scene beneath! a Scene divine!
Where Saints, Clouds, Seraphs intermingled shine!
Here Water-falls, that play melodious round,
Like a sweet Organ, swell a lofty Sound!
The solemn Notes bid earthly Passions fly,
Lull all my Cares, and lift my Soul on High!
This monumental Marble -- this I rear
To One -- Oh! ever mourned! -- Oh! ever dear!
He stopped -- pathetic Sighs the Pause supply,
And the prompt Tear starts, quivering, on his Eye!
I looked -- two Columns near the Wall were seen,
An imag'd Beauty stretched at length between.
Near the wept Fair, her Harp Cecilia strung,
Leaning, from high, a listening Angel hung!
Friendship, whose Figure at the Feet remains,
A Phoenix, with irradiate Crest, sustains:
This graced one Palm, while One extends t'impart
Two foreign Hands, that clasp a burning Heart.
A pendent Veil two hovering Seraphs raise,
Which, opening Heaven, upon the Roof displays!
And two, benevolent, less-distant, hold
A Vase, collective of Perfumes up-roll'd!
These from the Heart, by Friendship held, arise;
Odorous as Incense gathering in the Skies.
In the fond Pelican is Love expressed,
Who opens to her Young her tender Breast.
Two mated Turtles hovering hang in Air,
One by a Faulcon struck! -- in wild Despair,
The Hermit cries, -- So Death, alas! destroys
The tender Consort of my Cares, and Joys!
Again soft Tears upon his Eyelid hung,
Again checked Sounds died, fluttering, on his Tongue.
Too well his pining, inmost Thought I know!
Too well even Silence tells the story'd Woe!
To his my Sighs, to his my Tears reply!
I stray over all the Tomb a watery Eye!
Next, on the Wall, her Scenes of Life I gazed,
The Form back-leaning, by a Globe half-rais'd!
Cherubs a proffered Crown of Glory show,
Eyed wistful by the admiring Fair below.
In Action eloquent disposed her Hands,
One shows her Breast, in Rapture One expands!
This the fond Hermit seized! -- over all his Soul,
The soft, wild, wailing, amorous Rassion stole!
In steadfast Gaze his Eyes her Aspect keep,
Then turn away, awhile dejected weep;
Then he reverts 'em; but reverts in vain,
Dimmed with the swelling Grief, that streams again.
Where now is my Philosophy? (he cries)
My Joy, Hope, Reason, my Olympia dies!
Why did I ever that Prime of Blessings know?
Was it, ye cruel Fates! t'im bitter Woe?
Why would your Bolts not level first my Head?
Why must I live to weep Olympia dead?
-- Sir, I had once a Wife! fair bloomed her Youth,
Her Form was Beauty, and her Soul was Truth!
Oh, she was dear! -- How dear, what Words can say?
She dies! -- My Heaven at once is snatched away!
Ah! what avails, that, by a Father's Care,
I rose a wealthy, and illustrious Heir?
That early in my Youth I learned to prove
The instructive, pleasing, academic Grove?
That in the Senate Eloquence was mine?
That Valor gave me in the Field to shine?
That Love showered Blessings too -- far more than All,
High-rapt Ambition ever could happy call?
Ah! -- What are Thief, which even the Wise adore?
Lost is my Pride! -- Olympia is no more!
Had I, ye persecuting Powers! been born
The World's cold Pity, or, at best, its Scorn;
Of Wealth, of Rank, of kindred Warmth bereft;
To Want, to Shame, to ruthless Censure left;
Patience, or Pride, to this, Relief, supplies!
But a lost Wife! -- there! there Distraction lies!
Now three sad Years I yield me all to Grief,
And fly the hated Comfort of Relief.
Though rich, great, young, I leave a pompous Seat,
(My Brother's now) to seek some dark Retreat:
Mid cloistered, solitary Tombs I stray,
Despair, and Horror lead the chearless Way!
My Sorrow grows to such a wild Excess,
Life, injured Life must wish the Passion less!
Olympia! -- My Olympia's lost! (I cry)
Olympia's lost, the hollow Vaults reply!
Louder I make my lamentable Moan;
The swelling Echoes learn like me to groan;
The Ghosts to scream, as through lone Isles they sweep;
The Shrines to shudder, and the Saints to weep!
Now Grief, and Rage, by gathering Sighs, suppressed,
Swell my full Heart, and heave my laboring Breast!
With struggling Starts, each vital String they strain,
And strike the tottering Fabric of my Brain!
Over my sunk Spirits frowns a vap'ry Scene,
Woe's dark Retreat! the madding Maze of Spleen!
A deep, damp Gloom o'erspreads the murky Cell;
Here pining Thoughts, and secret Terrors dwell!
Here learn the Great unreal Wants to feign!
Unpleasing Truths here mortify the Vain!
Here Learning, blinded first, and then beguiled,
Looks dark as Ignorance, as Frenzy wild!
Here first Credulity on Reason won!
And here false Zeal mysterious Rants begun!
Here Love impearls each Moment with a Tear,
And Superstition owes to Spleen her Fear!
Fantastic Lightnings, through the dreary Way,
In swift, short Signals, flash the bursting Day!
Above, beneath, across, around, they fly!
A dire Deception strikes the mental Eye!
By the Blue Fires, pale Phantoms grin severe!
Shrill-fancied Echoes wound the affrighted Ear!
Air-banish'd Spirits flag in Fogs profound,
And all-obscene, shed baneful Damps around!
Now Whispers, trembling in some feeble Wind,
Sigh out prophetic Fears, and freeze the Mind!
Loud laughs the Hag! -- She mocks Complaint away,
Unroofs the Den, and lets in more than Day.
Swarms of wild Fancies, winged in various Flight,
Seek emblematic Shades, and mystic Light!
Some drive with rapid Steeds the shining Car!
These nod from Thrones! Those thunder in the War!
Till, tired, they turn from the delusive Show,
Start from wild Joy, and fix in stupid Woe.
Here the lone Hour, a Blank of Life, displays,
Till now bad Thoughts a Fiend more active raise;
A Fiend in evil Moments ever nigh!
Death in her Hand, and Frenzy in her Eye!
Her Eye all red, and sunk! -- A Robe she wore,
With Life's Calamities embroidered over.
A Mirror in one Hand collective shows,
Varied, and multiplied that Group of Woes.
This endless Foe to generous Toil and Pain
Lolls on a Couch for Ease; but lolls in vain;
She muses over her woe-embroider'd Vest,
And Self-Abhorrence heightens in her Breast.
To shun her Care, the Force of Sleep she tries,
Still wakes her Mind, though Slumbers doze her Eyes:
She dreams, starts, rises, stalks from Place to Place,
With restless, thoughtful, interrupted Pace;
Now eyes the Sun, and curses every Ray,
Now the green Ground, where Color fades away.
Dim Specter dance! Again her Eye she rears;
Then from the blood-shot Ball wipes purpled Tears;
Then presses hard her Brow, with Mischief fraught,
Her Brow half bursts with Agony of Thought!
From me (she cries) pale Wretch thy Comfort claim,
Born of Despair, and Suicide my Name!
Why should thy Life a Moment's Pain endure?
Here every Object proffers Grief a Cure.
She points where Leaves of Hemlock black'ning shoot!
Fear not! pluck! eat (said she) the sovereign Root!
Then Death, reversed, shall bear his ebon Lance;
Soft over thy Sight shall swim the shadowy Trance!
Or leap yon Rock, possess a watery Grave,
And leave wild Sorrow to the Wind and Wave!
Or mark -- this Poniard thus from Misery frees!
She wounds her Breast! -- the guilty Steel I seize!
Straight, where she struck, a smoking Spring of Gore
Wells from the Wound, and floats the crimsoned Floor.
She faints! She fades! -- Calm Thoughts the Deed revolve,
And now, unstartling, fix the dire Resolve!
Death drops his Terrors, and, with charming Wiles,
Winning, and kind, like my Olympia smiles!
He points the Passage to the Seats divine,
Where Poets, Heroes, sainted Lovers shine!
I come, Olympia! -- My reared Arm extends;
Half to my Breast the threatening Point descends!
Straight Thunder rocks the Land! new Lightnings play!
Nor tempt the Vengeance of an angry God!
Nor tempt the Vengeance of an angry God!
Nor tempt the Vengeance of an angry God!
Fly'st thou from Providence for vain Relief?
Such ill-sought Ease shall draw avenging Grief.
Honor, the more obstructed, stronger shines,
And Zeal by Persecution's Rage refines.
By Woe, the Soul to daring Action swells;
By Woe, in plaintless Patience It excels;
From Patience, prudent, clear Experience springs,
And traces Knowledge through the Course of Things;
Thence Hope is formed, thence Fortitude, Success,
Renown: -- Whatever Men covet and caress.
The vanished Fiend thus sent a hollow Voice,
Would thou be happy? Straight be Death thy Choice;
How mean are those, who passively complain.
While active Souls, more free, their Fetters strain?
Though Knowledge thine, Hope, Fortitude, Success,
Renown -- Whatever Men covet, and caress;
On Earth Success must in its Turn give way,
And even Perfection introduce Decay.
Never the World of Spirits thus -- their Rest
Untouched! entire! -- once happy, ever blessed!
Earnest the heavenly Voice responsive cries,
Oh, listen not to Subtilty unwise!
Thy guardian Saint, who mourns thy hapless Fate,
Heaven grants to prop thy Virtue, ere too late.
Know, if thou will thy dear-lov'd Wife deplore,
Olympia waits thee on a foreign Shore;
There in a Cell thy last Remains be spent;
Away! deceive Despair, and find Content!
I heard, obeyed; nor more of Fate complained;
Long Seas I measured, and this Mountain gained.
Soon to a yawning Rift, Chance turned my Way;
A Den it proved, where a huge Serpent lay!
Flame-ey'd he lay! -- He rages now for Food,
Meets my first Glance, and meditates my Blood!
His Bulk, in many a gathered Orb up-roll'd,
Rears Spire on Spire! His Scales, be-dropt with Gold,
Shine burnished in the Sun! Such Height they gain,
They dart green Luster on the distant Main!
Now writhed in dreadful Slope, he stoops his Crest,
Furious to fix on my unshielded Breast!
Just as he springs, my Sabre smites the Foe!
Headless he falls beneath the unerring Blow!
Wrath yet remains, though Strength his Fabric leaves,
And the meant Hiss, the gasping Mouth, deceives;
The lengthening Trunk slow-loosens every Fold,
Lingers in Life; then stretches stiff, and cold.
Just as the invet'rate Son of Mischief ends,
Comes a white Dove, and near the Spot descends.
I hail this Omen! all bad Passions cease,
Like the slain Snake, and all within is Peace.
Next, to Religion, this plain Roof I raise!
In duteous Rites, my hallowed Tapers blaze!
I bid due Incense on my Altar smoke;
Then, at this Tomb, my promised Love invoke!
She hears! -- She comes! -- My Heart what Raptures warm?
All my Olympia sparkles in the Form!
No pale, wan, livid Mark of Death she bears!
Each roseate Look, a quickening Transport, wears!
A Robe of Light, high-wrought, her Shape, invests;
Unzon'd the swelling Beauty of her Breasts!
Her auburn Hair, each flowing Ring, resumes,
In her fair Hand, Love's Branch of Myrtle blooms!
Silent, awhile, each well-known Charm, I trace;
Then thus, (while nearer she avoids the Embrace)
Thou dear Deceit! -- must I a Shade pursue?
Dazzled I gaze! -- thou swim'st before my View!
Dipped in etherial Dews, her Bough divine
Sprinkles my Eyes, which, strengthened, bear the Shine:
Still thus I urge, (for still the shadowy Bliss
Shuns the warm Grasp, nor yields the tender Kiss.)
Oh, fly not! -- fade not! listen to Love's Call!
She lives! -- no more I Am Man! -- I Am Spirit all!
Then let me snatch thee! -- press thee! -- take me whole!
Oh, close! -- yet closer! -- closer to my Soul!
Twice, round her Waist, my eager Arms entwined,
And, twice deceived, my Frenzy clasped the Wind!
Then thus I raved -- Behold thy Husband kneel,
And judge! O judge what Agonies I feel!
Oh be no longer, if unkind, thus fair;
Take Horror's Shape, and fright me to Despair!
Rather, than thus, unpitying, see my Moan,
Far rather frown, and fix me here in Stone!
But mock not thus -- Alas! (the Charmer said,
Smiling; and, in her Smile, soft Radiance played)
Alas! no more eluded Strength employ,
To clasp a Shade! -- What more is mortal Joy?
Man's Bliss is, like his Knowledge, but surmis'd;
One Ignorance, the other Pain disguised;
Thou were (had all thy Wish been still possessed)
Supreamly cursed from being greatly blessed;
For oh! so fair, so dear was I to Thee,
Thou had forgot thy God, to worship me;
This he foresaw, and snatched me to the Tomb;
Above I flourish in unfading Bloom.
Think me not lost; for thee I Heaven implore!
Thy guardian Angel, though a Wife no more!
I, when abstracted from this World you seem,
Hint the pure Thought, and frame the heavenly Dream!
Close at thy Side, when Morning streaks the Air,
In Musick's Voice I wake thy Mind to Prayer!
By me, thy Hymns, like purest Incense, rise,
Fragrant with Grace, and pleasing to the Skies!
And when that Form shall from its Clay refine,
(That only Bar betwixt my Soul, and Thine!)
When thy loved Spirit mounts to Realms of Light,
Then shall Olympia aid thy earliest Flight;
Mingled we'll flame in Raptures, that aspire
Beyond all Youth, all Sense, and all Desire.
She ended. Still such Sweetness dwells behind,
The enchanting Voice still warbles in my Mind,
But lo! the unbodied Vision fleets away! --
-- Stay my Olympia! -- I conjure thee, stay!
Yet stay -- for thee my Memory learns to smart!
Sure every Vein contains a bleeding Heart!
Sooner shall Splendour leave the Blaze of Day,
Than Love, so pure, so vast as mine, decay!
From the same heavenly Source its Luster came,
And glows, immortal, with congenial Flame!
Ah! -- let me not with Fires neglected, burn!
Sweet Mistress of my Soul, return, return!
Alas! -- she is fled! -- I traverse now the Place,
Where my enamored Thoughts, her Footsteps, trace.
Now, over the Tomb, I bend my drooping Head,
There Tears, the Eloquence of Sorrow, shed.
Sighs choke my Words, unable to express
The Pangs, the Throbs of speechless Tenderness!
Not with more ardent, more transparent Flame,
Call dying Saints on their Creator's Name,
Than I on here is! -- But, through yon yielding Door,
Glides a new Phantom over the illumined Floor!
The Roof swift-kindles from the beaming Ground,
And Floods of living Luster flame around!
In all the Majesty of Light arrayed,
Awful it shines! -- it is Cato's honored Shade!
As I, the Heavenly Visitant, pursue,
Sublimer Glory opens to my View!
He speaks! -- But, oh! what Words shall dare repeat
His Thoughts? -- They leave me fired with Patriot Heat!
More than poetic Raptures now I feel,
And own that godlike Passion, Public Zeal!
But from my Frailty it receives a Stain,
I grow, unlike my great Inspirer, vain;
And burn, once more, the busy World to know,
And would, in Scenes of Action, foremost glow!
Where proud Ambition points her dazzling Rays!
Where Coronets, and Crowns, attractive, blaze!
When my Olympia leaves the Realms above,
And lures me back to solitary Love.
She tells me Truth, prefers an humble State,
That genuine Greatness shuns the being Great!
That mean are those, who false-term'd Honor prize;
Whose Fabrics, from their Country's Ruins, rise;
Who look the Traitor, like the Patriot, fair;
Who to enjoy the Vineyard, wrong the Heir.
I hear! -- through all my Veins new Transports. roll!
I gaze! -- Warm Love comes rushing on my Soul!
Ravished I gaze! -- Again her Charms decay!
Again my Manhood to my Grief gives way!
Cato returns! -- Zeal takes her Course to reign;
But Zeal is in Ambition lost again!
I Am now the Slave of Fondness! -- now of Pride!
-- By Turns they conquer, and by Turns subside!
These balanced Each by Each, the golden Mean,
Betwixt 'em found, gives Happiness serene;
This I Will enjoy! -- He ended! -- I replied,
O Hermit! thou art Worth severely tried!
But had not innate Grief produced thy Woes,
Men, barbarous Men had preyed on thy Repose.
When seeking Joy, we seldom Sorrow miss,
And often Misery points the Path to Bliss.
The Soil, most worthy of the thrifty Swain,
Is wounded thus, ever trusted with the Grain;
The struggling Grain must work obscure, its way,
Ever the first Green springs upward to the Day;
Up-sprung, such weed-like Coarseness it betrays,
Flocks on the abandoned Blade permissive graze;
Then shoots the Wealth, from Imperfection clear,
And thus a grateful Harvest crowns the Year.
The END of the SECOND CANTO.
THE WANDERER. A VISION.
CANTO III.
THUS free our social Time from Morning flows,
'Till rising Shades attempt the Day to close.
Thus my new Friend: Behold the Light's Decay:
Back to yon City let me point thy Way.
South-West, behind yon Hill, the sloping Sun,
To Ocean's Verge, his fluent Course, has run:
His parting Eyes a watery Radiance shed,
Glance through the Vale, and tip the Mountain's Head;
To which opposed, the shad'wy Gulphs, below,
Beauteous, reflect the party-colored Snow.
Now dance the Stars, where Vesper leads the Way;
Yet all, faint-glimm'ring with Remains of Day.
Orient, the Queen of Night emits her Dawn,
And throws, unseen, her Mantle over the Lawn.
Up the blue Steep, her crimson Orb now shines;
Now on the Mountain-top her Arm reclines,
In a red Crescent seen: Her Zone now gleams,
Like Venus, quivering in reflecting Streams.
Yet red'ning, yet round-burning up the Air,
From the white Cliff, her Feet slow-rising glare!
See! Flames, condensed, now vary her Attire;
Her Face, a broad Circumference of Fire.
Dark Firs seem kindled in nocturnal Blaze;
Through Ranks of Pines, her broken Luster plays,
Here glares, there brown-projecting Shade bestows,
And glittering sports upon the spangled Snows.
Now Silver turn her Beams! -- Yon Den they gain;
The big, roused Lion shakes his brinded Main.
Fierce, fleet, gaunt Monsters, All, prepared for Gore,
Rend Woods, Vales, Rocks, with wide-resounding Roar.
O dire Presage! -- But fear not thou, my Friend,
Our Steps the Guardians of the Just attend.
Home-ward I Will wait thee on -- and now survey,
How Men, and Spirits chase the Night away!
Yon Nymphs, and Swains in amorous Mirth advance;
To breathing Music moves the circling Dance.
Here the bold Youth in Deeds adventrous glow,
Skimming in rapid Sleds the crackling Snow.
Not when Tidides won the funeral Race,
Shot his light Car along in swifter Pace.
Here the glazed Way with Iron Feet they dare,
And glide, well-pois'd, like Mercuries in Air.
There Crowds, with stable Tread, and levelled Eye,
Lift, and dismiss the Quoits, that whirling fly.
With Force superior, not with Skill so true,
The ponderous Disk from Roman Sinews flew.
Where neighboring Hills some cloudy Sheet sustain,
Freez'd over the nether Vale a pensile Plain,
Cross the roof'd Hollow rolls the massy Round,
The cracked Ice rattles, and the Rocks resound;
Censures, Disputes, and Laughs, alternate, rise;
And deaf'ning Clangor thunders up the Skies.
Thus, amid crowded Images, serene,
From Hour to Hour we passed, from Scene to Scene:
Fast wore the Night. Full long we paced our way;
Vain Steps! the City yet far-distant lay.
While thus the Hermit, ever my Wonder spoke,
Methought, with new Amusement, Silence broke,
Yon amber-hued Cascade, which fleecy flies
Through Rocks, and strays along the trackless Skies,
To frolic Fairies marks the mazy Ring,
Forth to the Dance from little Cells they spring,
Measured to pipe, or harp! -- and next they stand,
Marshalled beneath the Moon, a radiant Band!
In Frost-work now delight the sportive kind:
Now court wild Fancy in the whistling Wind.
Hark! -- the funereal Bell's deep-sounding Toll,
To Bliss from Misery, calls some righteous Soul!
Just freed from Life, like swift-ascending Fire,
Glorious it mounts, and gleams from yonder Spire!
Light clapped its Wings! -- It views, with pitying Sight,
The friendly Mourner pay the pious Rite;
The Plume high-wrought, that black'ning nods in Air;
The slow-paced, weeping Pomp; the solemn Prayer,
The decent Tomb; the Verse, that Sorrow gives;
Where, to Remembrance sweet, fair Virtue lives.
Now to mid Heaven the whitened Moon inclines,
And Shades contract, marked out in clearer Lines;
With noiseless Gloom the Plains are deluged over:
See! -- from the North, what streaming Meteors pour!
Beneath Boots spring the radiant Train,
And quiver through the Axle of his Wain.
Over Altars thus, impainted, we behold
Half-circling Glories shoot in Rays of Gold.
Cross Either swift elance the vivid Fires!
As swift again each pointed Flame retires!
In Fancy's Eye encount'ring Armies glare,
And sanguine Ensigns wave unfurled in Air!
Hence the weak Vulgar deem impending Fate,
A Monarch ruined, or unpeopled State.
Thus Comets, dreadful Visitants! arise
To them wild Omens, Science to the Wise!
These mark the Comet to the Sun incline,
While deep-red Flames around its Center shine!
While its fierce Rear, a winding Trail, displays,
And lights all Either with the sweepy Blaze!
Or when compelled, it flies the torrid Zone,
And shoots by Worlds un-number'd, and unknown;
By Worlds, whose People, all-aghast with Fear,
May view that Minister of Vengeance near!
Till now the transient Glow, remote, and lost,
Decays, and darkens mid-involving Frost!
Or when it, Sun-ward, drinks rich Beams again,
And burns imperious on th'etherial Plain!
The Learn'd-One curious eyes it from afar,
Sparkling through Night, a new, illustrious Star!
The Moon, descending, saw us now pursue
The various Talk: -- the City near in view!
Here from still Life (he cries) avert thy Sight,
And mark what Deeds adorn, or shame the Night!
But heedful each, immodest Prospect fly;
Where Decency forbids Enquiry's Eye.
Man were not Man, without Love's wanton Fire,
But Reason's Glory is to quell Desire.
What are thy Fruits, O Lust? Short Blessings, bought
With long Remorse, the Seed of bitter Thought;
Perhaps some Babe to dire Diseases born,
Doomed for Another's Crimes, through Life, to mourn;
Or murdered, to preserve a Mother's Fame;
Or cast obscure; the Child of Want, and Shame!
False Pride! What Vices on our Conduct steal,
From the World's Eye one Frailty to conceal?
Ye cruel Mothers! -- Soft! those Words command!
So near, shall Cruelty, and Mother stand?
Can the Dove's Bosom snaky Venom draw?
Can its Foot sharpen, like the Vultur's Claw?
Can the fond Goat, or tender, fleecy Dam
Howl, like the Wolf, to tear the Kid, or Lamb?
Yes, there are Mothers -- There I feared his Aim,
And, conscious, trembled at the coming Name;
Then with a Sigh his issuing Words opposed!
Straight with a falling Tear the Speech he closed.
That Tenderness, which Ties of Blood deny,
Nature repaid me from a Stranger's Eye.
Pale grew my Cheeks! -- But now to general Views
Our Converse turns, which thus my Friend renews.
Yon Mansion, made by beaming Tapers gay,
Drowns the dim Night, and counterfeits the Day.
From lumin'd Windows glancing on the Eye,
Around, athwart, the frisking Shadows fly.
There Midnight Riot spreads illusive Joys,
And Fortune, Health, and dearer Time destroys.
Soon Death's dark Agent, to luxuriant Ease,
Shall wake sharp Warnings in some fierce Disease.
O Man! thy Fabrick's like a well-form'd State;
Thy Thoughts, first-rank'd, were sure designed the Great!
Passions Plebeians are, which Faction raise;
Wine, like poured Oil, excites the raging Blaze:
Then giddy Anarchy's rude Triumphs rise:
Then sovereign Reason from her Empire flies:
That Ruler once deposed, Wisdom, and Wit
To Noise, and Folly, Place, and Power, submit;
Like a frail Bark thy weakened Mind is tossed,
Unsteer'd, unballanc'd, 'till its Wealth is lost.
The Miser-spirit eyes the spend-thrift Heir,
And mourns, too late, Effects of sordid Care.
His Treasures fly to cloy each fawning Slave;
Yet grudge a Stone, to dignify his Grave.
For this, low-thoughted Craft his Life employed;
For this, though wealthy, he no Wealth enjoyed;
For this, he gripped the Poor, and Alms denied,
Unfriended lived, and unlamented died.
Yet smile, grieved Shade! when that unprosp'rous Store
Fast-lessens, when gay Hours return no more;
Smile at thy Heir, beholding, in his Fall,
Men once obliged, like him, ungrateful All!
Then Thought-inspiring Woe his Heart shall mend,
And prove his only wise, unflatt'ring Friend.
Folly exhibits thus unmanly Sport,
While plotting Mischief keeps reserved her Court.
Lo! from that Mount, in blasting Sulphur broke,
Stream Flames voluminous, enwrap'd with Smoke!
In Chariot-shape they whirl up yonder Tower,
Lean on its Brow, and like Destruction lour!
From the black Depth a fiery Legion springs;
Each bold, bad Spectre claps her sounding Wings;
And straight beneath a summoned, traitorous Band,
On Horror bent, in dark Convention stand:
From each Fiend's Mouth a ruddy Vapor flows,
Glides through the Roof, and over the Council glows:
The Villains, close beneath the Infection pent,
Feel, all-possess'd, their rising Galls ferment;
And burn with Faction, Hate, and vengeful Ire,
For Rapine, Blood, and Devastation dire;
But Justice marks their Ways: She waves, in Air,
The Sword, high-threat'ning like a Comet's Glare.
While here dark Villainy her self deceives,
There studious Honesty our View relieves.
A feeble Taper, from yon lonesome Room,
Scattering thin Rays, just glimmers through the Gloom.
There sits the sapient BARD in museful Mood,
And glows impassioned for his Country's Good!
All the bright Spirits of the Just, combined,
Inform, refine, and prompt his towering Mind!
He takes the gifted Quill from Hands divine,
Around his Temples Rays refulgent shine!
Now rapt! now more than Man! -- I see him climb,
To view this Speck of Earth from Worlds sublime!
I see him now over Nature's Works preside!
How clear the Vision! and the Scene how wide!
Let some a Name by Adulation raise,
Or Scandal, meaner than a venal Praise!
My Muse (he cries) a nobler Prospect view!
Through Fancy's Wilds some Moral's Point pursue!
From dark Deception clear-drawn Truth display,
As from black Chaos rose resplendent Day!
Awake Compassion, and bid Terror rise!
Bid humble Sorrows strike superior Eyes!
So pampered Power, unconscious of Distress,
May see, be moved, and being moved, redress.
Ye Traitors, Tyrants, fear his stinging Lay!
Ye Powers unlov'd, unpitied in Decay!
But know, to you sweet-blossom'd Fame he brings,
Ye Heroes, Patriots, and paternal Kings!
O Thou, who formed, who raised the Poet's Art,
(Voice of thy Will!) unerring Force impart!
If wailing Worth can generous Warmth excite,
If Verse can gild Instruction with Delight,
Inspire his honest Muse with orient Flame,
To rise, to dare, to reach the noblest Aim!
But, O my Friend! mysterious is our Fate!
How mean his Fortune, though his Mind elate!
Aeneas-like he passes through the Crowd,
Unsought, unseen beneath Misfortune's Cloud;
Or seen with slight Regard: Unprais'd his Name:
His after-Honour, and our after-Shame.
The doomed Desert to Avarice stands confessed;
Her Eyes averted are, and steeled her Breast.
Envy asquint the future Wonder eyes:
Bold Insult, pointing, hoots him as he flies;
While coward Censure, skilled in darker Ways,
Hints sure Detraction in dissembled Praise!
Hunger, Thirst, Nakedness there grievous fall!
Unjust Derision too! -- that Tongue of Gall!
Slow comes Relief, with no mild Charms endued,
Ushered by Pride, and by Reproach pursued.
Forced Pity meets him with a cold Respect,
Unkind as Scorn, ungen'rous as Neglect.
Yet, suffering Worth! thy Fortitude will shine!
Thy Foes are Virtue's, and her Friends are thine!
Patience is thine, and Peace thy Days shall crown;
Thy Treasure Prudence, and thy Claim Renown:
Myriads unborn, shall mourn thy hapless Fate,
And Myriads grow by thy Example Great!
Hark! from the Watch-Tow'r rolls the Trumpet's Sound,
Sweet through still Night, proclaiming Safety round!
Yon Shade illustrious quits the Realms of Rest,
To aid some Orphan of its Race distressed,
Safe winds him through the subterraneous Way,
That mines yon Mansion, grown with Ruin gray,
And marks the wealthy, unsuspected Ground,
Where green with Rust, long-buried Coins abound.
This plaintive Ghost, from Earth when newly fled,
Saw those, the Living trusted, wrong the Dead;
He saw, by Fraud abused, the lifeless Hand
Sign the false Deed, that alienates his Land;
Heard on his Fame injurious Censure thrown,
And mourned the beggared Orphan's bitter Groan:
Commissioned now the Falsehood He reveals,
To Justice soon th'enabled Heir appeals;
Soon by this Wealth are costly Pleas maintained,
And by discovered Truth lost Right regained.
But why (may some enquire) why kind Success,
Since mystic Heaven gives Misery often to bless?
Though Misery leads to Happiness, and Truth,
Unequal to the Load this languid Youth.
Unstrengthen'd Virtue scarce his Bosom fired,
And fearful from his growing Wants retired.
(Oh, let none censure if, untried by Grief,
If amidst Woe untempted by Relief!)
He stooped reluctant to low Arts of Shame,
Which then, even then he scorned, and blushed to name.
Heaven sees, and makes th'imperfect Worth its Care,
And chears the trembling Heart, unformed to bear.
Now rising Fortune elevates his Mind,
He shines unclouded, and adorns Mankind.
So in some Engine, that denies a Vent,
If unrespiring is some Creature pent,
It sickens, droops, and pants, and gasps for Breath,
Sad over the Sight swim shad'wy Mists of Death;
If then kind Air pours powerful in again,
New Heats, new Pulses quicken every Vein,
From the cleared, lifted, life-rekindled Eye,
Dispersed, the dark and dampy Vapors fly.
From trembling Tombs the Ghosts of Greatness rise,
And over their Bodies hang with wistful Eyes;
Or discontented stalk, and mix their Howls
With howling Wolves, their Screams with screaming Owls.
The Interval 'twixt Night and Morn is nigh,
Winter more nitrous chills the shadowed Sky.
Springs with soft Heats no more give Borders green,
Nor smoking breathe along the whitened Scene;
While steamy Currents sweet in Prospect charm,
Like Veins blue-winding on a Fair-one's Arm.
Now Sleep to Fancy parts with half his Power,
And broken Slumbers drag the restless Hour.
The Murdered seems alive, and ghastly glares,
And in dire Dreams the conscious Murderer scares,
Shows the yet-spouting Wound, th'ensanguin'd Floor,
The Walls yet-smoaking with the spatter'd Gore;
Or shrieks to dozing Justice, and reveals
The Deed, which fraudful Art from Day conceals;
The Delve obscene, where no Suspicion pries;
Where the disfigured Coarse unshrouded lies;
The sure, the striking Proof, so strong maintained,
Pale Guilt starts self-convicted, when arraigned.
These Spirits Treason of its Power divest,
And turn the Peril from the Patriot's Breast.
Those solemn Thought inspire, or bright descend,
To snatch in Vision sweet the dying Friend.
But we deceive the Gloom, the Matin Bell
Summons to Prayer! -- Now breaks the Inchanter's Spell!
And now -- But yon fair Spirit's Form survey!
It Is she! Olympia beckons me away!
I haste! I fly! -- adieu! -- and when you see
The Youth, who bleeds with Fondness, think on me!
Tell him my Tale, and be his Pain carest;
By Love I tortured was, by Love I Am blessed.
When worshipped Woman we entranced behold,
We praise the Maker in his fairest Mold;
The Pride of Nature, Harmony combined,
And Light immortal to the Soul refined!
Deprived of charming Woman, soon we miss
The Prize of Friendship, and the Life of Bliss!
Still through the Shades Olympia dawning breaks!
What Bloom, what Brightness lusters over her Cheeks!
Again she calls! -- I dare no longer stay!
A kind Farewell -- Olympia, I obey.
He turned, nor longer in my Sight remained,
The Mountain he, I safe the City gained.
The END of the THIRD CANTO.
THE WANDERER. A VISION.
CANTO IV.
STILL over my Mind wild Fancy holds her Sway,
Still on strange, visionary Land I stray.
Now Scenes crowd thick! Now indistinct appear!
Swift glide the Mouths, and turn the varying Year!
Near the Bull's Horn Light's rising Monarchdraws;
Now on it is Back the Pleiades he thaws!
From vernal Heat pale Winter forced to fly,
Northward retires, yet turns a watery Eye;
Then with an aguish Breath nips infant Blooms,
Deprives unfolding Spring of rich Perfumes,
Shakes the slow-circling Blood of human Race,
And in sharp, livid Looks contracts the Face.
Now over Norwegian Hills he strides away:
Such slippery Paths Ambition's Steps betray.
Turning with Sighs, far, spiral Firs he sees,
Which bow obedient to the Southern Breeze.
Now from yon Zemblan Rock his Crest he shrouds,
Like Fame's, obscured amid the whitening Clouds;
Thence his lost Empire is with Tears deplored:
Such Tyrants shed over Liberty restored.
Beneath his Eye (that throws malignant Light
Ten Times the measured Round of mortal Sight)
A waste, pale-glimm'ring, like a Moon, that wanes,
A wild Expanse of frozen Sea contains.
It cracks! vast, floating Mountains beat the Shore!
Far off he hears those icy Ruins roar,
And from the hideous Crash distracted flies,
Like One, who feels his dying Infant's Cries.
Near, and more near the rushing Torrents sound,
And one great Rift runs through the vast Profound,
Swift as a shooting Meteor; groaning loud,
Like deep-roll'd Thunder through a rending Cloud.
The late-dark Pole now feels unsetting Day:
In Hurricanes of Wrath he whirls his Way;
Over many a polar Alp to Frost he goes,
Over crackling Vales, embrown'd with melting Snows;
Here Bears stalk Tenants of the barren Space,
Few Men, unsocial Those! -- a barbarous Race!
At length the Cave appears! the Race is run:
Now he recounts vast Conquests lost, and won,
And taleful in th'Embrace of Frost remains,
Barred from our Climes, and bound in icy Chains.
Mean while the Sun his Beams on Cancer throws,
Which now beneath his warmest Influence glows.
From glowing Cancer fallen the King of Day,
Red through the kindling Lion, shoots his Ray.
The tawny Harvest pays the earlier Plough,
And mellowing Fruitage loads the bending Bough.
It Is Dayspring. Now green Lab'rinths I frequent,
Where Wisdom often retires to meet Content.
The mounting Lark her warbling Anthem lends,
From Note to Note the ravished Soul ascends;
As thus it would the Patriarch's Ladder climb,
By some good Angel led to Worlds sublime:
Often (Legends say) the Snake, with wakened Ire,
Like Envy rears in many a scaly Spire;
Then Songsters drop, then yield their vital Gore,
And Innocence, and Music are no more.
Mild rides the Morn in orient Beauty dressed,
An azure Mantle, and a purple Vest,
Which blown by Gales her gemmy Feet display,
Her amber Tresses negligently gay.
Collected now her rosy Hand they fill,
And, gently wrung, the pearly Dews distill.
The songful Zephyrs, and the laughing Hours
Breathe sweet; and strew her opening Way with Flowers.
The chatt'ring Swallows leave their nested Care,
Each promising Return with plenteous Fare.
So the fond Swain, who to the Market hies,
Stills with big Hopes his Infant's tender Cries.
Yonder two Turtles, over their callow Brood,
Hang hovering, ever they seek their guiltless Food.
Fondly they bill. Now to their morning Care,
Like our first Parents part the amorous Pair:
But ah! -- a Pair no more! -- with spreading Wings,
From the high, sounding Cliff a Vultur springs;
Steady he sails along the aerial Gray,
Swoops down, and bears yon timorous Dove away.
Start we, who, worse than Vulturs, Nymrods find,
Men meditating Prey on human Kind?
Wild Beasts to gloomy Dens re-pace their Way,
Where their couched Young demand the slaughtered Prey.
Rooks from their nodding Nests black-swarming fly,
And in hoarse Uproar tell the Fowler nigh.
Now in his Tabernacle roused, the Sun
Is warned the blue, aetherial Steep to run:
While on his Couch of floating Jasper laid,
From his bright Eye Sleep calls the dewy Shade.
The crystal Dome transparent Pillars raise,
Whence beamed from Saphirs living Azure plays:
The liquid Floor, in-wrought with Pearls divine,
Where all his Labors in Mosaic shine.
His Coronet, a Cloud of Silver-white;
His Robe with unconsuming Crimson bright,
Varied with Gems, all Heaven's collected Store;
While his loose Locks descend, a golden Shower.
If to his Steps compared, we tardy find
The Grecian Racers, who outstript the Wind.
Fleet to the glowing Race behold him start!
His quickening Eyes a quivering Radiance dart,
And, while the last, nocturnal Flag is furled,
Swift into Life and Motion look the World.
The Sun-flow'r now averts her blooming Cheek
From West, to view his Eastern Luster break.
What gay, creative Power his Presence brings?
Hills, Lawns, Lakes, Villages! -- the Face of Things,
All Night beneath successive Shadows missed,
Instant begins in Colors to exist:
But absent these from Sons of Riot keep,
Lost in impure, unmeditating Sleep.
T'unlock his Fence, the new-ris'n Swain prepares,
And ever forth-driv'n recounts his fleecy Cares;
When, lo! an ambush'd Wolf, with Hunger bold,
Springs at the Prey, and fierce invades the Fold!
But by the Pastor not in vain defied,
Like our arch Foe by some celestial Guide.
Spread on yon Rock the Sea-Calf I survey,
Bask'd in the Sun his Skin reflects the Day:
He sees yon tow'r-like Ship the Waves divide,
And slips again beneath the glassy Tide.
The watery Herbs, and Shrubs, and Vines, and Flowers
Rear their bent Heads, o'ercharg'd with nightly Showers.
Hail glorious Sun! to whose attractive Fires,
The wakened, vegetative Life aspires!
The Juices, wrought by thy directive Force,
Through Plants, and Trees, perform their genial Course,
Extend in Root, with Bark unyielding bind
The hearted Trunk; or weave the branching Rind;
Expand in Leaves, in flowery Blossoms shoot,
Bleed in rich Gums, and swell in ripened Fruit.
From thee, bright, universal Power! began
Instinct in Brute, and generous Love in Man.
Talked I of Love? -- Yon Swain, with amorous Air,
Soft swells his Pipe, to charm the rural Fair.
She milks the Flocks; then, listening as he plays,
Steals in the running Brook a conscious Gaze.
The Trout, that deep, in Winter, ooz'd remains,
Up-springs, and Sunward turns its crimson Stains.
The Tenants of the Warren, vainly chased,
Now lured to ambient Fields for green Repast,
Seek their small, vaulted Labyrinths in vain;
Entangling Nets betray the skipping Train;
Red Massacres through their Republic fly,
And Heaps on Heaps by ruthless Spaniels dye.
The Fisher, who the lonely Beech has strayed,
And all the live-long Night his Network spread,
Drags in, and bears the loaded Snare away;
Where flounce deceived th'expiring, finny Prey.
Near Neptune's Temple, ( Neptune's now no more)
Whose Statue plants a Trident on the Shore,
In sportive Rings the generous Dolphins wind,
And eye, and think the Image human-Kind:
Dear, pleasing Friendship! -- See! the Pile commands
The Vale, and grim as Superstition stands!
Time's Hand there leaves its Print of mossy green,
With Hollows, carved for Snakes, and Birds obscene.
O Gibbs, whose Art the solemn Fane can raise,
Where God delights to dwell, and Man to praise;
When moulder'd thus the Column falls away,
Like some great Prince, majestic in Decay;
When Ignorance, and Scorn the Ground shall tread,
Where Wisdom tutored, and Devotion prayed;
Where shall thy pompous Work our Wonder claim?
What, but the Muse alone, preserve thy Name?
The Sun shines, broken, through yon Arch, that rears
This once-round Fabric, half-depriv'd by Years,
Which rose a stately Colonade, and crowned
Encircling Pillars, now unfaithful found;
In Fragments, these the Fall of those forebode,
Which, nodding, just up-heave their crumbling Load.
High, on yon Column, which has battered stood,
Like some stripped Oak, the Grandeur of the Wood,
The Stork inhabits her aerial Nest;
By her are Liberty and Peace carest;
She flies the Realms, that own despotick Kings,
And only spreads over freeborn States her Wings.
The Roof is now the Daw's, or Raven's Haunt,
And loathsome Toads in the dark Entrance pant;
Or Snakes, that lurk to snap the heedless Fly,
And fated Bird, that often comes fluttering by.
An Aqueduct across yon Vale is laid,
It Is Channel through a ruined Arch betrayed;
Whirled down a Steep, it flies with torrent-Force,
Flashes, and roars, and plows a devious Course.
Attracted Mists a golden Cloud commence,
While through high-colour'd Air strike Rays intense.
Betwixt two Points, which yon steep Mountains show,
Lies a mild Bay, to which kind Breezes flow.
Beneath a Grotto, arched for calm Retreat,
Leads lengthening in the Rock -- Be this my Seat.
Heat never enters here; but Coolness reigns
Over Zephyrs, and distilling, watery Veins.
Secluded now I trace th'instructive Page,
And live over Scenes of many a backward Age;
Through Days, Months, Years, through Time's whole Course I run,
And present stand where Time it self begun.
Ye mighty Dead of just, distinguished Fame,
Your Thoughts, (ye bright Instructers!) here I claim.
Here ancient Knowledge opens Nature's Springs;
Here Truths historic give the Hearts of Kings.
Hence Contemplation learns white Hours to find,
And labors Virtue on th'attentive Mind.
O loved Retreat! thy Joys Content bestow,
Nor Guilt, nor Shame, nor sharp Repentance know.
What the fifth Charles long aimed in Power to see,
That Happiness he found reserved in Thee.
Now let me change the Page -- Here Tully weeps,
While in Death's icy Arms his Tullia sleeps,
His Daughter dear! -- Retired I see him mourn,
By all the Frenzy now of Anguish torn.
Wild his Complaint! Nor sweeter Sorrow's Strains,
When Singer for Alexis lost complains.
Each Friend condoles, expostulates, reproves:
More than a Father raving Tully loves;
Or Sallust censures thus! -- Unheeding Blame,
He schemes a Temple to his Tullia's Name.
Thus over my Hermit once did Grief prevail,
Thus rose Olympia's Tomb, his moving Tale,
The Sighs, Tears, frantic Starts, that banish Rest,
And all the bursting Sorrows of his Breast.
But hark! a sudden Power attunes the Air!
Th'inchanting Sound enamored Breezes bear;
Now low, now high, they sink, or lift the Song,
Which the Cave echoes sweet, and sweet the Creeks prolong.
I listened, gazed, when, wondrous to behold!
From Ocean steam'd a Vapor gathering rolled:
A blue, round Spot on the Mid-roof it came,
Spread broad, and redden'd into dazzling Flame.
Full-orb'd it shone, and dimmed the swimming Sight,
While doubling Objects danced with darkling Light.
Amazed I stood! -- amazed I still remain!
What earthly Power this Wonder can explain?
Gradual at length the Luster dies away:
My Eyes restored a mortal Form survey.
My Hermit-Friend? It Is He. -- All hail! (he cries.)
I see, and would alleviate thy Surprise.
The vanished Meteor was Heaven's Message meant,
To warn thee hence; I knew the high Intent.
Hear then! In this sequestered Cave retired,
Departed Saints converse with Men inspired.
It Is sacred Ground; nor can thy Mind endure,
Yet unprepared, an Intercourse so pure.
Quick let us hence -- And now extend thy Views
Over yonder Lawn; there find the heaven-born Muse!
Or seek her, where she trusts her tuneful Tale
To the mid, silent Wood, or vocal Vale;
Where Trees half check the Light with trembling Shades,
Close in deep Glooms, or open clear in Glades:
Or where surrounding Vistas far descend,
The Landscape varied at each lessening End!
She, only She can mortal Thought refine,
And raise thy Voice to Visitants divine.
END of the FOURTH CANTO.
THE WANDERER. A VISION.
CANTO V.
WE left the Cave. Be Fear (said I) defied!
Virtue (for thou art Virtue) is my Guide.
By time-worn Steps a steep Ascent we gain,
Whose Summit yields a Prospect over the Plain.
There bench'd with Turf, an Oak our Seat extends,
Whose Top a verdant, branched Pavilion bends.
Vistas with Leaves diversify the Scene,
Some pale, some brown, and some of lively green.
Now from the full-grown Day a beamy Shower
Gleams on the Lake, and gilds each glossy Flower.
Gay Insects sparkle in the genial Blaze,
Various as Light, and countless as its Rays.
They dance on every Stream, and pictured play,
Till by the watery Racer snatched away.
Now, from yon Range of Rocks, strong Rays rebound,
Doubling the Day on flowery Plains around:
Kingcups beneath far-striking Colors glance,
Bright as th'etherial glows the green Expanse.
Gems of the Field! -- the Topaz charms the Sight,
Like these, effulging yellow Streams of Light.
From the same Rocks fall Rills with softened Force,
Meet in yon Mead, and well a River's Source.
Through her clear Chanel shine her finny Shoals,
Over Sands, like Gold, the liquid Crystal rolls.
Dimmed in yon coarser Moor her Charms decay,
And shape through rustling Reeds a ruffled Way.
Near Willows short and bushy Shadows throw:
Now lost, she seems through nether Tracts to flow;
Yet, at yon Point, winds out in Silver State,
Like Virtue from a Labyrinth of Fate.
In lengthening Rows prone from the Mountains run
The Flocks: -- their Fleeces glist'ning in the Sun;
Her Streams they seek, and, 'twixt her neighboring Trees,
Recline in various Attitudes of Ease.
Where the Herds sip, the little scaly Fry,
Swift from the Shore, in scattering Myriads fly.
Each liv'ried Cloud, that round the Horizonglows,
Shifts in odd Scenes, like Earth, from whence it rose.
The Be hums wanton in yon Jess'mine Bower,
And circling settles, and despoils the Flower.
Melodious there the plumy Songsters meet,
And call charmed Echo from her arched Retreat.
Neat, polished Mansions rise in Prospect gay;
Time-batter'd Towers frown awful in Decay;
The Sun plays glittering on the Rocks, and Spires,
And the Lawn lightens with reflected Fires.
Here Mirth, and Fancy's wanton Train advance,
And to light Measures turn the swimming Dance.
Sweet, slow-paced Melancholy next appears,
Pompous in Grief, and Eloquent of Tears.
Here Meditation shines in Azure dressed,
All-starr'd with Gems: A Sun adorns her Crest.
Religion, to whose lifted, raptured Eyes
Seraphic Hosts descend from opening Skies;
Beauty, who sways the Heart, and charms the Sight;
Whose Tongue is Music, and whose Smile Delight;
Whose Brow is Majesty; whose Bosom Peace;
Who bad Creation be, and Chaos cease;
Whose Breath perfumes the Spring; whose Eye divine
Kindled the Sun, and gave its Light to shine.
Here in thy Likeness fair Mrs. Oldfield.
Ophelia seen,
She throws kind Luster over the enlivened Green.
Next her Description, robed in various Hues,
Invites Attention from the pensive Muse!
The Muse! -- she comes! refined the Passions wait,
And Precept, ever winning, wise, and great.
The Muse! a thousand Spirits wing the Air:
(Once Men, who made like her Mankind their Care.)
Enamored round her press th'inspiring Throng,
And swell to Extacy her solemn Song.
Thus in the Dame each nobler Grace we find,
Fair Wortley's angel-Accent, Eyes, and Mind.
Whether her Sight the dew-bright Dawn surveys,
The Noon's dry Heat, or Evening's tempered Rays,
The Hours of Storm, or Calm, the gleby Ground,
The corral'd Sea, gem'd Rock, or Sky prosound,
A Raphael's Fancy animates each Line,
Each Image strikes with Energy divine;
Bacon, and Newton in her Thought conspire;
Not sweeter than her Voice is Hendel's Lyre.
My Hermit thus. She beckons us away:
Oh, let us swift the high Behest obey!
Now through a Lane, which mingling Tracts have crossed,
The Way unequal, and the Landscape lost,
We rove. The Warblers lively Tunes essay,
The Lark on Wing, the Linnet on the Spray.
While Music trembles in their songful Throats,
The Bullfinch whistles soft his flute-like Notes.
The bolder Blackbird swells sonorous Lays;
The varying Thrush commands a tuneful Maze;
Each a wild Length of Melody pursues;
While the soft-murm'ring, amorous Wood-Dove cooes.
And, when in Spring these melting Mixtures flow,
The Cuckoo sends her Unison of Woe.
But as smooth Seas are surrow'd by a Storm;
As Troubles all our tranquil Joys deform;
So, loud through Air, unwelcome Noises sound,
And Harmony's, at once, in Discord, drowned.
From yon dark Cypress croaks the Raven's Cry;
As dissonant the Daw, Jay, chatt'ring Pie:
The clamorous Crows abandoned Carnage seek,
And the harsh Owl shrills out a sharp'ning Shriek.
At the Lane's End a high-lath'd Gate's preferred,
To bar the Trespass of a vagrant Herd.
Fast by, a meagre Mendicant we find,
Whose russet Rags hang fluttering in the Wind:
Years bow his Back, a Staff supports his Tread,
And soft white Hairs shade thin his palsied Head.
Poor Wretch! -- Is this for Charity his Haunt?
He meets the frequent Slight, and ruthless Taunt.
On Slaves of Guilt often smiles the squand'ring Peer;
But passing knows not common Bounty here.
Vain thing! in what do thou superior shine?
His our first Sire: what Race more ancient thine?
Less backward traced, he may his Lineage draw
From Men, whose Influence kept the World in awe:
Whose worthless Sons, like thee, perchance consumed
Their ample Store, their Line to Want was doomed.
So thine may perish by the course of Things,
While his from Beggars re-ascend to Kings.
Now Lazar, as thy Hardships I peruse,
On my own State instructed would I muse.
When I view Greatness, I my Lot lament,
Compared to thee, I snatch supreme Content.
I might have felt, did Heaven not gracious deal,
A Fate, which I must mourn to see thee feel.
But soft! the Cripple our Approach descries,
And to the Gate, though weak, officious hies.
I spring preventive, and unbar the Way,
Then, turning, with a Smile of Pity say,
Here, Friend! -- this little, copper Alms receive;
Instance of Will, without the Power to give.
Hermit, if here with Pity we reflect,
How must we grieve, when Learning meets Neglect?
When God-like Souls endure a mean Restraint;
When generous Will is curbed by tyrant Want;
He truly feels what to Distress belongs,
Who, to his private, adds a People's Wrongs;
Merit's a Mark, at which Disgrace is thrown,
And every injured Virtue is his own.
Such their own Pangs with Patience here endure,
Yet there weep Wounds, they are denied to cure.
Thus rich in Poverty, thus humbly Great,
And though depressed superior to their Fate.
Minions in Power, and Misers, mid their Store,
Are mean in Greatness, and in Plenty poor.
What Is Power, or Wealth? Were they not formed for Aid,
A Spring for Virtue, and from Wrongs a Shade?
In Power we salvage Tyranny behold,
And wily Avarice owns polluted Gold.
From golden Sands her Pride could Lybia raise,
Could she, who spreads no Pasture, claim our Praise?
Loathed were her Wealth, where rabid Monsters breed;
Where Serpents, pampered, on her Venom, feed.
No sheltry Trees invite the Wand'rer's Eye,
No Fruits, no Grain, no Gums, her Tracts supply;
On her vast Wilds no lovely Prospects run;
But all lies barren, though beneath the Sun.
My Hermit thus. I know thy Soul believes,
It Is hard Vice triumphs, and that Virtue grieves;
Yet often Affliction purifies the Mind,
Kind Benefits often flow from Means unkind.
Were the whole known, what we uncouth suppose,
Doubtless, would beauteous Symmetry disclose.
The naked Cliff, that singly rough remains,
In Prospect dignifies the fertile Plains;
Lead-colour'd Clouds, in scattering Fragments seen,
Show, though in broken Views, the blue serene.
Severe Distresses Industry inspire;
Thus Captives often excelling Arts acquire,
And boldly struggle through a State of Shame,
To Life, Ease, Plenty, Liberty and Fame.
Sword-law has often Europe's Balance gained,
And one red Victory Years of Peace maintained.
We pass through Want to Wealth, through dismal Strife
To calm Content, through Death to endless Life.
Lybia thou nam'st -- Let Africk's Wastes appear
Cursed by those Heats, that fructify the Year;
Yet the same Suns her Orange-Groves befriend,
Where clust'ring Globes in shining Rows depend.
Here when fierce Beams over withering Plants are rolled,
There the green Fruit seems ripened into Gold.
Even Scenes, that strike with terrible Surprise,
Still prove a God, just, merciful, and wise.
Sad wintry Blasts, that strip the Autumn, bring
The milder Beauties of a flowery Spring.
Ye sulfurous Fires in jaggy Lightnings break!
Ye Thunders rattle, and ye Nations shake!
Ye Storms of riving Flame the Forest tear!
Deep crack ye Rocks! rent Trees be whirled in Air!
Reft at a Stroke, some stately Fane we'll mourn;
Her Tombs wide-shatter'd, and her Dead up-torn;
Were noxious Spirits not from Caverns drawn,
Racked Earth would soon in Gulphs enormous yawn:
Then all were lost! -- Or should we floating view
The baleful Cloud, there would Destruction brew;
Plague, Fever, Frenzy close-engend'ring lie,
'Till these red Ruptures clear the sullied Sky.
Now a Field opens to enlarge my Thought,
In parcell'd Tracts to various Uses wrought.
Here hard'ning Ripeness the first Blooms behold,
There the last Blossoms Spring-like Pride unfold.
Here swelling Peace on leafy Stalks are seen,
Mixed Flowers of Red and Azure shine between;
Whose waving Beauties, heightened by the Sun,
In colored Lanes along the Furrows run.
There the next Produce of a genial Shower,
The Bean Fresh-blossoms in a speckled Flower;
Whose morning Dews, when to the Sun resigned,
With undulating Sweets embalm the Wind.
Now daisy Plats of Clover square the Plain,
And part the bearded from the beardless Grain.
There fibrous Flax with Verdure binds the Field,
Which on the Loom shall art-spun Labors yield.
The Mulb'ry, in fair summer Green arrayed,
Full in the midst starts up, a silky Shade.
For human Taste the rich'd-stain'd Fruitage bleeds;
The Leaf the silk-emitting Reptile feeds.
As Swans their Down, as Flocks their Fleeces leave,
Here Worms for Man their glossy Entrails weave.
Hence to adorn the Fair, in Texture gay,
Sprigs, Fruits, and Flowers on figured Vestments play:
But Industry prepares them often to please
The guilty Pride of vain, luxuriant Ease.
Now frequent, dusty Gales offensive blow,
And over my Sight a transient Blindness throw.
Windward we shift. Near down th'etherial Steep,
The Lamp of Day hangs hovering over the Deep.
Dun Shades, in rocky Shapes up Either rolled,
Project long, shaggy Points, deep-ting'd with Gold.
Others take faint th'unripen'd Cherry's Die,
And paint amusing Landscapes on the Eye.
There blue-veil'd Yellow, through a Sky serene,
In swelling Mixture forms a floating Green.
Streaked through white Clouds a mild Vermilion shines,
And the Breeze freshens, as the Heat declines.
Yon crooked, sunny Roads change rising Views
From brown, to sandy-red, and chalky Hues.
One mingled Scene another quick succeeds,
Men, Chariots, Teams, yoked Steers, and prancing Steeds,
Which climb, descend, and, as loud Whips resound,
Stretch, sweat, and smoke along unequal Ground.
On winding Thames, reflecting radiant Beams,
When Boats, Ships, Barges mark the roughen'd Streams,
This Way, and that, they different Points pursue;
So mix the Motions, and so shifts the View.
While thus we throw around our gladden'd Eyes,
The Gifts of Heaven in gay Profusion rise;
Trees rich with Gums, and Fruits; with Jewels Rocks;
Plains with Flowers, Herbs, and Plants, and Beeves, and Flocks;
Mountains with Mines; with Oak, and Cedar, Woods;
Quarries with Marble, and with Fish the Floods.
In dark'ning Spots, mid Fields of various Dies,
Tilth new-manur'd, or naked Fallow lies.
Near Uplands fertile Pride enclosed display,
The green Grass yellowing into scentful Hay,
And thick-set Hedges sense the full-ear'd Corn,
And Berries blacken on the virid Thorn.
Mark in yon Heath opposed the cultured Scene,
Wild Thyme, pale Box, and Firs of darker green.
The native Strawberry red-ripening grows,
By Nettles guarded, as by Thorns the Rose.
There Nightingales in unprun'd Copses build,
In shaggy Furzes lies the Hare concealed.
'Twixt Ferns, and Thistles, unsown Flowers amuse,
And form a lucid Chase of various Hues;
Many half-grey with Dust: Confused they lie,
Scent the rich Year, and lead the wandering Eye.
Contemplative, we tread the flowery Plain,
The Muse preceding with her heavenly Train.
When, lo! the Mendicant, so late behind,
Strange View! now journeying in our Front we find!
And yet a View more strange our Heed demands;
Touched by the Muse's Wand transformed he stands.
Over Skin late-wrinkled, instant Beauty spreads;
The late-dimm'd Eye a vivid Luster sheds;
Hairs, once so thin, now graceful Locks decline;
And Rags, now changed, in regal Vestments shine.
The Hermit thus. In him the BARD behold,
Once seen by Midnight's Lamp in Winter's Cold;
The Bard, whose Want so multiplied his Woes,
He sunk a Mortal, and a Seraph rose.
See! -- where those stately Yew-Trees darkling grow,
And, waving over yon Graves, brown Horrors throw,
Scornful he points -- there, over his sacred Dust,
Arise the sculptured Tomb, and labored Bust.
Vain Pomp! bestowed by ostentatious Pride,
Who to a Life of Want Relief denied.
But thus the Bard. Are these the Gifts of State?
Gifts unreceiv'd! -- These? Ye ungen'rous Great!
How was I treated when in Life forlorn?
My Claim your Pity; but my Lot your Scorn.
Why were my studious Hours opposed by Need?
In me did Poverty from Guilt proceed?
Did I contemporary Authors wrong,
And deem their Worth, but as they prized my Song?
Did I sooth Vice, or venal Strokes betray
In the low-purpos'd, loud, polemic Fray?
Did ever my Verse immodest Warmth contain,
Or, once licentious, heavenly Truths profane?
Never. -- And yet when Envy sunk my Name,
Who called my shadowed Merit into Fame?
When undeserved a Prison's Grate I saw,
What Hand redeemed me from the wrested Law?
Who clothed me naked, or when hungry fed?
Why crushed the Living? Why extolled the Dead?
But foreign Languages adopt my Lays,
And distant Nations shame you into Praise.
Why should unrelish'd Wit these Honors cause?
Custom, not Knowledge, dictates your Applause:
Or think you thus a self-Renown to raise,
And mingle your Vain-Glories with my Bays?
Be Yours the mouldering Tomb! Be mine the Lay
Immortal! -- Thus he scoffs the Pomp away.
Though Words like these unlettered Pride impeach,
To the meek Heart he turns with milder Speech.
Though now a Seraph, often he deigns to wear
The Face of human Friendship, often of Care;
To walk disguised an Object of Relief,
A learned, good Man, long exercised in Grief;
Forlorn, a friendless Orphan often to roam,
Craving some kind, some hospitable Home;
Or, like Ulysses, a low Lazar stand,
Beseeching Pity's Eye, and Bounty's Hand;
Or, like Ulysses, Royal Aid request,
Wandering from Court to Court, a King distressed.
Thus varying Shapes, the seeming Son of Woe
Eyes the cold Heart, and Hearts that generous glow;
Then to the Muse relates each lordly Name,
Who deals impartial Infamy, and Fame.
Often, as when Man, in mortal State depressed,
His Lays taught Virtue, which his Life confessed,
He now forms visionary Scenes below,
Inspiring Patience in the Heart of Woe;
Patience that softens every sad Extreme,
That casts through Dungeon-Glooms a cheerful Gleam,
Disarms Disease of Pain, mocks Slander's Sting,
And strips of Terrors the terrific King,
Against Want, a sourer Foe, its Succor lends,
And smiling sees the Ingratitude of Friends.
Nor are these Tasks to him alone consigned,
Millions invisible befriend Mankind.
When watery Structures, seen cross Heaven t'ascend,
Arch above Arch in radiant Order bend,
Fancy beholds, a-down each glittering Side,
Myriads of missionary Seraphs glide;
She sees good Angels genial Showers bestow
From the red Unequal of the dewy Bow.
They smile upon the Swain: He views the Prize;
Then grateful bends, to bless the bounteous Skies.
Some collect Winds, and send propitious Gales
Often where Britannia's Navy spreads her Sails;
There ever wafting, on the Breath of Fame,
Unequaled Glory in her Sovereign's Name.
Some teach young Zephyrs vernal Sweets to bear,
And float the balmy Health on ambient Air;
Zephyrs, that, often where Lovers listening lie,
Along the Grove in melting Music die,
And in lone Caves to Minds poetic roll
Seraphic Whispers, that abstract the Soul.
Some range the Colors, as they parted fly,
Clear-pointed to the philosophic Eye,
The flaming Red, that pains the dwelling Gaze;
The stainless, lightsome Yellow's gilding Rays;
The clouded Orange, that betwixt them grows,
And to kind Mixture tawny Luster owes;
All-chearing Green, that gives the Spring its Dye;
The bright, transparent Blue, that robes the Sky;
And Indico, which shaded Light displays;
And Violet, which in the View decays.
Parental Hues, whence Others all proceed;
An ever-mingling, changeful, countless Breed;
Unravel'd, variegated Lines of Light,
When blended, dazzling in promiscuous White.
Often through these Bows departed Spirits range,
New to the Skies, admiring at their Change;
Each Mind a Void, as when firstborn to Earth,
Beheld a second Blank in second Birth;
Then, as yon Seraph-Bard framed Hearts below,
Each sees him here transcendant Knowledge show.
New Saints he tutors into Truth refined,
And tunes to rapturous Love the new-form'd Mind.
He swells the Lyre, whose loud, melodious Lays
Call high Hosannahs from the Voice of Praise;
Though one bad Age such Poesy could wrong,
Now Worlds around retentive roll the Song:
Now God's high Throne the full-voic'd Raptures gain,
Celestial Hosts returning Strain for Strain.
Thus he, who once knew Want without Relief,
Sees Joy resulting from well-suff'ring Grief.
Hark! while we talk, a distant, patt'ring Rain
Resounds! -- See! up th'etherial Plain
Shoots the bright Bow! -- The Seraph flitts away;
The Muse, the Graces from our View decay.
Behind yon western Hill the Globe of Light
Drops sudden; fast-pursued by Shades of Night.
Yon Graves from winter-Scenes to Mind recall
Rebellion's Council, and Rebellion's Fall.
What Fiends in sulfurous, Car-like Clouds upflew?
What midnight Treason glar'd beneath their View?
And now the Traitors rear their Babel Schemes,
Big, and more big, stupendous Mischief seems;
But Justice, roused, superior Strength employs,
Their Scheme wide-shatters, and their Hope destroys.
Discord she wills; the missile Ruin flies;
Sudden, unnatural Debates arise,
Doubt, mutual Jealousy, and dumb Disgust,
Dark-hinted Mutt'rings, and avowed Distrust;
To secret Ferment is each Heart resigned;
Suspicion hovers in each clouded Mind;
They jar, accused accuse, reviled revile,
And Wrath to Wrath oppose, and Guile to Guile;
Wrangling they part, themselves themselves betray;
Each dire Device starts naked into Day;
They feel Confusion in the Van with Fear;
They feel the King of Terrors in the Rear.
Of these were Three by different Motives fired,
Ambition One, and One Revenge inspired.
The Third, O Mammon, was thy meaner Slave;
Thou Idol seldom of the Great, and Brave.
Florio, whose Life was one continued Feast,
His Wealth diminished, and his Debts increased,
Vain Pomp, and Equipage his low Desires,
Who never to intellectual Bliss aspires;
He, to repair by Vice what Vice has broke,
Durst with bold Treasons Judgment's Rod provoke.
His Strength of Mind, by Lux'ry half-dissolv'd,
Ill brooks the Woe, where deep he stands involved.
He weeps, stamps wild, and to and fro now flies;
Now wrings his Hands, and sends unmanly Cries,
Arraigns his Judge, affirms unjust he bleeds,
And now recants, and now for Mercy pleads;
Now blames Associates, raves with inward Strife,
Upbraids himself; then thinks alone on Life.
He rolls red-swelling, tearful Eyes around,
Sore smites his Breast, and sinks upon the Ground.
He wails, he quite desponds, convulsive lies,
Shrinks from the fancied Ax, and thinks he dies:
Revives, with Hope enquires, stops short with Fear,
Entreats even Flattery, nor the worst will hear;
The worst, alas, his Doom! -- What Friend replies?
Each speaks with shaking Head, and down-cast Eyes.
One Silence breaks, then pauses, drops a Tear;
Nor Hope affords, nor quite confirms his Fear;
But what kind Friendship part reserves unknown
Comes thundering in his Keeper's surly Tone.
Enough -- struck through and through, in ghastly Stare,
He stands transfixt, the Statue of Despair;
Nor ought of Life, nor ought of Death he knows,
Till Thought returns, and brings Return of Woes:
Now pours a Storm of Grief in gushing Streams:
That past -- Collected in himself he seems,
And with forced Smile retires -- His latent Thought
Dark, horrid, as the Prison's dismal Vault.
If with himself at Variance ever-wild,
With angry Heaven how stands he reconciled?
No penitential Orisons arise;
Nay he obtests the Justice of the Skies.
Not for his Guilt, for sentenced Life he moans;
His Chains rough-clanking to discordant Groans,
To Bars harsh-grating, heavy-creaking Doors,
Hoarse-echoing Walls, and hollow-ringing Floors,
To Thoughts more dissonant, far, far less kind,
One Anarchy, one Chaos of the Mind.
At length, fatigued with Grief, on Earth he lies:
But soon as Sleep weighs down the unwilling Eyes,
Glad Liberty appears, no Damps annoy;
Treason succeeds, and all transforms to Joy.
Proud Palaces their glittering Stores display;
Gain he pursues, and Rapine leads the Way.
What Gold? What Gems? -- He strains to seize the Prize;
Quick from his Touch dissolved, a Cloud it flies.
Conscious he cries. -- And must I wake to weep?
Ah, yet return, return delusive Sleep!
Sleep comes; but Liberty no more: -- Unkind,
The Dungeon-Glooms hang heavy on his Mind.
Shrill Winds are heard, and howling Demons call;
Wide-flying Portals seem unhinged to fall;
Then close with sudden Claps; a dreadful Din!
He starts, wakes, storms, and all is Hell within.
His Genius flies -- reflects he now on Prayer?
Alas! bad Spirits turn those Thoughts to Air.
What shall he next? What, straight relinquish Breath,
To bar a public, just, though shameful Death?
Rash, horrid Thought! yet now afraid to live,
Murderous he strikes -- May Heaven the Deed forgive!
Why had he thus false Spirit to rebel?
And why not Fortitude to suffer well?
Were his Success, how terrible the Blow?
And its Recoil on him eternal Woe.
Heaven this Affliction then for Mercy meant,
That a good End might close a Life misspent.
Where no kind Lips the hallowed Dirge resound,
Far from the Compass of yon sacred Ground;
Full in the Center of three meeting Ways,
Staked through he lies. -- Warned let the Wicked gaze!
Near yonder Fane, where Misery sleeps in Peace,
Whose Spire fast-lessens, as these Shades increase,
Left to the North, whence often brewed Tempests roll,
Tempests, dire Emblems, Cosmo, of thy Soul!
There mark that Cosmo, much for Guile renowned!
His Grave by unbid Plants of Poison crowned.
When out of Power, through him the Public Good,
So strong his factious Tribe, suspended stood.
In Power, vindictive Actions were his Aim,
And Patriots perished by the ungenerous Flame.
If the best Cause he in the Senate chose,
Even Right in him from some wrong Motive rose.
The Bad he loathed, and would the Weak despise;
Yet courted for dark Ends, and shunned the Wise.
When ill his Purpose, eloquent his Strain;
His Malice had a Look, and Voice humane.
His Smile, the Signal of some vile Intent,
A private Poniard, or empoison'd Scent;
Proud, yet to popular Applause a Slave;
No Friend he honored, and no Foe forgave.
His Boons unfrequent, or unjust to Need;
The Hire of Guilt, of Infamy the Meed,
But if they chanced on Learned Worth to fall,
Bounty in him was Ostentation all.
No true Benevolence his Thought sublimes,
His noblest Actions are illustrious Crimes.
Fine Parts, which Virtue might have ranked with Fame,
Enhance his Guilt, and magnify his Shame.
When Parts, and Probity in Man combine,
In Wisdom's Eye, How charming must he shine?
Let him, less happy, Truth at least impart,
And what he wants in Genius bear in Heart.
Cosmo, as Death draws nigh, no more conceals
That Storm of Passions, which his Nature feels;
He feels much Fear, more Anger, and most Pride;
But Pride and Anger make all Fear subside.
Dauntless He meets at length untimely Fate;
A desperate Spirit! rather Fierce, than Great.
Darkling he glides along the dreary Coast,
A sullen, wandering, self-tormenting Ghost.
Where veiny Marble dignifies the Ground,
With Emblem fair in Sculpture rising round,
Just where a crossing, lengthening Isle we find,
Full East; whence God returns to judge Mankind,
Once-lov'd Horatio sleeps, a Mind elate!
Lamented Shade, Ambition was thy Fate!
Even Angels, wondering, often his Worth surveyed;
Behold a Man, like One of Us! they said.
Straight heard the Furies, and with Envy glar'd,
And to precipitate his Fall prepared:
First Avarice came. In vain Self-Love she pressed;
The Poor he pitied still, and still redressed:
Learning was his, and Knowledge to commend,
Of Arts a Patron, and of Want a Friend.
Next came Revenge: But her Essay, how vain?
Nor Hate, nor Envy, in his Heart remain.
No previous Malice could his Mind engage,
Malice, the Mother of vindictive Rage.
No -- from his Life his Foes might learn to live;
He held it still a Triumph to forgive.
At length Ambition urged his Country's Weal,
Assuming the fair Look of public Zeal;
Still in his Breast so generous glowed the Flame,
The Vice, when there, a Virtue half became.
His pitying Eye saw Millions in Distress,
He deemed it God-like to have Power to bless;
Thus, when unguarded, Treason stained him over,
And Virtue, and Content were then no more.
But when to Death by rig'rous Justice doomed,
His genuine Spirit Saint-like State resumed.
Often from soft Penitence distilled a Tear;
Often Hope in heavenly Mercy lightened Fear;
Often would a Drop from struggling Nature fall,
And then a Smile of Patience brighten all.
He seeks in Heaven a Friend, nor seeks in vain;
His guardian Angel swift descends again;
And Resolution thus bespeaks a Mind,
Not scorning Life, yet all to Death resigned;
-- Ye Chains, fit only to restrain the Will
Of common, desperate Veterans in Ill,
Though rankling on my Limbs ye lie, declare,
Did ever my rising Soul your Pressure wear?
No! -- free as Liberty, and quick as Light,
To Worlds remote she takes unbounded Flight.
Ye Dungeon-Glooms, that dim corporeal Eyes,
Could ye once blot her Prospect of the Skies?
No! -- from her clearer Sight, ye fled away,
Like Error, pierced by Truths resistless Ray.
Ye Walls, that witness my repentant Moan!
Ye Echoes, that to midnight Sorrows groan!
Do I, in Wrath, to you of Fate complain?
Or once betray Fear's most inglorious Pain?
No! -- Hail, twice hail then ignominious Death!
Behold how willing glides my parting Breath!
Far greater, better far, -- Ay sar indeed!
Like me, have suffered, and like me will bleed.
Apostles, Patriarchs, Prophets, Martyrs all,
Like me, once fell, nor murmured at their Fall.
Shall I, whose Days, at best, no Ill designed,
Whose Virtue shone not, though I loved Mankind,
Shall I, now guilty Wretch, shall I repine?
Ah, no! to Justice let me Life resign!
Quick, as a Friend, would I embrace my Foe!
He taught me Patience, who first taught me Woe;
But Friends are Foes, they render Woe severe,
For me they wail, from me extort the Tear.
Not those, yet-absent, missive Griefs control;
These Periods weep, those rave, and these condole.
At Entrance shrieks a Friend, with pale Surprise;
Another panting, prostrate, speechless lies;
One gripes my Hand, one sobs upon my Breast!
Ah, who can bear? -- It shocks, it murders Rest!
And is it yours, alas! my Friends to feel?
And is it mine to comfort, mine to heal?
Is mine the Patience, yours the Bosom-strife?
Ah! would rash Love lure back my Thoughts to Life?
Adieu, dear, dangerous Mourners! swift depart!
Ah, fly me! fly! -- I tear ye from my Heart.
Ye Saints, whom Fears of Death could never control,
In my last Hour compose, support my Soul!
See my Blood wash repented Sin away!
Receive, receive me to eternal Day!
With Words like these the destined Hero dies,
While Angels waft his Soul to happier Skies.
Distinction now gives way; yet on we talk,
Full Darkness deep'ning over the formless Walk.
Night treads not with light Step the dewy Gale,
Nor bright-distends her Star-embroider'd Veil;
Her leaden Feet inclement Damps distill,
Clouds shut her Face, black Winds her Vesture fill;
An Earth-born Meteor lights the sable Skies,
Eastward it shoots, and, sunk, forgotten dies.
So Pride, that rose from Dust to guilty Power,
Glares out in vain, so Dust shall Pride devour.
Fishers, who yonder Brink by Torches gain,
With teethful Tridents strike the scaly Train.
Like Snakes in Eagles' Claws, in vain they strive,
When heaved aloft, and quivering yet-alive.
While here, methought, our Time in Converse passed,
The Moon Clouds muffl'd, and the Night wore fast.
At prowling Wolves was heard the Mastiff's Bay,
And the warned Master's Arms forbad the Prey.
Thus Treason steals, the Patriot thus descries,
Forth-springs the Monarch, and the Mischief flies.
Pale Glowworms glimmer'd through the Depth of Night,
Scattering, like Hope through Fear, a doubtful Light.
Lone Philomela tuned the silent Grove,
With pensive Pleasure listened wakeful Love.
Half-dreaming Fancy formed an Angel's Tongue,
And Pain forgot to groan, so sweet she sung.
The Night-Crone, with the Melody alarmed,
Now paused, now listened, and awhile was charmed;
But like the Man, whose frequent-stubborn Will
Resists what kind, seraphic Sounds instill;
Her Heart the Love-inspiring Voice repelled,
Her Breast with agitating Mischief swelled;
Which closed her Ear, and tempted to destroy
The tuneful Life, that charms with virtuous Joy.
Now fast we measure back the trackless Way;
No friendly Stars directive Beams display.
But, lo! -- a thousand Lights shoot instant Rays!
Yon kindling Rock reflects the startling Blaze.
I stand astonished -- thus the Hermit cries,
Fear not, but listen with enlarged Surprise!
Still, must these Hours our mutual Converse claim,
And cease to echo still Olympia's Name?
Grots, Riv'lets, Groves Olympia's Name forget,
Olympia now no sighing Winds repeat.
Can I be mortal, and those Hours no more,
Those amorous Hours, that plaintive Echo's bore?
Am I the same? Ah no! -- Behold a Mind,
Unruffl'd, firm, exalted, and refined!
Late Months, that made the vernal Season gay,
Saw my Health languish off in pale Decay.
No racking Pain yet gave Disease a Date;
No sad, presageful Thought preluded Fate:
Yet numbered were my Days -- My destined End
Near, and more near -- Nay, every Fear suspend!
I passed a weary, lingering, sleepless Night;
Then rose, to walk in Morning's earliest Light:
But few my Steps -- A faint, and chearless few!
Refreshment from my flagging Spirits flew.
When, lo! retired beneath a Cypress Shade,
My Limbs upon a flowery Bank I laid.
Soon by soft-creeping, murmuring Winds composed,
A Slumber pressed my languid Eyes -- they closed:
But closed not long, -- methought Olympia spoke;
Thrice loud she called, and thrice the Slumber broke.
I waked. Forth-gliding from a neighboring Wood,
Full in my View the shad'wy Charmer stood.
Rapturous I started up to clasp the Shade;
But staggered, fell, and found my Vitals fade.
A mantling Chilness over my Bosom spread,
As if that Instant numbered with the Dead.
Her Voice now sent a far, imperfect Sound,
When in a swimming Trance my Pangs were drowned.
Still farther off she called -- with soft Surprise,
I turned, -- but void of Strength, and Aid to rise;
Short, shorter, shorter yet, my Breath I drew:
Then up my struggling Soul unburthen'd flew.
Thus from a State, where Sin, and Grief abide,
Heaven summoned me to Mercy -- thus I died.
He said. The Astonishment, with which I start,
Like bolted Ice runs shivering through my Heart.
Art thou not mortal then? (I cried) But lo!
His Raiment lightens, and his Features glow!
In shady Ringlets falls a Length of Hair;
Embloom'd his Aspect shines, enlarged his Air.
Mild from his Eyes enlivening Glories beam;
Mild on his Brow sits Majesty supreme.
Bright Plumes of every Die, that round him flow,
Vest, Robe, and Wings in varied Luster show.
He looks, and forward steps with Mien Divine;
A Grace celestial gives him all to shine.
He speaks -- Nature is ravished at the Sound,
The Forests move, and Streams stand listening round!
Thus He. As Incorruption I assumed,
As instant in immortal Youth I bloomed!
Renewed, and changed, I felt my vital Springs,
With different Lights discerned the Form of Things;
To Earth my Passions fell like Mists away,
And Reason opened in eternal Day.
Swifter than Thought from World to World I flew,
Celestial Knowledge shone in every View.
My Food was Truth -- what Transport could I miss?
My Prospect all Infinitude of Bliss.
Olympia met me first, and, smiling Gay,
Onward to Mercy led the shining Way;
As far transcendant to her wonted Air,
As her dear, wonted self to many a Fair!
In Voice, and Form, Beauty more beauteous shows,
And Harmony still more harmonious grows.
She points out Souls, who taught me Friendship's Charms,
They gaze, they glow, they spring into my Arms!
Well-pleased, high Ancestors my View command;
Patrons, and Patriots all; a glorious Band!
Horatio too, by well-borne Fate refined,
Shone out white-rob'd with Saints, a spotless Mind!
What once, below, Ambition made him miss,
Humility here gained, a Life of Bliss!
Though late, let Sinners then from Sin depart!
Heaven never yet despised the contrite Heart.
Last shone, with sweet, exalted Luster graced,
The SERAPH-BARD, in highest Order placed!
Scers, Lovers, Legislators, Prelates, Kings,
All raptured listen, as he raptured sings.
Sweetness, and Strength his Look, and Lays employ,
Greet Smiles with Smiles, and every Joy with Joy:
Charmful he rose; his ever-charmful Tongue
Joy to our second Hymeneals sung;
Still as we passed, the bright, celestial Throng
Hailed us in social Love, and heavenly Song.
Of that no more! my deathless Friendship see!
I come an Angel to the Muse and Thee.
These Lights, that vibrate, and promiscuous shine,
Are Emanations all of Forms Divine,
And here the Muse, though melted from thy Gaze,
Stands among Spirits, mingling Rays with Rays.
If thou would Peace attain, my Words attend,
The last, fond Words of thy departed Friend!
True Joy's a Seraph, that to Heaven aspires,
Unhurt it triumphs mid celestial Quires.
But should no Cares a mortal State molest,
Life were a State of Ignorance at best.
Know then, if Ills oblige thee to retire,
Those Ills Solemnity of Thought inspire.
Did not the Soul abroad for Objects roam,
Whence could she learn to call Ideas home?
Justly to know thy self, peruse Mankind!
To know thy God, paint Nature on thy Mind!
Without such Science of the worldly Scene,
What is Retirement? empty Pride, or Spleen:
But with it Wisdom. There shall Cares refine,
Rendered by Contemplation half-divine.
Trust not the frantic, or mysterious Guide,
Nor stoop a Captive to the Schoolman's Pride.
On Nature's Wonders fix alone thy Zeal!
They dim not Reason, when they Truth reveal;
So shall Religion in thy Heart endure,
From all traditionary Falsehood pure;
So Life make Death familiar to thy Eye;
So shall thou live, as thou may learn to die;
And, though thou view'st thy worst Oppressor thrive,
From transient Woe, immortal Bliss derive.
Farewell -- Nay stop the parting Tear! -- I go!
But leave the Muse thy Comforter below.
He said. Instant his Pinions upward soar,
He lessening as they rise, till seen no more.
While Contemplation weighed the mystic View,
The Lights all vanished, and the Vision flew.
FINIS.
ERRATUM.
Page 123, Line 14. for the etherial, read the broad etherial.

Lately Published,
THE Hive. A Collection of the most celebrated SONGS. To which is prefixed, A
Criticism on Song-Writing, by Mr. PHILIPS. In three Volumes. The third Edition,
with Alterations and Additions. Each Volume contains near 300 Songs. Price of
each 2 s. 6 d. From Words so sweet new Grace the Notes receive,
And Music Borrows Helps, she used to Give.
Tickell. II. A Collection of [near 500] EPIGRAMS. To which is prefixed, A
Critical Dissertation on that Species of Poetry. Price 2 s. 6 d. III. Mr.
PHILIPS's TRAGEDIES; viz. The Distressed Mother; The Briton; Humfrey, Duke of
Gloucester. Price 3 s. IV. -- FREE-THINKER. In three Volumes, Royal Paper. 2 l.
5 s. V. EPISTLES, ODES, etc. written on several Subjects; with a Translation of
Longinus's Treatise on the Sublime. By Mr. WELSTED. To which is prefixed, A
Dissertation concerning the Perfection of the English Language, the State of
Poetry, etc. Price 4 s. N. B. The Poems and Dissertation are printed in a small
Volume. Price 2 s.

VI. Oikographia. A Poem to his Grace the Duke of DORSET. By Mr. WELLTED. Price
1 s. VII. A HYMN to the CREATOR. Written by a Gentleman, on the Occasion of the
Death of his only Daughter. Price 6 d. VIII. The EXCURSION. A Poem. To which is
added, William and Margaret, a Ballad; now first published from the Author's
Copy. Price 1 s. IX. The TEMPLER's BILL of Complaint to the Right Hon. the Lord
High Chancellor. Price 6 d. X. An EPISTLE to the Right Honorable Sir ROBERT
WALPOLE. The Third Edit. Price 6 d. XI. The INSTALMENT. To the Right Hon. Sir
ROBERT WALPOLE, Knt. of the most Noble Order of the Garter. By E. YOUNG, LL.D.
Price 6 d. XII. An ODE to the QUEEN, on the happy Accession of their Majesty's
to the Crown. Price 6 d. XIII. The LOVES of HERO and LEANDER, from the Greek of
Musaeus. By Mr. STERLING. To which are added, Some new Translations from
various Greek Authors, Anacreon, Sappho, Julian, Theocritus, Bion, Moschus, and
Homer. By another Hand. Price 1 s. XIV. T. Lucretius Carus of the Nature of
Things. Translated into English Verse by Mr. CREECH. The Sixth Edition
illustrated with Notes. Two Volumes 8 vo. Price 10 s. XV. The LAWS of POETRY.
Being a Critical Commentary on the Duke of Buckingham's Essay on Poetry, and
the Earl of Roscommon's Essay on Translated Verse; with Notes on the Lord
Lansdown's Poem on Unnatural Flights in Poetry. The Commentary written by Mr.
GILDON, and revised by the Duke of Buckingham; the Notes by the Lord Lansdown.
Price 4 s. XVI. CATO MAJOR. A Poem. Upon the Model of Tully's Essay of Old Age.
In Four Books. By SAMUEL CATHERALL, M. A. Fellow of Oriel-College in Oxford,
and Prebendary of Wells. Price 2 s. -- In Catone Majore (qui est scriptus de
Senectute) Catonem induxi Senem disputantem, quia nulla videbatur aptior
Persona, quae de illa Aetate loqueretur, quam ejus, qui and diutissimae Senex
fuisset and in ipsa Senectute prae caeteris floruisset. TULL. de Amic. XVII.
CATO's LETTERS. To which is prefixed, A large Preface containing an Answer to
the most popular Objections to these Letters, and a Character of the late JOHN
TRENCHARD, Esquire Four Volumes. Price 10 s. XVIII. Secreta Monita Societatis Jesu:
The Secret Instructions of the Jesuits. In Latin and English. Price 2 s. Au
defaut de la Force, il faut employer la Ruse. Motto to Layer's Scheme. XIX. The
late Archbishop of Cambray's Dialogues concerning ELOQUENCE: With his Letter to
the French Academy, concerning Rhetoric, Poetry, History, and a Comparison
betwixt the Ancients and Moderns. Translated from the French, and illustrated
with Notes and Quotations, by W. STEVENSON, M. A. Price 4 s. 6 d. XX. The
Adventures of Telemachus, written by the late Archbishop of Cambray: Done into
English by Mr. LITTLEBURY, etc. The Eleventh Edition, adorned with Cuts; and to
which is now added, An Alphabetical Index to each Volume. Price 6 s.
All Printed for J. WALTHOE.


