POEMS BY MR. JERNINGHAM.

A NEW EDITION.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. ROBSON, NEW BOND-STREET.

M. DCC. XCVI.

ADVERTISEMENT OF THE EDITOR.
THE two Volumes we now offer to the Public contain what was comprised in the
former edition of three Volumes. -- The additional lines and alterations will
be noticed in their proper place. In the first edition of these Poems, the
Author concludes his Preface with these words, -- It is with great diffidence
that I add my literary Mite to the Treasury of English Poetry. -- In analogy to
this humble metaphor, we will venture to assert, that the Mite is no
counterseit coin; that it is not debased by an admixture of any improper alloy;
and that it came from the Poetic Mint impressed with the Image of Nature.

CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
THE MAGDALENS Page 1 YARICO TO INKLE Page 11 THE NUN Page 26 THE NUNNERY: IN
IMITATION OF GRAY Page 35 THE DESERTER Page 42 IL LATTE Page 56 MATILDA Page 63
THE SWEDISH CURATE Page 69 THE FUNERAL OF ARABERT Page 83 LINES WRITTEN IN
HUME'S HISTORY Page 104 Page CUPID'S QUIVER Page 106 DREAMS Page 108
DISSIPATION Page 112 THE INDIAN CHIEF Page 116 INSCRIPTION Page 119 THE
VENETIAN MARRIAGE Page 120 THE MEXICAN FRIENDS Page 129 THE SPEECH OF THE
EMPEROR OF MEXICO AT THE PLACE OF INTERMENT Page 139 THE SPEECH OF THE HIGH
PRIEST AT THE PILE Page 142 THE ANCIENT ENGLISH WAKE Page 147 INSCRIPTION Page
168 ON THE DEATH OF TWO FAVORITE BIRDS Page 169 SENSIBILITY Page 171 THE
SOLDIER'S FAREWELL Page 172 ALBINA Page 177 TO THE LATE EARL OF CHESTERFIELD
Page 184 Page ON THE DEATH OF GARRICK Page 187 ON THE AUTHOR OF THE BALLAD
CALLED, THE CHILDREN IN THE WOOD Page 190 TO LADY CATHARINE MURRAY Page 195 TO
A LADY WHO LAMENTED SHE COULD NOT SING Page 197 TO LADY JERSEY Page 198 TO MRS.
MONTAGU Page 199 HONORIA Page 201
THE MAGDALENS; A POEM.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE MAGDALEN Charity was established in the year 1758. A commodious habitation
was engaged, in PRESCOT STREET, by the promoters of this benevolent
institution, and the house was opened on the tenth of August, when eight
unhappy objects were admitted.

In the year 1772, the Charity was removed to a more spacious building in ST.
GEORGE'S FIELDS.

THE MAGDALENS.
SEE to yon fane the suppliant Nymphs repair,
At Virtue's shrine to breathe Contrition's sigh:
Their youthful cheek is pal'd with early care,
And sorrow dwells in their dejected eye.
Hark! they awake a solemn plaintive lay,
Where Grief with Harmony delights to meet:
Not Philomela from her lonely spray,
Trills her clear note more querulously sweet.
Are these the fair (late Pleasure's Festive quire)
Who wont the dome of Luxury to tread?
Who decked in varying fashion's new attire,
Still vied in splendour with the highborn Maid?
For sober weeds they change their flowing train,
Of the pearl bracelet strip the graceful arm,
Conceal the breast that glowed in every vein,
And madden'd into joy at Love's alarm.
Ah now no more the diamond's dazzling ray
Darts from the artful mazes of the hair;
No more those tresses garishly display
The idle plumes that sportive mocked the air.
Yet Beauty lingers on their mournful brow,
As loath to leave the cheek suffus'd with tears,
Which scarcely blushing with a languid glow,
Like Morn's faint beam through gathering mist appears.
No more compare them to the gaudy flower,
Whose painted foliage wantons in the gale:
They look the lily drooping from the shower,
Or the pale violet sickening in the vale.
If fond of empire and of conquest vain,
They frequent vot'ries to their altars drew,
Yet blazed those dazz'ling altars to their bane,
The idol they, and they the victim too!
Once destitute of counsel, aid, or food,
Some helpless orphans in this dome reside,
Who (like the wandering children in the wood)
Trod the rude paths of life without a guide.
Some who encircled by the great and rich
Were won by wiles and deep-designing art,
By splendid bribes, and soft persuasive speech,
Of power to cheat the young unguarded heart.
Some on whom Beauty breathed her radiant bloom,
While adverse stars all other gifts removed;
Who hurried from the dungeon's living tomb,
To scenes their inborn virtue disapproved.
What though their youth imbibed an early stain,
A second innocence is now their claim;
While in the precincts of this blesss'd domain,
They bask beneath the rays of rising Fame.
So the young myrtles in Misfortune's day,
Nipt by the blast that swept their vernal bed,
In sheltering walls their tender leaves display,
And wak'ning into life new fragrance shed.
Though white-wing'd Peace protect this calm abode,
Though each tumultuous passion be suppressed,
Still Recollection wears a sting to goad,
Still Conscience wakes to rob their soul of rest.
See one the torturing hour of memory prove,
Who wrapped in pensive secrecy forlorn,
Sits musing on the pledges of her love,
Who fell the victims of paternal scorn:
Forgot, deserted in the extremeft need,
By him who should have reared their tender age:
'Was this, Seducer, this the promised meed?'
She cries -- then finks beneath Affliction's rage:
Her busy mind recalls the fatal plain,
Which with slow laboring steps she journey'd over,
Half-yielding to the fierce impetuous rain,
While in her arms two helpless babes she bore:
Her mind recalls how at that awful hour
The dismal Owlet scream'd her shivering note,
How shrieked the Spirit from the haunted tower,
While other sounds of woe were heard remote:
How to the covert of a tottering shed,
As Night advanced, she fearfully retired;
And as around the dark'ning horror spread,
Her famished infants on her breast expired:
How keenest Anguish bade her bosom bleed,
As there she brooded over her hapless state:
'Was this, Seducer, this the promised meed?'
She cries -- then sinks beneath Affliction's weight.
Another mourns her fall with grief sincere.
Whom tranquil Reason tells she is shunned, disdain's
Repulsed as vile, by those who held her dear,
Who called her once Companion, Sister, Friend.
That recollects the day when lost to shame,
She fondly sacrificed her vestal charms,
Resigned the virgin's for an harlot's name
And left a parent's for a spoiler's arms.
Imagination pictures to her mind
The father's rage, the mother's softer woe:
Unhappy pair! to that distress consigned,
A child can give, a parent only know.
At this deep scene, by Fancy drawn, imprefs'd,
The filial passions in her heart revive:
Reproach vindictive, rushes on her breast,
To Nature's pangs too feelingly alive.
If this, or similar tormenting thought,
Cling to their soul, when pensively alone,
For youth's offense, for Love's alluring fault,
Say, do they not sufficiently atone?
Nor deem me one of Melancholy's train,
If anxious for the sorrow-wedded Fair,
Though little skilful of that heavenly strain,
Whose melting numbers to the heart repair:
I steal impatient from the idle throng,
The roving gay companions of my age, This poem was first published in 1763.

To temper with their praise my artless song,
And soft-ey'd Pity in their cause engage.
It Is Virtue's task to soothe Affliction's smart,
To join in sadness with the Fair distressed:
Wake to another's pain the tender heart,
And urge to clemency the rigid breast.
YARICO to INKLE.
ADVERTISEMENT.
INKLE is preparing to set out for England, after having sold YARICO to a
merchant at Barbados, 'notwithstanding 'that the poor Girl, (says the
Spectator) 'to incline him to commiserate her condition, 'told him that she was
with child by him: but he 'only made use of that information, to rise in his
'demands upon the purchaser.'

YARICO to INKLE.
WITH falsehood lurking in thy sordid breast,
And perj'ry's seal upon thy heart impressed,
Dare thou, Oh Christian! brave the sounding waves,
The treacherous whirlwinds, and untrophied graves?
Regardless of my woes, securely go,
No curse-sraught accents from these lips shall flow:
My fondest wish shall catch thy flying sail,
Attend thy course, and urge the favoring gale:
May every bliss thy God confers be thine,
And all thy share of woe comprised in mine.
One humble boon is all I now implore,
Allow these feet to print their kindred shore:
Give me, Oh Albion's son! again to roam,
For thee deserted, my delightful home:
To view the groves that deck my native scene,
The limpid stream, that graceful glides between:
Retrieve the fame I spurned at Love's decree,
Ascend the throne which I forsook for thee:
Approach the bower -- (why starts th'unbidden tear?)
Where once thy YARICO to thee was dear.
The scenes the hand of Time has thrown behind,
Return impetuous to my busy mind:
'What hostile vessel quits the roaring tide
'To harbor here its tempest-beaten side?
'Behold the beach receives the shipwrecked crew:
'Oh mark their strange attire and pallid hue!
'Are these the Christians, restless sons of pride,
'By avarice nurtured, to deceit allied?
'Who tread with cunning step the maze of art,
'And mask with placid looks a cankered heart?
'Yet note, superior to the numerous throng,
'(Even as the citron humbler plants among)
'That Youth! -- Lo! beauty on his graceful brow,
'With nameless charms bids every feature glow:
'Ah! leave, fair stranger, this unsocial ground,
'Where danger broods, and fury stalks around:
'Behold thy foes advance -- my steps pursue
'To where I Will screen thee from their fatal view:
'He comes! he comes! the ambrosial feast prepare,
The fig, the palm-juice, nor the anana spare:
In spacious canisters nor fail to bring
The scented foliage of the blushing spring:
Ye graceful handmaids, dress the roseat bower,
And hail with music this auspicious hour --
Ah no! forbear -- be every lyre unstrung,
More pleasing music warbles from his tongue;
Yet utter not to me the lover's vow,
All, all is thine that Friendship can bestow:
'Our laws, my station, check the guilty flame --
'Why was I born, ye powers, a Nubian dame?
'Yet see around, at Love's enchanting call,
'Stern laws submit, and vain distinctions fall:
'And mortals then enjoy life's transient day,
'When smit with passion they indulge the sway;
'Yes! crowned with bliss, we'll roam the conscious grove,
'And drink long draughts of unexhausted love:
'Nor joys alone, thy dangers too I Will share,
'With thee the menace of the waves I Will dare:
'In vain -- for smiles his brow deep frowns involve,
'The sacred ties of Gratitude dissolve,
'See Faith distracted rends her comely hair,
'His fading vow's while tainted zephyrs bear!'
Oh thou, before whose seraph-guarded throne
The Christians, bow, and other Gods disown,
If, wrapped in darkness, thou deny'st thy ray,
And shround'st from NUBIA thy celestial day!
Indulge this fervent prayer, to thee addressed,
Indulge, though uttered from a sable breast:
May gathering storms eclipse the cheerful skies,
And mad'ning furies from thy hell arise:
With glaring torches meet his impious brow,
And drag him howling to the gulf below! --
Ah no! May Heaven's bright messengers descend,
Obey his call, his every wish attend!
Still over his form their hovering wings display!
If he be blessed, these pangs admit allay:
Me still her mark let angry Fortune deem,
So thou may walk beneath her cloudless beam.
Yet often to my rapt ear did thou repeat,
That I sufficed to frame thy bliss complete.
Deluded sex! the dupes of man decreed,
We, splendid victims, at his altar bleed.
The grateful accents of thy praiseful tongue,
Where artful flattery too persuasive hung,
Like flowers adorned the path to my disgrace,
And bade Destruction wear a smiling face.
Yet formed by Nature in her choicest mould,
While on thy cheek her blushing charms unfold,
Who could oppose to thee stern Virtue's shield?
What tender virgin would not wish to yield?
But pleasure on the wings of Time was born,
And I exposed a prey to tyrant scorn.
Of low-born traders -- mark the hand of fate! --
IS YARICO reduced to grace the state,
Whose impious parents, an adventurous band,
Imbrued with guiltless blood my native land:
Even snatched my father from his regal seat,
And stretched him breathless at their hostile feet!
Ill-fated prince! The Christians sought thy shore,
Unsheathed the sword, and mercy was no more.
But thou, fair stranger, came with gentler mind
To shun the perils of the wrecking wind.
Amidst thy foes thy safety still I plan'd,
And reached for galling chains the myrtle band:
Nor then unconscious of the secret fire,
Each heart voluptuous throb'd with warm desire:
Ah pleasing youth, kind object of my care,
Companion, Friend, and every name that is dear!
Say, from thy mind can thou so soon remove
The records graven by the hand of Love?
How as we wantoned on the flowery ground,
The loose-rob'd pleasures danced unblam'd around:
Till to the sight the growing burden proved
How thou o'ercam'st -- and how, alas! I loved!
Too fatal proof! since thou with avarice fraught,
Did basely urge (ah! shun the wounding thought!)
That tender circumstance -- reveal it not,
Lest torn with rage I curse my fated lot:
Lest startled Reason abdicate her reign,
And Madness revel in this heated brain:
That tender circumstance -- inhuman part --
I will not weep, though serpents gnaw this heart:
Frail, frail resolve! while gushing from mine eye
The pearly drops these boastful words belie.
Alas! can Sorrow in this bosom sleep,
Where strikes Ingratitude her talons deep?
When he whom still I love, to Nature dead,
Stabs Pleasure as she mounts the nuptial bed?
What time his guardian power I most required,
Against my fame and happiness conspired!
And (do I live to breathe the barbarous tale?)
His faithful YARICO exposed to sale!
Yes, basely urged, (regardless of my prayers,
Even while I bathed his venal hand with tears)
The tenderest circumstance -- I can no more --
My future child -- to swell his impious store: --
All, all mankind for this will rise thy foe,
But I, alas! alone endure the woe:
Endure what healing balms can never control,
The heart-lodg'd stings and agony of soul. --
Was it for this I left my native plain,
And dared the tempest brooding on the main?
For this unlocked (seduced by Christian art)
The chaste affections of my virgin heart?
Within this bosom san'd the constant flame,
And fondly languish'd for a Mother's name?
Lo! every hope is poisoned in its bloom,
And horrors watch around this guilty womb.
With blood illustrious circling through these veins,
Which never was checkered with plebeian stains,
Through ancestry's long line ennobled springs,
From fame-crown'd warriors and exalted kings,
Must I the shafts of Infamy sustain?
To Slav'ry's purposes my Infant train?
To catch the glances of his haughty lord?
Attend obedient at the festive board?
From hands unscepter'd take the scornful blow?
Uproot the thoughts of glory as they grow?
Let this pervade at length thy heart of steel;
Yet, yet return, nor blush, oh man! to feel:
Ah! guide thy steps from yon expecting fleet,
Thine injured YARICO relenting meet:
Bid her recline, woe-stricken, on thy breast,
And hush her raging sorrows into rest!
If Pity's voice cannot wake thy torpid soul,
Let Terror her impending thunder roll: --
'Twas night -- my solitary couch I pressed,
Till sorrow-worn I wearied into rest:
Methought -- nor was it childish Fancy's flight --
My country's Genius stood confessed to sight:
'Let Europe's sons (he said) enrich their shore
'With stones of luster, and barbaric ore:
'Adorn their country with their splendid stealth,
'Unnative foppery, and gorgeous wealth;
'Embellish still her form with foreign spoils,
'Till like a gaudy prostitute she smiles:
'The day, the avenging day at length shall rise,
'And tears shall trickle from that harlot's eyes:
'Her own Gods shall prepare the fatal doom
'Lodg'd in Time's pregnant and destructive womb:
'The mischief-bearing womb, these hands shall rend,
'And straight shall issue forth Confusion's fiend.'
Say, ALBION youth, flow all my words in vain,
Like seeds that strew the rude ungrateful plain?
Say, shall I never regain thy wonted grace?
Never stretch these arms to catch the wished embrace?
Enough -- with new-awak'd resentment fraught
Assist me, Heaven! to tear him from my thought:
No longer vainly suppliant will I bow,
And give to love, what I to hatred owe;
Forgetful of the race from whence I came,
With woe acquainted, but unknown to shame.
Hence, vile Dejection, with thy plaintive prayer,
Thy bended knee, and still descending tear:
Rejoin, rejoin the pale-complexion'd train --
The conflict's past -- and I Am myself again.
Thou parent Sun! if ever with pious lay
I ushered in thy world-reviving ray!
Or as thy fainter beams illum'd the west,
With grateful voice I hymn'd thee to thy rest!
Beheld, with wondering eye, thy radiant seat,
Or sought thy sacred dome with unclad feet!
If near to thy bright altars as I drew,
My votive lamb thy holy Flamen slew!
Forgive! that I, irrev'rent of thy name,
Dared for thy foe indulge the unhallowed flame:
Even on a Christian lavished my esteem,
And scorned the sable children of thy beam.
This poniard, by my daring hand impressed,
Shall drink the ruddy drops that warm my breast:
Nor I alone, by this immortal deed
From Slav'ry's laws my infant shall be freed.
And thou, whose ear is deaf to Pity's call,
Behold at length thy destined victim fall;
Behold thy once-lov'd NUBIAN stained with gore,
Unwept, extended on the crimson floor:
These temples clouded with the shades of death,
These lips unconscious of the lingering breath:
These eyes uprais'd (ere closed by Fate's decree)
To catch expiring one faint glimpse of thee.
Ah! then thy YARICO forbear to dread,
My fault'ring voice no longer will upbraid,
Demand due vengeance of the powers above,
Or, more offensive still, implore thy love.
THE NUN; OR, ADALEIDA TO HER FRIEND.
WITH each perfection dawning on her mind,
All Beauty's treasure opening on her cheek:
Each flattering hope subdued, each wish resigned,
Does gay OPHELIA this lone mansion seek?
Say, gentle maid, what prompts thee to forsake
The paths thy birth and fortune strew with flowers?
Through Nature's kind endearing ties to break,
And waste in cloistered walls thy pensive hours?
Let sober thought restrain thine erring zeal,
That guides thy footsteps to the vestal gate;
Lest thy soft heart (this friendship bids reveal)
Like mine unblest, should mourn like mine too late.
Does some angelic lonely-whisp'ring voice,
Some sacred impulse, or some dream divine,
Applaud the dictates of thy early choice? --
Approach with confidence the awful shrine.
There kneeling at yon altar's marble base,
(While tears of rapture from thine eyelid steal,
And smiling Heaven illumes thy soul with grace)
Pronounce the vow thou never can repeal.
But if misled by false-entitled friends,
Who say -- that Peace with all her comely train,
From starry regions to this clime descends,
Smooths every frown, and softens every pain:
That vestals tread Contentment's flowery lawn,
Approved of Innocence, by Health carest:
That robbed in colors of the vernal dawn,
Celestial Hope sits smiling at their breast.
Suspect their siren song and artful style,
Their pleasing sounds some treacherous thought conceal;
Full often does pride with sainted voice beguile,
And sordid interest wear the mask of zeal.
A tyrant abbess here perchance may reign,
Who, fond of power, affects the imperial nod;
Looks down disdainful on her female train,
And rules the cloister with an iron rod.
Reflection sickens at the life-long tie,
Back-glancing Memory acts her busy part;
Its charm the world unfolds to Fancy's eye,
And sheds allurement on the youthful heart.
Lo! Discord enters at the sacred porch,
Rage in her frown, and terror on her crest:
Even at the hallowed lamps she lights her torch,
And holds it flaming to each virgin breast.
But since the legends of monastic bliss,
By fraud are fabled, and by youth believed;
Unbought experience learn from my distress,
Oh! mark my lot, and be no more deceived.
Three lustres scarce with hasty wing were fled,
When I was torn from every weeping friend;
A trembling victim to the temple led,
And (blush ye parents!) by a father's hand.
Yet then what solemn scenes deceived my choice!
The pealing organ's animating sound;
The choral virgins' captivating voice,
The blazing altar, and the priests around:
The train of youth arrayed in purest white,
Who scattered myrtles as I passed along:
The thousand lamps that poured a flood of light,
The kiss of Peace from all the vestal throng;
The golden censers tossed with graceful hand,
Whose fragrant breath ARABIAN odor shed;
Of meek-ey'd novices the circling band,
With blooming chaplets wreathed around their head.
My willing soul was caught in rapture's flame,
While sacred ardor glowed in every vein;
Methought applauding angels sung my name,
And Heaven's unsullied glories gilt the fane.
Methought in sunbeams robbed the heavenly spouse
Indulged the longings of my holy love:
Not undelighted heard my virgin vows --
While over the altar waved the mystic dove.
This temporary transport soon expired,
My drooping heart confessed a dreadful void;
Now helpless, heav'n-abandon'd, uninspir'd,
I tread this dome, to Misery allied.
No wak'ning joy informs my fullen breast,
Through opening skies no radiant seraph smiles;
No saint descends to foothe my soul to rest;
No dream of bliss the dreary night beguiles.
Here haggard Discontent still haunts my view,
The umber'd genius reigns in ve'ry place;
Arrays each virtue in the darkest hue,
Chills every prayer and cancels every grace.
I meet her ever in the chearless cell,
The gloomy grotto and the awful wood;
I hear her ever in the midnight bell,
The chiding gale, and hoarse-resounding flood.
This caused a mother's tender tears to flow,
(The sad remembrance time shall never erase)
When having sealed the irrevocable vow,
I hastened to receive her last embrace.
Yet never did her maternal voice unfold
This cloistered scene in all its horror dressed;
Nor did she then my trembling steps withold,
When here I entered a reluctant guest.
Ah! could she view-her only child betrayed,
And let submission over her love prevail?
Th'unfeeling priest why did she not upbraid,
Forbid the vow, and rend the hovering veil?
Alas! she might not -- her relentless lord
Had sealed her lips, and chid the rising tear;
So Anguish in her breast concealed its hoard,
And all the Mother sunk in dumb despair.
But thou who own'st a Father's sacred name,
What act impelled thee to this ruthless deed?
What crime had forfeited my filial claim?
And given (Oh! blasting thought) thy heart to bleed?
If then thine injured child deserve thy care,
Oh! haste and bear her from this lonesome gloom:
In vain -- no words can soothe his rigid ear;
And iron laws have riveted my doom.
Yet let me to my fate submissive bow;
From fatal symptoms, if I right conceive,
This stream, OPHELIA, has not long to flow,
This voice to murmur, and this breast to heave.
Ah! when extended on th'untimely bier,
To yonder vault this form shall be conveyed;
Thou Wilt not refuse to shed one grateful tear,
And breathe the requiem to my fleeting shade.
With pious footsteps join the sable train,
As through the lengthening isle they take their way:
A glimmering taper let thy hand sustain,
Thy soothing voice attune the funeral lay.
Behold the minister who lately gave
The sacred veil, in garb of mournful hue,
(More friendly office), bending over my grave,
And sprinkling my remains with hallowed dew:
As over the corse he strews the humbling dust,
The sternest heart will raise Compassion's sigh;
Even then, no longer to his child unjust,
The tears may trickle from a FATHER'S eye.
THE NUNNERY. This Poem, which was placed at the end of the volume in the
former edition, comes with greater propriety immediately after the NUN: for as
there ADALEIDA foretells her fate, so is her death mentioned in the NUNNERY, and
marked with some peculiar circumstances, which render the present Poem a
supplement to the preceding one.

Now pants the night-breeze through the darkened air,
And Silence sooths the vestal world to rest,
Save where some pale-ey'd novice (rapt in prayer)
Heaves a deep moan, and smites her guiltless breast.
Within those ancient walls with moss overspread,
Where Grief and Innocence their vigils keep,
Each in her humble cell till midnight laid,
The gentle daughters of Devotion sleep.
Of Wantonness the pleasure-breathing lay,
Or Laughter beck'ning from his rosy seat,
Or Vanity attired in colors gay,
Shall never allure them from their sober state.
Domestic comforts they shall never know,
Nor voice of kindred reach their distant ear:
Never with a mother's transport shall they glow,
While playful children charm the lingering year.
The various flowers in many a wreath they twine,
To crown the altar on some festive day;
How fervent do they kiss each holy shrine!
How through the columns streams the choral lay!
Let not Ambition mock with jest profane,
The life that woos Retreat's obscureft shade,
Nor worldly Beauty with a sneer disdain,
The humble duties of the cloistered Maid.
The glift'ning eye, the half-seen breast of snow,
The coral lip, the blush of Nature's bloom,
Awaits alike the inexorable foe,
The paths of Pleasure lead but to the tomb.
Perhaps in this drear mansion are confined
Some bosom formed to love, unspoil'd by art;
Charms that might soften the severest mind,
And wake to extacy the coldest heart.
Full many a riv'let wandering to the main,
Sequestered pours its solitary stream:
Full many a lamp devoted to the fane,
Sheds unregarded its nocturnal beam.
Some uncrown'd MARGARET, loit'ring in her cell,
By Nature formed bright Glory's course to run;
Here some inglorious MOUNTAGU may dwell,
Some EDITHA Mr. POPE'S Mother.
,unconscious of a son.
From Flatt'ry's lip to drink the sweets of praise,
In conscious charms with rivals still to vie:
In circles to attract the partial gaze,
And view their beauty in the admirer's eye,
Their lot forbids: nor does alone remove
The thirst of praise, but even their crimes restrain:
Forbids through Folly's labyrinth to rove,
And yield to Vanity the flowing rein.
To rear 'mid Hymen's joys domestic strife,
Or seek that converse which they ought to shun;
To loose the sacred ties of nuptial life,
And give to many what they vowed to one.
What though they are sprinkled with etherial dew!
With blooming wreaths by hands of Seraphs crowned!
Though Heaven's unfading splendors burst to view,
And harps celestial to their ear resound!
Still Recollection prompts the frequent sigh,
The cheerful scenes of younger days arise;
Still to their native home their wishes fly,
Affection's stream still gushes from their eyes:
For who entranced in visions from above,
The thought of kindred razes from the mind?
Feels in the soul no warm returning love,
For some endeared companion left behind?
Their joy-encircled hearth as they forsook,
From some fond breast reluctant they withdrew;
As from the deck they sent a farewell look,
Fair ALBION sunk for ever from their view.
For thee who mindful of the encloister'd train,
Do in these lines their mournful tale relate,
If by Compassion guided to this fane,
Some kindred spirit shall enquire thy fate:
Happily some matron-vestal may reply,
"Often have we heard him, when Light's lingering ray
"Scarce marked its passage through the dark'ning sky,
"At yonder altar join the vesper-lay.
"Where hapless ADALEIDA sought repose,
"Often at yon grave would he her fate condole!
"And in his breast as scenes of grief arose,
"He saw ascending slow her spotless soul:
Peace to my EDWARD' s heart, the vision said,,
Ah! not unseen thou shed'st that grateful tear;
I wait at night to catch thy wonted tread,
And thank thy faithful love that sorrows here.
"One eve I missed him at the hour divine;
"Along that isle, and in the facristy:
"Another came, not yet beside the shrine,
"Not at the font, nor in the church was he:
"The next we heard the bell of Death intone,
"And to his grave we moved, a mournful band;
"Approach and read, on this sepulchral stone,
"These lines, engraved by Friendship's holy hand:"
EPITAPH.
Pause over the Youth -- nor grudge the short delay.
Full soon his little history is told --
He gave to Solitude the pensive day,
And Pity framed his bosom of her mould.
THE DESERTER.
BY others blessed with genius' rays
Let noble acts be told,
While I, content with humbler praise,
A simple tale unfold:
The SPANIARD left the hostile plain,
To seek his native land,
Beneath the sails that swept the main,
CABEYSA joined the band:
Who, as he met his country's foes
Within the field of Fame,
Above his rank obscure arose,
And graced his humble name:
Yet not the early wreath of Fame
With haughtiness was twined:
Nor pride nor fickleness could claim
The empire of his mind:
The lowly hut, beneath whose roof
He sighed a sad adieu,
Received him (time and distance-proof)
To Love and LAURA true:
This hamlet-fair, by Fortune scorned,
Seemed Nature's favorite child,
With hand profuse by her adorned
-- The flowret of the wild!
Her neat but homely garments pressed
The pure, the feeling heart,
Often sought in vain behind the vest
Of decorated art:
"If sharing all thy cares (she said)
"Has paled my beauty's rose,
"Ah! know, for thee the heart that bled,
"With all its passion glows:
"Blessed moment, to my wish that gives
"The long long absent youth!
"He lives -- the endeared CABEYSA lives,
"And Love confirms the truth.
"When thy brave comrades fell around,
"What Pow'r's benignant care
"Secured thee from the fatal wound,
"And LAURA from despair?
"Often in the troubling dream of night
"I saw the rushing spear;
"Nor did the Morn's awak'ning light
"Dispel the lingering fear."
"Thy tender fears (the youth replied)
"Ah give them to the air!
"To happiness we are now allied,
"And pleasure be our care:
"Let us pursue the joy begun,
"Nor lose by dull delay:
"Say, LAURA, shall tomorrow's sun
"Illume our nuptial day?"
With look declined she blushed consent --
Reserve that takes alarm,
And Love and Joy their influence lent
To raise meek Beauty's charm.
The guests, to hail the wedded pair,
Beneath their roof repaired;
With them the little feast to share
Their scanty purse prepared:
Though no delicious wines were poured,
Mirth took his destined place,
The handmaid Neatness spread the board,
And sage Content said grace.
Scarce through one hasty week had Love
His grateful blessings shed,
When bliss (as flies the frighted dove)
Their humble mansion fled:
'Twas at BELLONA'S voice it flew,
That called to War's alarms:
Bad the youth rise, to valor true,
And break from LAURA'S arms:
But she still strained him to her heart,
To lengthen the adieu:
"Ah what, (she said) should thou depart,
"Shall I and Sorrow do?
"Say, valiant youth, when you are away
"Who Will raise my drooping head?
"How shall I chase the fears that say
"Thy loved CABEYSA'S dead?
"With thine my fate I now involve,
"Intent thy course to steer;
"No words shall shake my firm resolve,
"Not even that trickling tear."
"Framed for each scene of soft delight,
"(He said) thy gentle form,
"As shrinks the lily at the blight,
"Will droop beneath the storm."
"Blessed in thy presence! every pain
"(She added) brings its charm,
"And Love, though falls the beating rain,
"Will keep this bosom warm."
Even as the wall-flow'r rears its head,
'Mid ruins, wrecks, and tombs,
So 'mid the woes around that spread,
True Love unconquered blooms.
Her zeal (the supplement of strength)
Upheld her many a day,
But Nature's powers subdued at length,
On Sickness' couch she lay:
Three painful days unseen she lay
Of him she held so dear:
"Ah! does he thus my love repay?"
She said -- and dropped a tear:
"CABEYSA, at a league's remove,
"Dwells on the tent-spread hill:
"Ah! wherefore did he vow true love,
"And not that vow fulfill?"
Yet not deficiency of truth
Forbad to yield relief,
Stern power withheld the tender youth,
And duty to his chief:
Who, wisely counseled, drew a line
To check the hand of Stealth,
That ravaged wide th'encircling vine,
The humble peasant's wealth:
To pass the line, it was ordained,
Whoever should presume,
Should a Deserter be arraigned,
And meet the coward's doom.
This law, by Equity approved,
And to the peasant dear,
Soon to the brave CABEYSA proved
Destructively severe:
Now LAURA'S image haunts his soul,
In Woe's dark tints arrayed:
While to his breast Compassion stole,
And all her claims displayed:
"For me her native home, (he said)
"For me each weeping friend,
"For me a Father's arms she fled --
"And shall not Love attend?
"Say for a chosen lover's sake,
"What more could woman do?
"And now that Health and Peace forsake,
"Shall I forsake her too?
"Now stretched upon the naked ground,
"Oppressed with pain and fear,
"She casts a languid eye around,
"Nor sees CABEYSA near:
"Now, now she weeps at my delay,
"And shall neglect be mine?
"Submit, ye fears, to Pity's sway:"
He spoke -- and crossed the line.
Soon at his sight the fair resumed
Each captivating grace:
On her pale cheek the rose re-bloom'd,
And smiles illum'd her face.
Yet to that cheek returned in vain
Bright Health's vermilion dye,
For bitter tears that cheek shall stain,
And dim her brilliant eye:
The youth returning through the gloom,
At Midnight's secret hour,
Was seized -- and to Dishonour's tomb
Doomed by the martial power.
To meet his fate at wake of day
(Love's victim) he was led:
No weakness did his cheek betray,
While to the chief he said,
"If in the battle death I Have dared,
"In all its horror dressed,
"Think not this scene, by thee prepared,
"Sheds terror on my breast:
"Yet then at LAURA'S hapless fate,
"My fortitude impairs,
"Unmann'd I sink beneath the weight
"Of her oppressive cares:
"Ah! when her grief-torn heart shall bleed,
"Some little solace grant,
"Oh! guard her in the hour of need
"From the rude hand of Want!"
Now, kneeling on the fatal spot,
He twined the dark'ning band:
The twelve, who drew the unwelcome lot,
Reluctant took their stand:
And now the murmuring throng grew dumb,
'Twas silence all -- save where,
At intervals, the sullen drum
Struck horror on the ear:
Now, with their death-fraught tubes up-rear'd,
The destined twelve were seen --
And now the explosion dire was heard
That closed CABEYSA'S scene.
Another scene remained behind
For LAURA to supply --
She comes! mark how her tortured mind
Speaks through the expressive eye:
"Forbear -- will ye in blood (she said)
"Your cruel hands imbrue?
"On me, on me your vengeance shed,
"To me alone it is due:
"Relent -- and to these arms again
"The valiant youth restore.
"I rave -- already on the plain
"He welters in his gore."
Advancing now, she pierced the crowd,
And reached the fatal place,
Where, lifting from the corse the shroud,
No semblance could she trace.
"Is this -- oh blasting view! (she cried)
"The youth who loved too well?
"His love for me the law defied,
"And for that love he fell!
"When will the grave this form receive? --
"Prepare the mutual tomb;
"There, only there, I Will cease to grieve,
"There cease to curse my doom."
Now, conquered by Affection's force,
Which broke her heart in twain,
She sunk upon the bleeding corse,
And never rose again.
IL LATTE.
Insipe, parve puer, risu cognoscere matrem.
YE Fair, for whom the hands of HYMEN weave
The nuptial wreath to deck your virgin brow,
While pleasing pains the conscious bosom heave,
And on the kindling cheek the blushes glow:
Whose spotless soul contains the better dower,
Whose life unstained full many virtues vouch,
For whom now Venus frames the fragrant bower,
And scatters roses over the destined couch:
To you I sing. -- Ah! ere the raptured youth
With trembling hand removes the jealous veil,
Where, long regardless of the vows of truth,
Unsocial coyness stamped the ungrateful seal:
Allow the poet round your flowing hair,
Culled from an humble vale, a wreath to twine,
To Beauty's altar with the Loves repair,
And wake the lute beside that living shrine:
That sacred shrine! where female virtue glows,
To which retreat the warm affections fly;
Where Love is born, where strong attachment grows,
Where frames pure Constancy the faithful tie.
That shrine! where Nature with presaging aim,
What time her friendly aid LUCINA brings,
The snowy nectar pours, delightful stream!
Where fluttering Cupids dip their purple wings:
For you who bear a Mother's sacred name,
Whose cradled offspring, in lamenting strain,
With artless eloquence afferts his claim,
The boon of Nature, but asserts in vain:
Say why, illustrious daughters of the Great,
Lives not the nursling at your tender breast?
By you protected in his frail estate?
By you attended, and by you caressed?
To venal hands, alas! can you resign
The Parent's task, the Mother's pleasing care?
To venal hands the smiling babe consign?
While HYMEN starts, and Nature drops a tear.
When 'mid the polished circle ye rejoice,
Or roving join fantastic Pleasure's train,
Unheard perchance the nursting lifts his voice,
His tears unnotic'd, and unsooth'd his pain.
Ah! what avails the coral crowned with gold?
In heedless infancy the title vain?
The colors gay the purfled scarfs unfold?
The splendid nurs'ry, and the attendant train?
Far better had thou first beheld the light
Beneath the rafter of some roof obscure;
There in a Mother's eye to read delight,
And in her cradling arm repose secure. --
Nor wonder, should HYGEIA, blissful Queen!
Her wonted salutary gifts recall,
While haggard Pain applies his dagger keen,
And over the cradle Death unfolds his pall.
The flow'ret ravished from its native air,
And bid to flourish in a foreign vale,
Does it not often elude the planter's care,
And breathe its dying odors on the gale?
For you, ye plighted fair, when Hymen crowns
With tender offspring your unshaken love,
Behold them not with Rigor's chilling frowns,
Nor from your sight unfeelingly remove.
Unsway'd by Fashion's dull unseemly jest,
Still to the bosom let your infant cling,
There banquet often, an ever-welcome guest,
Unblam'd inebriate at that healthful spring.
With fond solicitude each pain assuage,
Explain the look, awake the ready smile;
Unfeigned attachment so shall you engage,
To crown with gratitude maternal toil:
So shall your daughters, in Affliction's day,
When over your form the gloom of age shall spread,
With lenient converse chase the hours away,
And smooth with Duty's hand the widowed bed:
Approach, compassionate, the voice of Grief,
And whisper patience to the closing ear;
From Comfort's chalice minister relief,
And in the potion drop a silial tear.
So shall your sons, when beauty's charms are fled,
When fades the languid luster in your eye;
When Flattery shuns her Hybla-drops to shed,
The want of beauty, and of praise, supply:
Even from the wreath that decks the warrior's brow,
Some chosen leaves your peaceful walks shall strew:
And even the flowers on classic ground that blow,
Shall all unfold their choicest sweets for you.
When to the embattled host the trumpet blows,
While at the call fair ALBION'S gallant train
Dare to the field their triple-number'd foes,
And chase them speeding over the martial plain:
The mother kindles at the glorious thought,
And to her son's renown adjoins her name;
For at the nurt'ring breast the Hero caught
The love of Virtue, and the love of Fame.
Or in the senate, when Britannia's cause
With generous themes inspires the glowing mind,
While listening Freedom grateful looks applause,
Pale Slavery drops her chain, and sculks behind:
With conscious joy the tender parent fraught,
Still to her son's renown adjoins her name;
For at the nurt'ring breast the Patriot caught
The love of Virtue, and the love of Fame:
Yet then, ascending still with bolder view,
Should the blessed youth to heavenly gists aspire,
While with keen eye he pierces nature through,
And his proud bosom owns a Muse of fire:
The Mother yields to Glory's soaring thought,
And darts of thrilling transport touch her frame;
For at the nurt'ring breast the Poet caught
The love of Virtue, and the love of Fame.
MATILDA.
Ou sont les entrailles, les cris, les emotions puiffantes de la Nature? --
C'est dans l'ame brulante et passionnee des Meres. Essai sur les Femmes.
OUTRAGEOUS did the loud wind blow
Across the sounding main:
The vessel tossing to and fro,
Could scarce the storm sustain.
MATILDA to her fearful breast
Held close her infant dear;
His presence all her fears increased,
And waked the tender tear.
Now nearer to the grateful shore
The shattered vessel drew:
The daring waves now ceased to roar,
Now shout the exulting crew.
MATILDA, with a Mother's joy,
Gave thanks to Heaven's power:
How fervent she embraced her boy!
How blessed the saving hour!
Oh! much deceived and hapless fair,
Though ceased the waves to roar,
Thou, from that fatal moment, never
Did taste of pleasure more:
For, stepping forth from off the deck,
To reach the welcome ground,
The Babe, unclasping from her neck,
Plunged in the gulf profound.
Amazement-chain'd! her haggard eye
Gave not a tear to flow,
Her bosom heaved no conscious sigh,
She stood a sculptured woe.
To snatch the child from instant death,
Some braved the threatening main,
And to recall his fleeting breath
Tried every art in vain.
But when the corse first met her view,
Stretched on the pebbly strand,
Roused from her ecstacy she flew,
And pierced the opposing band.
With tresses discomposed and rude,
Fell prostrate on the ground,
To the infant's lips her lips she glew'd,
And Sorrow burst its bound.
Now throwing round a troubled glance,
With Madness' ray inflamed,
And, breaking from her silent trance,
She wildly thus exclaimed;
"Heard ye the helpless infant scream?
"Saw ye the mother bold?
"How, as she flung him in the stream,
"The billows over him rolled?
"But soft, awhile -- see! there he lies,
"Embalmed in infant sleep:
"Why fall the dew-drops from your eyes?
"What cause is here to weep?
"Yes, yes -- his little life is fled,
"His heaveless breast is cold:
"What tears will not thy Mother shed,
"When thy sad tale is told!
"Ah me! that cheek of livid hue --
"That brow -- that auburn hair --
"Those lips where late the roses blew,
"All, all my Son declare.
"Strange thrilling horrors chill each vein --
"A voice in accents wild
"Thunders to this distracted brain,
"MATILDA slew her child!"
She added not -- but sunk oppressed --
Death on her eyelids stole
While from her grief-distracted breast
She sighed her tortured soul.
THE SWEDISH CURATE, A POEM.
ADVERTISEMENT.
CHRISTIERN the Second, king of Denmark, offered to appear in person at
Stockholm, to frame a treaty of peace, provided GUSTAVUS VASA remained a
hostage on board the Danish fleet. The king having by this stratagem secured
the illustrious Swede, forcibly carried him away to Denmark, where he was
imprisoned for a considerable time. GUSTAVUS at length found means of escaping
from his confinement; and traveling through Sweden in disguise, was received
by SUVERDSIO, a poor country curate, who, at the hazard of his life, concealed
him in the parish church, and informed him of every thing that had happened in
Sweden during his absence, particularly of the massacre of the senate at
Stockholm, in which the father of GUSTAVUS was included.

THE SWEDISH CURATE.
BENEATH the friendly veil that midnight spread,
GUSTAVUS to the patriot Priest was led,
An humble, plain, disinterested man,
Who reared his useful life on Virtue's plan:
Pleased to behold, entrusted to his care,
The hopes of Sweden, and fair Freedom's heir;
Lest hostile steps should their abode invade,
He to Religion's dome the Chief conveyed:
There unrestrained he gladly owned his guest,
And yielded to the zeal that fired his breast.
"Beneath yon hallowed lamp's resplendent light,
"Which glows a brilliant on the breast of Night.
"Let me thy long-lost image now survey,
"And grateful homage to GUSTAVUS pay:
"Opprefs'd, overthrown at CHRISTIERN'S dire decree,
"Unhappy Sweden still looks up to thee."
"Do thou with honest and indignant zeal,
The Hero answered, "speak of Sweden's weal?
"Lament the ills the Danish hands achieve?
"Or do thou flatter only to deceive?
"Then be it so -- call forth thy murdering train,
"And summon to my bier the cruel Dane;
"Thus to Preferment's summit shall thou rise,
"And catch the hovering mitre for thy prize."
"Misjudging Youth!" the sacred Seer replied,
"Suppress the injurious doubt, and still confide:
"Though indigent I stand! yet far above
"The hovering mitre is my country's love:
"Let others to the gilded cross aspire,
"And from the crozier catch Ambition's fire,
"And as they bask in LEO'S fost'ring ray,
"Their wealth, their pride, their pageantry display:
"Let me, by grandeur undisturbed, unseen,
"Content inspher'd in Duty's humbler scene,
"Sequestered lead my unaspiring days
"And quench at Virtue's fount the thirst of praise;
"Be mine to dwell amidst the village swains,
"Survey their pleasures, and partake their pains,
"Still to their wants unfold my little store,
"And place Contentment at the cottage-door.
"Ah! deem me then no longer Falshood's son,
"(By some dishonest meed's allurement won)
"Prompt to surprise thee with ignoble art,
"And through thy bosom pierce my country's heart.
"Avert it, Heaven! -- Shall on this hallowed ground,
"Where all Religion's terrors breathe around,
"Say, shall Venality, with artful mien,
"Dare to profane this venerable scene?
" -- Yon distant altar, dressed in simple guise,
"Which seems from out the encircling tombs to rise,
"From whose dread base at each returning day,
"While over the world ten lustres rolled away,
"I Have sent to Heaven, upon the wings of prayer,
"The hamlet's homage and the hamlet's care,
"Shall never behold me tottering over my grave,
"False to my country, treacherous, to the brave."
The Chief, convinced, replies -- "Oh! virtuous Seer,
"Thy firm intrepid zeal I now revere:
"That honour-breathing voice, those silver hairs,
"That candid brow, engraved with Wisdom's cares,
"All strike my soul with Truth's unclouded ray,
"Before whose warmth Suspicion melts away."
"Thrice happy hour!" the exulting Pastor said,
"Let injured Sweden raise her drooping head,
"For lo! her godlike Hero comes to save
"Her laws, her rights, her freedom from the grave.
" -- Urged in thy absence by intruding fears,
"We thought thee dead, and bathed that thought in tears."
"My death," the Chief returned, "the Dane decreed,
"But fear, the tyrant's curse, forbade the deed:
"Yet then the monarch spread his treacherous sails,
"And by the favor of conspiring gales,
"Conveyed me on his rapid bark away,
"To his entrusted faith an helpless prey:
"Can thou conceive the pangs that stung my breast,
"I who to Fame my ardent vows addressed,
"When for the unblemished luster of renown,
"That plays encircling on young Valor's crown,
"Condemned by Fortune's inauspicious doom,
"These eyes were blasted with a prison's gloom?
"In every plan, in all my wishes crossed,
"These arms, my zeal, my youth to Sweden lost.
"But Heaven, that watches with paternal care
"The blameless suff'rer, raised me from despair,
"Gave to my longing hopes the welcome hour,
"Decreed to snatch me from the Danish power:
"Yet then new Sorrows did my path pursue,
"In scenes presented to my mournful view:
"Still as I wandered over my native land,
"I marked the ravage of a tyrant's hand:
"Rich Industry had fled the naked plains,
"To Slav'ry's banners marched the unwilling swains:
"Each lofty seat that crowned the mountain's brow,
"And frowned defiance on the invading foe,
"Spoiled of its honors, desolate, disgraced
"Its turrets fallen, its battlements defaced!
"Seemed to the pensive traveller to say,
"Behold the dire effect, of lawless sway!
"The dreary scene unequal to sustain,
"I figh'd -- and languish'd for my chains again:
"Yet other ills, perchance, I Have still to know,
"Perchance GUSTAVUS feels but half his woe.
"Averfe to walk beneath the eye of day,
"Often through the night I urged my lonely way;
"Wherever I went my name I still suppressed,
"And locked each bold enquiry in my, breast."
The Priest renewed, "Heart-wounded I unveil,
"Replete with Sweden's woes, the covered tale:
"The barbarous scene now ripening into fate,
"The Danish King unbarr'd Destruction's gate Alluding to the massacre of the
senate at Stockholm.
:
"Stern Tyranny through trembling Stockholm bore
"Her torturing wheel, and axes stained with gore:
"While at her side a captive train appeared --
"Illustrious train! by Liberty revered:
"Still as they passed, they heard around them rise
"The people's loud laments and piercing cries:
"These eyes beheld (and do I live to tell?)
"How firm to Truth these patriot martyrs fell.
"First on the scaffold, proud to lead the way
"To honored death from ignominious day,
"Appeared -- Ah! let me not that scene disclose,
"And pour upon thy soul a flood of woes:
"Here will I pause -- yet wherefore thus conceal
"What babbling Fame will soon to thee reveal?
"Oh!I summon all thy fortitude of heart,
"For I must wound it in the tenderest part:
"He on the tragic scene who first appeared,
"To meet the bloody axe that CHRISTIERN reared,
"Unblam'd through life, a venerable Seer,
"For whom now gushes this unbidden tear,
"Who Virtue's steep ascent unrivaled won,
"Revered, regretted, called GUSTAVUS son!
The astonished Hero, at his words oppressed,
Like Sorrow's image stands with voice suppressed:
The Priest, unequal to dispense relief,
Stood at his side, enwrapp'd in silent grief.
-- Now breaking from the chains Affliction framed,
And bursting into voice, the Youth exclaimed:
"Oh injured spirit of my Father, hear!
"By yon dread altar, and these shrines, I swear,
"The base inhuman Dane the day shall rue
"He dared the scaffold with thy blood imbrue:
"A monitor within, to which I yield,
"Stirs and impels me to the avenging field."
He said -- a deeper darkness seemed to reign,
A hollow wind ran murmuring through the fane,
When lo! ascending from the realms of Night,
An awe-commanding spectre rushed to sight:
Around his temples seemed the civic wreath,
And thus prophetic spoke the Son of Death:
"Arise to vindicate the sacred laws,
"Revenge thy father's and thy country's cause:
"Arise! to MORA'S distant field repair,
"Where Freedom's banners catch the playful air;
"Beneath whose shade for thee impatient stand,
"Prepared to combat, an intrepid band:
"But whether in the bold ensanguin'd strife
"Thou shall or forfeit or prolong thy life --
"Thy foes shall fall -- This to thy knowledge given,
"The rest lies buried in the breast of Heaven:
"Still let my wrongs support thee in the fight -- "
He ceased -- and instant vanished into night.
The Pastor spoke -- "Go forth, illustrious Chief,
"At Heaven's commandment, to the realm's relief:
"Yet then indulge me in this bold request,
"Say, is each meaner thought subdued to rest?
"Say, in this solemn and important hour,
"Glows not thy bosom with the lust of power?"
"Not all the radiant sunbeams of renown,
"Nor yet the dazzling luster of a crown,
"Shall ever," the Youth replies, "this heart control:
" -- My country's love possesses all my soul.
"Even as the bird that from its ashes springs,
"And soars aloft upon exulting wings,
"So does my country's love its birth assume,
"And mount triumphant from the passions' tomb.
"But should I view, unnumber'd with the slain,
"'It Is all I ask, fair Freedom's future reign,
"Then from my gratitude thy voice shall claim
"All that thy want or fondest wish can frame.
"No splendid gifts," the virtuous man rejoined,
"Have power to move the duty-center'd mind:
"Yet would thy gratitude my love secure,
"Then be, Oh Chief! a father to the poor: --
"Illustrious offspring of an honored race,
"Allow my warm attachment this embrace."
He spoke -- and, with a love devoid of art,
He pressed GUSTAVUS to his feeling heart.
Now, breaking from the Youth's encircling arms,
Resigned him to his fate and War's alarms:
Then to the sacred altar he repaired,
And thus aloud his ardent vows preferred:
"Oh Thou that liv'st enshrined from mortal eye,
"Look down indulgent from thy sacred sky,
"See the bold Youth to valor's impulse yield,
"See, see him hastening to the embattled field!
" -- On Freedom's brow be his the wreath to twine!
"To see that happy glorious day be mine!"
He added not -- Heaven granted half his prayer,
The rest was scattered to the abortive air.
Scare had the Chief commenced his bold career,
When slept the Curate on the peaceful bier:
There heaved the village swain the fight profound,
There stood the grateful poor lamenting round.
Thus mourned, thus honored, fell the hallowed sage,
A bright example to each future age!
The hamlet, jealous of her Pastor's fame,
Adorned her simple annals with his name.
THE FUNERAL OF ARABERT, MONK OF LA TRAPPE, A POEM.
ADVERTISEMENT.
ARABERT, a young ecclesiastic, retired to the convent of LA TRAPPE, in
obedience to a vow he had taken during a fit of illness: LEONORA, with whom he
had lived in the strictest intimacy, followed her lover, and by the means of a
disguise, obtained admission into the monastery, where a few days after she
assisted at her lover's Funeral.

THE FUNERAL, etc.
FAIR LEONORA, by Affliction led,
Sought the dread dome where sleep the hallowed dead:
The solemn edifice was wrapped around
In midnight darkness, and in peace profound:
A solitary lamp, with languid light,
Served not to chase, but to disclose the night;
Served to disclose (the source of all her pains)
The tomb that gaped for ARABERT'S remains:
To this, she sent the deep, the frequent sigh,
And spoke -- the warm tear rushing from her eye.
'Doom'd to receive all that my soul holds dear,
'Give him that rest his heart refused him here:
'Oh! screen him from the pain the tender know,
'The train of sorrows that from passion flow!
'And to his happier envied state adjoin,
'(Or all is vain) an ignorance of mine.'
As thus she mourned, an aged priest drew near,
(Whose pure life glided as the riv'let clear)
The virtuous ANSELM. -- Though in cloisters bred,
Still bright-ey'd Wisdom to his cell he led:
From paths of sophistry he loved to stray,
To tread the walk where Nature led the way.
The Prior's rank he long had held approved,
Esteemed, revered, and as a parent loved:
Unskilful in the jargon of the schools,
He knew Humanity's diviner rules;
To others gentle, to himself severe,
On Sorrow's wound he dropped the healing tear.
In all the negligence of grief, he found
The fair extended on the naked ground.
Touched at her woe, the sacred Father said,
'Well may thou droop if Happiness be fled:
'Sure, if at holy ARABERT'S decease,
'Impetuous sorrows rush upon thy peace,
'Some much-loved friend in him you must deplore,
'Or, dearer still, a brother is no more:
'Yet, as through life our weary steps we bend,
'Let us not sink when beating storms descend:
'Still let Religion hold unrivaled sway,
'And Patience walk companion of our way.
'Ah, lose not sight of that delightful shore,
'Whose blissful bowers shall friends to friends restore!
'Tho' here Misfortune comes to blast our will,
'The Heavens are just, and GOD a Father still.'
'Blest be the voice,' the rising mourner said,
'That bids Affliction raise her drooping head:
'That bids me hope (beyond even Death's domain)
'These eyes shall banquet on my love again.
'Ah, start not, ANSELM -- for, to truth allied,
' Impiety now throws her mask aside:
'No holy Monk, by Contemplation led
'To these sequestered mansions of the dead;
'No Youth devoted to Religion's power,
'Implores thy pity at this awful hour. --
'The guilty secret I Will at length unfold --
'Im me -- (forgive!) a woman you behold.
' -- Ah, fly me not! let Mercy now prevail,
'And deign to mark my sad disast'rous tale.
'Known to Misfortune from my tender years,
'My parents' ashes drank my early tears:
'A barbarous uncle, to each vice allied,
'The office of a parent ill supplied:
'Of my entire inheritance possessed,
'By lucre prompted, and by fortune blessed,
'He passed the ocean never to return,
'And left me weeping over my parents' urn:
'Then ARABERT, the generous stranger, came,
'To soothe my sorrows, and relieve my shame:
'Beneath his tender care my woes decreased,
'More than Religion's, he was Pity's priest:
'To reach his bounty my affection strove,
'Till gratitude was heightened into love:
'Nor he at length refused the lover's part,
'The pity that adorned, betrayed his heart.
'How ardently he wished the nuptial rite
'In holy wedlock might our hands unite!
'But stern Religion at our vows exclaimed,
'And tore the bands that Love and Nature framed:
'For then devoted to her hallowed shrine,
'His country's laws forbade him to be mine.
'Tho' from my mind each flattering thought retired,
'And in my bosom Hope and Peace expired;
'Yet on their ruins Love triumphant rose:
'Enough -- shame over the rest a mantle throws:
'At length Remorse effaced the guilty scene,
'And to his breast applied her dagger keen;
'Restrain'd in full career the erring youth,
'And led him back to Innocence and Truth:
'Twas then he fled (divorced from Pleasure's chain)
'To woo Religion in this gloomy fane:
'Yet ere he fled, my bliss he fondly planned,
'And scattered riches with a lavish hand:
'Ah, what to me availed the golden store?
'The giver gone, the gift could charm no more.
'While in the gloom his tedious absence cast,
'My former life in fancy I repassed,
'Repentance gained admission to my breast,
'Nor did it enter an unwelcome guest:
'For never to Pleasure I dismissed the rein
'Free and unconscious of Reflection's pain;
'If hapless LEONORA loved too well,
'Content, fair Virtue's friend, with Virtue fell:
'But not my stubborn soul could prayer subdue,
'E'en grafted on remorse my passion grew;
'Too fatal passion -- by its impulse led,
'In man's attire to this retreat I fled:
'Yet then, even then to bashful Fear allied,
'Still over my Love did Modesty preside.
'In those calm moments that precede the night,
'When peaceful Nature wears a softened light,
'I met the Youth within the solemn grove,
'(His frequent walk) absorbed in heavenly love:
'By warm occasion eagerly impelled,
'A sudden fear my ready steps withheld:
'While God and he employ the trembling scene,
''Twere sacrilege, I cried, to rush between:
'Still from that hour my wishes I restrained,
'And in my breast the unwilling secret chained;
'Unknown to him, yet half-content I grew,
'So that his form might daily charm my view.
'But new Affliction, with relentless hand,
'O'erthrew the project that my heart had planned;
'Amid the horrors of the lonesome night,
'A ghastly spectre rushed upon my sight,
'And poured these accents on my trembling ear,
' Think not Impiety shall triumph here:
' Thy hopes are blasted -- Death's tremendous bell
' Shall sound, ere many hours, thy lover's knell:
'I started from my couch, with fright impressed,
'Flew to the fane to calm my anxious breast,
'By love then prompted -- yet by love dismayed,
'The peopled choir I tremblingly surveyed;
'Sill 'mid the innumerous monastic train,
'These eyes solicited his form in vain:
'Nor in the field or pensive grove retired
'Could I discover whom my heart required:
'Then sure (I cried) at this unhappy hour
'Does Anguish over his cell diffuse its power:
'Shall LEONORA not relieve his pain,
'And with these arms his drooping head sustain?
'Say, near the couch, when Death is stalking round,
'Shall not the spouse of his fond heart be found?
'Ah no -- the affection that subdues me still,
'At that dread moment checked my ardent will,
'Lest rushing on his sight I should control
'The holy thoughts that hovered over his soul.
'This lowering morn disclosed the fatal truth:
'Oh early lost -- oh loved -- oh hapless youth --
'Fix'd to the column of the hallowed porch --
''Twas scarcely light -- some Fury lent her torch --
'I read --
The pious ARABERT' s no more,
The peace the dead require, for him implore:
'Let peace, let joy, (I said) his spirit join,
'Nor joy nor peace must ever encircle mine.
'Lamented Youth! too tenderly allied,
'In vain you fled me, and in vain you died;
'Still to your image, which this breast inurns,
'My constant heart a lamp perpetual burns.
'But thou, to whom as friend he did impart
'Each latent wish and foible of the heart;
'For well I know, where Sorrow drops a tear,
'Or Misery complains, thou still art near;
'Ah say, by love did my known image dressed,
'Come to his mind thus welcome, thus carest?
'Or on his soul come rushing undesir'd,
'The fatal fair, by female arts inspired,
'Who dimmed the luster of his radiant name,
'And from his temples tore the flower of fame;
'Who through the winding maze of Pleasure's bower
'Allur'd (for beauty such as mine had power)
'E'en to the dangerous steep -- and cast him down
'From high repute to groveling disrenown? --
'Wretch that I am, to my distressful state
'There wanted not the addition of his hate:
'For him I plunged my artless youth in shame,
'Unlock'd reserve, and sacrificed my fame:
'Still, still I fear (unable to confide,)
'Before my ARABERT, the lover died:
'This thought (to thee I Will own) suspends my grief,
'While cold Indifference comes to my relief:
'Say, virtuous ANSELM, if this thought be vain,
'And give, Oh give me all my grief again!'
To her replied the pity-breathing seer,
'Mark well my words, and lose thy idle fear:
'When on the couch of Death the victim lay,
'Not in that moment was his friend away:
'As at his side I took my mournful stand,
'With feeble grasp he seized my offered hand,
'And thus began: -- "The fatal dart is sped,
"Soon, soon shall ARABERT increase the dead:
"'It Is well -- for what can added life bestow,
"But days returning still with added woe?
"Say, have I not secluded from my sight
"The lovely object of my past delight?
"Ah, had I too dethroned her from my mind,
"When here the holy brotherhood I joined,
"Remorse would not, increasing my disease.
"Prey on my soul, and rob it of its ease:
"And yet I strove, unequal to the part,
"Weak to perform the sacrifice of heart:
"And now, even now, too feeble to control,
"I feel her clinging to my parting soul."
'He spoke -- (my sympathetic bosom bled)
'And to the realms of Death his spirit fled.'
The fair rejoined: 'Misled by foul distrust,
'To him, whose heart was mine, am I unjust?
"Ah, ARABERT, the unwilling fault forgive,
'Dead to the alluring world, in thee I live:
'My thoughts, my deep regret, my sorrows own,
'No view, no object still but thee alone:
'At all the vengeance bursting from above,
'Alarm'd, I weep, I shudder, yet I love.'
As thus she spoke, the death-bell smote her ear,
While to the porch the funeral train drew near:
Ah, LEONORE, in that tremendous hour,
Did thou not feel all Heaven's avenging power,
When moving through the isle the choral band,
And vested priests, with torches in their hand,
Gave to thy view, unfortunately dear,
Thy lover sleeping on the untimely bier?
Collecting now at length her scattered force,
With trembling footsteps she approached the corse,
And, while she checked the conflict in her breast,
The wide-encircling throng she thus addressed:
'Well may ye mark me with astonished eyes,
'Audacious bypocrite in man's disguise;
'Who, urged by passion, dared with steps profane
'Approach the hallowed dome of Virtue's train:
'Lead me, ah lead me, to the dungeon's gloom,
'The rack prepare -- I yield me to your doom:
'Yet still should Pity in your breast abide,
'And Pity sure to Virtue is allied,
'To my distress benign attention lend,
'Your acts of rigor for a while suspend,
'Till over this bier ('it is Nature's kind relief)
'I've poured my plaints, and paid the rites of Grief:
'Ah! he was dearer to this bleeding heart,
'Far dearer than expression can impart.
'Thou who did place us in this vale of tears,
'Where Sorrow blasts the plant that Pleasure rears;
'If, as the tenets of our creed require,
'Thy wakened justice breathe immortal ire;
'If Love, from whence even here misfortunes flow,
'Beyond the grave is cursed with endless woe:
'Ah! not on ARABERT thy vengeance pour!
'On me, on me thy storm of anger shower!
'For I allured him far from Virtue's way,
'And led his youthful innocence astray:
'Ah! not in punishment our fate conjoin,
'He shared the rapture, but the guilt was mine.'
With trembling hand she now the veil withdrew, It Is usual to bury the monks of
La Trappe in their monastic habit, extended on a plank.

When lo, the well known features struck her view:
Absorpt in grief she cast a fond survey --
At length her thoughts in murmurs broke away:
'That eye -- which shed on mine voluptuous light,
'Alas! how sunk in everlasting night!
'See from those lips the living color fled,
'Where Love resided, and where Pleasure fed!
'And where bright Eloquence had poured her store
'Dumb Horror sits -- and Wisdom is no more:
'Yet ere the worm (since this is doomed its prey)
'Shall steal the lingering likeness quite away,
'On that cold lip sure LEONORE may dwell,
'And, free from guilt, imprint the long farewell:'
She added not -- but bending low her head,
Three times the mourner kissed the unconscious dead.
Now holy ANSELM urged her to restrain
Her boundless grief, in reverence of the fane:
She answered, starting from the sable bier,
'Can I forget that ARABERT was dear?
'Can I, cold monitor! at once uproot
'Th' affections from my in most soul that shoot?
'Can I forget, as destitute I lay,
'To sickness, grief, and penury a prey,
'How eagerly he flew at Pity's call,
'Put forth his hand, and raised me from my fall?
'All unsolicited he gave me wealth,
'He gave me solace, and he gave me health:
'And, dearer than the bliss those gifts impart,
'He strained me to his breast, and gave his heart:
'And shall these hallowed walls and awful fane
'Reproach the voice that pours the praiseful strain?
'Say, at the friend's, the guardian's, lover's tomb,
'Can Sorrow sleep, and Gratitude be dumb?
'But I submit -- and bend thus meekly low,
'To kiss the avenging hand that dealt the blow:
'Resign'd I quit the losing path I trod,
'Fall'n is my idol -- and I worship God.'
She ceased -- the choir intones the funeral song,
Which holy echoes plaintively prolong;
And now the solemn organ, tuned to woe,
Poured the clear notes pathetically slow:
These rites performed -- along the extending fane
She now attends the slow-proceeding train;
Who over the mournful cypress-shaded way,
To the expecting tomb the dead convey.
See now the priests the closing act prepare,
And to the darksome vault commit their care:
At this dread scene, too feelingly distressed,
She poured the last effusions of her breast:
'Come, guardian Seraph, from thy throne above,
'And watch the tomb of my departed love!'
She paused -- then (over the yawning tomb reclined)
In all the tenderness of grief rejoined:
'Oh Beauty's flower -- Oh Pleasure ever new --
'Oh Friendship, Love, and Constancy, adieu!
'Ye virtues that adorned the unhappy Youth,
'Affection, Pity, Confidence, and Truth,
'The generous thoughts that with the feeling dwell,
'And sympathy of heart -- farewell, farewell!
'Not all of ARABERT this tomb contains,
'All is not here while LEONORE remains:
'Methinks a voice even animates the clay,
'And in low accents summons me away:
' Haste, LEONORE -- thy other self rejoin,
' And let thy glowing ashes mix with mine.
'Ah, trust me, ARABERT! to share thy doom,
'Prepar'd, resolved, I Will meet thee in the tomb:
'Forbear, Oh Heaven, in pity to these tears,
'To curse my sorrow with a length of years!
'When this grief-drooping form shall press the bier,
'Say, virtuous ANSELM, will thou not be near,
'To grace the close of my unhappy doom,
'And lay these limbs in this lamented tomb?
'Thus when this tortured heart shall cease to rave,
'Our blended dust shall warm the faithful grave:
'Nor distant far is that releasing hour,
'For Nature now, oppressed beyond her power,
'Resigns at length my troubled soul to rest,
'And Grief's last anguish rushes through my breast.'
Behold her now extended on the ground,
And see the sacred brethren kneeling round:
Them she addresses in a fault'ring tone,
'Say, cannot Death my daring crime atone?
'Ah, let Compassion now your hearts inspire,
'Amid your prayers I unalarm'd expire.
'Thou who art even in this dread moment dear,
'Oh, shade of ARABERT, still hover near:
'I come.' -- And now, emerging from her woes,
('It Was Love's last effort) from the earth she rose;
And, strange to tell! with strong affection fraught,
She headlong plunged into the gloomy vault:
And there, what her impassioned wish required,
On the loved breast of ARABERT expired.
WRITTEN IN Mr. HUME'S HISTORY.
BIG with the tales of other years,
I view the historic tome;
Which to the pensive mind appears
A deep capacious tomb:
Where long embalmed by CLIO'S hand.
The patriot and the slave,
Who saved, and who betrayed the land,
Press one extensive grave:
With those that grasped the imperial helm,
And trod the path of Power:
With those who graced fair Learning's realm,
And Beauty's fairer bower.
If thus the illustrious close their scene,
Oblivion then may laugh:
What flows from HUME'S recording pen
Is but an Epitaph!
IMITATED From the FRENCH.
STRAYING beside yon wood-screen'd river,
Dan Cupid met my wondering view;
His feathered arrows stored his quiver,
Each feather glowed a different hue:
'For him who frames the daring deed,
'(The little Godhead said, and laughed)
'To fly with Miss beyond the Tweed,
'An eagle's plume adorns the shaft.
'The prattler, vain of his address,
'The magpye's feathers never fail;
'And for the youth too fond of dress,
'I rob the gaudy peacock's tail.
'Whene'er I mean to rouse the care
'That lurks within the jealous heart,
'The owl that wings the midnight air
'Lends his grave plume to load the dart.
'But rarely when I would assail
'The constant heart with truth impressed,
'Then for the trembling shaft I steal
'A feather from the turtle's breast:
'Lo! one with that soft plumage crowned,
'Which more than all my arms I prize!'
' -- Alas!' I cried, 'this gave the wound,
'When late you shot from JULIA'S eyes.'
FOR THE VASE AT BATH EASTON This poetical institution ceased at the death of
LADY MILLAR, 1781; which event has been celebrated by MISS SEWARD.
UPON DREAMS. NOVEMBER, 1777.
I.
As Echo's voice returns the pleasing lay,
So is a Dream the echo of the day:
The busy thoughts that round some object teem
Often join in sleep to form the nightly theme;
Then bright-ey'd Fancy lifts her magic wand,
While scenes unreal rise at her command;
Then Comedy, with all her laughing train,
Straight issues from the porch of Comus' fane,
And bringing with her all her pleasing wiles,
Her pranks, her gambols, and her winning smiles,
She bids her merry troop approach the bed,
And beat their airy dance round ANSTEY'S head.
II.
Still when some chosen Fair commands the heart,
Gay Fancy acts at night her mimic part:
With skilful hand she decks the living scene,
And ushers to the view the bosom's Queen.
Ye Lovers, answer to the truth I sing;
Say, does not Fancy to your slumber bring,
Dressed by each grace, in Beauty's best array,
The welcome Fair who charmed you through the day?
Does not her form return to glad the sight,
Like Cynthia bursting through the cloud of night?
How pleased each well-known feature we descry,
That look of sense -- that eloquence of eye! --
She speaks -- her words, beyond vain Music's art,
Steal on our slumber, and enchant the heart.
III.
Sometimes a dream anticipates the date,
Comes as a prophet to reveal our fate:
And thus, ere YORICK sunk into the tomb,
The Priest of sentiment foresaw his doom:
'Twas night -- his solitary couch he pressed,
Till sorrow-worn he wearied into rest;
ELIZA then soft gliding on his view,
Thus over his slumber breathed her sad adieu:
'Oh thou, my guardian, confident, and friend,
'To what thy handmaid now reveals attend:
'No longer now the gift of Health implore,
'The curtain drops, and thy short scene is over;
'Yet ere thy feeling spirit takes its flight
'To yonder regions of celestial light,
'Some fond endearment to ELIZA show,
'And thy last blessing on thy Child bestow.'
The Vision ceased -- yet then the shaul she spread See the Letters to ELIZA.

To raise compassionate his drooping head,
And (from her eyes as beads of sorrow fell)
Low on her knees received his last farewell.
FOR THE VASE AT BATH EASTON. DISSIPATION.
I.
IF Hope, the friend of Man, extend a ray
Along the sky of some far distant day;
Gay Dissipation boasts a friendlier power,
She breaks the gloom that dims the present hour!
Even painter-like she takes her ready stand,
A radiant pencil decks her skilful hand,
And with the colors of her magic art
She gilds the cloud that settles on the heart,
II.
This Proteus often takes a different frame:
To Heroes she assumes the shape of Fame;
To suckling Bards she rolls the river Came;
To Dowagers she takes the form of Pam.
III.
Could CELIA long endure a country life;
The prim false-breeding of the attorney's wife;
The parson's pun; the husband's duller joke;
The folitary walk; the raven's croak;
Did not the Goddess act the Prophet's part,
And to her mournful votary impart
The wished for blessings that are doomed to crown
The cheerful hours that glide within the town,
And paint young Pleasure's gayly-vested train
With all the conquests of the next campaign?
And even in town could she endure the weight
Of the long after-dinner tete-a-tete,
Did not the Goddess to her mind recall
The approaching splendors of the evening ball?
IV.
Behold, encircled with Affliction's gloom,
BELINDA watches at her husband's tomb;
Beneath the oppressive weight of grief she bends,
Like the pale lily when the rain descends:
But Dissipation, with her soothing aid,
Forbids the beauteous drooping flower to fade.
The Fair intends, in proof of her distress,
To wear the mourning of the days of Bess!
But in obedience to the present court,
Kind Dissipation bids her wear the short.
At her command, while tears bedew her cheeks,
BELINDA through the veil of mourning peeps;
Her pulse beats quicker as she then surveys
The approaching prospect of more happy days:
At length the change of mourning brings relief,
And at the change she loses half her grief.
Now on the joys that meet her on the way,
The mourner casts a fearful coy survey:
Now less reserved, a bolder view she sends,
And bolder still she Pleasure's bark ascends,
Where laughing HEBE grasps the glittering helm,
To guide the vessel to the Idalian realm.
Now soft recorders send a soothing sound,
And in the notes affliction's plaints are drowned;
The sails grow pregnant with the wanton air,
Not unregarded by the conscious Fair,
Who glides obedient to the favoring wind,
And leaves the gloom of widowhood behind.
An ENGLISH OFFICER in the late war being taken prisoner by the French Indians,
became the slave of an old INDIAN CHIEF, who treated him with humanity. One day
the Indian took the Officer up a hill, and addressed him as follows: See the
Anecdotes of Literature, vol. 5th.

THE INDIAN CHIEF.
'TWELVE tedious moons have thou my captive been,
'I've taught thee how to build the swift canoe,
'To chase the boar, prepare the beaver's skin,
'To speed the shaft, and scalp the shrieking foe.
'Say, does thy Father sleep within his grave?' --
'Oh Heaven forbid!' the feeling Youth replied --
'Then do his sorrows all my pity crave,'
The Chief returned -- ' 'Twere better he had died.
'I was a Father once -- oh valiant son!
'Thy loss each lowering morn and eve recall.
'To shield my years, to Danger's path he run;
'These eyes beheld the gallant warrior fall:
'And Glory saw him fall with wounds overspread,
'Bold on his bosom every wound he bore:
'I rent the forelock from his murd'rer's head,
'And left him breathless on the crimson shore.
'Since that sad day my hours no pleasure share' --
The Indian Chief now paused, with sorrow fraught,
Wrapped in the awful silence of despair;
At length in words he clothed his mournful thought.
'Behold that sun! how bright it shines to you!
'Since that sad day to me it looks a cloud:
'How gay you blooming roses meet your view!
'To me Grief drops over Nature's breast a shroud.
'Go, virtuous Stranger! to thy Father go,
'Wipe from his furrowed cheek Misfortune's tear:
'Go, bid the sun to him his splendour show,
'And bid the flower in all her bloom appear.'
INSCRIPTION FOR A REED-HOUSE
Say, if to shun the noisy day,
The summer sun's oppressive ray,
Thou visit'st Contemplation's cell,
Here tarry -- she will repay thee well:
For she can bid each passion cease,
And sooth the troubled heart to peace,
Can to thy sober wishes yield
Contentment's flower and Wisdom's shield.
At Cossy, the Seat of Sir WILLIAM JERNINGHAM.
THE VENETIAN MARRIAGE.
THE western sun's expiring ray
TO VENICE gave a milder day;
Till by degrees the lingering light
Serenely softened into night.
CAMILLA then, with fearful soul,
To the Adriatic margin stole,
Where in a bark, at Love's command,
PLACENTIO took his faithful stand:
Possessing now his future bride,
He bade the bark securely glide,
Which far unlike that gally showed
That down the silver Cydnus rowed,
Beneath whose purple sails were seen
Proud Ostentation's gaudy Queen,
Who sure of conquest, vain of mind,
All languishingly lay reclined!
Here Beauty undefiled by art,
Whose bosom owned a tender heart,
Beneath the sails from home removed,
And trusted to the man she loved.
A soothing calmness lulled the deep,
And hushed each wavy surge to sleep:
The air along the sultry day,
Scorched by the summer's fervent ray,
Was freshen'd by a recent shower,
While silence solemnized the hour.
The still solemnity impressed
With awful thoughts CAMILLA'S breast:
For now by prompting Love impelled,
Now by Timidity withheld,
The words she to her lips applied
Recoiled, and unaccented died.
PLACENTIO too, alike subdued,
They sailed along in silent mood,
And stillness reigned from shore to shore,
Unbroke -- but by the dashing oar.
At length the Fair dissolved the charm --
'Ah, wonder not I feel alarm:
'Confiding in thy love I came,
'And risk'd for thee my virgin fame:
'Ah tell me to what place we sail,
'For in my bosom fears prevail: --
'Yet answer not this idle fear,
'Where'er thou art, bright Honor's there.'
'The plan I form,' the Youth replied,
'To Innocence is close allied,
'And fearful of thy virgin fame
'As of her babe the tender dame.
' -- These waves, that wander to the sea,
'Wash in their pilgrimage a tree,
'Which spreads its lowly branches wide,
'And dips them in the passing tide:
'There, in a shed composed of reeds,
'An aged hermit tells his beads:
'He, generous Sage! will join our hand,
'In wedlock's unremitting bands.
'Then to VALCLUSA we'll repair,
'Where LAURA's soul informs the air:
'Where PETRARCH'S spirit hovers round,
'The guardian of the sacred ground,
'Forbidding still the fiend of art,
'That shrewd perverter of the heart,
'The snake, Inconstancy, to rove
'Within the paradise of Love.
'As when the winter's storms are fled
'The fearful snow-drop lifts her head,
'So may that whiter flower, thy breast,
'Wake into life, from fears released,
'Mild as these twilight breezes blow,
'Still as the waves on which we flow!'
'Ye walls where first I drew the air!'
Returned (assured) the beauteous Fair;
'Ye turrets which but dimly seen
'Encrease the terror of the scene!
'Ye stately towers! and rising spires!
'From you CAMILLA now retires.
'Thou tomb whose pious urn contains
'My facred Parents' cold remains!
'Ye partners of my tender years,
'Whom youthful sympathy endears!
'Ye joys that crown my native coast! --
'Well for PLACENTIO all are lost.'
She ceased -- and on her pensive soul
Again an awful musing stole,
Such as the twilight scene excites,
Such as the feeling heart delights;
For as the coy nocturnal flower The night-smelling Geranium.

No more its sweets at eve withholds,
So the meek heart at the evening hour
Its sensibility unfolds.
The mild enlivener of the night
Now yields her kind directing light!
As from the wood's deep bosomm sprung,
Her sober radiance round she flung,
The trees that slept along the shore
With light's soft veil she mantled over;
The bending tower of old renown
She rounded with a silver crown:
The antique fane now rose to view,
Envelop'd in the purest hue:
Behold the luster spreading wide
Illuminates the ocean-tide,
While placid beams serenely gay
Like star-drops on her bosom play!
This beauteous soul-subduing sight,
Diffusing round a calm delight,
With sympathetic touch impressed
The seat of Love, PLACENTIO'S breast:
'Behold,' he cried, with Pleasure's voice,
'Thou Beauty's flower, Affection's choice!
'Behold how Nature decks the night,
'And clothes her scenes with vestal light!
'Methinks kind Heaven displays its power
'To decorate thy nuptial hour.'
At length they reach the sacred cell
Where Wisdom, Peace, and Virtue dwell;
There, bent beneath the weight of age,
They find prepared th'expecting Sage.
He hailed them in a friendly tone,
And bade them call his cell their own:
Where rose an altar formed of moss,
Crowned with a simple wooden cross!
There too a taper, mildly bright,
Supplied a pompous glare of light.
No holy relick rich-enchas'd
This humble low-roof'd temple graced:
But flowrets from the neighboring wood
The unambitious alter strewn:
For incense they exhaled perfume,
For ornament they gave their bloom.
The Hermit spoke -- 'Hail, virtuous pair,
'May sorrow now your bosom spare!
'Tho' youth be yours, yet well I know
'You've tasted deep of human woe:
'Control, and Art, and Baseness joined
'To cancel what your hearts designed:
'But now Misfortune's reign is over,
'And Pleasure opens all her store.'
See now the youthful Pair unite
To meet the hymeneal rite:
Pronouncing, as they lowly bow,
Warm from the heart, the hallowed vow:
At length the Hermit joins their hands
In willing and unvenal bands,
Unspotted-bands! which mutual Love,
And Considence, and Virtue wove.
THE MEXICAN FRIENDS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
The subline instance of heroic friendship that forms the subject of this Poem,
is recorded by ANTONIO DE SOLIS, in his History of Mexico. This is an episode
of a more extensive poem, which is suppressed: This episode is retained, as
being the part of that poem which was favorably received. Two fragments, which
met with the same distinction, are also preserved.

THE MEXICAN FRIENDS.
Two valiant Youths (whom Friendship's holy hand
Had joined with her indissoluble band)
Beheld indignant, smit with patriot grief,
The great achievements of the hostile chief:
And now JANELLAN thus accosts his Friend: --
'Firm to no purpose, active to no end,
' See from our gallant men yon hallowed tower
'Already ravished by the invading power:
'Must this, committed to our mutual care,
'The same defeat, the same dishonor share?
'If so -- the victor shall not long survive --
'A thought that bids my fading hope revive,
'A though -- that like the thunder-flash of night
'Darts on my darkened mind a radiant light --
'But ere my veiled designment I unfold,
'Declare, however rash, however bold,
'Thou'lt not o'ershade with Caution's chill control,
'The warm, the splendid purpose of my soul.'
VENZULA to his breast his hand applied,
And thus, beyond the power of words, replied.
The Youth resumed -- 'From this aerial height.
'Bid thy bold vision take its deepest flight,
'Down to yon rock, far stretching over the shore,
''Gainst which the raging waves incessant roar,
'Whose clashing voices into stillness fade,
'Ere this tremendous distance they pervade:
'If Fortune bless what my proad counsels urge,
'Yon waves shall murmur soon the victor's dirge!
'My secret project I will now unveil: --
'Should CORTEZ over this valiant band prevail,
'Should through controulment, and through stubborn force,
'Pour like a torrent his destructive course,
'When on this summit first he shall appear,
'I will advance, with well dissembled fear,
'And, suppliant as I kneel to win this grace,
'I'll dauntless lock him in a stern embrace,
'Bear him reluctant to yon giddy steep,
'Where yawns a dreadful opening to the deep,
'And thence -- self-ruin'd for my country's good --
'Plunge with her foe into the whelming flood!'
VENZULA answered -- 'Yes, I much admire
'What now thy matchless virtue dares inspire:
'But will thou, with an avarice of same,
'The meed of Glory all exclusive claim?
'Wilt thou to perils close to Death adjoin'd
'Advance, and leave thy faithful Friend behind?
'In infancy we shared the glittering toys,
'And in one circle played our harmless joys:
'And when we quitted Childhood's lowly vale,
'Where springing flowrets scent the playful gale,
'Still hand in hand we climbed youth's arduous height,
'Whence greater scenes expanded on the sight,
'Still our pursuits consenting to one plan,
'Like wedded streams our lives united ran:
'And will thou now oppose the sacred tide,
'And bid the friendly waves disparting glide?'
JANELLAN spoke -- 'Endearing Youth! forgive:
'The conqu'ror of some future CORTEZ live!
'Nor mark my fall with Grief's dejected brow,
'View from my death the bright effects that flow:
'Behold the tomb that Gratitude shall raise,
'Illustrious signal of my Country's praise.'
To this the brave VENZULA made reply,
And as he spoke, tears started from his eye:
'What though Felicity, thy gift, shall stream
'Sunlike over MEXICO with brightest beam,
'Not all the splendor that her rays impart,
'Will ever illumine my benighted heart,
'When destitute of thee, its only ray,
'Without the hope of kind returning day.
'Yet then to this great argument adjoin'd
'Sublimer motives urge my steady mind:
'Recal, recall that joy-diffusing hour,
'When gay Prosperity adorned my bower,
'As thy fair sister, half-afraid to speak,
'With downcast look, and blush-embellish'd cheek,
'At Love's request assented to be mine:
'Of fleeting bliss vain momentary shine!
'For she, in flower of Youth and Virtue's bloom,
'Was swept untimely to the ravenous tomb:
'As sorrow-wounded over her couch I hung,
'To catch the tones that faded as they sprung,
' The God, she said, now summons me away,
' Far from the confines of the endearing day:
' Thou of the life I lose the dearest part,
' Thou chosen spouse! thou sunbeam of my heart,
' Say, by Affection's glowing hand impressed,
' Shall I not live in thy recording breast?
' If sacred be the suff'rer's last desires,
' Revere what now my parting soul requires:
' I leave a brother, by bright Honor reared,
' By all approved, and much to me endeared:
' Be, for the sister's love, the brother's Friend;
' Nor from his side depart when storms descend:
' The palm of Glory waving in your sight,
' In council, peril, enterprise unite.'
'Shall I, when danger calls, consign to air
'The last bequeathing wishes of the Fair?
'Perdition catch the base unmanly thought!
'By Love's subliming purest dictates taught,
'Amid the perils that around thee wait,
'View me resolved to share the impending fate:
Now to this spot the foe impels the war,
'Discordance screams, opposing lances jar:
'The steep ascent, lo! CORTEZ now has gained,
'Ah! mark his spear with streaming gore distained!
The illustrious Youths now act their dread design:
See at the victor's knee they low incline!
Now clasp with circling force the incautious foe,
And close adhering to his figure grow:
Their deadly aim his better fate controlled,
With matchless power he bursts their stubborn hold:
The heroes, blasted in their bold intent,
Approached (Death hovering near) the dire descent:
Then, in each other's circling arms intwin'd,
In energetic harmony combined:
'Twas Friendship, burning with meridian flame,
One cause -- one thought -- one ruin -- and one fame:
Tremendous moment! See, they fall from light,
And dauntless rush to never-ending night!
Ye self-devoted patriot victims, hail!
Oblivion's gulf shall never entomb your tale:
While History to Time's extremest goal
Her stream majestic shall through ages roll,
Like two fair flowrets on one stem that blow,
Ye on her margin shall for ever glow.
The MEXICANS having gained an advantage over the SPANIARDS, and having buried
the troops (that were slain in the action) in a large field, GUATIMOZINO, the
emperor of MEXICO, thus addresses the place of interment:

GUATIMOZINO's SPEECH, AT THE PLACE OF INTERMENT.
"HAIL, sepulcher, which every coward shuns!
"Thou glorious hecatomb of Valor's sons!
"On thee, oh sacred altar of renown,
"The Eternal Being looks (...) down!
"They, they are dear to that all seeing eye,
"Who greatly daring act, or bravely die.
"Let this suggestion sooth the bleeding heart,
"In which Despair has lodged his poisoned dart:
"To you I speak, ye fair afflicted train,
"Who weep for brothers, friends, and lovers slain:
"To you I speak, ye widows plunged in care;
"And you whose sons stern fate refused to spare."
As thus he said -- deep from some breast unknown
Burst unsubdued Affliction's piercing moan,
Now intermitting, now returning loud --
At length, advancing through the wondering crowd,
A matron-form the attentive hero viewed,
Her robe neglected, and her tresses rude;
With hurried step the royal Youth she sought,
Her wild eye speaking the inexpressive thought:
Close at her side a lovely boy appears --
Now through opposing grief her voice she rears:
"Give, give to me the virtue that repels
"The whelming surge of Sorrow as it swells!
"Two valiant sons, in age my comfort's store,
"My loved, my duteous children, are no more:
"This morn, this direful morn, a prey to fears,
"I bathed our parting with presaging tears:
"That they expired on Honor's sacred bed,
"That their souls mingle with the illustrious dead,
"Well do I know -- and glory in the thought:
"Bright Virtue's flame, perchance, from me they caught,
"From me the instructive lesson first they claimed,
"This bosom nurtured, and this voice inflamed.
"Yet ill with this vain pomp of splendid words
"My drooping, loaded, sinking heart accords:
"Ah! still to Glory's though despair succeeds,
"And the agonizing Mother inly bleeds.
"This orphan babe to you I now bequeath,
"With Honor's brightest flowers his mind inwreath."
The child, half-conscious of the mother's grief,
As if attempting to dispense relief,
Stretched forth his little arms, and playful smiled:
In vain the boy her scorpion thoughts beguiled;
Inclining at his call her anguish'd face,
Death-struck she perished in the wished embrace.
GUATIMOZINO having opposed the Spaniards with great bravery in various
engagements, was at length defeated and taken prisoner. In order to extort from
him a discovery of the principal mines, he was laid on burning coals: The
second in command was also condemned to the same torture, and amidst his
susserings called upon his royal master, to be released from the vow of
secrecy; which drew from GUATIMOZINO these memorable words: Am I on a bed of
roses? -- When the flames had entirely consumed the unfortunate Hero, the
High Priest of Mexico approached the pile, and lamented the fate of his royal
Master.

THE SPEECH OF THE HIGH PRIEST, AT THE PILE.
WHEN first the inhuman deed appalled his sight,
Even as the cedar shrunk in sudden blight
He stood -- while, at the dire appearance thrilled,
Each function of the soul numb Horror chilled:
At length, relenting into conscious grief,
The Seer exclaimed -- "Oh loved, oh hapless Chief!
"The ashes still that feed yon lingering flame,
"Do they of all thou art the existence claim?
"Long schooled in pale Adversity's rude porch,
"Where Hope's gay scenes are burnt by Havock's torch,
"For me, with grief adjoin'd to age oppressed,
"Remained but this to cleave my care-worn breast.
"In early youth to me thou wast consigned,
"I watched the dawn of thy celestial mind,
"I saw, by Nature waked, thy talents rise,
"And Virtue mark them with her brightest dies.
"Ah! what avail these fruitless tears I shed?
"Tho'thou art gone -- yet Vengeance is not dead:
"The pregnant womb of Time" -- He added not --
While from his eye a radiant meaning shot.
His bosom heaved with a prophetic throe,
Till language gave his struggling thoughts to flow.
"Methinks Futurity, celestial Maid,
"Through distant Time's dim lengthening isle displayed,
"Pours on my favored vision days unborn,
"That pant impatient for the lingering morn:
"Smooth as the clear expanse of vernal skies,
"A world of water claims my wondering eyes;
"See on its wavy breast, in splendid pride,
"Innum'rous brigantines triumphant ride The SPANISH Armada failed in 1588,
disposed in the form of a crescent, and stretching the distance of seven miles
from the extremity of ane division to that of the other.

"Mark how the gorgeous mass advancing ploughs
"The groaning main with high aspiring prows:
"Secure in all the haughtiness of strength,
"It moves a crescent of tremendous length,
"And big with thunders and destructive force,
"To BRITAIN'S coast directs its threatening course.
"Often has LAS CASAS, in applauding strain,
"To me revealed that sea-encircled plain.
"Thou Glory of the West! Enchantment's isle,
"Where beauteous maids on godlike heroes smile:
"By Nature's hand with Nature's chaplet crowned,
"In arts, in commerce, and in arms renowned;
"August, magnificent, exalted Dame,
"As with a garment robbed in Freedom's flame!
"Arise, arise -- forestall the intended blow,
"See to thy portal sails the audacious foe,
"Another scenery is now displayed,
"No more the main assembled vessels shade,
"A beggared remnant (of the splendid throng
"That swept in conscious majesty along)
"With prows disfigured, and dishonored masts,
"While through the rent sails mourn the hollow blasts,
"In shattered, mean, dismantled, rude array,
"Steal over the waves their ignominious way.
"Oh! of thy brilliant and extensive train
"Do these, ARMADA, these alone remain?
"Who has overthrown the honors of thy helm?
"The voice of Fame replies -- ELIZA'S realm! --
"Where lurk thy galleons that surprised the deep?
"Loud Fame replies -- In Ocean's tomb they sleep!
"And of HISPANIA once the bright renown,
"Now glows an added gem to BRITAIN'S crown."
The curiosity of an ignorant MEXICAN, concerning the origin of the Air, is so
poetically expressed in the following lines, that the Editor thinks himself
justified in re-printing them, though they were omitted by the Author in the
last edition of his Poems.

"WHENCE is that veering spirit of the sky,
"Whose secret form eludes the human eye;
"Who now, unmindful of its matchless power
"Indulgent whispers to the vernal flower,
"Plays with her leaves, and hovering over her bloom
"From her young breast allures the enclosed perfume:
"And now; envelop'd in a sullen mood,
"Tempestuous rushes on the groaning wood;
"Armed with destructive energy, invades,
"Despoils, devasts the consecrated shades?"
THE ANCIENT ENGLISH WAKE; A POEM.
ADVERTISEMENT.
The Wake is of very great antiquity in this country. It was held on the day of
the Dedication, that is, on the day of the saint to whom the village church was
dedicated. Booths were erected in the churchyard and on the adjacent plain,
and after divine service the rest of the time was devoted to the occupations of
the fair, to merriment and festivity.

See BOURNE's Antiquities of the Common People, with Observations by Mr. BRAND.

The merchants, who frequented the fairs in numerous caravans or companies,
employed every art to draw the people together. They were therefore accompanied
by jugglers, minstrels, and buffoons. WARTON'S History of English Poetry, vol.
ii. p. 367. THE ANCIENT ENGLISH WAKE.
HARK! how the merry, merry bells resound,
To summon to the Wake the hamlets round:
The villagers, in all their best array,
Go forth to celebrate the festive day.
Now from the moat-encircled castle came
An aged Chief, who graced the roll of Fame:
Who knows not, A celebrated character in the reign of HENRY the Third.
CHESTER'S Earl, to worth allied,
The boast of chivalry, and valor's pride?
From courts and busy camps at length retired,
To deeds of Fame no longer he aspired:
Pleased, far sequestered from the voice of praise,
To give to peace his last remaining days,
And while life's hourglass near its period stands,
To watch and pray beside the closing sands.
But, 'mid the stillness of retirement's shade,
Domestic sorrow on his bosom preyed:
A Daughter, framed his favor to engage,
Pride of his house, and soother of his age,
Her native mansion had abruptly fled --
The veil of darkness over the rest was spread.
Often of his child some welcome news to gain
The tortured Father sought, but sought in vain.
He strives (this day) his sorrows to beguile,
And hide his anguish with a sickly smile.
The hoary Pastor, near the village-fane,
Received the honored Chief and all his train:
This holy, meek, disinterested man
Had formed his useful life on duty's plan:
Unpracticed in those arts that teach to rise,
The vacant mitre never allured his eyes.
Regardless still of dissipation's call,
He seldom tarried at the festive hall,
Where all around the storied texture hung,
Where psaltries sounded, and where minstrels sung;
But to the humble cot's neglected door
The sacred man the balm of comfort bore:
Still would he listen to the injured swain,
For he who listens mitigates the pain:
There was he seen reclining over the bed,
Where the pale maiden bowed her anguish'd head;
Where, reft of hope, the yielding victim lay,
And like a wreath of snow dissolved away:
With feeling soul the Pastor often inquired
Where the meek train of silent grief retired,
Shame, that declines her sorrows to impart,
The drooping spirit, and the broken heart.
He never the friar's gaping wallet fed,
But to the widow sent his loaf of bread:
His fee to ROME reluctantly he paid,
And called the Pardoner's a pilf'ring trade,
The sacred Psalter well he knew to gloss,
And on its page illuminate the cross:
The written Missal on the altar seen,
Enclosed in velvet of the richest green,
Displayed initials by his fancy planned,
Whose brilliant colors owned his skilful hand.
This gaily-letter'd book his art devised,
The temple's only ornament comprised:
The hallowed service of this modest fane
(Far from the splendour of a choral train)
Could boast no labored chant, no solemn rites,
No clouds of incense, and no pomp of lights;
But at the plain and lowly altar stands
The village-priest with pure uplifted hands,
Invoking from above Heaven's guardian care,
In all the meek simplicity of prayer.
Famed CHESTER, now returning from the fane,
Surveys the tents gay-spreading over the plain:
Beneath whose roof the merchant-band displayed
The cheerful scenery of active trade:
While some, intent on wealth, with sober view,
The graver purport of the fair pursue;
Some, of a free and roving mind, partake
The various callings of the busy Wake;
These urge the prescient seer, deep-vers'd in fate,
Some passage of their story to relate:
There the fond maid, solicitous to know
Some future instance of her joy or woe,
Attends, half unbelieving, half sincere,
To the vague dictates of the artful Seer.
Lo, where the trader all his art employs
To rear the pageantry of holy toys,
And on the simple rustics shed the glare
Of gaudy Superstition's lighter ware:
Here beads hung round in many a splendid row,
In crystal, glitter, or in coral glow:
Here gayly-painted saints attract the sight,
There ivory crosses of the purest white:
Here brilliant pebbles from the hallowed well,
In which are lodged the wonder-working spell.
Some by the traveled pilgrim take their stand,
To hear the wonders of a foreign strand;
While others, smitten with the love of song,
Around the minstrel's harp attentive throng.
Of war and daring chiefs the master sung,
While from the chords terrific founds he flung:
At length, descending from his lofty mood,
The feeling bard a milder theme pursued,
And gently waked those soft, complaining tones,
So dear to melody, which Scotland owns. Though the Scottish music, as we now
have it, is attributed to JAMES the First of Scotland, yet as most of the
harpers were supporsed to have come from the North, it is very probable that
there was something alluring and characteristic in the northern music previous
to that period, and which partook of the style that reigns in the compositions
of JAMES the First, and which TASSONI calls Musica lamentevole e mesta
differente da tutte l'altre.

Now, when the thronging audience all withdrew,
A beauteous Maiden still remained in view:
She seemed as one of the dejected kind,
Whose face betrays the secret of the mind;
She looked as opening day scarce tinged with light,
Or summer's eve when fading into night:
She spoke -- 'Sweet are the songs from Scotland's coast,
'They, they admire them best who feel them most:
'Abrupt pathetic airs, devoid of art,
'That breathe upon the soul and melt the heart:
'Still, when the bard some mournful tale records,
'With plaintive harmony they clothe his words;
'Ah! then they witness to the ear of grief,
'That food to sorrow is the best relief.
'Bend, generous minstrel, to a mourner's prayer,
'Sooth with thy art the ills I Am doomed to bear;
'Still let some Highland airs thy skill employ,
'And steep my soul in melancholy joy.'
Attentive to the tuneful Maid's request,
With magic touch the weeping harp he pressed,
And wakened into life that powerful strain,
Whose sound persuasive charms almost to pain,
That thrilling harmony to nature true,
Whose arrows only wound the sacred few.
See now the throng in clust'ring numbers go
To where the troop displayed the gaudy show DR. WARTON observes, in his
History of English Poetry, that the subject of this sort of spectacle was (till
the reign of HENRY the Seventh) confined to moral allegory, or to religion
blended with buffoonery.
:
They first presented to the expecting view,
Amid encircling clouds of richest hue,
Religion, on a throne exalted high,
While flowers fell sprinkling from the mimic sky:
Now stately entering on the splendid scene,
Arrayed in white, three female forms were seen:
These female figures to the admiring crowd
The names of Faith, of Hope, of Love avowed:
Three rivals; they appear before the throne
To plead -- and make their various merit known.
Faith, while a sable band overspread her eyes,
In accents to this purport claimed the prize:
'Foe to the prying search of shallow wit,
'Thy sacred lore, unquestioned, I admit:
'Before the dazzling splendour of the Law
'I close my view, and bend with trembling awe.'
Hope, with an air to confidence allied,
Advanced -- her symbol leaning at her side:
'The sea of life do wrecking winds deform?
'Borne on a plank, I smile amidst the storm:
'Still through the dark'ning showers that intervene,
'With piercing view I mark the promised scene,
'Where, lift'ning to the ocean's distant roar,
'Delight sits harbored near the frgrant shore.'
Next Charity, with looks that dwelt on high,
Her soul, ecstatic, beaming from her eye,
Began -- 'No fond expectancies I frame,
'I boast no merit, no reward I claim;
'While Heaven's creative power around me flows,
'The flame of love within my bosom glows;
'Rais'd from the nature of a senseless clod,
'I burn with gratitude, and thank my God!
'I feel, I feel affection's piercing dart -- '
She paused, and laid her hand upon her heart.
A dove-like form now sailing from the skies.
Bore in her beak the flow'r-inwoven prize;
Religion reached it from the hovering dove,
And twined the wreath around the brow of Love.
Now other actors mute attention claim,
Whose antic gestures marked a lighter aim;
A troop of busy mutt'ring friars pressed
Around a law-man by the fiend possessed:
The meagre Exorcist now plies his part,
Acts all the wonders of his secret art:
Nor word of magic, prayer, nor rite avails,
The whole artillery of the Father fails:
At length he sportive cries: 'Still uncontrolled,
'No power can wrest sly Satan from his hold;
'Here end we then this ineffectual strife,
'A lawyer's bosom is a place for life.' --
The baffled Exorcist now quits his ground,
While peals of simple laughter burst around,
See to the tents the villagers repair,
The solace of the temperate feast to share;
A gay pavilion, that adorned the plain,
Received time-honour'd CHESTER and his train:
'Twas then a Maid, whose cheek wore beauty's hue,
(Clad as a pilgrim) rushed upon their view;
And said, while at the Warrior's feet she fell,
'This lowly attitude becomes me well;
'Nor will I ever raise my blushing face,
'Till my loved Father shall pronounce my grace.'
'Lost AGATHA!' the astonished CHESTER cries;
'Lost AGATHA!' each glad'ning guest replies.
'Tell, tell me, fugitive,' the Father said,
'Before my blessing on thy soul I shed,
'Dost thou return with all thy bloom of name,
'And all the wonted fragrance of thy fame?
'If, soiled by vice in some unhappy hour,
'Thy character has lost its boasted flower,
'Away, away -- far from my sight retire,
'Nor dare, rash girl! to meet thy wrathful Sire.'
With injured look, and blush-embellish'd cheek.
The beauteous AGATHA began to speak:
'Proud of my ancestry, our honored name
'Shall never through me receive the blast of shame;
'Pure as the lily drooping with the dew
'(Heaven is my judge) I now approach thy view.'
'Then with a Father's wonted glow I burn,
'My fond affections all to three return;
'Thy look, thy words, thy tears, each doubt efface,'
He said -- and locked her in his close embrace.
At length he urged his daughter to recite
The dark mysterious purport of her flight.
In act to speak advanced the beauteous Fair,
And drew attention still as midnight air:
She sighed -- the roses on her cheek grew pale,
While expectation panted for the tale.
'Recall,' she said, 'that brilliant hour recall,
'When first RODOLPHUS graced the festive hall;
'Adorn'd with Valor's wreath, in early fame,
'In flower of youth, in beauty's pride he came;
'The blush of diffidence was on his brow,
'When, in soft voice, he spoke the ardent vow:
'Oh kind, oh generous Sire! thy friendly voice
'Approv'd the Youth, and sanctified my choice:
'To his affection as I nearer drew,
'Encreasing merit opened on my view:
'When he discoursed (till then to me unknown)
'I breathed the sigh that sorrow does not own:
'Regardless of the throng when he was by,
'Still lingered on his form my lovesick eye,
'Still did each moment some new charm disclose,
'As brings each gale new fragrance from the rose.
'Oh tender Sire! thou nam'dst the nuptial hour,
'And graced thy daughter with a regal dower:
'Ah me! what boots it that I now display
'The fatal could that brooded over that day?
'That day -- when hope had chased each lingering fear,
'When all my fond expectancies drew near,
'When love and fortune smiled -- joy turned aside,
'And left me, plunged in woe, misfortune's bride:
'To the swift progress of disease a prey,
'On death's terrific couch RODOLPHYS lay;
'As sorrow-wounded over his form I bent,
'His closing voice these accents feebly sent: --
"The Power above, whose will we must obey,
"Who tears me now from thee and joy away,
"Late saw me at the conscious altar bow,
"And heard these lips pronounce the hallowed vow,
" Beneath the banner of the Cross to stand,
" And scourge the usurpers of the Holy Land.
"This unaccomplish'd vow to thee I leave,
"With steadfast ear my parting words receive:
"In the small compass of an urn enshrined,
"To some bold warrior be my heart consigned,
"To live with him when his intrepid hand
"Shall scourge the usurpers of the Holy Land."
'He ceased -- his fading eyes now rolled in vain,
'Now closed -- and never gazed on me again. It was not unusual during the long
period of the Crusades, for the knights to make this request upon their
deathbeds. Among other instances, see particularly one mentioned by FROISSART,
in his first volume, chapter 21; where the king of Scotland entreats DOUGLAS to
embalm his heart immediately after his decease, in order to carry it with him
to the holy war.

'No bold adventurous war-bred youth I sought,
'For love inspired me with a bolder thought:
'I dropped the robe that decked the peaceful maid,
'And, in the warrior's garb of steel arrayed,
'Amidst the embattled ranks unknown I stood,
'Beneath the banner of the holy rood.
'As in their urn RODOLPHUS' ashes slept,
'I bore them to the plain where RACHEL wept.
'Peace to the souls of Archers that were hurled
'In that dread moment to another world!
'Fierce from the hands of hostile Pagans flung,
'Dark over the field a cloud of jav'lins hung.
'Still to this mind returns (dismissed in vain).
'The thundering tumult of the horrid plain.
'At length our daring men, to valor true,
'The fiery-tressed Saracens o'erthrew:
'Still do thou ask what charm, what sacred power,
'Upheld my frame in danger's rudest hour?
'Behold, behold the wonder-working charm, Taking the urn from her garment.
,
'That calmed my fear in danger's rude alarm:
'This little tomb, that clasps his better part,
'Where sleep the ashes of his spotless heart,
'This relic, as it touched my conscious breast,
'My fainting soul with energy impressed.
'Enough -- soon as the flag of truce unfurled
'Its softer color to the Pagan world,
'To England then I urged my lonesome way,
'Cloath'd in this pilgrim garb of amice gray:
'Still as the tenor of my way I kept,
'O'er thee, oh Father! fond remembrance wept:
'Oft did I say, while tears rolled down my face,
'(And as I spoke I moved with quicker pace)
'By Time's devasting hand despoiled of friends,
'Unspous'd, undaughter'd, my loved parent bends;
'Like desolation, all unfenc'd he shows,
'Expos'd and naked to assailing woes.
'I go, I go his sorrows to assuage,
'To smooth with filial hand the couch of age:
'Ply duty's task, whose labors never tire,
'Invent young sports to cheer his evening fire;
'The joy I cannot feel to him impart,
'And brighten with his smiles my drooping heart.'
'Forbear, forbear!' the enraptured Father cries,
(While tears of gladness glitter in his eyes)
'Oh insupportable! oh joyful hour!
'That bursts upon me in a flood of power.'
He ceased -- and to the moat-encircled dome
In triumph led the beauteous wanderer home;
Where at the castle-gate expecting staid
A numerous train to greet the welcome Maid.
Meanwhile the jocund villagers convene,
Where the wreathed may pole crowns the festive green;
The comely maids the gifted ribband wear,
Gay-streaming from the flow'r-encircled hair.
See with the amorous youths they now advance,
Demand the music, and provoke the dance;
Linked hand in hand they form the mirthful round,
Obedient to the shrill pipe's nimble found.
Thus on the flowing stream of time, the day
With prosperous fails glides rapidly away,
Till, as the faint beams glimmer from the west,
The curfew tolls the hamlet train to reft. A beautiful Picture, taken from the
Ancient Wake, by HAMILTON, is to be seen in MACKLIN'S Gallery.

INSCRIPTION INTENDED FOR AN OLD THATCHED CHURCH.
FAR from the splendour of a costly fane,
My low roof canopies the humble train:
Deep in my vaults, divorced from human woes,
The life-worn weary villagers repose:
When at my altar kneels the hamlet Fair,
And to her God unveils her bosomed care:
Or does the herdsman bend with grief diftrest,
Kind comfort steals upon their lightened breast:
Here too Religion weaves, with viewless hand,
For spotless village hearts, the nuptial band,
And twines with many a charm the holy braid
That joins the lab'rer and the nut-brown maid.
ON THE DEATH of TWO FAVORITE BIRDS.
INVOLVED in flame and suffocating breath,
A hapless bird was doomed to sudden death;
The female, touched at his uncommon fate,
Surveyed the form of her disfigured mate;
With drooping head and shivering wings she stood,
In all the agony of widowhood!
At length, to grief's severest power a prey,
She dropped -- and sighed her little soul away.
Ye wedded birds, though rigid be your doorn,
Yet ANNA The Honorable Mrs. TALBOT.
watches at your early tomb;
For you her flowing pity bursts restraint,
Your dirge is uttered in her soft complaint,
Your elegy, without the poet's art,
Is writ by sorrow on the purest heart.
SENSIBILITY.
CELESTIAL spring! to Nature's favorites given,
Fed by the dews that bathe the flowers of heaven:
From the pure crystal of thy fountain flow
The tears that trickle over another's woe;
The silent drop that calms our own distress;
The gush of rapture at a friend's success;
Thine the soft showers down Beauty's breast that steal,
To sooth the heart-wounds they can never heal:
Thine too the tears of ecstacy that roll,
When Genius rushes on the ravished soul;
And thine the hallowed flood that drowns the eye,
When warm Religion lifts the thought on high.
THE SOLDIER's FAREWELL, ON THE EVE OF A BATTLE.
NIGHT, expecting the dread morrow,
Hovered over the martial train;
Beauteous ALICE, led by sorrow,
Hurried to the silent plain:
'Give the watchword!' the guard uttered
Loudly from his destined place;
'Lo! it is I,' fair ALICE muttered
Hastening to his fond embrace.
'Ever beauteous, faithful ever,'
Quick the gallant Youth rejoined
'Cruel Death can only sever
'Hearts in love's strong links entwined.
'Soon shall we be torn asunder,
'Therefore welcome art thou come:
'Till morn wakes the battle's thunder
'Rest thee on that broken drum.'
She sat down, in mind reviewing
Ills the morning might behold,
Tears still other tears pursuing,
Down her cheek in silence rolled:
Thoughts to other thoughts succeeding
Over her mind incessant flow;
She, like Meekness, inly-bleeding,
Broods in stillness over her woe:
'Wherefore, ALICE, do thou ponder
'Evils that are Fancy's brood?
'Sure our parting might be fonder
'Than beseems this silent mood:
'Yet continue still to ponder
'Things thy voice wants power to say,
'Thy dumb grief to me seems fonder
'Than words decked in bright array.'
She replied (her tears still gushing)
'What avails it to be brave?
'Thou, amidst the battle rushing,
'Here perchance may meet a grave:
'Should'st thou perish in the action,
'Where's the peace to sooth my care?
'All my life would be distraction,
'Madness, wailing, and despair.
'Still thou were of gentlest carriage,
'Still affectionately true,
'And a lover still in marriage,
'And a friend and parent too.'
'Cheer thee, cheer thee, best of women,
'Trust to the great Power above;
'When I rush amidst the foemen,
'Heav'n may think on her I love.
'Saving is the Miser's pleasure,
'Spending is the Soldier's thrift;
'Take this guinea, all my, treasure,
'Take it -- as a parting gift.
'Here end we this mournful meeting,
'Catch from my lips this fond sigh;
'If this be our last, last greeting,
'Know, that I was born to die.
'See! the dayspring gilds the streamers
Waving over the martial trian;
'Now the hoarse drum wakes the dreamers,
'Ne'er perchance to dream again:
'Hark! I hear the trumpet's clangor
'Bid the British youth excel;
'Now, now glows the, battle's anger:
'Lovely ALICE, fare thee well!'
ALBINA.
ADVERTISEMENT.
The subject of these Stanzas is not founded upon a fiction. The young woman
was cruelly deluded by a man who was already married: The mock ceremonial of a
marriage took place in ITALY: She soon after returned to ENGLAND, and going
into a sequestered part of the country, devoted herself to retirement.

ALBINA.
WOULD Genius to my fond demand
My earnest bold request bestow,
A vivid pencil to this hand,
Dipped in the brilliant vernal bow:
How eager would I then engage
(With faithful and unerring aim)
To paint on the poetic page
ALBINA'S elegance of frame!
Her tresses -- dark with auburn hue:
Her brow serene -- young Candour's throne:
Her timid eye -- whose languid blue
Sheds charms peculiarly its own.
Her cheek -- that wears a lively glow:
Not after the fresh morning shower
Can ITALY'S rich summer show,
On all her banks so bright a flower.
Her cherry lip -- inviting bliss,
Where Love deliciously reposes,
Accompanied by many a kiss,
On fragrant leaves of breathing roses.
Yet who can paint her beauteous mind?
There Innocence has fixed her seat;
There easy wit, and taste refined,
And sentiment and knowledge meet.
Love, who often whelms the Fair in woe,
Soon robbed her guileless mind of rest:
Affection's flame dissolved the snow
That lodged within her spotless breast.
As still the East the morn-beams streak,
And gild the portal of the day,
So did her morning thought still break
On the same Youth with Ardour's ray:
As the last glimm'rings of the sky
Pause on the lake, ere they expire,
Each night her thought (as closed her eye)
Died on the Youth of her desire.
The nuptials eager to profane,
The bold, unfeeling, treacherous Youth
Led the chaste Maiden to the fane
With all the mockery of Truth.
Hypocrisy with downcast air,
Profaneness with an atheist eye,
And Lust with a malignant leer,
Remarked the mock-connubial tie.
No sooner had the Youth prevailed,
Successful in his impious aim,
He left the drooping Fair, assailed
By Grief, by Infamy, and Shame.
'Twas then the beauteous Mourner wooed
Meek Quiet, in her lonely seat,
Where Competency watchful strewn
Her sober treasures at her feet.
I Will not the little pathway tell
That winds to thy sequestered scene;
Where Virtue loves with thee to dwell,
Remote -- unseeing and unseen.
Where Resignation takes her stand,
Prompt to perform her friendly part,
And gathers with a trembling hand
The fragments of a broken heart.
TO THE LATE EARL of CHESTERFIELD.
RECLINED beneath thy shade, Blackheath!
From politics and strife apart;
His temples twined with laurel-wreath,
And Virtue smiling at his heart:
Will CHESTERFIELD the Muse allow
To break upon his still retreat;
To view if health still smooths his brow,
And prints his grove with willing feet?
'Twas this awaked the present theme,
And bade it reach thy distant ear;
Where, if no rays of Genius beam,
Sincerity at least is there.
May pale Disease fly far aloof,
Over venal domes its flag display;
And Health beneath thy peaceful roof
Add luster to thy evening ray!
If this my fervent wish be crowned,
I Will dress with flowers the godhead's shrine: --
Nor thou, with Wisdom's chaplet bound,
At any absent gift repine.
What though thou do not grace a throne,
While subjects bend the supple knee;
No other king the Muses own,
And Science lifts her eye to thee.
Though Deafness, by a doom severe,
Steals from thy ear the murmuring rill,
Or Philomel's delightful air;
Even deem not this a partial ill.
Ah! if anew thine ear was strung,
Awake to every voice around;
Thy praises, by the many sung,
Would stun thee with the choral sound.
ON THE DEATH OF MR. GARRICK, 1779.
O HALLOWED Censer! formed by magic power
To waft the incense of bright AVON'S flower!
Those airy forms, by glowing Truth designed,
Which proudly issued from the Poet's mind,
No longer realis'd by GARRICK'S art,
Rush on the scene, and rouse the throbbing heart:
MACBETH.
Ambition -- prompt to seize the imperial reins,
Who hospitality's pure rite profanes,
And sees (as wildly his strained eye balls glare)
The fatal dagger trav'ling through the air:
HAMLET
Affection -- who, half-daring, half-dismay'd,
Pursues with anxious steps a Father's shade:
As the awful form stalks solemnly along,
Dread Expectation chills the circling throng:
RICHARD the Third
Proud Cruelty -- beside a languid lamp,
Who 'mid the stillness of the slumbering camp,
Amid the terrors of the lonesome night,
Sits deeply musing on the morrow's fight:
'Till worn with thought, with many a care oppressed,
He drops the world, and wearies into rest:
In vain -- Remorse now bids her serpents roll
In horrid volumes round his tortured soul:
LEAR.
Old Age -- who banished from his native throne,
Forced from the door so lately called his own,
Stands muttering to the foul and midnight air
(In beggared robes) the accents of Despair:
Unreverenc'd, shunned, rejected, and reviled,
Stung at the mockery of an impious child,
And while the big tears trickle from his eyes,
I gave you all, the generous Father cries;
Let the fierce spirit of the tempest shed
The raging torrent on this hoary head;
The worst is past, let the loud thunder burst,
The drooping Sire is by a Daughter cursed.
These were the scenes late held to BRITAIN'S view,
On which she gazed with transport ever new:
Endearing scenes! Ah! never to return;
While Genius sorrows over a GARRICK'S urn.
ON THE AUTHOR OF THE BALLAD CALLED THE CHILDREN IN THE WOOD.
LET others praise the martial song,
Which rushes as a flood,
And round the harp attentive throng
That honors deeds of blood:
Let me that humble Bard revere,
Though artless be his theme,
Who snatched the tale to Pity dear,
From dark Oblivion's stream.
Say, little MARY The daughter of Sir THOMAS BEAUCHAMP, of LAXCLEY PARK, in
NORFOLK.
, prattling maid,
(Whose wit thine age excels)
Beneath what holy yew-tree's shade
Thy favorite Author dwells?
Ah! not on WESTMINSTER'S proud ground
The fond enquiry waste:
Go where the meek of heart are found,
And the unambitious rest.
Where WALTON'S limpid streamlet flows,
On NORFOLK'S rich domain,
A gently-rising hillock shows
The hamlet's straw-roos'd fane.
Hard by is seen a marble stone,
By many a winter worn;
Forgetfulness around has thrown
The rude o'ermantling thorn:
Within this low obscure abode
Fame says the Bard is laid;
Often have I left the beaten road
To greet the Poet's shade.
Fame too reports, that when the bier
Received the Poet's frame,
The neighboring Hamlets hastened here,
And all the Childhood came:
Attired in white, an Infant Band
Advanced in long array;
With rosemary-leaves each little hand
Overspread the mournful way:
Encircling now the Poet's tomb,
Thrice on his name they call,
And thrice into the hallowed gloom
Sweet showers of violets fall.
Compassion's Priest! oh! feeling Bard,
Who melts the heart away,
Enduring praise shall still reward
Thy short and simple lay.
Those shall thy praise be found among
Whom Nature's touch has graced,
The warm of heart applaud thy song,
And all the pure of taste:
The Child shall leave his jocund dance,
Suppress his frolic mood,
And bend to hear, in silent trance,
The Story of the Wood.
TO LADY CATHARINE MURRAY, DURING HER RECOVERY FROM AN ILLNESS, OCCASIONED BY
HER CLOTHES CATCHING FIRE, 1781.
With a green and yellow
Melancholy she sat, like Patience on
A monument, smiling at grief.
SHAKESPEARE.
HAD our great tragic Bard (whose master-hand
The patient VIOLA'S sweet portrait planned)
Beheld fair CATHARINE to pain consigned,
Yet towering over her fate with strength of mind,
In other colors he had then displayed
The pleasing image of his patient Maid!
Not with dim tints of yellow and of green,
Would he have sicklied over the sufferer's mien:
But in a shading cap that veils the face,
Half-stealing from the sight each softened grace,
He would have pictured to the steadfast view
A cheek a little pal'd with languor's hue;
An eye that, beaming with the rays of sense,
Speaks to the soul an artless eloquence,
And seems a look of gratitude to throw
On those whose feelings share the sufferer's woe:
And last her lips (whose blushes well display
The glowing color of the ruby's ray)
Where Patience dwells, refusing to complain,
With Resignation This accomplished young lady was married, in 1782, to the
Honoerable EDWARD BOUVERIE, and died in 1783.
that can smile at pain!
TO A LADY, WHO LAMENTED SHE COULD NOT SING.
'OH! give to LYDIA, ye blessed Powers,' I cried,
'A voice!' the only gift ye have denied. --
'A voice!' says VENUS, with a laughing air,
'A voice! strange object of a Lover's prayer!
'Say -- shall your chosen Fair resemble most
'Yon Philomel, whose voice is all her boast?
'Or, curtain'd round with leaves, yon mournful Dove,
'That hoarsely murmurs to the conscious grove?'
-- 'Still more unlike,' I said, 'be LYDIA'S note
'The pleasing tone of Philomela's throat,
'So to the hoarseness of the murmuring Dove
'She joins ('it is all I ask) the Turtle's love.'
A SONNET to the Book These lines were sent to LADY JERSEY, with a former
edition of these Poems.

AH go! beyond thy kindred copies blessed,
Go meet thy happiness -- be JERSEY'S guest:
She, skilled to judge, thy humble themes receives,
Her graceful hand shall touch thy trembling leaves:
Her eyes, the boast and envy of the age,
Shall shed their pleasing luster over thy page:
And while she reads, thy conscious form shall feel
The breath of spring from lips celestial steal.
FEBRUARY 4th, 1785.
Ye radiant Fair! ye HEBES of the day,
Who heedless laugh your little hour away!
Let Caution be your guide, when next ye sport
Within the precincts of the splendid court:
The event of yesterday Alluding to MRS. MONTAGU'S fall, the preceding day, as
she was going down the stairs at ST. JAMES'S.
for prudence calls,
It Is dangerous treading when MINERVA falls.
HONORIA: OR, THE DAY OF ALL SOULS. A POEM.
ADVERTISEMENT.
The Scene of the following little Poem is supposed to be in the great church
of St. AMBROSE at MILAN, the second of November, on which day the most solemn
office is performed for the repose of the Dead.

HONORIA.
'YE hallowed bells, whose voices through the air
'The awful summons of affliction bear:
'Ye slowly-waving banners of the dead,
'That over yon altar your dark horrors spread:
'Ye curtain'd lamps, whose mitigated ray
'Casts round the fane a pale, reluctant day:
'Ye walls, ye shrines, by Melancholy dressed,
'Well do ye suit the fashion of my breast!
'Have I not lost what language cannot unfold,
'The form of Valor, cast in Beauty's mould?
'Th' intrepid Youth the path of battle tried,
'And foremost in the hour of peril died.
'Nor was I present to bewail his fate,
'With pity's lenient voice to sooth his state,
'To watch his looks, to read, while Death stood by,
'The last expression of his parting eye.
'But other duties, other cares impend,
'Cares that beyond the mournful grave extend:
'Now, now I view convened the pious train,
'Whose bosom sorrows at another's pain,
'While recollection, pleasingly severe,
'Wakes for the awful dead the silent tear,
'And pictures (as to each her sway extends)
'The sacred forms of lovers, parents, friends.
'Now Charity a fiery seraph stands
'Beside yon altar with uplifted hands.
'Yet, can this high solemnity of grief
'Yield to the Youth I love the wished relief?
'These rites of death -- ah! what can they avail?
'HONORIUS died beyond the hallowed pale.
'Plung'd in the gulf of fear -- distressful state!
'My anxious mind abhors to know his fate:
'Yet why despond? could one slight error roll
'A flood of poison over the healthful soul?
'Had not thy virtues full sufficing power
'To clear thee in the dread recording hour?
'Did they before the Judge abashed remain?
'Did they, weak advocates, all plead in vain?
'By love, by piety, by reason taught,
'My soul revolts at the blaspheming thought:
'Sure, in the breast to pure religion true,
'Where Virtue's templed, God is templed too.
'Then, while the august procession moves along,
'Midst swelling organs, and the pomp of song;
'While the dread chaunt, still true to Nature's laws,
'Is deepen'd by the terror-breathing pause;
'While' midst encircling clouds of incense lost
'The trembling priest upholds the sacred host;
'Amid these scenes shall I forget my suit?
'Amid these scenes shall I alone be mute?
'Nor to the footsteps of the throne above
'Breathe the warm requiem to the Youth I love?
'Now silence reigns along the gloomy fane,
'And wraps in dread repose the pausing strain:
'When next it bursts, my humble voice I Will join,
'Disclose my trembling wish at Mercy's shrine,
'Unveil my anguish to the throne above,
'And sigh the requiem to the Youth I love.
' -- Does Fancy mock me with a false delight,
'Or does some hallowed vision cheer my sight?
'Methinks, emerging from the gloom below,
'Th'immortal spirits leave the house of woe!
'Inshrin'd in Glory's beams the reach the sky,
'While choral songs of triumph burst from high!
'See, at the voice of my accorded prayer,
'The radiant Youth a^cen^ the fields of air!
'Behold! -- he mounts unutterably bright,
'Cloath'd in the sun-robe of unfading light!
'Applauding Seraphs hail him on his way,
'And lead him to the gates of everlasting day.'
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

