THE LAW OF LIBERTY, OR, ROYAL LAW, By which all Mankind will certainly be
judged!

THE LAW OF LIBERTY, OR, ROYAL LAW, BY WHICH ALL MANKIND WILL CERTAINLY BE
JUDGED!

EARNESTLY RECOMMENDED TO THE SERIOUS CONSIDERATION OF ALL SLAVEHOLDERS AND
SLAVEDEALERS.

BY GRANVILLE SHARP.

So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be JUDGED by THE LAW OF LIBERTY.
Jam. ii. 12. LONDON: Printed for B. WHITE, at Horace's Head, in Fleet Street;
and E. and C. DILLY, in the Poultry.

MDCCLXXVI.

THE LAW OF LIBERTY, OR, ROYAL LAW.
IN two former Tracts I have attempted to describe the JUST LIMITATION OF
SLAVERY IN THE LAWS OF GOD, and THE LAW OF PASSIVE OBEDIENCE, with respect more
particularly to the due SUBMISSION of Christian Servants or Slaves to their
Masters.

The purpose of the present Tract is not only to point out the reciprocal duty
of Christian Masters to their Servants, and all other persons with whom they
are connected, but also more particularly to enable our British American
Slaveholders to examine or measure (with very little trouble) by the Rule of
God's Holy Word, the Legality or Illegality of Slavery among Christians. For
this purpose some of the clearest and most essential Maxims or Principles of
Scripture are selected and compared with each other in the following pages.

So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be JUDGED by THE LAW OF LIBERTY.

This the earnest advice of the Apostle James in his General Epistle; (ii. 12.)
and as it is therefore manifest that we shall certainly BE JUDGED by THE LAW OF
LIBERTY, it becomes a business of the utmost importance to ascertain what
particular Law is thereby to be understood, that we may write it on our hearts,
since our everlasting happiness depends upon it, and the peril of eternal
damnation seems to attend a breach of it; for he shall have JUDGMENT WITHOUT
MERCY (says the Apostle in the following verse) who has showed NO MERCY! The
necessary premises for the examination of the question are nothing less than
the fundamental moral Principles of Christianity; and if I am rather prolix in
defining them, I hope the importance of the subject will be considered as a
sufficient excuse; for indeed the subject is not only important to those
persons for whose use this Tract is particularly intended ( I mean those
persons who desire to be satisfied concerning THE LEGALITY or ILLEGALITY OF
SLAVERY AMONG CHRISTIANS) but to all Mankind besides of every rank and
denomination.

All the moral duties of the Gospel are briefly comprehended in two single
Principles of the Law of Moses, viz. THE LOVE OF GOD, and THE LOVE OF OUR
NEIGHBOR. Nothing, therefore, can be esteemed truly lawful under the Gospel,
that is, in the least, repugnant to either of these; and we need never be at a
loss to distinguish what is, or what is not so, if we will but carefully
consider the proportion or degree of that Love, which is clearly expressed to
be due, both to God and our Neighbor in these two comprehensive and eternal
maxims. The degree of Love due to God exceeds all comparison or consideration
of other things; for it must (says the text) be " with ALL thy heart, and with
ALL thy soul, and with ALL thy might. (Deuteronomy. vi. 5.) which necessarily implies
a most fervent zeal for the glory of GOD, far exceeding all worldly
considerations. And with respect to the degree or true proportion of Love due
to our Neighbor, we have no pretense to plead ignorance, since the appointed
measure of it is contained in every Man's Breast -- THOU SHALL LOVE THY
NEIGHBOR AS THYSELF. (Lev. xix. 18.) On these two Commandments (said the
Eternal Judge) hang ALL THE LAW and THE PROPHETS. (Mat. 22.40.) The same
Eternal Judge of Mankind made also, on another occasion, a similar declaration
concerning the Sum or Compendium OF THE LAW AND THE PROPHETS -- All things
whatsoever ye would that Men should do to you (said he) do ye even so to them;
for this is THE LAW AND THE PROPHETS. (Matthew. vii. 12.) This most excellent
rule of conduct and behavior toward our Neighbors, which includes the whole
Substance or Spirit of "THE LAW AND THE PROPHETS," so perfectly corresponds
with the second great Commandment, to LOVE our Neighbors as ourselves (viz. to
manifest our LOVE, by DOING to them, as we ourselves might WITH REASON AND
JUSTICE expect and desire THEY WOULD DO UNTO US) that it seems intended like a
sort of paraphrase to explain the true tenor of it; for though the mode of
expression is different, yet the effect of the doctrine is undoubtedly the
same; because the Apostle Paul has in like manner declared this second great
Commandment to be the Compendium of "all the Law." All the Law (says he) is
fulfilled in one word, even in this: Thou shall LOVE thy Neighbor AS THYSELF.
(Gal. v. 14.

SELF-LOVE, therefore, must be the RULE or MEASURE (not of Self-gratification,
or private Interest, but) of our Conduct and Behavior toward other Men! It
must not be SOLE TENANT of the heart; but is always to leave equal room for a
due balance of that Love which we owe to our Neighbor, whenever the present
circumstances (whatever they may be) require a conscientious regard to the
public Good, or a sympathetick consideration for the Feelings and Sufferings
of Individuals, to enable us to fulfill our Duty to our Neighbor. SELF-LOVE is
not hereby excluded; for Self-preservation, and a prudent regard for our own
support and happiness, may still be allowed an equal Share of our
consideration, without a Breach of this second great Commandment, which would
otherwise be too hard and difficult for Human Nature to receive: we are not
commanded therein to love our Neighbors MORE than ourselves, but only ((...))
AS ourselves; so that SELF-LOVE is apparently the true Measure of our Conduct
and Behavior toward other Men: and though an exalted Sense of Duty to God
(according to the first great Commandment) may, in some particular cases,
prompt Men to noble actions, wherein SELF-LOVE may seem to be lost in a
generous and benevolent regard to others (of which there are several instances
in Scripture, as I have elsewhere shown (1) See my Tract on the Law of Nature,
and Principles of Action in Man. P. 79 -- 105.
; and also though the like admirable generosity and perfect disinterestedness
may, possibly, upon some unforeseen occasion, become likewise the peculiar duty
of any one of us, viz. to lay down (our) Lives for the Brethren (2) Hereby
perceive we (or rather, it should be rendered, Hereby have we perceived) the
LOVE (of God), because he laid down his Life for us (said the Apostle, and then
he immediately informs us of the duty which arises from that extraordinary
manifestation of LOVE) AND WE OUGHT (says he) TO LAY DOWN (our) LIVES FOR THE
BRETHREN. 1 John iii. 16. This plain declaration of our duty ((...), etc. "WE
OUGHT to lay down our Lives," etc.) sufficiently enables us to account for the
many extraordinary examples of SELF-LOVE being superseded by more noble
Principles, some of which I have cited in my Tract on the Law of Nature, and
Principles of Action in Man, p. 79 -- 105, to which also the following may be
added.

THE GRATITUDE of the Galatians to their Teacher Paul, is expressed by that
Apostle in the strongest terms -- I bear you record (says he) that if it had
been possible, ye would have plucked out your own eyes, and have given them to
me. Gal. iv. 15.

Not inferior to this was the LOVE of that same Apostle himself toward the
Corinthians, though they were so far from returning a mutual affection like the
Galatians, that the Apostle, it seems, had reason to complain of their
INGRATITUDE -- I will very gladly SPEND, AND BE SPENT for you (literally "for
your Souls," said he) though the more abundantly I LOVE you, the less I be
LOVED. 2 Cor. xii. 15.

To "SPEND, AND BE SPENT" for others, and that "very gladly!" is the strongest
expression of disinterested LOVE that could have been chosen! It implies a
cheerful sacrifice of every thing that is dear in this world (LIFE ITSELF NOT
EXCEPTED!) and greater Love has no Man than this, that a Man lay down his Life
for his friends. John xv. 13. So that, as no Man can have greater Love than
this, we may certainly esteem it the highest demonstration of "perfect Love;"
and as the sentence last quoted from the Apostle John relates, in its primary
application, to the voluntary sacrifice which Christ made of himself to save
Mankind, it leads us to the true foundation of that "perfect Love" enjoined in
the Scriptures, which (as the preceding examples demonstrate) does occasionally
overcome the general Principle of Self-love, and every other interested Motive
natural to "MAN!

The Apostle John informs us, no less than twice in one chapter, that "GOD IS
LOVE!" ((...). 1 John iv. 8. (...). ibid. v. 16.)

This information is introduced in an argument, whereby the Apostle endeavors
to inculcate a due sense of the necessity we are laid under, to love one
another, because GOD has first loved us: so that GRATITUDE TO GOD must be the
foundation of our "Love to one another;" and we are therefore bound to imitate
(and will certainly endeavor to imitate, if "GOD DWELLS IN US." See 1 John
iv. 13.16.) that glorious Attribute of the Divine Nature, LOVE ("GOD IS LOVE")
which he has manifested toward us, by sacrificing all that could be truly
perfect and dear in his sight, even his only begotten Son, who also voluntarily
submitted himself (for our happiness and eternal welfare) to the most severe
temporal sufferings, and trials, even unto death!

TO GOD, and to the ETERNAL WORD, therefore, (to whom we are indebted, not only
for that extraordinary manifestation of LOVE, but for all other things that we
enjoy, even for our very existence) our return of LOVE, must be UNLIMITED; and
the natural Principle of SELF-LOVE, which is given as the measure of our LOVE
to our Neighbor in the Law of Liberty, or second great Commandment, must be
entirely suppressed whenever it falls in competition with the Love of God
enjoined in the first great Commandment; and though this doctrine is very hard
and difficult to be received, and much more difficult to be practiced, as it
includes the most exalted Heroism and Greatness of Soul that Human Nature is
capable of attaining, yet we have ample reason to hope and trust (as the
discharge of our Duty to our Neighbor includes and fulfils the most essential
part of our Duty to God) that those men, who carefully endeavor to make "the
Law of Liberty," (I mean the second great Commandment) their general or
ordinary Rule of Conduct IN LIFE, will not want due assistance from the
Almighty to enable them to fulfill also the duty which arises from the first
great Commandment, even UNTO DEATH, if any extraordinary emergency should
require such a manifestation of their LOVE; because we are assured by the
Scriptures, that "GOD dwells" in those men, who maintain the proper measure
of Love and Benevolence for the rest of mankind.

"BELOVED" (said the beloved Apostle) let us LOVE one another: for LOVE is of
GOD, and every one that LOVES is born of GOD, and knows GOD. He that LOVES
NOT knows not God, FOR GOD IS LOVE. In this was manifested the LOVE OF GOD
toward us, because that GOD sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we
might live through him. Herein is LOVE, not that WE LOVED GOD, but that he
LOVED US, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. BELOVED, IF GOD
SO LOVED US, we ought also to LOVE ONE ANOTHER. No man has seen God at any
time. If we love one another, GOD DWELLS IN US, and his LOVE "is perfected in
us." 1 John iv. 7 -- 12. And again, in the 16th verse -- We have known and
believed the LOVE that God has to us. GOD IS LOVE, and he that dwells in
LOVE, DWELLS IN GOD, AND GOD IN HIM. Herein is our LOVE MADE PERFECT, etc.


, 1 John iii. 16. yet as this far exceeds the measure of Love laid down in the
second great Commandment, which is given us as the general or ordinary Rule of
Life, we may be assured, that such a very difficult duty, as that of laying
down our Lives for the Brethren, can only be required of us on very
extraordinary occasions, as in times of persecution, or on other such pressing
emergencies, when some very singular Good or Benefit to our Friends, our
Country, or Mankind in general, apparently depends upon our perseverance unto
death for their sakes, in a just cause to the Glory of God; or to the
manifestation of his revealed Truth, for their confirmation and example! This
is, indeed, the best and most noble foundation, not only for true PATRIOTISM in
all Men, as Members, respectively, of some particular Nation, but also for
UNIVERSAL BENEVOLENCE, as Citizens of the World; which latter Duty should
always regulate and limit the former (viz. PATRIOTISM) by the eternal Rules of
natural Equity and Justice. But though a cheerful obedience in this ultimate
Duty of laying down our Lives, and sacrificing Self-love, and every temporal
Blessing for the Good of others, does undoubtedly exalt HUMAN NATURE to the
highest pitch of Heroism and real Dignity, let us all, nevertheless, pray God
(as in effect we do by that comprehensive expression in our daily prayers --
"Lead us not into temptation") to preserve us from any such severe trials of
our Obedience and LOVE to him as the necessity of of laying down our Lives for
the Brethren; lest, through the want of presence of mind, or unwariness, or
through weakness and natural infirmity, any of us should unhappily shrink back
from that ultimate Duty, and thereby incur the dreadful condemnation of those
that deny Christ before Men! Let us also be truly thankful, that the absolute
Command, in the second great Branch of our Duty, by which all Mankind are to be
JUDGED (as shall hereafter be shown) extends no farther than to limit SELF-LOVE
by a sympathetick Consideration or Fellow-feeling for our Neighbor's welfare,
lest the former (Self-love) should be considered as the proper and universal
Principle of Action, and thereby endanger the peace and happiness of Society by
its partial instigations: let me add too, that if SELF-LOVE is not thus
restrained, it will defeat its own Purpose and fixed Principles of
Self-preservation, by incurring a dreadful and eternal Doom!

The OMISSION of an Act of Mercy and Benevolence toward our Neighbor, when it
is in our power, and occasion requires it, is declared by our Lord, the Savior
of the World, to be as gross an affront, even to himself, as if he had been
personally neglected and denied by us! Inasmuch (says he) as ye did it not to
one of the least of these, YE DID IT NOT TO ME. Matt. xxv. 45. And if SINS of
OMISSION, even toward the meanest of our Brethren, are by OUR LORD esteemed as
a personal Affront to himself, we may be assured, that the actual COMMISSION of
Injuries will be infinitely more heinous in his sight, and cannot escape his
just Vengeance. We must remember also, that this Declaration of our Lord will
be made to those miserable wretches, who shall stand on the Left Hand, after
the tremendous final sentence is passed upon them! Depart from me ye Cursed,
into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels! See verse 41.

It is manifest therefore, that a Violalation of THE LOVE THAT IS DUE TO OUR
NEIGHBOR, is a Violation also of THE LOVE OF GOD; and, on the contrary, the
latter is perfected by a strict obedience to the former -- "If we LOVE one
another" (says the beloved Apostle) God dwells in us, and HIS LOVE IS
PERFECTED IN US. (1 John iv. 12.) So that the two great Commandments appear to
be reciprocally included and blended together in their consequences; by which
we may more readily perceive the propriety of our Lord's declaration, that the
second great Commandment is like unto the first (3) Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This
is the first and great Commandment. AND THE SECOND IS LIKE UNTO IT, Thou shall
love thy Neighbor as thyself. On these two Commandments hang all the Law and
the Prophets. (Matt. xxii. 37. to 40.)
; and this reciprocal connection between them enables us also to comprehend the
reason why the second is given alone (when BOTH are undoubtedly necessary) as
the grand test of Christian obedience, and as the sum and essence of the whole
Law of God. For all the Law is fulfilled (says the Apostle Paul) in one word,
(even) in this, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thyself. (Gal. v. 14.)

Now a continued multiplication of Statutes (as in England, where the number
exceeds the capacity of the human Memory) affords matter only for Equivocation,
Doubt, and Evasion, whereby SOUND LAW is vitiated and corrupted; and the
loathsome Prostitute, still retaining the Name of LAW, arises (like the Harlot
POPERY from pure CHRISTIANITY) in another Dress! She is clothed with the
many-coloured garment of misconstruction, and seats herself at the right hand
of the unjust judge, prompting him with wily Subterfuges, and bad Precedents
instead of LAW; whereby he is enabled to ensnare the innocent, and screen the
guilty. But, on the other hand, when we consider that "ALL LAW" is reduced to
so small a compass, that it may be accounted, comparatively, as ONE WORD, there
is no room left for offenders to plead Ignorance, as an excuse for having
violated the general Laws of Morality, and the natural Rights of Mankind. Let
me therefore exhort my opponents, as they regard their own eternal welfare, to
take this subject into their most serious consideration, and no longer refuse
to acknowledge this glorious WORD or Maxim, as the TRUE MEASURE (except a still
greater measure of LOVE is required (4) This exception relates only to such
extraordinary cases of emergency as are mentioned in pages 12 to 17.
of all their actions, and more especially with respect to the present point
before us, the Legality or Illegality of Slavery among Christians! For this
question, by infallible necessity, falls under the decision of this very Law;
because it sets before us our own personal Feelings, as the proper Measure or
Standard of our Behavior to other Men; for Tyrants, Slaveholders,
Extortioners, and other Oppressors, would most certainly dislike to be treated
as as they treat others; so that this compendious Law necessarily excludes the
least Toleration of Slavery, or of any other Oppression, which an innocent Man
(5) On the other hand, notorious offenders, that are clearly convicted of their
crimes by the laws of the land, may, consistently with reason and justice, be
punished with a temporary DEPRIVATION OF LIBERTY, provided they be not sold to
strangers, nor even to their own countrymen, to be subjected to private
dominion, or the absolute rule of individuals, which is dreadfully baneful to
morality! The community at large (and that community only whose Laws they have
broken) can alone have any RIGHT to detain them in bondage; and this RIGHT of
detaining should be moderated by such wholesome regulations for the religious
instruction, as well as employment, of the unhappy convicts, as should
apparently tend more to their reformation, (to render them worthy of being
speedily restored to Liberty) than to any other object; and no persons
whatsoever should be entrusted with the care, instruction, or employment of
such public delinquents, without being subject to the inspection and legal
control of the king's judges, and of other regular crown officers of the Law
department (but of no other crown officers as such whatever) as also of the
county courts of assizes and sessions, courts of inquest, grand juries,
justices of the peace, sheriffs, and of such other legal guardians of the
public peace, for and in behalf of the public, lest the cause of liberty should
suffer by the influence of any innovation in that respect.
would be unwilling to experience in his own person from another.

We must therefore acknowledge this heavenly maxim to be the true standard, not
only of mutual Benevolence among MEN, but also, of our Love and Duty to GOD;
since it includes the first great Commandment, by perfecting the Love of God in
us, as I have before remarked (see p. 20.); so that it must necessarily be
esteemed the most sure and best foundation "of PERFECT LIBERTY." And
accordingly we find it expressly distinguished in Scripture by the title of
"the Law of Liberty."

"So speak ye, and so do," (says the Apostle James) as they that shall be
judged by THE LAW OF LIBERTY. (James ii. 12.) This title properly belongs,
indeed, to the whole Law, or Gospel of Christ, and seems to be so applied by
the same Apostle in the preceding chapter (25th verse) wherein he speaks of the
perfect LAW OF LIBERTY. -- Yet the general application of the title does not
lessen the propriety of that particular application, which I conceive to have
been intended by the Apostle in this 2d chapter, because the precept in
question is a complete Compendium of Christian Morality, containing (as I have
before observed) the very Essence of the whole Gospel, or general LAW OF
LIBERTY, with respect to our Duty toward Men, and has, therefore, an
indisputable Right, also, to the general Title of the whole. But there are
other reasons to justify the application of this general Title of the Gospel to
that one comprehensive Word, or Maxim, in which "all the Law is fulfilled." --
Though the Apostle James seems to mean the whole Gospel in that passage of his
first chapter, wherein he mentions "THE PERFECT LAW OF LIBERTY." -- Yet the
whole tenor of his argument in the 2d chapter, where he again mentions THE LAW
OF LIBERTY, is apparently founded on the Principles of the glorious Maxim in
question -- THOU SHALL LOVE THY NEIGHBOR AS THYSELF; for the Subject, in the
beginning of the chapter, particularly relates to the Duty we owe to OUR
NEIGHBORS, being a warning against "Respect of Persons," or Partiality; and as
the Maxim in question forbids even Self-preference, by directing us to love our
Neighbors ((...)) AS ourselves, it is so apparently suitable to the Apostle's
subject, that he expressly cites it under the eminent title of the " Royal Law
((...)) to enforce his argument. My Brethren (says he) have not the Faith of
our Lord Jesus Christ (the Lord) of Glory, WITH RESPECT OF PERSONS; and then,
after charging them in the 2d and 3d verses with Partiality, in preferring a
well-dressed Man in their assemblies to the Poor, and after appealing to them
thereupon in the 4th and 5th verses, saying, Are ye not partial in yourselves,
etc. and also, after reproving them (in the 6th and 7th verses) for despising
the Poor; he adds, in the 8th verse -- "If ye fulfill", (says he) " the ROYAL
LAW ((...)) according to the Scripture, THOU SHALL LOVE THY NEIGHBOR AS
THYSELF, (which is the very Maxim in question) ye do well: But if ye have
RESPECT TO PERSONS, (says he, thereby plainly pointing out this PARTIALITY as a
direct breach of the said ROYAL LAW) ye commit Sin, and are convinced of the
Law as Transgressors. For whosoever shall keep the whole Law, (continues the
Apostle) and yet offend in one (point) he is guilty of all. For he that said do
not commit Adultery; said also, Do not kill. Now if thou commit no Adultery,
yet if thou kill, thou art become a Transgressor of the Law. So speak ye, and
so do ye, as they that shall be JUDGED by the LAW OF LIBERTY, (manifestly
referring us to the indispensible Principle of doing as we would be done by, or
to that which is exactly parallel -- the loving our Neighbors as ourselves)
FOR HE SHALL HAVE JUDGMENT WITHOUT MERCY (said the Apostle) THAT HAS SHOWED NO
MERCY; and Mercy rejoiceth against Judgment. (James ii. 1. to 13.)

This absolute necessity that we are laid under to show Mercy, that we may
obtain Mercy, is apparently founded on the very same Principle, which our Lord
declared to be the Law and the Prophets; that is, the sum and essence of the
whole Scriptures, as I have before remarked -- ALL THINGS WHATSOEVER YE WOULD
THAT MEN SHOULD DO TO YOU, DO YE EVEN SO TO THEM: FOR THIS IS THE LAW AND THE
PROPHETS; (Mat. vii. 12.) and I have already shown (in p. 3.) that this
comprehensive Maxim is exactly the same in effect (though expressed in
different words) as the second great Commandment of our Lord, THOU SHALL LOVE
THY NEIGHBOR AS THYSELF; in which (as the Apostle Paul has expressly declared)
All the Law is fulfilled, viz. " All the Law (says he) is fulfilled in ONE WORD
(even) in this, THOU SHALL LOVE THY NEIGHBOR AS THYSELF. (Gal. v. 14.)

This one Word (as the Maxim is esteemed by the Apostle Paul) is therefore
undoubtedly that glorious LAW OF LIBERTY by which we shall all be judged, as
the Apostle James has fairly warned us -- So speak ye, and so do (says he) as
they that SHALL BE JUDGED BY THE LAW OF LIBERTY. And therefore, if what has
already been said be duly considered, the propriety of citing this glorious and
comprehensive LAW OF LIBERTY, in vindication of the NATURAL LIBERTY OF MANKIND
against the Tyranny of Slaveholders, cannot be doubted or called in question;
for though this SUPREME LAW virtually prohibits every other kind of Oppression,
yet its very title leads us to a more particular and express application of it
AGAINST THE TOLERATION OF SLAVERY AMONG CHRISTIANS: because it seems to be thus
eminently distinguished by the appointment of God himself in his Holy Word, as
the peculiar Antidote against that baneful Evil (SLAVERY) which is most
opposite and repugnant to its glorious title -- "THE LAW OF LIBERTY." This "LAW
OF LIBERTY," this SUPREME, this "ROYAL LAW," must therefore be our guide in the
interpretation and examination of all Laws which relate to the Rights of
Persons, because it excludes Partiality, or Respect of Persons, and
consequently removes all ground for the pretense of any absolute Right of
Dominion inherent in the Masters over their Slaves: for as all Ranks of Men are
EQUAL in the Sight of God (the Christian Slave, or Servant, being the Freeman
of the Lord, and the Christian Master the Servant of Christ, 1 Cor. vii. 22.)
there is no doubt but that the same Christian Qualities are necessary to be
maintained by the Christian MASTER, that are required of the Christian SERVANT;
as Humility, Forgiveness of Trespasses or Debts, and (though not Submission,
yet certainly) Brotherly Love toward Inferiors, with unfeigned Charity and
universal Benevolence, founded on the glorious Maxim, or Royal Law, THOU SHALL
LOVE THY NEIGHBOR AS THYSELF. All which are as indispensably necessary to form
the disposition of a true Christian Master, as they are absolutely incompatible
with the oppressive and tyrannical Claims of our American Slaveholders! Quod
tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris. What thou would not have done to
thee, do not thou to another, -- was the favorite Maxim of the Emperor
Alexander Severus, according to the Report of Lampridius quoted by the learned
Jos. Mede, Book 3. p. 550. This Principle was probably deduced from "THE ROYAL
LAW," "or LAW OF LIBERTY;" for Lampridius relates, that the Emperor heard it
either from some Jews or Christians: ( Quod a quibusdam sive Judoeis sive
Christianis audierat, et tenebat, etc.) and it cannot be denied, that the
doctrine of it is necessarily included in that great and indispensable
Commandment. The doctrine was expressed even by Christ himself nearly to the
same effect, which I have already quoted: -- All things whatsoever ye would
that Men should do to you, do ye even so to them: FOR THIS IS THE LAW and THE
PROPHETS. (Mat. vii. 12.) So that Slavery is absolutely inconsistent with
Christianity, because we cannot say of any Slaveholder, that he does not to
another, what he would not have done to himself! For he is continually exacting
involuntary Labor from others without Wages, which he would think monstrously
unjust, were he himself the Sufferer! Nay, many of them are so besotted with
Avarice, that they are not content with reaping the whole Fruit of other Men's
Labor upon Earth WITHOUT WAGES (3) Woe unto him that builds his House by
Unrighteousness, and his Chambers by Wrong; that USES HIS NEIGHBOR'S SERVICE
WITHOUT WAGES, AND GIVES HIM NOT FOR HIS WORK. Jer. xxii. 13.
; but would deprive their poor Laborers even of their eternal Comfort, if they
could exact a little more Work from them, by reducing them nearer to the State
of Brutes! -- What I advance cannot be denied; for it is notorious, that many
Masters oppose the instruction of their Slaves in Christian Knowledge; and but
very few promote it as they ought; so that the Iniquity of the ignorant Slave
must rest with double Weight on the guilty head of the owner, to fill up the
measure of his sins!

Suppose a reverse of fortune -- that an English or Scotch Slaveholder, or
Slavedealer, is shipwrecked on the Barbary Coast, and is retained, as a Slave,
by the Moors, who seize him; or is sold, as such, to another Person, according
to the detestable customs of that Savage people! -- Would he esteem himself the
lawful Property of his tawney Master, because the wretched police of those
Barbarians, in tolerating Slavery, is similar to his own former practices as an
American Slaveholder, or African Trader? Would he not think it cruel treatment
to be esteemed a mere Chattel; and, as such, to be ranked with the horses and
oxen of his African Master? Like them, to be compelled by stripes to perform
the most servile and abject Labor? Like them, to receive no Wages, or other
Reward for his Service, except a little coarse Provender, merely to keep him in
working Order for his Master's Benefit? Would he not think himself grievously
injured by being forcibly detained and prevented from working for himself? And
would he not think himself absolutely robbed of the Fruits of his own Labor?
He would certainly have ample reason to lament the Mahometan's Ignorance of the
heavenly Precept, "THOU SHALL LOVE THY NEIGHBOR AS THYSELF; for he would then
be taught, by his own Sufferings, to comprehend the full force, extent, and and
meaning of that benevolent Command, which, in his prosperity, he was never
willing to understand, though the doctrine is so plain and obvious, that there
can be no excuse for misunderstanding it; for unless the Slaveholder can make
it appear, that his SLAVE is not his NEIGHBOR, he must necessarily acknowledge
this "LAW OF LIBERTY" to be the true Measure of his conduct and behavior
toward his SLAVE, as well as toward all other MEN!

Let not Slaveholders or African Traders conceive, that they are at liberty to
receive or reject this glorious Precept, according as it may suit their
interest or convenience! But rather let them carefully examine (for they are
particularly interested in the determination of the question) whether obedience
to the doctrine of the great LAW OF LIBERTY, is not absolutely indispensable?
And whether the violation of it is not dangerous to salvation?

If they think there is any room to flatter themselves, that they do not offend
God by tolerating Slavery among them, let them but examine their Actions by
this "ROYAL LAW," and they will clearly perceive both their Guilt and Danger,
unless they have Consciences seared with a hot Iron!"

"If ye have respect unto Persons" (says the Apostle James, when he enforces
the Observation of the ROYAL LAW) ye commit Sin, and are convinced of THE LAW
AS TRANSGRESSORS, etc. ii. 9. Now this Offense of having Respect unto Persons,
is a mark which strongly characterizes Slaveholders as Violaters of "THE ROYAL
LAW."

They are courteous, friendly, and hospitable enough, in general, to Persons of
their own Rank, as, indeed, they ought to be; but, at the same time, they look
down upon their Slaves (who are equally their Brethren) as if they were not
Human Beings, and rank them as mere Chattels with their Horses and Dogs; so
that there needs no Argument to prove them guilty of having Respect unto
Persons in a most notorious degree, whereby they surely "commit Sin," and are
convinced of the Law as Transgressors. What therefore have such Men to expect,
when they shall be judged by "THE LAW OF LIBERTY!" especially as the Apostle
adds, they shall have Judgment without Mercy, that have showed no Mercy! etc.

And even our Lord himself has declared the very same doctrine, though in
different Words -- With the same MEASURE that ye METE (says he) " shall it be
MEASURED unto you again." (...). Luke vi. 38. Mat. vii. 2. Mark iv. 24.

What MEASURE of Benevolence, therefore, have these Men to expect, who
endeavor to enrich THEMSELVES by enslaving and oppressing their BRETHREN? For
Men, who, "without Mercy," or Fellow-feeling, have violated THE ROYAL LAW OF
LIBERTY, can neither be said to love God, nor their Neighbor, as directed in
the two great Commandments, and consequently are Violaters of "the whole Law;"
by which they absolutely deprive themselves of the Benefit of Christ's
Redemption! This seems to be the necessary meaning of that dreadful Doom
beforementioned; He shall have JUDGMENT without MERCY, that has showed NO
MERCY.

But let no Man conceive, that I presume to charge Individuals, or any Person
in particular, with the want of this MERCY, so necessary to Salvation, even
though they are apparently guilty of that oppressive treatment of their
Neighbor, which I now oppose; for this would seem like setting bounds to the
Mency of God, whereby I should be liable to involve myself, as an uncharitable
Judge, in the same condemnation. And there are, certainly, a variety of
circumstances, beyond the reach of human knowledge, that may extenuate the
guilt of particular Persons, of which the great Searcher of Hearts alone can
judge!

It is not, therefore, the Persons, but the uncharitable Practices of
Slaveholders and Slavedealers, that I now venture to condemn; and these I can
with confidence affirm to be really damnable, or dangerous to Salvation, as
being the most notorious violations of that Christian Charity, or LOVE OF OUR
NEIGHBOR, which God indispensably requires of us, and without which, the
highest Gifts are vain, and even Faith itself! For, though I have "ALL FAITH"
(said the Apostle Paul) so that I could remove Mountains, and have no CHARITY,
I am nothing. 1 Cor. xiii. 2. The nature of this indispensable CHARITY is more
particularly described by the same Apostle under the appellation of LOVE
((...)). "LOVE," (says he) works no ILL to his Neighbor: therefore LOVE is
the fulfilling of the Law. Romans xiii. 10. But, as the being detained in an
involuntary Slavery is one of the greatest ILLS, or EVILS, that can happen to
our Neighbor, it must necessarily be allowed, that he who causes, or continues
such an unnatural Oppression of poor unfortunate Strangers, who never injured
him, nor his, nor ever voluntarily contracted to serve him, even for the
shortest term, much less for life; such a Man, I say, most certainly " works
ILL to his Neighbor;" and, consequently, violates that saving LOVE, which is
required for the fulfilling of the Law. For he that LOVES another (says the
Apostle in a preceding verse of the same chapter) has fulfilled the Law: and
after repeating the several Articles of the Decalogue, respecting our Duty
toward our NEIGHBOR, he adds, and if there be any other Commandment, it is
briefly comprchended in this, THOU SHALL LOVE THY NEIGHBOR AS THYSELF. Romans
xiii. 8 -- 10. We may therefore fairly conclude, that this glorious MAXIM is
the touchstone or proof of that saving LOVE, which is THE FULFILLING OF THE
LAW, and without which "FAITH IS DEAD," as declared by the Apostle Paul; that
it is also "THE ROYAL LAW," being thus eminently distinguished from all other
Precepts of the Gospel, by the Apostle James; and if it is not also
particularly signified (though I am fully convinced that it is) under the Title
of THE LAW OF LIBERTY, by the same Apostle, in his 2d Chapter; yet it is surely
one of the most essential and comprehensive Principles of that "LAW OF
LIBERTY," by which we shall all be judged; because the Apostle at the same time
declares, that " he shall have Judgment WITHOUT MERCY, who has showed NO
MERCY;" (chap. ii. 13.) by which he manifestly refers to the Breach of that
particular Precept, which ought to regulate the Conduct of all Mankind toward
each other; and therefore, lastly, we must acknowledge this same Precept to be
also THE TRUE MEASURE or Test on which our eternal Doom will depend in that
awful Day, when it shall be MEASURED unto us again, according to THE MEASURE of
our Actions, as declared by the eternal Judge himself, (Mat. vii. 2. Mark iv.
24. Luke vi. 38.) whose Words cannot fail! And if even a mere Neglect or
Omission in our Duty toward our Neighbor is so offensive to our blessed Lord,
that he esteems it as a Denial and Affront to his own Person, (which I have
already observed) how much more offensive to him must be the actual Commission
of the grossest Injuries, such as the Exaction of an involuntary Service from
our poor Brethren WITHOUT WAGES, and the various Cruelties usually practiced to
enforce the same, which are the necessary and unavoidable Attendants on Slavery
-- What a dreadful MEASURE of RETRIBUTION, then, may obstinate and unrepenting
Slaveholders and Slavedealers justly expect from the righteous Judge! Surely
there is but too much Cause to apprehend, that Christ will one Day PROFESS UNTO
THEM -- Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my Brethren,
ye have DONE IT UNTO ME! (Mat. xxv. 40.)

This Sentence, indeed, is applied in the Text to those who shall have DONE
GOOD to their Brethren; yet by necessary Consequence it is equally applicable
(as in the 45th verse) to those who have neglected, or shown them no Brotherly
LOVE and CHARITY! -- " Inasmuch (said our Lord) as ye did it not to one of the
least of these, ye did it not to me. And these (by which our Lord plainly
referred to all that should neglect or violate that indispensible Brotherly
Love and Charity which he enjoined) shall go away INTO EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT:
but the Righteous into Life eternal!

But alas! -- to worldly minded Men the Judgments of another World seem too far
distant to awaken their Attention, though they are liable to be called away, in
the very next Hour, to a State of Existence, wherein the most pungent Remorse
will avail them nothing! From such therefore, and from those unrepenting
Individuals, that will still persist in violating the LAW OF LIBERTY by
Slave-dealing and Slave-holding, it is time to turn away! I have already
bestowed too much labor upon them, I mean, with respect to themselves! But
this Warning was not intended for them alone; -- the whole Community -- every
Individual (without excepting even those who never had the least Concern in
promoting Slavery) is personally interested in the Consideration of this
Subject! For if a Breach of God's Command, even in the hidden Crime of a single
Individual, as in the Case of Achan, could involve a whole Nation in Trouble
(4)" -- For Achan the Son of Carmi," -- took of THE "ACCURSED THING," (i. e. of
that which was devoted to Destruction by God's express Command): And the Anger
of the Lord was kindled against the Children of Israel. Joshua vii. 1. -- Thus
the whole NATION was involved in the Consequences of Achan's Guilt! Nay,
Jehovah himself expressly imputed the Action of that one Individual to the
NATION at large, until a solemn and public Exertion of NATIONAL Justice had
expiated that presumptive Breach of his Command! For when Joshua and the Elders
of Israel lay prostrate before God, lamenting the public Calamity and Disgrace,
which a late Defeat of their Army had brought upon the NATION, -- the Lord
(Jehovah) said unto Joshua, Get thee up; wherefore lie thou thus upon thy
Face? ISRAEL has sinned, and THEY HAVE also TRANSGRESSED my Covenant which I
commanded them: for THEY have even taken of THE ACCURSED THING, and have
stolen, (that is, THEY have stolen (...)) and THEY have dissembled also, and
THEY have put (it) even among their own Stuff. (Yet this general Crime, for so
it was imputed, was perpetrated by a single Individual, though the whole NATION
was doomed to suffer for it, till the actual Aggressor should be brought to
public Justice; and this should teach us, that the Welfare of NATIONS greatly
depends on a strict Administration of public Justice and Righteousness, lest
the State should be accountable for the Crimes of Individuals.) "Therefore the
Children of Israel" (said Jehovah himself) could not stand before their
Enemies, (but) turned (their) Backs before their Enemies, because they were
ACCURSED. (Thus the CURSE was transferred to the People from THE ACCURSED
THING, until public Justice could trace and transfer it to the devoted Head of
the guilty Person!) " Neither will I (said Jehovah) be with you any more,
except ye destroy THE ACCURSED from among you. See the whole Chapter.
, and deprive them of God's Blessing, how much more hateful in the Sight of God
must be a public Infringement of his ROYAL LAW, THE PERFECT LAW OF LIBERTY, by
national Authority!

The AFRICAN SLAVE TRADE, which includes the most contemptuous Violations of
Brotherly Love and Charity that men can be guilty of, is openly encouraged and
promoted by the British Parliament! And the most detestable and oppressive
Slavery, that ever disgraced even the unenlightened Heathens, is notoriously
tolerated in the British Colonies by the public Acts of their respective
Assemblies, -- by Acts that have been ratified with the Assent and Concurrence
of BRITISH KINGS!

The horrible Guilt therefore, which is incurred by Slave-dealing and
Slave-holding, is no longer confined to the few hardened Individuals, that are
immediately concerned in those baneful Practices, but alas! the WHOLE BRITISH
EMPIRE is involved!

By the unhappy Concurrence of National Authority, the GUILT is rendered
National; and National GUILT must inevitably draw down from GOD some tremendous
National Punishment (which, I trust, is fully demonstrated in my Tract on THE
LAW of RETRIBUTION) if we do not speedily take away the accursed Thing from
among us, -- if we do not carefully reform and redress at least every public
and notorious Violation of GOD's "Royal Law," the perfect Law of Liberty!

GRANVILLE SHARP.
"GLORY to GOD in the Highest!
"And on Earth -- PEACE,
"GOOD WILL toward Men!"


TEXTS OF SCRIPTURE QUOTED OR ILLUSTRATED IN THE FOREGOING TRACT.
LEVITICUS. Chapter. Verse. Page. XIX. 28. 9 DEUTERONOMY. VI. 5. 8 JOSHUA. VII.
48, n. 1. 47, n. JEREMIAH. XXII. 13. 34, n. MATTHEW. VII. 2. 39. 44 12. 9. 29.
33 XXII. 37 -- 40. 20, n. 40. 9 XXV. 40. 45 41. 19 45. 19. 45. MARK. IV. 24.
39. 44. LUKE. VI. 38. 39. 44. JOHN. XV. 13. 13, n. G 2 ROMANS. XIII. 8 -- 10.
42 10. 41 I CORINTHIANS. VII. 22. 31 XIII. 2. 41 II CORINTHIANS. XII. 15. 13,
n. GALATIANS. IV. 15. 13, n. V. 14. 10. 29 JAMES. I. 26 II. 26. 43 13. 43 1 --
13. 28 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 27 9. 37 12. 6. 24 13. 7. 43 25. 25 I JOHN. III.
16. 12 IV. 7 -- 12. 16, n. 8. 14, n. 13. 16. 14, n. 16. 16, n.

INDEX.
A
AFRICAN Slave Trade, encouraged by parliament, page 48. Alexander Severus
(emp.) his favorite maxim, 32 Author, his design in this tract, 5. And for
whose use it is intended, 7. The consideration of which every man is interested
in, 7. 46. and seq. See Slaveholders.
B
Benevolence (universal) its best foundation, 16. Brethren, the duty of laying
down our lives for them explained, 12, and seq. The highest demonstration of
perfect love, 13 note. Only required on very extraordinary occasions, 16.
C
Charity, an indispensable duty, 41. Christian Master, his qualifications, 32.
Corinthians, their ingratitude to St. Paul, 13 note.
G
Galatians, their gratitude to St. Paul, 13 note. GOD, the extent of our love
to him, 8. Is love, 14 note. Our love to him perfected by that to our
neighbor, 20. All men equal in his sight, 31. Gospel, its moral duties
comprehended in two single principles, 7. Is properly the law of liberty, 24,
and seq. Gratitude to God, the foundation of our love to one another, 14 note.
See Self-love.
J
Just Limitation of Slavery an the laws of God, 5.
L
Lampridius, 32. Law. See Statutes. Law of Liberty, recommended as a rule of
action by St. James, 6. Defined, 24. See Gospel, Slavery. Obedience to it,
indispensable, 37, and seq. Law of Nature, and Principles of Action in Man, 12
note, 13 note. Law of Passive Obedience, 5. Liberty, notorious offenders may be
temporarily deprived of, 23 note. Life, laying it down for our brethren. See
Brethren. Love, of God and our neighbor, the two moral principles of the
gospel, 8. See Neighbor.
M
Mede (Jos.) 32. Morality, ignorance no excuse for having violated its laws,
22.
N
Neighbor, our love to him explained, 8. Enforced by our Savior, 9. And by
St. Paul; 10. Omission of it, declared by our Savior an affront to himself,
18. A violation of it violates our love to God, 19. See GOD. The Royal Law, 26.
43. The necessity thereof proved, 27, 28. The Law of Liberty, 43. The test on
which our eternal doom will depend, 44.
P
Patriotism (true) its noblest foundation, 16. Paul (St.) his love to the
Corinthians, 13 note. Popery, how it differs from pure Christianity, 21.
R
Royal Law. See Neighbor.
S
Self-love, the rule of our conduct toward other men, 10, 11. But not the
universal principle of action, 18. Must be suppressed when it comes in
conpetition with the love of God, 15 note. Slaveholders, the legality or
illegality of their practices among Christians considered, 6, and seq. Their
practices contrary to the laws of Christ, in doing that to others, which they
would not have done to themselves, 33. A striking appeal to their consciences,
34, and seq. The sinfulness of their conduct, 38, and seq. Their practices, not
their persons, condemned by the author, 41. The injustice of those practices,
ibid. The dreadful consequences to be expected from them, 44. Slavery, the
investigation of its legality or illegality among Christians, the design of
this tract, 6, 7. Not defensible on Christian principles, 23. Expressly against
the Law of Liberty, 30. Absolutely inconsistent with Christianity, 32.
Statutes, their multiplicity in England only affords matter for equivocation,
doubt, and evasion, 21.
FINIS.

