AN ANSWER To Some OBJECTIONS OF A Moderate ENQUIRER.
Robert Snow,
WE received a Paper subscribed by thee, and directed to the Church or People
of God called Quakers, etc. Which Paper contains some Objections, which (thou
say) thou have heard spoken against us, and wherein thou desire to be
satisfied. To which we say, It is no strange Thing to us to be spoken against
by the World's Teachers, that being no more than befell the People of God, in
the First breaking forth of Christianity in the World, Of whom it was said,
Acts 28. 22. As concerning this Sect, we know that every where it is spoken
against. But we are willing to endeavor thy Satisfaction, by Answering the
Objections.

The First is, You own no Day, either the First or Last, as a Sabbath to the
Gentiles.

Answer: The Sabbath (which was the seventh or last Day of the Week) was given
to the Jews, Ex. 16. 29. Romans 9. 4. Not to the Gentiles, Psalm. 147. 19, 20.
Romans 3. 19. and was to last (as other typical Ordinances were) until the time
of Reformation, Heb. 9. 10. till the Seed should come, Gal. 3. 19. which was
Christ. ver. 16. the Lord of the Sabbath, Mat. 12. 8. who, in the Fullness of
time, did blot out the Handwriting of Ordinances, etc. and took it out the
Way, nailing it to his Cross, Col. 2. 14. From whence the Apostle thus infers,
Let no man therefore judge you (the Saints and faithful Brethren, Col. 1. 2.)
in Meat or in Drink, or in respect of an Holy Day, or of the New Moon or of the
Sabbath Days, Col. 2. 16. which, says he, are a Shadow of things to come, but
the Body is of Christ. ver. 17. Thus was that Sabbath, which was given by God,
to his People the Jews, ended and taken away by Christ, before the Gentiles
were called to be his People. And as for the First Day of the Week, we do not
read in the Holy Scriptures, that it is called the Sabbath Day, or commanded to
be kept and observed for a Sabbath, as the Seventh Day had been. But, on the
contrary, we find the Apostle Paul, writing to the Romans, who were Gentiles
(though not without some mixture of believing Jews amongst them, as appears,
Acts 18. 2.) says, One Man esteems one Day above another (there was the
believing Jew) Another esteems every Day alike (there was the believing
Gentile.) Well, what then! Does he commend the Former of these, and condemn the
Latter? No but he says, Let every Man be fully persuaded in his own Mind, Romans
14. 5. And in the 4 th. 10 th. and 13 th. verses disswades them from judging
one another about the Observing, or not observing a Day, as well as about the
Eating, or not eating of Meats; and seems to lay no more Stress upon the one,
than the other. And if the Drift of the Apostle's discourse there be heedfully
minded, it will appear that, as he sets him who believed he might eat all
Things, with him that esteemed every Day a like; and him that esteemed one Day
above another, with him that eat Herbs: So he imputes the Weakness to the
Latter, ver. 2. and sets himself on the other side, saying, We then that are
strong ought to bear the Infirmities of the Weak, Chap. 15. 1. And he tells the
Galatians (which though a Gentile Chureh, had also Jewish Believers in it) I am
afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you Labor in vain, Gal. 4. 11. Why
so? Ye observe Days and Months, and Times, and Years, says he, ver. 10. So
jealous was the Apostle, lest any that had been gathered from outward
Observations, and from a shadowy State, should imbondage themselves again in
Shadows, and fall short of enjoying the Substance, which is the true Gospel
Rest that remains to the People of God, Heb. 4. 9. Which in the next verse is
described to be, Their Ceasing from their own Works, as God did from his. Into
which Rest we (says the Apostle) that have helieved, do enter, ver. 3. and in
the 11. verse he presses others to labor to enter into that Rest. Now when the
Apostle says, There Remains a Rest, it plainly implies that the former Rest,
the outward Sabbatical Rest, did not remain, but was passed away and gone. Nor
is it reasonable to suppose, that the Rest here mentioned, which is said to
Remain to the People of God, was an outward Bodily Resting from outward Bodily
Labor, on what soever Day; both, as that would be but to change one Type or
Figure for another, and, as the entering into this Rest is set forth in the
Text, as a Matter of Labor and Difficulty, ver. 11. as it is indeed, yet
blessed be the Lord, he has enabled some, that have believed in his Name, and
subjected to his Power, to enter into this Rest, in this his Day; and many are
pressing after it, as the true, abiding Gospel-Rest, which the Legal Sabbath
was but a Type or Shadow of.

The 2. OBJECTION is, You deny the Scriptures to be any Rule for Man or Woman
to walk by, so as to direct them to the saving of their Souls.

Answer, In this we are misrepre^ented. We sincerely own, love and regard the
Holy Scriptures, believing with the Apostle, that they were given by
Inspiration of God, and are profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. and that
they are able to make wise unto Salvation, through Faith that is in Christ
Jesus, ver. 15. And great benefit and delight we sind in them, reading them in
the openings of that Divine Spirit, by which they were given forth. We are so
far from denying them to be any Rule, etc. that we acknowledge them to contain
many excellent Rules, Precepts, Doctrines and Instructions, directing Man and
Woman how to walk, that they may obtain the Salvation of their Souls. Yet we do
not say (as some have done) that the Scriptures are the only Rule, or the chief
and principal Rule: because we dare not give the Honor and Office of the Holy
Spirit unto the Scriptures; For the Scriptures themselves declare, That it is
the Office of the Holy Spirit to guide Believers into all Truth, John. 16. 13.
And indeed, the true Meaning and Benefit of the Scriptures themselves is not
attained to in the Reading of them, unless the Spirit that gave them forth do
open them, and unseal the Mysteries contained in them. So that the Holy Spirit
is greater than the Scriptures, and therefore we cannot but give the chief
Place unto him. For he is able to manifest himself unto Man, and to lead man
into the Way of Salvation, either with and by the Scriptures, or without them,
as he pleases: But the Scriptures cannot do that without the Operation of the
Holy Spirit. Justly therefore do we affirm the Spirit of God, to be the Chief
Rule, and yet acknowledge the Holy Scriptures to be a true Rule, and proper
Instrument in the Hand of the Spirit, to direct Men and Women how they ought to
walk, to obtain Salvation to their Souls, as the Spirit of the Lord makes use
of the Scriptures to that End.

The 3d OBJECTION is, You deny the Resurrection of this mortal Body, that this
Mortal shall not put on Immortality.

Answer, In this also we are misrepresented: We do not deny, but own the
Resurrection of the Dead; Believing, with the Apostle, that This Corruptible
shall put on Incorruption, and this Mortal shall put on Immortality, 1 Cor. 15.
54. And indeed, if we did not believe this, we might well say (as he did) If in
this Life only we have Hope in Christ, we were of all Men most miserable, ver.
19. And, Why stand we in jeopardy every Hour, ver. 30. But the Lord knows, and
we have openly and sincerely declared, that we believe and own the Resurrection
of the Dead, according as the Holy Scriptures testify concerning it; Which say,
Thou sowest not that Body that shall be, but bare Grain etc. But God gives it
a Body as it has pleased him, and to every Seed his own Body, ver. 37, 38. It
is sown a natural Body; it is raised a Spiritual Body, ver. 44. the reason of
which follows ver. 50. namely, That Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom
of God, neither does Corruption inherit Incorruption. And as we firmly believe
this; So we take this to be sufficient, without being so curiously inquisitive
as he, who would needs ask, How are the Dead raised up? and with what Body do
they come? ver. 35. and was called Fool for his Pains, ver. 36.

The 4th OBJECTION is, You suffer Women to be your Teachers, that were forbid
by the Apostle, for he says, that they should keep silence.

Answer, The Jews of old had a strong Persuasion (grounded upon some
misunderstood Places of Scripture) that the Salvation of God was confined to
them, and belonged not at all to the Gentiles. And this Opinion had prevailed
so far upon them, that even those of them that received the Gospel could not
easily shake it off. In so much that, after Peter had been with Cornelius the
Centurion, and was come back again to Jerusalem, he was called before the
Church for it, they that were of the Circumcision contending with him, and
saying, Thou went in to Men uncircumcised, and did eat with them, Act.
11. 2, 3. To whom, having related the Occasion and Particulars of that Matter,
he concludes his Defense thus, For as much then as God gave them the like Gift
as he did unto us, who believed on the Lord Jesus Christ, what was I, that I
could withstand God? ver. 17. And in the next verse it follows, when they heard
these Things they held their Peace, and glorisied God, etc. This Answer, which
the Apostle gave in that Case, may be suitable (we think) for us to give in
this Case, to such as (from some misunderstood Places of Scripture) are
offended at us for Suffering Women to speak in our Assemblies, viz. For as much
as God has given them the like Gift as he did unto us, who believed on the
Lord Jesus Christ, what are we that we should withstand God? God, by his
Servant Joel, in the Time of the Law, had made this Promise, with Relation to
the Times of the Gospel, viz. And it shall come to pass afterward (or in the
last Days, as Peter repeats it, Act. 2. 17.) that I will pour out my Spirit
upon all Flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters shall prophecy, your old Men
shall dream Dreams, your young Men shall see Visions: And also upon the
Servants and upon the Handmaids in these Days will I pour out my Spirit, Joel
2. 28, 29. (And they shall prophecy, adds Peter, Act. 2. 18.) Here was no
Distinction of Sex made; But this Promise of pouring out the Spirit, and of
prophesying thereby, is extended as expressly and fully to the Daughters as to
the Sons, to the Handmaids as to the Servants. And this the Apostle Peter does
expressly apply to that great pouring forth of the Spirit upon the Church, at
the Pentecost immediately after Christ's Ascension, saying, This is that which
was spoken by the Prophet Joel, Acts 2. 16. Now at that great and eminent
pouring forth of the Spirit it appears the Women were not excluded: For when,
after the Ascension, the Apostles and Disciples were returned from Mount Olivet
to Jerusalem, it is said, These all continued with one Accord in Prayer and
Supplication with the Women, and Mary the Mother of Jesus, etc. Acts 1. 14. The
Number of the Names together being about an hundred and twenty, ver. 15. And
when the Day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one Accord in one
Place, Chap. 2. 1. and in verse. 3. it is said, the cloven Tongues sat upon
each of them, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak
with other Tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance, ver. 4. Here was no
Distinction made; no shutting out the Women; but all were together, all
received the Gift of the Spirit, and began to Speak with other Tongues as the
Spirit gave them utterance. Nor was it thus only at that time, and upon that
extraordinary Occasion, but continued in the Church afterward. For we read
that Philip the Evangelist had four Daughters that did Prophesy; Acts 21. 8, 9.
Phebe, a Woman, is recommended by the Apostle Paul to the Church at Rome, not
only as a Sister, but as a Servant of the Church, Romans 16. 1. Priscilla, a
Woman, is called by the same Apostle, My Helper (or Fellow Labourer) in Christ
Jesus, ver. 3. Tryphena and Tryphosa, two godly Women, are saluted by him as
Laborers in the Lord; And of the beloved Persis, another Holy Woman, he
testifies, that she labored much in the Lord, ver. 12. The same Apostle, in
his Epistle to the Philippians, says, I entreat thee also, true Yoke Fellow,
help those Women which labored with me in the Gospel, Phil. 4. 3. Which is the
Phrase by which the Apostle does frequently express his own Ministry, And which
he particularly applies to Timotheus, whom he calls Our Brother and Minister of
God, and our Fellow Labourer in the Gospel of Christ, 1 These. 3. 2. Which is a
clear Evidence that those Women, that had received the Gift of Prophesy, did
minister therein to the Edification of the Church, as well as the Men. Nay the
Apostle Paul, in that very Epistle, wherein he is thought by some to
discountenance Women's Preaching, does give Directions for the Manner of their
Preaching or Prophesying, viz. That they should do it with their Heads covered.
For having first said, Every Man praying or prophesying, having his Head
covered, dishonors his Head, 1 Cor. 11. 4. He adds, But every Woman that
Prays or Prophesyeth with her Head uncovered dishonored her Head, ver. 5.
This puts it out of doubt, that Women's Praying and Prophesying in the Church,
was at that Time both lawful and usual, as well as Men's.

Now, that by Prophesying here is meant Preaching (not barely foretelling
Things to come) may not only be inferred from the use of the same Word in the
verse foregoing, where, being spoken of Men, it is granted on all Hands to
intend Preaching (and from thence the general practice of Men's Preaching
uncovered is defended) but may also fairly be concluded, from the explanation
the Apostle gives of it, in Chap. 14. ver. 31. where he tells that Church in
general, We may all Prophesy one by one that all may learn; Which manifests
that by Prophesying he intended Preaching or Teaching, that being the proper
way or means of Learning. And in the Beginning of that Chapter, where he
prefers Prophesying before Speaking whith Tongues, ver. 1. and 5. he says, He
that Prophesyeth, Speaks unto Men, to Edification, and Exhortation, and
Comfort, ver. 3. And, He that Prophesyeth, Edifieth the Church, ver. 4. which
plainly show that by Prophesying he meant Preaching or Teaching, that being the
proper means or way of Edifying. And therefore, seeing he not only allowed
Women to Prophecy, but directed and advised them how they should perform it
Chap. 11. 5. and that in this Place Prophesying and Preaching appear to be one
and the same Thing, it is unreasonable to suppose he denied them the Liberty of
Preaching, being gifted and called thereunto. As for those Words of his, 1 Cor.
14. 34. Let your Women keep silence in the Churches: sor it is not permitted
unto them to speak; but to be under Obedience, as also says the Law. Observe
first, that those Words, [ as also says the Law] relate only to the Women's
being under Obedience, not to their keeping silence in the Church: For that was
never enjoined them in the Law, but they were permitted to speak in the
Congregation; And both Miriam, who was a Prophetess, did sing the Triumphs of
the Lord, in the public Congregation, Ex. 15. 20. 21. And Deborah, who was a
Prophetess, did recount the noble Acts of the Lord, and celebrate his Praises
in a Triumphant Song, Judges 5. Read also what Hanna spoke in the House of the
Lord in Shiloh, 1 Samuel 2. And Anna, who was a Prophetess, did not only give
thanks unto the Lord, but spoke of Christ to all them that looked for
Redemption in Jerusalem, Luke 2. 38. This was direct Preaching, and that in the
Temple. So that the Women were not enjoined silence under the Law, but were
permitted to Speak. In the next Place, consider what Speaking it was that was
forbidden by the Apostle in that Place, 1 Cor. 14. 34. which from his following
Words will appear to be, not a Speaking of the Words of Life and Salvation, not
a Speaking as the Spirit of God gives utterance; but speaking disorderly,
asking Questions unseasonably, and out of place; not speaking for the
Edification of Others, but speaking for their own Information only: for he
immediately adds, If they will learn any Thing, let them ask their Husbands at
home, ver. 35. These Words [ learn and ask] plainly show, that the Speaking
here condemned was not a Speaking the Doctrines of the Gospel for the
Edification of the Church; but asking Questions for their own Satisfaction,
which they might have done at home, but not there: therefore he adds, For it is
a Shame for Women to speak in the Church. And so indeed it was, in such a
disorderly manner as they speak, to interrogate or Catechize either the
Minister, or their Husbands, openly in the Church; to ask the Meaning of this,
or call for an Explanation of that, which might look like a throwing off their
Obedience to their Husband, and must needs Occasion Disorders and Confusion in
the Assembly; which we may perceive was the Thing that troubled the Apostle,
and which he labored to reform: for he said before, God is not the Author of
Confusion, but of Peace, ver. 33. and he concludes the Chapter with this
Admonition, Let all Things be done decently and in Order: So that it was the
disorderly Practice of some Women in that Church which he reproves, who, it
seems, when any Thing was spoken which they did not understand, would
interpose, and ask Questions for information Sake, which was uncomely in them,
offensive and troublesome to the Congregation. This sort of Speaking was not
permitted them, but was a Shame to them, and from which they ought to have kept
silence in the Church. And if they will learn any Thing, says he, let them ask
their Husbands at home. Of like import are those other Words, of the same
Apostle to Timothy, and probably on the same Occasion. Let the Woman, says he,
learn in silence with all Subjection. But I suffer not a Woman to teach, nor to
usurp Authority over the Man, but to be in silence, 1 Timothy 2. 11, 12. For hence
it appears still, that the Occasion they took of speaking, was under pretense
of learning, wherein they took an undue Liberty to ask Questions, as if they
would catechize or teach their Husbands. But though the Apostle would not
suffer such sort of Speaking in the Church, as might give Occasion to any to
think that the Women did cast off the Obedience they owed, and did usurp
Authority over their Husbands; nor after such a manner, as might breed
Confusion in the Congregation (for he was so watchful against that, that he
enjoins the Man to be silent in that Case, as well as the Woman. If any Man,
says he, speak in an unknown Tongue, -- let one interpret. But if there be no
Interpreter, let him keep silence in the Church; 1 Cor. 14. 27, 28. Yet we have
before showed, that he allowed of Women prophesying, and that by Prophesying,
he meant Preaching. We have also given many Instances of Women that labored in
the Work of the Gospel in that Day; and could, from a living and sure
experience, multiply Instances of many Women in this Day, whom the Lord has
committed the Word of Life and Reconciliation unto, and who, in the quickening
Power and Virtue thereof, have sounded forth the same, to the awakening of many
that were a sleep in Sin, and turning of many from Darkness to Light, and from
the Power of Satan to God, who are now become living Seals of their Ministry.
Neither would this seem so strange as it does to some, did they duly consider,
That God is no Respecter of Persons. But that, as, in the old Creation, Male
and Female were Created in the Image of God: So, in the new Creation, Male and
Female are all one in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3. 28. But, as they that contended
with Peter, for conversing with the Gentiles, when they had heard his Defense,
held their Peace, and glorified God, saying, Then has God also to the Gentiles
granted Repentance unto Life, Acts 11. 18. So, we hope they that have taken
Offense at us, for suffering Women to speak in the Church, when they shall have
duly and impartially weighed, what is herein offered for their Satisfaction,
will hold their Peace (as to any Opposition thereunto) and glorify God, saying,
Then has God committed unto Women also the Word of Reconciliation.

The fifth Objection is, You are a People that have gained Health to your
Immortal Souls, and are sure of Heaven, when the Scriptures say, that the
Righteous Man falls seven times a Day; and the Apostle Paul said that Sin was
still actually in him.

Answer. We do not desire to boast of any Seize. Yet we cannot but
confess, to the Glory of God, and the Praise of his Holy Name, that His saving
Health has appeared in this his Day, and we (through his Mercy) have tasted of
it. Christ, the Savior, is manifested in Spirit, and we (through Grace) have
felt the healing Virtue of his Divine Life and Power. Through the tender Mercy
of our God, the Dayspring from on high has visited us, and has given Light
to us that sat in Darkness and in the Shadow of Death, and has guided our
Feet into the way of Peace, and has helped us to make our Calling and Election
sure. As for the Scripture thou mentionest, we do not find that the Scripture
says, The Righteous Man falls seven times a Day; but in Prove. 24. 16. we find
it thus written, For a Just Man falls seven times, and rises up again; but
the Wicked shall fall into Mischief. And as the Verse before shows the Occasion
of these Words, where it is said, Lay not wait, O wicked Man, against the
Dwelling of the Righteous: spoil not his resting place. So the latter Part of
this 16th Verse [ but the wicked shall fall into Mischief] implies, that the
just Man does not fall, as the wicked Man does, into Mischief. And seeing all
Sin is Mischief, it seems as if the Fall here spoken of the just Man, were not
a falling into Sin, but into some outward Calamity or Exercise. However the
Place speaks nothing of daily or continual falling. Nor do we remember that
Paul does use that very Expression concerning himself, viz. That Sin was still
actually in him; though we know that he does, in diverse places, run through, as
it were, and open the various States and Travels of the Soul; in some of which
he cried out, O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver, etc! But he rested
not there, but quickly breaks forth into a Rejoicing, and cries out, I thank
God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 7. 24, 25. And then in the next
Chapter, having said, There is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, he says expressly
concerning himself. For the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, has
made me free from the Law of Sin and Death, ver. 2. And again, Thanks be to
God, which gives us the Victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 57.
This Victory we press after; this Freedom from the Law of Sin and Death, we
labor and travel to attain unto, by a Subjection through Divine Assistance) to
the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus.

The 6th Objection is, Why your Teachers persuade you, that all other People
are in a barren and desolate Condition, and are out of Christ.

Answer. Our Teachers do not persuade us so; nor do we Judge so of all other
People: For we our selves were gathered out of various Professions, States and
Conditions; and some of us, who had been seeking after the Lord in other
Professions, can remember, that before we were thus gathered to this divine
Principle of Light, which the Lord has set up, in this his Day, as an Ensign
for the Nations to be gathered unto, and to walk in: we were not wholly barren
and desolate; but had, at Seasons, some touches and tastes of the Virtue of that
hidden Life, which we were then Strangers to; the Lord having regard to the
Sincerity of our Hearts, and answering, in some measure, the Breathings of our
Souls to him; so far, at least, as to cherish and keep alive those good Desires
which were begotten in us, and to beget in us a greater Hunger and Thirst after
him. And it is not hard to us to believe, that so it may be with others at this
Day, who have an Integrity to the Lord, though not acquainted with his
Outgoings, and Manifestations of himself in this Dispensation of Light and
Life: And both our Prayers to God the Father, in and through his Son Jesus
Christ, and our Labor and Endeavors, in the Openings of his Love and Life in
our Hearts, are, that all these, in whatsoever Profession, may be drawn off
from all the dry Hills and barren Mountains, and gathered into the true
Sheepfold. For we remember our Savior said, Other Sheep I have, which are not
of this Fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my Voice; and there
shall be one Fold, and one Shepherd, Joh. 10. 16. The Lord grant, that none of
these may mistake his Voice, or disobey it.

The last Objection is, You deny all outward Ordinances, as Baptism, and the
Six Principles, that were taught to the first primitive Christians.

Answer. The Dispensation of the Law was outward, and the Ordinances
appertaining to that Dispensation were outward also: But the Dispensation of
the Gospel is spiritual and inward, and the Ordinances appertaining to this
Dispensation are of a spiritual Nature. The Baptism with Water was John's, and
came up under the Dispensation of the Law, nor did properly belong to the
Gospel Dispensation, though for a time, by Condescension, continued, as
Circumcision, and some other Legal Rites, were. And this was that Baptism which
Paul says Christ sent him not to baptize with, 1 Cor. 1. 17. But the Baptism of
Christ, the true Gospel-Baptism, that by which the true Believer is baptized
into Jesus Christ, Romans 6. 3. and buried with him into Death, ver. 4. The one
Baptism, Ephesians. 4. 5. is the Baptism with the Holy Ghost and with Fire, and is
plainly distinguished from the Baptism with Water, both by John, to whom the
Water Baptism belonged, and by Christ, to whom the Spirit-Baptism belonged. For
John said, I indeed baptize you with Water unto Repentance; but he that comes
after me is mightier than I, whose Shoos I am not worthy to bear: He shall
Baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with Fire, Mat. 3. 11. And Christ, as Luke
records a little before his Ascension, said, John truly baptized with Water,
but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence, Acts 1. 5.
which was the Promise of the Father, ver. 4. delivered by Christ to his
Apostles and Disciples, just before his parting from them, Luke 24. 49. Let it
therefore be fairly considered, 1. That the Dispensation of the Gospel is
Spiritual, and therefore the Ordinances belonging to it should be so too. 2
That in Mat. 28. 19. (From which place the Commission for Water Baptism is
usually fetched) there is no mention of Water. 3. That Baptism with Water is no
where in Scripture called Christ's Baptism. 4. That Baptism with Water is
frequently called John's Baptism. 5. That the Baptism with the Holy Ghost is
called Christ's Baptism. 6. That the Apostle Paul acknowledges but One Baptism,
Ephesians. 4. 5. which cannot be supposed to be that with Water, since then he must
exclude the Baptism of the Spirit. 7. That the Apostle Peter, speaking of the
Baptism that saves, says expressly, It is not the putting away the Filth of the
Flesh, 1 Pet. 3. 21. (which it is the Property of Water to do) as if he had
said, The Baptism which now saves us is not Water Baptism. 8. That Baptism with
Water is no where expressly commanded in Scripture, as it would doubtless have
been, had it been intended by Christ for a Gospel Ordinance. 9. That though it
was sometimes used after Christ's Ascension, yet that cannot authorize the use
of it now, any more than of Circumcision, and other Legal Ordinances, which, in
Condescension to the Weakness of Believers in that Day, were also used after
Christ's Ascension, yet are confessed by all not to be in force now. For John, as
himself said, was to decrease, Joh. 3. 30. which related to his Ministry or
Dispensation, not to his Person. Now a Decreasing implies a growing less, or
wearing away by degrees, not all on a sudden; or at once; and therefore no
wonder, if his Water Baptism was continued for a time, even after Christ's
Baptism of the Holy Spirit took place. But as Christ's Baptism was to increase,
so John's was to decrease, till Christ's came to be all in all, and John's
Water Baptism wholly to give place. Let these things, we say, be duly weighed,
and we hope we shall not be blamed, for leaving the Baptism of John, and
cleaving to the Baptism of Christ.

As for the Six Principles thou mentionest, seeing thou have not declared what
they are, it cannot be expected we should speak to them at this time. But we
recommend to thee that holy divine Principle of Light wherewith Christ lights
every Man that comes into the World, Joh. 1. 9. In which Light the Nations of
them that are saved shall walk, Rev. 21. 24. And we heartily desire thou may
walk therein.

T. E.

AN ACCOUNT OF TITHES in General.
THE only Command from God, that we read of in Holy Scripture, for the Payment
of Tithes, was given by Moses, to the People of Israel, in the time of the
Levitical Law. Then God first reserved to himself the Tithe of the Land of
Canaan, Lev. 27. 30. Which he did for this reason, that, intending to take the
Tribe of Levi more peculiarly into his Service (as he did, Numb. 3. 6. in stead
of, or in exchange for all the First born of Israel, ver. 12. 13. and 45. and
Chap. 8. ver. 18. Having before reserved and appropriated the First born to
himself, Ex. 13. 2.) he might bestow those Tithes on the Levites, for and
toward the Maintenance of that whole Tribe, as a Reward for their Service in
the Tabernacle of the Congregation, Numb. 18. 21. 31. and in lieu of, and
Compensation for, their Part or Share of and in the Land of Canaan, which
thereupon they were expressly cut off from, ver. 20, 23, 24.

2. Now although it was grounded on a Principle of Moral Justice and Equity,
that the Levites, thus engaged in a continual Attendance on a public Service,
and shut out from their Share in the Inheritance of the promised Land should
receive a sufficient Maintenance from them, for whom they performed that
Service, and who enjoyed their Part of the Land: Yet the ascertaining of the
Quot a of that Maintenance to the exact proportion of a Tenth Part of the
Increase of the Land, was not grounded on Moral Justice, but had its dependence
on the Ceremonial Law, adapted and limited to the Polity of that Dispensation
and People only. And that it might not be extended beyond its appointed Time
and Bounds, it pleased the Divine Wisdom, to subject it to such Ceremonial
Circumstances, as plainly rank it amongst those carnal Ordinances (Rites or
Ceremonies) which were imposed, but till the Time of Reformation, Spoken of
Heb. 9. 10. For as God appointed the Levites to be offered for a Wave-Offering,
by Moses, in the Name and on the behalf of the Children of Israel, when he said
to Moses, Thou shall bring the Levites to the Tabernacle of the Congregation,
and thou shall gather the whole Assembly of the Children of Israel together;
And thou shall bring the Levites before the Lord, and the Children of Israel
shall put their Hands upon the Levites: And Aaron shall offer (in the Margin
Wave) the Levites before the Lord, for an Offering (in the Margin,
Wave-Offering) of the Children of Israel; that they may execute the Service of
the Lord, Number. 8. 9, 10, 11. So the Tithes, which were assigned for the
Maintenance of the Levites, were to be first offered, by the People, as an
Heave Offering unto the Lord. ( The Tithes of the Children of Israel, which
they offer as an Heave Offering unto the Lord, I have given to the Levites,
etc. Numb. 18. 24.) And even the Tithes of those Tithes, which the Levites were
to yield unto the Priests, were to be offered, by the Levites, as an
Heave Offering to the Lord, before the Priests might have them. Thus speak unto
the Levites (said God to Moses) and say unto them, When ye take of the Children
of Israel the Tithe which I have given you from them for your Inheritance; Then
ye shall offer up an Heave Offering of it for the Lord, even a tenth Part of
the Tithe. And this your Heave Offering shall be reckoned unto you, as though
it were the Corn of the threshing Floor, etc. Thus ye also shall offer an
Heave Offering unto the Lord, of all your Tithes, which ye receive of the
Children of Israel: And ye shall give there of the Lord's Heave Offering to
Aaron the Priest, ver. 26, 27, 28. This makes it evident, beyond doubting, that
the Tithes, which were given by the People to the Levites, and by the Levites
to the Priests, under the Law, had their Dependence on the Ceremonial Law, as
that Priesthood had; And were to stand no longer than that Law and that
Priesthood stood: Which was but till Shiloh came, and by the Offering of
himself once for all, had put an end to all the shadowy Offerings under that
Law.

3. This the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, did so well understand, that
he positively declared, that the Levitical Priesthood being changed, there was
made of Necessity a Change also of the Law, (of that Law, by which that
Priesthood and the Maintenance of it had stood) See Heb. 7. 12. And it is also
evident from Scripture and Primitive Antiquity that neither the Apostles
themselves, nor (for some ages after them) any of the Christians, did meddle
with, or at all concern themselves about Tithes; But let them totally fall as
they did the other abrogated Part, viz. Offerings, etc. and of the Ceremonial
Law of Moses.

4. But after that the Mystery of Iniquity, which in the Apostles time began to
work (2 These. 2. 7.) had wrought to that Degree amongst some Christians, and
had drawn them so far from the Purity and Simplicity of the Gospel, as to form
and model the Church in many things, by and according to the Jewish Pattern
amongst other Ceremonial Parts of the Jewish Religion, which had been abolished
by the Coming and Death of Christ. Tithes were preached up again (about the
latter end of the fourth Century, and beginning of the fifth) by some, at
first, under the Notion of Alms and Charity (because part of the Tithes under
the Levitical Law, were appointed for the Maintenance of the Fatherless, the
Widow and the Stranger, Deuteronomy. 14. 28, 29.) And by others, as then still due by
the Mosaic Law, which had required them to be paid to the Levitical Priesthood.
Which Plea afterward (Corruptions increasing in the Church, and in those
especially who were called the Churchmen, or Clergy) more and more prevailing,
the Payment of Tithes was re-introduced, as due by those Levitical Laws, which
had been given to the Israelites of old. And upon that Bottom, Tithes have
stood, been claimed and the Claim defended unto this Day.

5. Now, not only he that thus claims, and receives Tithes; but he that
consents to, and complies with such Claim, by paying Tithes thus brought in,
and thus claimed, does thereby implicitly, and vertually (at least) deny that
Christ has put an End to the Ceremonial Law of Moses, and consequently that he
is come, and has suffered in his Flesh for Mankind. And that this may appear
as plain as is possible, I shall draw the Matter into an Argument, thus: To
uphold any Thing, as still in force, which was to be taken away, and cease at
and by the Death of Christ, is to deny that Christ is come and has suffered in
his Flesh for Mankind. But to receive, or pay Tithes now, is to uphold a Thing,
as still in force, which was to be taken away, and cease at and by the Death of
Christ: Therefore to receive, or pay Tithes now, is to deny that Christ is
come, and has suffered in his Flesh for Mankind.
The Major must be granted, and the Minor I thus prove. Whatsoever was a part
of the Ceremonial Law of Moses, was to be taken away, and cease at and by the
Death of Christ; But Tithes were a part of the Ceremonial Law of Moses;
Therefore Tithes were to be taken away, and cease at and by the Death of Christ:
The Major here again is unexceptionable; And the Minor is thus proved. Every
Heave Offering among the Jews was a Part of the Ceremonial Law of Moses; But
Tithes were an Heave Offering among the Jews, Number. 18. 24. Therefore Tithes
were a Part of the Ceremonial Law of Moses.


6. By this it appears, that without regard had of the Person to whom, or the
Use for which Tithes are paid, the paying of Tithes (as well as the receiving
them) being a Part of the abrogated Ceremonial Law of Moses, imports a denial
of the Coming, and Death of Christ. Hence it is, that Tithes have been, and are
commonly called Antichristian, or against Christ. And hence has risen that
saying (often used not only by our ancient Friends, but by some of the Martyrs
long before) viz. He that pays Tithes, does thereby deny that Christ is come in
the Flesh. That Conclusion could not have been drawn, from the paying of Tithes
to a wrong Ministry, or for a wrong use only, though such Payment be evil: Nor
could any thing justify that Inference, but the Consideration that Tithes,
depending on the Ceremonial Law of Moses, which must of Necessity and in course
fall, and cease when Christ suffered; the paying of Tithes carries in it a
supposal, that that Law is not yet ceased, but is still in force: and
consequently that Christ, whose Death must needs have ended it, is not yet
come, nor has yet suffered in his Flesh for Mankind.

7. That other Objection, not less weighty than common against paying Tithes to
the Clergy, so called, viz. The unlawfulness of upholding a false Ministry, to
perform a false Worship (being it self so clear and plain, that it needs no
illustration) I shall, in this Discourse, no further meddle with, than to
observe in my way, how far it may affect those Tithes also, which the
Impropriators claim. Wherefore having premised what is said before concerning
Tithes in general, to what Hand, or for what Use soever paid, let us now
inquire into those Tithes, which are called Impropriate.

Of Impropriate TITHES.
THAT these Tithes, which are claimed by the Impropriators, are of the same
Nature, and stand originally on the same Root and Ground, on which the other
Tithes stand, which are claimed and exacted by the Priests, is evident from
hence, that they were all heretofore, these as well as those, claimed by, and
paid to some or other of the Romish Clergy, or their Appendices, the Religious
Orders (so called) and upon the same Foot. That is, These Impropriate Tithes
were paid to those Religious Orders or Houses, as being due to God, by virtue,
of the Levitic-Law; as well as the other Tithes were paid to the
Parish Priests, on the same supposed Right, from the same Law. But how these
Ththes came to those Religious Houses first, and how afterward from them to
the Impropriators, is next to be inquired.

Until the Lateran Council (so named, because it was holden in the Pope's
Palace at Rome, called the Lateran) in the Year 1215. It was in the choice of
every Man to give his Tithes to what Church he pleased, so he gave them to some
Church. And even after that Council, the Popes, as Heads of that Church, by
their dispencing Power, did give leave to such as would sue, and pay for it, to
give their Tithes from the Parish Priest, to such Order of Religious People
(whether Monks, Friars, or Nuns) as they were best affected to. By which means,
the Parish Priests (called Seculars,) and those of the several Religious Orders
(called by a general Title, Regulars) being left to scramble, as they could,
for maintenance, the Regulars (mendicant Friars, and others) swarming in all
Places, and pretending, at least, to greater Sanctity, and Austerity of Life,
than the Parish Priests, prevailed with the People, either living or dying, to
give not only very considerable Estates in Lands, but also the Tithes of other
Lands, and of whole Parishes, from the Parish Priests, to their Religious
Houses or Convents.

The Tithes, or Parsonages, so given, were then called Appropriations, because
they were appropriated to this, that, or the other Religious House or Convent.
And I have read, that there were in England about 3845 Parsonages thus
appropriated. And as Tithes were then held to be due to God and holy Church;
and those Religious Orders were reputed a part of that Church: So the Tithes,
as well as the Lands thus given them, were continued to them, and possessed by
them, till that general Storm arose, in K. Henry 8. his time, which overturned
those Religious Houses and Orders together. And here, by the way, it may be
noted, That while those Religious Houses stood, a great part of the Lands which
had been given to them, were, by Papal Authority, exempted from paying Tithes:
Whence it is, that many of those Estates, which had belonged to those Religious
Houses, remain discharged from the Burden of Tithes still.

As Tithes were set up here on the Authority of the Levitic Law, and in
imitation of the Jewish Practice, consonant to that Law: So while those
Religious Houses stood, and the Pope's Power prevailed here, not only the
Seculars or Parish Priests, but all those Regulars who received Tithes, were
bound to pay the Tenths out of the Tithes they received to the Head of their
Church, the Pope as the Levites, under the Ceremonial Law, were required to do
to the Priests.

But after that K. Hen. 8. (upon a Quarrel between the Pope and him, about his
Divorce from his first Queen Catharine, which he earnestly desired, and the
Pope would not grant) fell off from the Pope (though not from Popery: For after
that, he retained the most pernicious Doctrines of the Romish Church, contained
in the six Articles, and burnt some for denying them) he threw off the Pope's
Supremacy here, and assumed it to himself; declaring himself, and being
declared, first by the Clergy in their Convocation, and soon after by Lords and
Commons in Parliament. The only Supreme Head in Earth of the Church of England.
This was done by the Statute of 26 Hen. 8. c. 1. And therein it is enacted.
'That the King, his Heirs and Successors, Kings of this Realm, shall be taken,
accepted and reputed the only Supreme Head in Earth of the Church of England.
And shall have and enjoy, annexed and united to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm, as well the Title and Style thereof, as all Honors, Dignities,
Praeeminences, Jurisdictions, Privileges, Authorities, Immunities, Profits and
Commodities to the said Dignity of Supreme Head of the same Church belonging
and appertaining. And shall have full Power and Authority, from time to time,
to Visit, Repress, Redress, Reform, Order, Correct, Restrain and Amend all such
Errors, Heresies, Abuses, Offenses, Contempts and Enormities whatsoever they
be, which by any manner of Spiritual Authority and Jurisdiction ought, or may
lawfully be reformed, repressed, ordered, redressed, corrected, restrained, or
amended,' etc. By which it is evident, the Intention of the Parliament then was
to transfer, confer and settle unto and upon King Henry all the Powers, Profits
and Privileges, which had been before supposed to be in, or belong to, or had
been enjoyed or exercised by the Pope, while he was received as Supreme Head of
the Church.

6. And therefore, as the Pope, while he retained the Supremacy here, had the
first Fruits (which are the Profits of every Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Living
for one Year, upon the advancing of any Ecclesiastical Person, to such a
Living; and also the Tenths, that is the tenth Part of all the Tithes: So these
two Revenues, as appendant to that Supremacy, followed it; being settled on the
King, in the same Session of Parliament, wherein the Supremacy was vested in
him. The Words of the Statute, 26 H. 8. c. 3. relating to the first Fruits, are
these. 'That for the more surety of Continuance and Augmentation of his High
ness Royal Estate, being not only now recognized (as he always indeed has
heretofore been) the only Supreme Head in Earth, next and immediately under God,
of the Church of England, but also their most assured and undoubted natural
Sovereign Liege Lord and King, etc. It may therefore be enacted and ordained
by, etc. That the King's Highness, his Heirs and Successors, Kings of this
Realm, shall have and enjoy from time to time to endure for ever, of every such
Person and Persons, which at any time after the first Day of January next shall
be nominated, elected, perfected, presented, collated or by any other means
appointed to have any Archbishopric, Abbacy, Monastery, Priory, College,
Hospital, Archdeaconry, Deanery, Provostship, Prebend, Parsonage, Vicarage,
Chauntry, Free-Chappel, or other Dignity, Benefice, Office, or Promotion
Spiritual, within this Realm, or elsewhere within any of the King's Dominions,
of what Name, Nature, or Quality soever they be, or to whose Foundation,
Patronage, or Gift soever they belong, the First Fruits, Revenues and Profits
for one Year of every such Archbishopric, Bishopric, Abbey, Monastery,
Priory, -- Parsonage, Vicarage,' etc. Then (after Provisions made for finding
out the value of those Spiritual Livings, and for paying, receiving and
recovering those First Fruits) the Settlement of the Tenths (that other part of
the Pope's Revenue) upon the King, follows, in the same Statute, in these Words.

'And over this, be it enacted by Authority aforesaid, that the Kings Majesty,
his Heirs and Successors, Kings of this Realm, for more Augmentation and
Maintenance of the Royal Estate of his Imperial Crown and Dignity of Supreme
Head of the Church of England, shall yearly have, take, enjoy and receive,
united and knit to his Imperial Crown for ever, one yearly Rent, or Pension,
amounting to the value of the Tenth Part of all the Revenues, Rents, Farms,
Tithes, Offerings, Emoluments, and of all other Profits as well called
Spiritual as Temporal, now appertaining or belonging, or that hereafter shall
belong to any Archbishopric, Bishopric, Abbacy, Monastery, Priory,
Archdeaconry, Deanery, Hospital, College, House-Collegiate, Prebend, Cathedral
Church, Collegiate-Church, Conventual-Church, Parsonage, Vicarage, Chauntry,
Free-Chappel, or other Benefice or Promotion Spiritual, of what Name, Nature,
or Quality soever they be, within any Diocese of this Realm, or in Wales,' etc.
And so goes on to direct the time, place and manner of Payment of these Tenths,
with the Penalty for non-payment.

Thus were these two great Pillars of Papal Supremacy (First Fruits and Tenths)
transferred from the Pope, (the old Head,) to the King, (the new Head of the
Church,) to support and maintain that Headship in him, as they had done before
in the Pope. Which Ecclesiastical Headship the King was no sooner possessed of,
than he began to exercise it amongst those Religious Orders; Suppressing (as
Herbert, in his Life, p. 379. relates) the Observant Friars at Greenwich,
Canterbury, Richmond and other Places, and substituting the Augustines in their
Places. 'Which he did (says Herbert there) for the finding out how his People
would take his Design of putting down Religious Houses:' To which he proceeded
the next Year, beginning with the lesser Sort, and suppressing all those
Monasteries, Priories and other Religious Houses of Monks, Canons, and Nuns,
which had not in Lands, Tenements, Rents, Tithes, Portions, and other
Hereditaments, above the clear yearly Value of two hundred Pounds. By which
means 376 of those Religious Houses being dissolved, a Revenue of above thirty
thousand Pounds a Year, beside an hundred thousand Pounds in Money raised yb
sale, at low Rates, of the Goods and Chattels, of those Houses (a Sum not small
in that Age) came to the King, for support of his Ecclesiastical Supremacy.

The Statute, which countenanced this Proceeding, is the 27. of Hen. 8. cap.
28. And a new Court, called the Court of Augmentations, was then erected and
settled by Parliament, for receiving and ordering these new accessional
Revenue: the Act for which, in our printed Statute Books, is set before that
for the Suppression of those lesser Monasteries. But though that, for
Suppressing those Monasteries, be, by an Hysterosis, set after that for
establishing the Court of Augmentations; Yet it must have been made before it:
For it is recited in it.

In that Statute, 27 Hen. 8. 28. for suppressing those smaller Monasteries,
mention is made of Monasteries, Abbeys, and Priores, which, within one Year
before the making of that Statute, had been given and granted to the King by
any Abbot, Prior, Abbess or Prioress, under their Convent-Seal, or that
otherwise had been suppressed, or dissolved. All which were, by that Statute
confirmed to the King, and to all those, unto whom the King either then before
had conveyed, or then after should convey any Part or Parts thereof; 'To hold
to them in like Manner, Form, and Conditions, as the Abbots, Priors, Abbesses,
Prioresses' and other chief Governors of any religious Houses, which had the
same, might or ought to have had if they had not been suppressed. For upon the
King's falling (as was noted before) upon the Observant Friars at Greenwich,
and other places, some of the more considerate of the Abbots, Priors, etc.
Seeing the Storm arising, which then threatened, and soon after brought
Destruction on those Orders, thought it better Policy to comply with the times,
and surrender upon Terms, in hopes to save something, than hold out to the last
(as many did) and lose all.

10. And indeed, the suppressing of those 376 lesser Monasteries, struck so
great a Fear into the greater, that the Statute made four Years after (31 Hen.
8. cap. 13.) whereby the Rest of the Religious Houses were given to the King,
recites, 'That diverse and sundry Abbots, etc. of their own free and voluntary
Mind, since the fourth of Feb. in the 27 of his Reign, had by due Order of Law,
and by their sufficient Writings of Record, under their Convent and common
Seals, severally given, granted and confirmed to the King his Heirs and
Successors for ever, All their said Monasteries, Abbeys, Priories, etc. and all
the Manors, Lord-ships, Lands, Tenements, Tithes, etc. to them belonging; and
had voluntarily renounced, left and forsaken the same.' And therefore, in the
said Statute it is enacted, 'That the King shall have, hold, etc. All such late
Monasteries, etc. and all the Sites, Circuits, Manners, Lands, Tenements, etc.
thereunto belonging.' In the ennumeration of the Particulars whereof, (which
are many) Tithes, Parsonages, appropriate, and Vicarages are expressly
mentioned. All which (as likewise all other Religious Houses, with the Revenues
thereof, which should there after be dissolved, suppressed, relinquished,
forfeited, or given to the King, and which by that Statute are settled on him)
he was to hold and enjoy, in as large and ample Manner, and Form, as the late
Abbots, etc. had held or of right ought to have held, the same, in Right of
their said late Monasteries, etc.

11. From hence this Observation arises. That since those Religious Orders did
hold the Tithes which they possessed, upon the supposed Right of their being
due to God and Holy Church, which they held themselves, and were by others
holden to be a part of; and the King received those Tithes and Parsonages
(amongst the rest of the Revenues of the Religious Houses) as well those that
were resigned to him by the Governors of those Houses themselves, as the rest
which by Act of Parliament he took, upon the same Right on which those
Religious Orders had holden them: He also must hold them upon that supposed
Right of their being due to God and Holy Church; which he then held himself,
and was holden by all, both Clergy and Laity, to be the only Supreme Head of
here in England. And as upon that supposed Right (of their being due to God and
Holy Church) on which the Religious Houses held them, they passed them from
those Houses to the King, as supreme Head of the Church: So on the same
supposed Right (of their being due to God and Holy Church) they passed from the
King, as supreme Head of the Church, to those (whether Spiritual or Lay
Persons) unto whom the King granted them. For they stuck not long in the King's
Hand: But he, of his own mere Motion, Liberality and Benignity (as the Statute
in the 33d Year of his Reign, cap. 39. relates) had by that time freely given
and granted, etc. unto diverse and sundry of the Lords and Nobles, as well
Spiritual as Temporal, and unto diverse and many other Persons and Bodies
politic, etc. diverse and many sundry Honors, Castles, Manors, Lands,
Tenements, and among the rest, Rectories, etc.

12. But great care was taken to retain, and keep up the Character of
Spirituality, which had formerly been stamped upon those Rectories, Parsonages,
and other Revenues by Tithes, into what Hands soever they were passed. And
therefore, by the Statute of 32 Hen. 8. cap. 7. in case of withholding, or
denying to pay the Tithes, all Persons claiming them (Impropriators, as well as
Priests) are restrained from suing in the Temporal Courts, and limited to the
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Courts only, for the Recovery of them.

And that they might still have Dependence upon the Supremacy, care was taken,
from the first, by the Statute of 27 Hen. 8. cap. 27. That none of these
Estates, which then had come, or should come, from any of those Religious
Houses to the King, should pass from him by Grant to any Person whatsoever,
without an express Reservation of a Tenth. And in a subsequent Statute (33 Hen.
8. cap. 39.) complaint being made that, although out of those Grants, which the
King had made to sundry Persons, of Honors, Castles, Manors, Lands,
Tenements, Rectories, etc. (which were under the Survey of the Court of
Augmentations) the Tenths had been reserved; yet the Persons unto whom such
Grants had been made, though they had quietly enjoyed and taken the Issues and
Profits of those Lands, Rectories, etc. had not paid the reserved Rents to the
King: Provision was made in that Statute, by several Forfeitures and
Nomine-Poenae's to enforce the Payment thereof.

Nor was Care taken of the Ecclesiastical Head (the King) only, but of the
Ecclesiastical Members (the Clergy) also: Many, if not most, of which had
Pensions, or Portions issuing out of those Parsonages, Rectories, or other
spiritual Benefices (as they were counted) which the Religious Orders held:
for, besides that upon the increasing of those Appropriations, whereby the
Parish Priests were pinched, there had been Provision made early, in the time
of K. Richard the Second, for the Vicars, as well as for the Poor; the Statute
of 15 Ric. 2. 6. directing, 'That, upon the Appropriation of such Churches, the
Diocaesian of the Place (or Bishop of the Diocese) shall ordain, according to
the value of such Churches, a convenient Sum of Money to be paid, and
distributed Yearly, of the Fruits and Profits of the same Churches, to the poor
Parishioners; and also, that the Vicar be well and sufficiently endowed.' Which
Statute (so far, at least, as concerned the Vicars) was afterward confirmed by
another Statue of 4. Hen. 4. cap. 12. which expressly ordains, 'That the Statute
of Appropriation of Churches, and of the Endowment of Vicars in the same, made
the 15th Year of K. Ric. the 2 d be firmly holden, and put in due Execution:' I
say, besides these, the Stat. of 34 and 35 of Hen. 8. cap. 19. takes notice,
'That the Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons and other Ecclesiastical Persons,
of both Provinces of Canterbury and York, having formerly, in right of their
Churches received out of the late Monasteries, etc. diverse Pensions, and other
Profits, had after the Dissolution of those Houses, been disturbed, and denied
of the having, receiving, and gathering of the said Pensions,' etc. Whereupon
it is, in the said Statute, enacted, 'That if any Person or Persons, being
Farmer or Occupier of any Manors, Lands, Tenements, Parsonges, Benefices, or
other Hereditaments of any of the said late Monasteries, etc. by the King's
Gift, Grant, Sale, Exchange, or other wise, out of which any such Pensions,
etc. have been heretofore lawfully going, answered or paid to any of the
Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, and other Ecclesiastical Persons
abovesaid, do, at any time after the First Day of April next coming, wilfully
deny the Payment thereof, Then it shall be lawful for the said Archbishops,
Bishops, Archdeacons, or other Ecclesiastical Persons aforesaid, being so
denied to be satisfied and paid there of, etc. to proceed in the Ecclesiastical
Courts, for the recovery thereof.'

14. By which Statute, all Pensions payable to Archbishops, Bishops,
Archdeacons, or other Ecclesiastical Person, that had been possessed thereof,
at or within Ten Years next before the time of the Dissolution of the
Monasteries, out of the Parsonages, Rectories, or Tithes holden by the said
Monasteries, etc. are confirmed and assured to such Archbishops, Bishops,
Archdeacons, and other Ecclesiastical Persons still.

15. So that, upon the whole, besides what has been said of Tithes in general,
with respect to the Judaizing, and denying of Christ, by the paying thereof
(which extends alike to all Tithes, those claimed by the Impropriator, as well
as those claimed by the Priest) the Impropriate Tithes being generally charged,
either with some Payment to the Vicars, for enlarging of their Stipends, or
with Pensions to the Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, and other
Ecclesiastics: all such of them as are so charged, come under the same
Objection, that is made against paying to the Priest, viz. The upholding of a
false Ministry, to perform a false Worship. And if any Impropriation may be
supposed to be free from all those Charges: yet all Impropriators, as well as
Priests, being bound to pay the reserved Tenths to the King, as Supreme Head of
the Church (which were wont before to be paid to the Pope, while he was owned
for Head of the Church) the paying of Tithes to an Impropriator, is a
Recognizing, and acknowledging of a Man (Bad or Good, Popish or Protestant, as
it happens) to be the only Supreme Head on Earth of the Church Which is to set
an Human Head to a Spiritual Body: and to divest and deprive our Lord Jesus
Christ of his undoubted Right, who the Apostle says expressly, is the Head of
the Body, the Church, Col. 1. 18. And that not of Man's making or appointing;
but God (says the Apostle) has given him to be the Head over all things to
the Church, which is his Body, Ephesians. 1. 22, 23.

T. E.

FINIS.

