VORTIGERN AND ROWENA; A COMI-TRAGEDY.

S. GOSNELL, Printer, Little Queen Street, Holborn.

PASSAGES SELECTED BY DISTINGUISHED PERSONAGES, ON THE GREAT LITERARY TRIAL OF
VORTIGERN AND ROWENA; A Comi-Tragedy.

"WHETHER IT BE -- OR BE NOT FROM THE IMMORTAL PEN OF SHAKSPEARE?" VOLUME II.

SEVENTH EDITION.

-- "Open me a huge Wardrobe aboundinge in motlie habittes, and mark how
fantasticallie poor mortals will arraie themselves!" VORT. and ROW. LONDON:
PRINTED FOR J. RIDGWAY, NO. 170, OPPOSITE OLD BOND STREET, PICCADILLY. 1807.

IRELAND versus SHAKESPEARE!!!
By the COURT.
IT having been effectually argued, and demurred on the part of the DEFENDANT,
that no questionable points of Literature, any more than questionable points of
law, can in equity be pressed to an hasty decision;

It is Ordered, that the VERDICT be not received, on this important cause,
until the whole SUFFRAGES, already tendered, or intended to be tendered, in
said cause, be duly received, and solemnly recorded!

POLONIUS
Die Veneris 12o, 1796.
CONTENTS.
A Amelia, Princess 37 A -- d -- n, Sir P -- p -- r 13 A -- kl -- d, Lady 74
Atk -- n, Mr. C. 102
B B -- lf -- st, Earl of 3 B -- kl -- y, Hon. Capt. G. 83 B -- ng -- m, Lady
E. 6 B -- ll -- r, Sir F. 7 B -- st -- w, Mrs. 28 B -- rw -- l, Mrs. 36 B --
th, Marquis of 77 B -- v -- rye, Hon. Mrs. 78 B -- k -- h -- m, M-q-s of 45 B
-- g -- ss, Lady Sm -- h 48 Br -- d -- l, Mr. 63 B -- r, Bishop of 69
C C -- ss of ****** 4 C -- m -- lf -- d, Lord 94 C -- with -- ne, Colonel 5
C-mpb-ll, Lady Caroline 8 C -- p -- g -- y, Mrs. 14 Cl -- v -- g, Lady Augusta
44 C -- nw -- s, V. Admiral 47 Ch -- m -- d -- y, C -- ss 52 C -- v -- y, Earl
of 61 C -- mbe, Alderman 91
D D -- l -- v -- l, Lord 67 D-d-y and W-d, Lady 39 D-n-g-l, Marchioness of 42
E Egr -- m -- t, Earl of 9 Es -- x, Countess of 10 Ex -- r, Countess of 24 Er
-- l, Earl of 73
G Gr -- nv -- le, Lady 12 Gl -- r, Duke of 25 Gl -- r, Princess S-ph-a of 80 G
-- rd -- r, Adm. Sir A. 59 G -- f -- d, Countess of 66 G -- ry, Sir William 81
H H -- st -- gs, Mrs. 34 H -- rl -- y, Right Hon T. 41 H -- pst -- y, Sir John
53 H -- g -- st -- n, Lady 54 H -- th -- c -- te, Lady 104 H -- y, Hon. Miss 99
K K -- p -- l, Miss 68
L L -- mb -- n, Lady Ann 64 L -- ds, Duke of 11 L -- t -- n, Marquis of 19 L
-- sh -- n, Alderman 21 Lasc -- ls, Prince 23 L -- w -- s, Sir W-tk-n 51 L -- t
-- l, Lady Eliz. 97 L -- sd -- le, Earl of 85
M M -- n -- rs, Lady 60 M -- lb -- gh, D -- ss of 50 M -- ld -- n, Lord 49 M
-- lms -- y, Lord 87 M -- nch -- r, Duke of 79 M -- y -- r, the Lord 29 M -- c
-- d, Major Genesis 38 M -- lb -- ne, Lady 31 M -- ra, Earl of 1 M -- nt -- gu,
Mrs. 2 M -- d, Earl of 15 Mil -- g -- n, Lady 18 M -- ll -- s, Mrs. 27 M -- l
-- g, Miss 95
N N -- w -- stle, Duchess of 16 N -- r -- h, Mrs. 20 N-th-b-d, Duchess of 84
N -- th, Hon. Mrs. 82
O O -- sl -- w, Hon. T. 29 Orf -- d, Earl of 30
P P -- lt -- y, Sir James 33 P -- of -- 57 P -- lt -- y, Sir William 89 P --
ck -- t, Ald -- n 103
Q Q -- sb -- y, Duke of 55
R R -- r, Bishop of 17 R -- ck -- ts, Lady E -- th 46 R --, Hon Miss 72 R --
lle, Lord 96 R -- nd -- ph, Rev. Dr. 75
S S -- mp -- n, Lady 101 S -- w -- l -- gh, Madame 90 S -- ym -- r, Lady H. 92
St -- f -- d, M -- n -- ss of 76 St -- rt, Miss 88 St -- t, Mrs. 58 Sn -- w,
Miss 62
T T -- d, Lady John 22 T-ll-m-che, Lady Bridget 32 T -- ill -- r, Mr. M. A. 43
T -- ill -- r, Mrs. M A. 56 T -- ill -- r, Mrs. M. A. (Her second suffrage) 86 T
-- r, Sir G. P. 65 T -- rn -- y, Mr. 98
W W -- ts -- n, Bishop 93 W -- ts -- n, Ald. Brook 35 W -- lb -- f -- ce, Mr.
100 W -- r, Sir G -- df -- y 71 Wh -- tb -- d, sen. Mr. 40 W -- l -- gh -- y os
E -- by, Lady 70

PASSAGES SELECTED AS SUFFRAGES ON THE TWENTY-FOURTH DAY's TRIAL.
CI. -- Earl of M -- RA.
" -- Commend me to a busy COUNT for a bustlinge world! One minute will he
woo you gallantly at a fair Dame's toilette on his humble knee -- and fly
the next to bend a prouder creste than his own, in the face of the Lords
Senate House! -- You may always meet SERASKIN at one turn or other of human
extremes. He will with zeal overflowinge stop to plead the cause of the poor
captive, while conveying the gauge of honorable defiance to a proud PRINCE in
aid of one, whom chance has barred from regal blood! -- Fight will he
himself most mansullie; but, as you prize the credit of his valor, let it be
done under his own guidance special. -- Punctilious is he as noble; so that he
will sense with the Sages of his Sov'raine's Council until the moone's at the
full, upon the sense constructive of their own decrees! -- Such outward
workinges sway this compound man, whose mind within moves but for others
good, which does his own felicity embrace!"

PAGE 321. -- GENUINE. CII. -- Mrs. M -- NT -- GU.
"Marry, good Dame! but you may well deride the partial boones of Nature,
when a left handed imitation of taste does so currentlie counterfeite her
handiworkes! -- With the redundance of mortal frailties establish me thy fair
fame on matchless singularity! -- Criticize where thou can not comprehend;
and satirize where the weak world does foolishlie admire. -- Like the matron
of Mantua, garter thy partie-coloured leg below the knee; and mount on the
listes of meeke-cyed Charity, by feedinge with dates and dainties one day in
the Calendar, all the sootie race of Chimnie-sweepinge boys, that they may
enjoie the luxury of their hard fate through the remainder of the year!"

PAGE 123. -- Not GENUINE. CIII. -- Earl of B -- LF -- ST.
"Methinks, good STEPHAND, those of my father's house did take me for a Bulle
of Irishe extraction; for they set curs to bait me into madness, while more
tenderly did they select an ambling Scotte, of Gallowaye breed, for the
merriment of my junior brother! -- But since they drove me to the altar of
sacrifice, I did adventure to take with me a help-meet, and there, with the
aid of pious Priest, I made my maiden Dr. PARR, whom the fortunate Mr. IRELAND
has named EDITOR elect, for this unique Comi-Tragedy, threw down his pipe, when
he came to this miserably begotten PEN, and owned himself for the moment, a
DISSENTER from the new SHAKSPEREAN faith!
BELLE fast, by a knot tied with my tongue, which does now challenge all
their wise wits to untie again with their teethe!"

PAGE 63. -- Not GENUINE. CIV. -- C -- ss of ******.
"Why was KARKMENA prodigalie stored
"With all the wiles which wanton round her sex,
"But to displaie in peering woman hoode
"Supremacie's fell power? Oh, mark ye well
"How she does turn meek Nature in her course;
"Make diadems the royal temples chafe;
"Tie with a busy hand the gordian knotte
"Of others love, that she (of human woe,
"Insatiate destiny) may cut in twain
"The silken ligatures of mortal bliss!
"Her features with her voice are well attuned,
"True to the varyinge mischiefs of her mind!
"Like the first polished Serpente, that seduced
"The easy faith of ADAM's wedded love,
"A more than Angel's form she can assume,
"And woo in scraph strains the creature doomed
"To drink the dulcet poison of her tongue,
"And fall her 'g^iled sacrifice!"
PAGE 187. -- GENUINE. TWENTY-FIFTH DAY's TRIAL.
CV. -- Colonel C -- WITH -- NE.
" -- Varnishe me doubly over by a special Court of Law Martial, or no more
wear I a coat of maile in the King's tented field! -- I have gone about to
indite me a speech that shall be-puzzle the bie-standers, and confound the
clumsie imagination of mine enemy! -- Let him do now as he list, I may defy
his malice to make me more or less, than the thing in verity I am! -- To
mine own bright valor am I indebted as a man of arms! -- I have seen much
powder wasted on a sun-shinie day! -- thanks to my genius in the art of war,
I am also right conversant in the quick step to the retreat, and, by an ear
refined, I now can nice distinction make, betwixt the " Dinner Tattoo," and "
Go to bed, Tom!" PAGE 51. -- GENUINE. CVI. -- Lady E -- B -- NG -- M.
"Oh fie, my quondam Coz. of Norfolk! -- Did you not practice on my girlishe
vanity, when I was depicted the fair SHEBA to your Grace's wiser SOLOMON? --
You told me I was then "in all my glory;" but, alack, no sooner did they
taunte me with the honors they conferred, than my weak woman's frailty
rebelled against the blood of HOWARD's lofty race! -- Why did I swear to
love the man by others eyes thus chosen? -- With souls as much at variance as
our says, what could I better, than the latter lose, to save the former, and
break the odious web, wherein, like silly fly, I was unwittinglie
ensnared?" PAGE 77. -- Not GENUINE. CVII. -- Sir F -- B -- LL -- R.
"This trottinge from Court to Court, term after term, befittes not my
humor well! -- But since I am sworn an Administrator of the Laws, I will see
them most wholesomelie dispensed to all offendinge creatures, male and female!
-- The knaves incorrigible will I stringe like ropes of onions; and to teach
conjugal obeisance to womankind, their measure of chastisement will I decree to
be dealt at their husbands hands by the Rule of THUMB!"

PAGE 94. -- GENUINE. CVIII. -- Lady CAROLINE C -- MPB -- LL.
"I did a plain untitled man espouse,
"(With wealth, like his own mountains high amassed
"That I might lead the pliante husband bound
"To vassalage eterne! -- To me he looks
"With lowly eye, as to the sacred founte
"From whence his borrowed luster is derived. --
"Whenever I deign to commune -- it is not often --
"His greedy ear mine accents does devour,
"As falling from anointed dignity!
"He, with the prating world, presumes to say,
"That I am shaped and featured in the moulde
"Of Grecian loveliness: -- but, Tineallie trained
"Above the incense of the lower spheres,
"See how I soar beyond poor mortals' praise,
"In proud supremacy of state!"
PAGE II. -- GENUINE. TWENTY-SIXTH DAY's TRIAL.
CIX. -- Earl of EGR -- M -- T.
-- "When they made such Lords as this same Compte Hugolto, they knew their
trade well, and wrought with the best materials! -- Marry, Sir, you trace not
him through the foiles, and doubles of your Court purlieus, but find him on
his own domaine, like one who shrinks not at the Shrieve's officer, nor fears
the reproaches of a tenantrie tortured upon rackrentes! -- Although the learned
languages be as familiar to him as plaine-dealing, he offends no unlettered man
with his ecce homos! or tu quoques! -- The felicity of all Heaven's creatures
is his delighte, and the voice of gratitude attends it -- even his hounds
challenge him at view, on the score of his benevolence! -- Whatever be the
portion of his failings, the frailty of man's nature will reasonably account
for it!"

PAGE 165. -- GENUINE. CX. -- Countess of ES -- X.
-- "On her visit to Algieres, they did elect her Empress of the gaudie
Maccaws! -- since which, plumes, and cheeks of various hues, have mightlie
adorned her! -- After this, the doctrines of " Painted paste-boards" -- "
Courtly paper." -- Mr. CAPEL LOFT, confessedly one of our most old-fashioned
Critics on the immortal Bard, says decidedly, "that these two passages allude
to the new art of gambling with CARDS, which crept into BRITAIN at that
period." -- We are apprehensive, however, that the learned Commentator has here
been guilty of a little anachronism, as CARDS were certainly invented in the
year 1390, to divert the melancholy of CHARLES VI. then King of France.
painted paste-b^ards did she estudie under the learned Jews in Palestine!
strange tricks by slight of hand were then displaied to those her
sisterhoode, who crossed her luckie palm in the silly hope of bettering their
fortunes! -- So that with her Lorde's Court dealinges, and her own dexterous
dealinges in " Painted paste-boards" -- " Courtly paper." -- Mr. CAPEL LOFT,
confessedly one of our most old-fashioned Critics on the immortal Bard, says
decidedly, "that these two passages allude to the new art of gambling with
CARDS, which crept into BRITAIN at that period." -- We are apprehensive,
however, that the learned Commentator has here been guilty of a little
anachronism, as CARDS were certainly invented in the year 1390, to divert the
melancholy of CHARLES VI. then King of France.
Courtly paper, they turn the world right merrily around them!"

PAGE 13. -- Not GENUINE. CXI. -- The Duke of L -- DS.
-- "In good truth he has been piouslie nurtured; for no sooner did his
sainted mother bring him forth, than falling sound asleep, she dreamed of
sucklinge his infant Grace upon the milkie way! hence of Christian mildness do
all his manners gently smack. -- And yet he 'll quarrel not either with a
Grace, or a Muse of fire; nay, he can whisper a light thing gallantly to a
female in the dark, and tag a mendicant Epilogue, to chaunte an half-damned
Plaie-wrighte out of the tortures of purgation!"

PAGE 12. -- Not GENUINE. CXII. -- Lady GR -- NV -- LE.
"Though fortune on her lovelie browe has placed
"In proudest jewelrie the wreathe of state,
"Mark with what grace upon her gentle breaste
"The pearl of Christian charity appears,
"More chastelie brighte, and radiantlie pure,
"Than all that Courtly diadems displaie!"
PAGE 88. -- GENUINE. TWENTY-SEVENTH DAY's TRIAL.
CXIII. -- Sir P -- P -- R A -- D -- N.
-- "Marry, Sir, I picked not up my common law as a pigeon does his pease,
in the common field, -- So will I throw away an opinion hastily for no man!
-- As every case in point has of necessity two sides, so has your
libelle constitutional its text, and contexte; out of which we sometimes make
a third -- to wit -- your mar-texte! -- But I do demean myself to parlie
thus; because it appertains unto me, as Master of the Rolls to our trusty
Sov'raine Lord the King, to see that on the proper side his royal bread be
gliblie buttered!"

PAGE 12. -- GENUINE. CXIV. -- Mrs. C -- P -- G -- Y.
"She is as dainty a wild-ducke as ever haunted the lake of a decoy -- and,
once on winge, arrest her giddie flighte who can! She has the wit most
wisely to enacte whatever folly vanity does set before her; and a
charity so Christian-like, that she does barter fine food and raiment for
the empty scraps of peddling poetasters! -- Music and farabands do so
invite her, that, with her lattice open, she will sit through moonlight nights,
unmasqued, to hear the strains of amorous serenaders, and come sorthe next
morn the Arch'ress DIAN, displaieing a leg most continentlie buskined! Oh, Sir,
so rarely does she play these pretty prankes, that half the gapeinge
world are cheated in belief that they have seen one angel upon earth Stark
mad!"

PAGE 29. -- Not GENUINE. CXV. -- Earl of M -- D.
-- "To moulde a sturdie race of mortal men, you must fashion them from
materials coarse and impenetrable! -- Let there be none, which the tear of
dulleyed Charity does melt to womanly compassion; -- but imitate the Stoique
fortitude of him, whose breaste is harder than a ten weeks froste, and which
no human breathe ever thawed into benevolence!"

PAGE 103. -- Not GENUINE. CXVI. -- Duchess of N -- W -- STLE.
"Oh, throughout Nature's works, what havocke wild
"Does one dire shafte of destiny ordain!
" -- If 'twere from state alone that I had fallen,
"This breaste had never swollen with grief or care;
"But I am humbled from the crowned height
"Of wedded love, and, with my Lord, have lost
"All that a woman's heart could hold, or prize!"
PAGE 107. -- GENUINE. TWENTY-EIGHTH DAY's TRIAL.
CXVII. -- Bishop of R -- R.
-- "I meet the prattling ABBOTTE of Glastonburie, just as he had gotten the
thorn in the flesh by meddling more busily with the Law than the Gos^ and
though a preacher of obedience passive in other men, he bore the smart of his
own sufferings a^er the manner of the priesthood -- intolerantlie! -- He was
clothed in lambe-skin throughout, signifying, I wotte, that he should become
belle-wether to the reverend flock. -- Journieing a little onward, I espied me
the counterfeit resemblance of his worship, fagotted at the public Market
Cross, in full pontificalibus! -- Marry, quothe I, my neighbors, but this
looks like a burninge shame, to make ye of such combustible HOLINESS, a
light to lighten the Gentiles!"

PAGE 321. -- GENUINE. CXVIII. -- Lady MIL -- G -- N.
"I pray you, dearest mother, think again!
"You, as the child of fortune, being 'trothed
"When the wild hey-daie of the blood was paste,
"Knew not, from crossinge of a virgin love,
"A frenzy that no medicine can reach,
"Save Time's oblivious anodyne; and which
"Does spread dire chillinges through the veins,
"To palsy life's enjoyment!"
PAGE 66. -- Not GENUINE. CXIX. -- Marquis of L -- T -- N.
-- "Time's chroniclers do tell us, that, practicing on the weakness seminine
of the Lord UDROSCO, the sly knaves of the Court eajoled him to hold the
darkened lantern, while they did try to filche the diadem from the browe of
their sick Master. Afterward he was so bedazzled by this peeringe of a meteor
light, as to follow it over unsounde soil, where in bogge and penance does
he still remain, far from the ray of rising, or of settinge sun!" PAGE 22.
-- GENUINE. CXX. -- Mrs. N -- TH.
-- "Say, who has seen
"GERSTINA, late from Mantua returned!
"I marvel if her travail has cast off
"The midnight 'witcheries of lustful play,
"Which held her mind by sascination bound? --
"Or if th'incautious care of vanity
"By prudence has been wisely sealed against
"The dulcet poison of a flatterer's tale?
"Thus error's wayward pathe may be trod back,
"And grace attend the foote-steps yet to come!"
PAGE 54. -- Not GENUINE. TWENTY-NINTH DAY's TRIAL.
CXXI. -- Alderman L -- SH -- N.
-- "More headstrong are these fellow Cittes of mine, than so many Spannishe
mules unbitted! -- They delighte themselves as much in a roasted Aldermanne on
their hustinges, as a barbicued pigge in the eramminge ides of November! -- And
here am I, the representative sworn of such gluttonizing varlettes; compelled
to bow to these stocks obeisantlie, or be dismissed their Senate-service! --
make strange speeches to amuse their wilde-goose fancies! -- eat with them
through sirlines cold, and pasties hot! -- nay eat mine own words till
they nearlie choke me, and all will not content them! -- A plague on such
servitude, say I, where our men of Liverie do lord it over their betters,
and keep their Civicke Masters thus at painful watch, and ward!"

PAGE 76. -- Not GENUINE. CXXII. -- Lady JOHN T -- D.
-- "For durance short
" Astrina's radiancie was in eclipse,
"Like the fair plannette of a clouded sphere;
"But when her diske unveiled again its orb,
"Forth shot its stream of light, and purer shone,
"To every eye that gazed upon her beauty!"
PAGE 83. -- GENUINE. CXXIII. -- PRINCE LASC -- S.
-- "Pooh! pooh! -- Nature could never mean, in wanton mockery, to stamp me
so like the thing in verity I am not! -- Sir, I was smuggled from my cradle
royal in the unfortunate hour of darkness. -- But, be that as it may, each
line of this fair face something majestique does denote; for women far and
near doat fondly on my PRINCELY seeming! -- These find it on my bloominge
cheek! -- some in the nose of regal arche! -- and others in each look, and
lineament, that mark superior birthe! -- nay, there are those, who do discern
similitude of our House in the leathern vest that does my rear environ! --
True it is, that all these dignities are but ill provided for by subject-like
revenues: yet must they be uphelde; for who, yelep'd the shadow of a Prince,
could baselie crouch beneathe the slender substance of a Gentleman!"

PAGE 2. -- Not GENUINE. CXXIV. -- Countess of EX -- R.
-- "Alack! is lordly grandeur naught but this, -- to live thus under vaulted
roofes, too vaste for human wantes, and see poor folk pent up in heaps
'neath strawless houseings? -- When they did tell me I was to be a Lady nobly
happy, I did expecte to hold more frequent commune with this worlde's peace;
but, well a day! time past I saw more innocence 'mid the lowly walkinges of
my father's sheep, than now I find through all the hurley- Burleigh scenes of
proud man's race!"

PAGE 12. -- GENUINE THIRTIETH DAY's TRIAL.
CXXV. -- Duke of GL -- R.
"Lo! there walks forth the mildest DUKE in Milan!
"But that I know the stuff of which he 's made,
"One might have sworn it on the cross
"The Destinies had tied him to a distaffe!
"Though he never vaulted on the embattled plain,
"He has a soul bestirringe him to arms,
"Leagued with the social softness of a mind
"That joies in human peace. -- No Court caballes,
"Nor feudes of mal-contents do him delighte:
"So to a PRINCE, thus lifting up the MAN,
"My heart right willingly does pay obeisance!"
PAGE 77. -- GENUINE. CXXVI. -- Hon. T. O -- SL -- W.
-- "I charge you, fellows, lay not uncourtlie hands on me! -- Should you
find me not the soft sleepie son of a Bedchamber LORD, toss me in a
Tailor's blankette! -- Though I may lack vaste possessions of lands and
beeves, I am a huge inheritor of pride, and that 's enough for me: -- so look
too 't -- for he must have more folly than does appertain to my share who
contends with the first begotten of a race, so rich in oftentation human!"

PAGE 65. -- GENUINE. CXXVII. -- Mrs. M -- LLS.
-- "And this be a LORDE's mansion, I Would have you to know, that I and mine have
been housed in a better! -- We knew what was what before we did depart from
Merry Wakefielde to join the Londonne Gentry! -- My good man, and it like
your Ladieship, was a clothier, and so it bechanced that I became so
marvelouslie dressed! -- For my part, I like every thing that is good for
the outside, as well as within; and the best will be the best, after all! --
Small as I appear, and little as your Ladieship may think it, I am worth no
less than ten thousand ducattes, simply as I stand apparelled before you!"

PAGE 24. -- Not GENUINE. CXXVIII. -- Mrs. BR -- ST -- W.
"By whim, or destiny, estranged from him
"Right heritor of all she has to give
"Of well-stored constancy, or wedded love,
"O! guarde her from the wiles which lurk arounde
"The zone of unprotected womanhoode,
"And show how gracefullie, in modest miene,
"Maternal habbittes do befitte her sex.
"Still soaringe in her sphere, so may this Star
"Which from the EAST has made its dazzlinge course,
"Serenelie set within our western clime!"
PAGE 84. -- GENUINE. THIRTY-FIRST DAY's TRIAL.
CXXIX. -- THE LORD M -- Y -- R.
-- "This Sir KNIGHTE that would be, was a thrivinge baker of unleavened
biscuite, and his countenance being combustiblie inclined, did take much fire
at the mouth of his own oven! -- He banquetted sumptucuslie whole troops of
Courtiers, in vessels of sretted silver, in honor of his own nativitie, while
poor men were crying aloud for bread-corne, which they were forbidden to
taste, and therefore lamented the hour they were born! -- His fellow Cittes
did proclaim in waggerie that he was himself but slacklie ba^ed; but that
heeded he not, while he could contrive to get a goodly cut at the Loaf of
State, and thence lay up in store, the crumbes of his own comfort!"

PAGE 49. -- Not GENUINE. CXXX. -- Earl of ORF -- D.
-- "Why should they make any one of God's frail creatures a mighty man
against his will, when so many packes of hungry knaves are huntinge night
and day for lordly honors! -- A title is to me no more than a pot of
founding metal is when tied perforce to a poor curre's tail, and which, with
all his might, he cannot shuffle off! -- I had rather be an indentured binder
of books, and stiche mine own works in humble coveringe of vellum, than the
paramount Duke in Palestine, enrobed in gold, and ermine!"

PAGE 78. -- Not GENUINE CXXXI. -- Lady M -- LB -- NE.
-- "I marvelle how the Lady ELIBERT, who has seen Time's hour-glasse so often
turned over, does stille maintain those looks of loveliness without
abatement! -- One might as soon stand the forked flashes of a fiery sky sans
blinkinge, as the autumnal radiance of her eye without thinking of the fruit
forbidden! -- If these meteors be permitted to hold so long a course, what
honest man's heart throughout Messina can be held in reasonable subjection?"
PAGE 123. -- GENUINE. CXXXII. -- Lady BRIDGET T -- LL -- M -- CHE.
"Armed with the pointed wiles of woman's wit,
"Early the phantome Pleasure I have chaced
"Through all her anticke roundes; and if, perchance,
"The 'witchinge fugitive I did approache,
"I lacked the skille her fleetinge course to stay!
" -- The chequered variance of wedded life
"Next ruled this giddie heart of mine, and gave
"Abundantly of joie and grief! -- Though last,
"Too soon came Sorrow, with a clouded sky,
"To mark the mother's melancholy sat,
"Who on one darlinge bliss had sealed her hope,
"And, ere it bloomed, beheld it t^ne away!"
PAGE 56. -- GENUI^ THIRTY-SECOND DAY's TRIAL.
CXXXIII. -- Sir JAMES M -- P -- LT -- Y.
"Tell me, Bellostern, did I not delineate their military exploites on the
Continente, with mavelous circumstantiation? When we were cussed like frogs
acrosse the dykes of the Low Countries, sent I not over couriers to them of
victories achieved, and in the face of the Senate, vouched I not the verity
of mine own Commentaries? -- And how for all those deeds have they repaide
me? I asked but to be ennobled after the manner of others of like deserts, when
they did renounce my suite who profitted of my service; so that I was compelled
to become the founder of mine own honors, by creating myself a Knighte of
the BATHE!"

PAGE 66. -- GENUINE. CXXXIV. -- Mrs. H -- ST -- GS.
-- "Mark me that fictionne fretted on the clothe in gold, and priestlie
purple! A tale it is in veriue, though here by holy fabuliste proclaimed! --
She on the right, with precious jewelrie bedecked, is the 'witching Sheba, who
rose and journied with the Sun, to visitte Solomon in all his glory! -- To
win him over to Eastern dalliance, see how her pliante body she does bend
even to the ground she sprang from! -- and lo! her eyes by basselisques
bequeathed, do rivette on his frame the silke-worme chain she wroughte for his
enthraldomme!"

PAGE 100. -- Not GENUINE. CXXXV. -- Alderman B -- K W -- TS -- N.
"My Ward of If we may credit Mr. IRELAND, his Coufin SHAKSPEARE took an
aversion to Shoemakers, and therefore he lets fly this sarcastic arrow at the
CIVIC MOTE of CORDWAINERS!
Cobblers, revengeful of the fin I lost, are sworn devourers of the jowles of
Coddo, with shoulders huge 'pertaininge! -- These simple knaves of gluttony,
but little wotte that I did tempte the prowlinge Sharke to play with me in the
waters, that I might learn of him voracious arts aright; -- and how, like
this purveyor of the deep, to boulte whatever floated tempting to the eye! --
I heed not then the shapeful limb I lost -- for, down the jawe capacious of
a Greenlande Whale alike the gorged PROPHET would I hoppe, so I might gain
more worldly wisdom by the dread descente!"

PAGE 22. -- Not GENUINE. CXXXVI. -- Mrs. B -- RW -- L.
-- "Full well I know
"That men in piece-meales have their hearts composed
"To feed th'impassioned appetites they meet;
"But say, shall I discharge my wedded vow,
"When with his frail infirmities I took
"This teeble Lord of mine, and fondly swore
"Even at the altarre's foot, I would endure them?
"Then let not malice multiply misdeedes
"To 'tract my aching eye, which feign would turn
"To gaze on what his virtues do illumine!"
PAGE 134. -- GENUINE. THIRTY-THIRD DAY's TRIAL.
CXXXVII. -- Princess AMELIA.
-- "The regalle VINE
"Gives thus her last fair blossomme to the sun,
"Even while its honored branches do displaie
"Ripe clusters temptinge to the luscious eye!
"Pass chillinge elements serenelie over,
"And leave no pallid blighte with power to tainte
"Such lovelie promise of autumnal fruit!"
PAGE 77. -- GENUINE. CXXXVIII. -- Major General M -- C -- D.
"I know the savage HUNTER well; like his own HOUNDS he does himself
delighte in human blood! When he let slip his thirstful dogs of war, he
did insultinglie denounce my northern nose as not well-sensed for the field!
therefore, as village curie, must I pursue, and yelpinge mar the chase I
cannot share!"

PAGE 54 -- Not GENUINE. CXXXIX. -- Lady D -- D -- Y and W -- D.
"Touching at the samed Island of Madeira, the natives did court her
Excellency to sojourne there, fancieing that their vintage might purple more
richly under her roseate influence! On this we gave our canvasse to the
winds, lest our own Britain might itself be spoiled of a countenance, which
argufied the better deeds of the good creature!"

PAGE 100. -- Not GENUINE. CXL. -- Mr. WH -- TB -- D, Sen.
-- "This is he, who does an oily beverage compounde, to cheer the honest
vaslalles of our isle! Of liquor stout he hoops ye countlesse caskes; though
he makes no if, nor butte, in which to bung up his benevolence. He has a
heart so fair abroache to silent charity, that never can it reach the lees;
-- nay, look at his very beasts of burden! -- do they not shine out the
kindly semblance of their master's face upon the polished surface of their
well-sed skins?"

PAGE 23. -- GENUINE. THIRTY-FOURTH DAY's TRIAL.
CXLI. -- Right Hon. T. H -- RL -- Y.
"Well have they stamped VIRGISTERN father of the capitalle, whose head Dan
TIME has silvered over so honorably in their servitude! Unlike the
cloudie-witted Cittes his fellows, he takes not his sleep and food as dull
provocatives to each other's joie; for, his commercial duties done, he hies
him to the noble culture of his soil, and thus stands he admired in each,
the civicke championne, and the ruralle Lord!"

PAGE 38. -- GENUINE. CXLII. -- Marchioness of D -- N -- G -- L.
"I Would sooner trundle turnippes through the streets,
"Than bear menne's weaknesses at second hand
"Without the Nurse's cordial spice of gain.
"She is alone steppe-mother, who o'er-steppes
"The punie offspringe of a former race,
"And bends them to that class submissivelie,
"Where Folly looks to find her elder-borne!"
PAGE 3. -- Not GENUIN^ CXLIII. -- Mr. M. A. T -- L -- R.
-- "Truly I was in lucke's way in havinge a father begotten before me! -- yet
what in mine infancy he did kindly treasure up, cunninge men would now
beguile me of in manhood! -- No sooner had I taken the wrinkles out of these
poor varlettes skins by wholesome provender, than they began to whet their
wits upon the coarsenesse of my kitchen diette! Marry, one of their Stage
Punnesters did ask me, an I were not Body TAILOR to ST. MICHAEL and all his
ANGELS? -- Moreover they did deride the golden architecqture of my Sire, and
would feign have pulled down with wantonne hands, what he, with hodde and
trowelle, did so marvelouslie pile up! -- So thought I fit to break with
them, lest, by the friendly prodigality of such hungry knaves, I should
myself be broken!" PAGE 99. -- GENUINE. CXLIV. -- Lady AUGUSTA CL -- V -- G.
"Courts marred ROWENA not: though shininge there
"Preeminentlie graced, she only sighed
"To win one inmate to her constante heart,
"And own him Lord of all her life to come!
"Her maiden hope fulfilled, how well she wore
"The pure, unsullied habitte of a wife!
"Which Nature formed to sit so lovelie on her! --
"Next came a motherre's new, and dear delights,
"When to her young inherittores she gave
"All the delicious stores of love twice told
"Which, in caresses from their manly Sire,
"She doatinglie had treasured up!" --
PAGE 55. -- GENUINE. THIRTY-FIFTH DAY's TRIAL.
CXLV. -- M -- q -- s of B -- K -- H -- M.
"Upon the oiley surface of this land
"Have I so rolled, and hugelie fattened,
"That my own ponderous temples 'gin to ache
"With the exceedinges of so vaste a surfeite!
"Now with a mind amphibioussie formed,
"I pine for other elements, and feign
"Would swaye a lordly scepter over the deep,
"That in this liquid void quite uncontrouled,
"A dread Leviathanne I there might move!"
PAGE 66. -- Not GENUINE. CXLVI. -- Lady E -- TH R -- CK -- TS.
"I do remember me, a fair, and noble maiden of Padua, so envied for her
beauty, that some of her own sex did chronicle against her loveliness,
tideings, false, as they were foul! but, in good soothe, Justice did amend
her damaged fame with so round a sum in duckattes, that she was constrained
to call a husband in to count them! -- marry, from hence it waggishlie was
said, that her Ladieship did draw her wedding sheets from out the liberty of
our press!"

PAGE 117. -- GENUINE. CXLVII -- Vice Admiral C -- NW -- S.
-- "That same blustering Ocean, let me tell you, Neighbor, breeds us a few
odd monsters, as troublesome as itself! -- It is an element on which the
circumnavigators of our Sovereign Lord do sail too often in chase of their
own fantasies! Some, like the moodie animals in Noah's days, you cannot
drive on boarde their barque with pitch-forkes; while others, muleishlie
inclined, will hardly quitte the mountain ARC when it be stranded!"

PAGE 117. -- GENUINE. CXLVIII. -- Lady SM -- H B -- G -- SS.
"Soon as my husbande's traffic in the EAST
"Displaied with gilding rays a rising sun,
"And bent the worlde's base worshippers before it,
"On his new wheel of fortune did I roll
"Within the giddie circles of the great
"To all mankind's amazement! -- Restless there.
"I deal my aires fantasticallie round,
"Pledged by insatiate vanity to prove
"What gold, with female frontlette unappalled
"In imitative grandeure may atchieve!"
PAGE 10. -- Not GENUINE. THIRTY-SIXTH DAY's TRIAL.
CXLIX. -- Lord M -- LD -- N.
"In these aristocratique days, 't is well there be some littel LORDS, who
can devise the means to make themselves less: such are your silly knaves,
who, setting not their bartes on aught substantial, will barter you the charms
of a delectable mistress for the more fleetinge semblance of a Prince's
favor! -- These fellows, without the spirit to protect a woman, will provoke
you one of our most puissante Lords to single combatte, and after all he
touches not his doublette, though it be swollen out as huge as an Islingtowne
haystacke!"

PAGE 3. -- GENUINE. CL. -- D -- ss of M -- LB -- GH.
"Go prate of meek humility to those
"Whose necks are formed to bend beneathe her yoke
"I have a creste that gracefullie denotes
"A high, and lofty mind, which scorns to view
"Poor vulgar mortals crawling underneathe,
"Those insectes of a lower world, ordained
"To be by higher orders trodden down!"
PAGE 100. -- Not GENUINE. CLI. -- Sir W -- TK -- N L -- W -- S.
"I have kept my Sabbathes in pot houses to a scurvie tune, if these
varlette Citizens, whom I have so nightlie drenched, do turn their ungrateful
tails upon me, now that my Welsh ale is upon the lees! -- But I will hie me to
the lordly ruler of our isle, and ask of him, whom I have followed through
thick and thin, whether my deserts do entitle me to no better fate than to
be turned up like a worn-out gander, to starve upon a common!"

PAGE 73. -- Not GENUINE. CLII. -- C -- ss of CH -- M -- D -- Y.
"Come, cheerilie, sweet Madam, still I say!
"These truante Lords of ours will have their bente
"Though we our swelling hearts do sigh to attomes!
"'It Is not weak woman's prayers, nor tears will turn^
"The loose, and ^ot course of him she loves,
"Nor break, alas! the Circe spelles of those
"Who do by blandishments libidinous
"Entice the better part of us away!"
PAGE 22. -- GENUINE. THIRTY-SEVENTH DAY's TRIAL.
CLIII. -- Sir JOHN H -- PSL -- Y.
-- "The nurse who first proclaimed my goodly nose must have predicted
unwiselie, for it has led me on a wrong scent from it is nativitie to the
present day! If men's wives did marvelle in admiration of it in my youth,
their witless Lords were set upon their guard by this precursor of my
approach! and now 't is dwindled to a gibeing stock for the honorable
Virginnes of the Court to giggle at! -- Since I have commenced Courtly Sir,
our witcrackers have cudgelled me with mine own weapons; nay the holy
Pontiffe's blessing has availed me naught in the honors it procured, for my
constituents have laughed this bloody hand to scorn, because, forsoothe, they
found it not bleed freely!"

PAGE 63. -- Not GENUINE. CLIV. -- Lady H -- G -- ST -- N.
"Pray thee, offend mine acheing ear no more
"With silly praises of a rural Spring;
"Painte not to me her milke-maides ruddie cheeks,
"Her bleating flocks -- or birds that tunelesse sing:
"From these my better fate, quick let me fly
"Into the flattering hauntes of pollished men,
"Where gaily bloome our sexe's dear delights,
"Which, often as plucked, do instant budde anewe!"
PAGE 77. -- GENUINE. CLV. -- Duke of Q -- SB -- Y.
"That can be no other than the Compte Falsteinberg, who still wears the gaie
doublette of youth, for having wrestled so long with Gaffer Time without a
fall! He has so beshattered the optical nerve of his nether eye, by gazing
beauty from it is countenance, that it lately went out like a small light in
a strong wind! -- Now puts he more confidence in Women, and but little in
Princes, thinking hereby to lead a life that is uprighte, and Christian-like!
Although insirmities manifold do besette him, the milk of human kindness
flows so round his weather-beaten heart, that when the balance of his frail
account is struck, his follies shall weigh but as a feather, light against
him!"

PAGE 34. -- GENUINE. CLVI. -- Mrs. M. A. T -- ILL -- R.
"In holy bands no sooner was she trothed,
"Than the gaie flattering world did buzze around
"Her matchless shape in adoration wild!
"Men swore her pictured semblance ill displaied
"The peering beauties of her lovelie form;
" -- That Nature robed in such divinity
"No mimicke artifice could ever trace!
"These tales with calm indifference she heard,
"Nor deigned to give one soft approving glance
"For all this prodigality of praise!
"Thus mighty proved ROWENA's wedded love,
"To guarde the honor of her littel Lord!"
PAGE 243. -- GENUINE. THIRTY-EIGHTH DAY's TRIAL.
CLVII. -- The P -- of --.
"If I Am apparent heir to sov'raigne power,
"Why not my lordly will ride paramounte
"Over all the narrow limmittes of men's minds?
"Oweing to naught obedience, who, like me,
"Can woman's shiftinge weaknesses control --
"To fond allegiance bend her yielding heart,
"In adoration, or in fear? -- From her
"Let tribute first in love be duly paid,
"A fruitful homage next, in sighs, and tears!"
PAGE 1. -- Not GENUINE. CLVIII. -- Mrs. ST -- T.
"Go, Gertrude, and inform my Lord the Kynge's Chief Justice, that though a
weak, and silly woman, I do defy the power of his denunciations legal! --
Tell him to boot, that, malgre his bar-points, I must have nightlie a cock on
my card, though I do penance for it by forfeiture of goods, and chattalles!
If his Lordship does say truly that I have lost the sense of shame, I can
look for it through any wooden Mr. STEEVENS says, this was an instrument
called by the Saxons a Pillorie; intended both for corporeal punishment, and
mental shame.
tellescope in the face of the world, without further expenditure of
blushinge!"

PAGE 31. -- GENUINE. CLIX. -- Admiral Sir A -- G -- RD -- R.
-- "Avast, all hands! -- I had rather repasse the fire of the enemie's line,
than be thus run athwart hauser by those land-lubbers in the choppes of the
channelle! -- A long watch in so short a sea, belikes me not! After bluffinge
it to windwarde fifteen days, on the 13th P. M. we came to rough anchorage in
the straites of Convente-Gardenne, where we might have rode out the remainder
of the gale; but seeing the COMMODORE row his jollie boat so right a head,
we doused our top-gallant sail to him, and finding ourselves drifting hard upon
the black buoy on the flattes, piped all hands, to cut and run!" PAGE 100.
-- GENUINE. CLX. -- Lady M -- N -- RS.
"Why seek ye, Sirs, the mild Rowena here?
"With the first smile of opening morn she 'peared,
"And hied her forth to visitte Dian's temple!
"There forms she wreathes of flowrettes chastelie culled
"From flowinge numbers of her plaintive muse,
"Sweetly to deck fair Fancie's hallowed shrine!"
PAGE 234. -- GENUINE. THIRTY-NINTH DAY's TRIAL.
CLXI. -- Earl of C -- V -- Y.
-- "I do still prefer the rogueish twinkeling of an hazel eye, to any other
constellation; and yet the spiteful jades report I am grown old, and ebbing
fast to dotage! Marry but it likes me not to fall into the vale of years,
because possession there is at the will of another Lord, and death the fine
certain for the fee-simple of a sinful life! -- Were I not to encounter in the
other world, wives, and doxies who have paid the debt of nature's frailties
half a centurie before me, I might not heed this journieing hence; but to be
clapper-clawed both here, and hereafter, is a penance too hard for any
mortal sinning!"

PAGE 49. -- GENUINE. CLXII. -- Miss SN -- W.
"That fair embodied mass is one of the mountain Appenines, for ever capt
with Snow! Whenever the Sun does woo her with his smiles right lustilie,
charmed with his warm embrace, she melting yieldes unto his will, and then
poures forth a genial current to the world below!"

PAGE 86. -- Not GENUINE. CLXIII. -- Mr. BR -- D -- L.
"I knew that whimsical Sir Hugo well, who waged knighte-errantrie against his
own sweet peace! In a sunne-shinie day, one might see him, like an arrant
schoole-boy, making duckes and drakes with the fleetinge comfortes of human
life! At other times would he stand slip-shod at his lattice, to kick the
purest blessings from his thresholde! With so unreasonable an ear for music
was he born, that he would forsake all the harmonies of his own household,
only to carry the cracked lute of a lewd minstrel, from Padua to Verona!"

PAGE 39. -- GENUINE. CLXIV. -- Lady ANN L -- MB -- N.
-- "Low on my bended knees I pray you pause, And view the dreadful
precipice you near With steps unhallowed! Quick'ie tread them back, And Time
oblivious soon shall raze them out. No longer let the proud, and parent sour
Attainte the lesser vessels of your blood, To pour dishonor foul on all our
race!"

PAGE 104. -- GENUINE. FORTIETH DAY's TRIAL.
CLXV. -- Sir G. P. T -- R.
"Which meddling Sir among you, can fathom the mind of a great man by the
shallowness of his every day understanding? -- As to mine own self, let my
deeds challenge their paramount deserts: am I not political, comical,
scientifical, pragmatical, naie perchance poetical, according to the quarterly
variations of St. Dunstan's chimes? -- In the Senate, I do speak
marvelloussie without book; and, returning home, can, upon a pinche, threade a
needle for a fair sempstresse, though I do prick my littel finger in the
atchievemente! -- In a word, I emploie the passing hours more in wisdom and
sound discretion, than any other of our motlie Squires to be met with in
Salamanca!"

PAGE 24. -- GENUINE. CLXVI. -- Countess of G -- F -- D.
"Come, come, Blanch, on the world let us set its proper value! -- it is
this same wealth does yielde to us women, all that our little hearts so
sobbe, and sighe for. Marry, I tell thee, Girl, that money is a match as well
as mischiefe-maker; for though it set half mankind at loggerheades, it
sweetly binds the better part in golden-bondage! -- Had my Lord been even
blind to my attractions personal, (which Heaven forbade), he had wit enough
at will to spy endowments in me, which outlive the short heighos of a bridal
honie-moone!"

PAGE 186. -- Not GENUINE. CLXVII. -- Lord D -- L -- V -- L.
"A plague on these female musquitoes! -- why do they keep buzzing about the
frail part of man, after he is paste flie-blowing? -- The jades know my
weakness, and practice lasciviouslie upon it: and yet the lees of life are
sweetened only by their cajoleries! -- Men, it seems, have different tastes and
palates; for mine own part, I am for plain sauce to my pickled gurnette! give
me but a fine wenche and a fiddle, and consign all the witchinge whoredoms of
BABYLON to my Lords the Bench of B -- S!"

PAGE 77. -- GENUINE. CLXVIII. -- Miss K -- P -- L.
"How it has chanced, that lofty Arestine
"Her cold and virgin course so long has held,
"None truly can devise. With airie pride
"Her wild and light-hued tresses still do flow
"In plaieful luxury adown her neck,
"Enticing every eye to wanton thither!
"Surely a creature formed and featured thus,
"Should be enforced to leave the commonweal
"Some little semblance of her lovelie self!
"Yet is her heart so icicled around,
"That not the woomg breathe of all her slaves
"Can thawe one frozen sighe, or grace her cheek
"With one soft smile which Love might call his own!"
PAGE 20. -- GENUINE. FORTY-FIRST DAY's TRIAL.
CLXIX. -- Bishop of B -- R.
-- "Pshawe! my good Lord of Canterbury! now are you grown more meek, than
truly sapient. If, for a little manual battery in defense of our Holy
Church, they be suffered to assault me legallie -- it is well! -- By St. Paul,
I stretched out mine arm of flesh but to subdue the wratheful spirit of the
sinful man. In verity he did refuse salvation in mine own way, that I might
humble him to the ground, and thus from eternal bondage save him! Should they
still squib their pop-gun quidlibets at nisi prius -- appealing to our Alma
Matter, I must bring her Cannon Law in my defense: -- nay, and they more
enchafe my mitred brows, malgre my wife's salt tears, by the mass, as
Abbotte of BANGOR, but I will lay right lustilie about me!"

PAGE 100. -- GENUINE. CLXX. -- Lady W -- L -- GH -- Y of E -- BY.
"Sir, as in infant honors you are dressed,
"And that by mine own hand, I pray you keep
"Your name, and new-coined title, far aloof
"From my long-blazoned fame! -- Go, proudly ga^
"Upon your unsoiled pattente, cheaplie earned,
"And leave to me, your dignifieing wife,
"The thornie traverses to higher grandeurl
"Mine be the polity to move between
"The love and hatred of a royal pair,
"And manage well their courtly discontents. --
"With these, I charge you, intermeddle not,
"Lest I, who out of nothing made a Lord,
"His Lordshippe may annihilate again!"
PAGE 34. -- Not GENUINE. CLXXI. -- Sir G -- DF -- Y W -- R.
-- "And you should see Sir Godbolde's pette Ewe pass the mountain, do his
Worship a good turn, honest shepherde, and make report of her right
speedily! -- The poor Knight has lamentably lost in her, four quarters of
as pretty muttone as ever sheepishlie looked tuppe in the face! -- We do
marvel what the murrain could aile her, unless she was stricken with the
gad-flie, and argyle on our Southern Downs, could not decently contain
herself! -- Marry, I do fear at best she will return to us too full of
unlawful lamb, to be fit food for any but FOXES to devour!"

PAGE 20. -- GENUINE. CLXXII. -- Hon. Miss R --.
"Where hides the fell despoiler now his head,
"On which the laurelles of licentious love
"Too long have bloomed? -- Base counterfeite of man,
"Say, could thy luring heart no warfare wage
"But against the virginne weakness of our sex?
"False to thy vows in early wedlock made,
"What from thy ripened perjuries could grow
"But blighted fruit our penitence to feed!
"Go, monster, baselie destined to transform
"A maiden's sighs to imprecations wild;
"Thy hauntes her ceaseless curses shall pervade,
"To tell thee what to villainy she owes!"
PAGE 11. -- Not GENUINE. FORTY-SECOND DAY's TRIAL.
CLXXIII. -- Earl of ER -- L.
"As you are more sharpe-witted than myself, I do subscribe most voluntarily
to your opinion: -- so thus it simply stands: -- 'by foregoing my title, I am
the more entitled to be a Gentleman than when I was a Lord;' -- for say you
truly, that Gentlemen were made ere Lords were created, or begotten; ergo,
Lordships were fabricated but to make newfangled Gentry, which we, of
original stock, stand not in need of. In verity then it is a problem most
clear, that I do think it long till I am beridden of my Lordly title, and
become the pretty kind of Gentleman that you do devoutlie wish to see me!"

PAGE 113. -- Not GENUINE. CLXXIV. -- Lady A -- KL -- D.
"Go, -- from Asterna's perfect model form
"Your patterned mothers to adorn the land!
"By travail often endured, and hopes renewed,
"Her duties are so graven on her heart,
"That no alluring blandishments of Courts
"From her parental course can now seduce her!"
PAGE 22. -- GENUINE. CLXXV. -- Rev. Dr. R -- ND -- PH.
-- "Look ye, Sirs! as a man of holy life and conversation, I do expecte to
be entreated with all priestlie reverence! -- I Will take the sins of no frail
flesh in christendom more than what I bear already. -- I delivered the
packet royalle with my own hands, and saw it booked, 'by the whole duty of man!' -- Touching the Golden Coinage of our Sov'rain Liege, I know naught --
for by the mass if it did journie with me it chinked not! That I placed this
packet in the right road to salvation, is true as light! let those who did
pervert it to purposes of darkness therefore be responsible. -- If the world,
putting ' faith in my good works,' do believe me, 'well!' -- if not, I
plead my benefitte of Clergy!"

PAGE 12. -- GENUINE. CLXXVI. -- M -- n -- ss of ST -- F -- D.
"Oh, she that bare her did I know right well! --
"When destined to depart our happy isle,
"In tears she left it for a foreigne shore,
"Though on its beache a princely lover stood!
"Hard now, that fate should blightinglie pursue
"Her fairest offspringe, hither driven over
"To cull upon her mother's native soil
"Some of those blessings which she left behind!
"Boldly I Will stand beside her innocence,
"Though all the brows of power do frown upon me!"
PAGE 34. -- GENUINE FORTY-THIRD DAY's TRIAL.
CLXXVII. -- Marquis of B -- TH.
"Slave! bring me another stoop of Canarie, and then leave me to my
lucubrations! -- In taking offe all my bon companions, Dame Fate has rather
run me hard; for now am I doomed, bottle after bottle, to recount my loss of
those who popped off before me, like decayed corkes from wine upon the frette!
-- So here incessantly sit I, to drink a requiem to their jollie souls!"

PAGE 13. -- GENUINE. CLXXVIII. -- Hon. Mrs. B -- V -- RYE.
-- "Oh! she has an unconquerable spirit in matters of public concern; and
so zealous for the well doing of the common weal, that she kicked her tailor
down stairs, only, forsoothe, because he had made a costly robe of state for
the Queene's Majesty, when she looked to be sole Regent of the People!"

PAGE 103. -- Not GENUINE. CLXXIX. -- Duke of M -- NCH -- R.
"I viewed him on the margin of the Thames, plyeing a pair of oars, as if he
had to earn a scantie livelihoode by buffeting the foamie tide! -- Whether his
Grace will thus bequalifie himself the better for affairs of state, I wotte
not; but, certes, he must be well prepared for the worste of times; because, by
the dexterous use of his scull, he may contrive at least to keep his own
head above the water!"

PAGE 72. -- Not GENUINE. CLXXX. -- Princess S -- PH -- A of GL -- R.
-- "Well might one envy those
"Within the confine of some lowly vale,
"Who pass their fleeting lives as nature wills,
"In all the purities of faithful love!
"My sickening heart for these would gladly yielde
"The titled trappinges which so much disguise
"Whatever simplicity may challenge in me!"
PAGE 206. -- GENUINE. FORTY-FOURTH DAY's TRIAL.
CLXXXI. -- Sir WILLIAM G -- RY.
-- "To the SULTAN's prime Mufti am I indebitted for mine election, who deigned
to choose me public spendthrifte of mine own privy purse for the benefitte
of the State! The next honor I do look for, is a permission, under his
Highness's hand and seal, to build an hospitalle for courtly lunatiques,
and to be named sole Governor thereof myself, at special times, whenever the
moon be at her fulle!"

PAGE 54 -- GENUINE^ CLXXXII. -- Hon. Mrs. N -- TH.
-- "Oh! there is a giddie worm within this unsubdued flesh of mine, that
will not die, and which neither travel e, nor the art spiritualle of my mitred
LORD can ever set at rest!"

PAGE 16. -- Not GENUINE. CLXXXIII. -- Hon. Capt. GEORGE B -- KL -- Y.
"The fault must lie at his own door, if a warfareing man be not accounted
valorous in the world's weak judgment at the least! -- Why has he the gift
of tongue, but to promulgate deeds, which did not reach the eyes of ordinary
observers? -- Marry, to make Fame's records surer on your side, call forth the
Limner's art, which does bepaint right lustilie beyond the life, and he will
so beblazon fiction's feats to aftertimes, that they shall long survive the
short-lived valor of your fighting Sirs!" --

PAGE 10. -- Not GENUINE. CLXXXIV. -- Duchess of N -- TH -- B -- D.
"Well may Northumbria's race in soothe be proud^
"Of this puissante partner of their Chief!
"Whatever in mortal dignity there be,
" Sans question it adornes her lovelie browe,
"Besuiting well the diadem she wears.
"But high over this so gracefullie do peer
"The simpler virtues of domestique life,
"That soon the titled eminence is lost
"In admiration of the fairer WOMAN!" --
PAGE 49. -- GENUINE. FORTY-FIFTH DAY's TRIAL.
CLXXXV. -- Earl of L -- SD -- LE.
-- "That is the manne to my thinking on the score of valor personal, who can
fight with all heaven's creatures more heartily than feed them! -- Such an
one is constrained to delve into the hungry bowels of the laud, in search of
wealth he lacks not; thus procreating convulsions under ground, and making
her people with their mother earth to quake! -- Of such almighty men,
Marvino, they now-a-daies do moulde their Lords, so that their constitution
politic be not sapped by more desperate underminers!"

PAGE 27. -- Not GENUINE. CLXXXVI. -- Mrs. M. A. T -- ILL -- R.
[Her Second SUFFRAGE.]
-- "A truce, I pray thee, Blanch,
"To all the dulcet flattery of thy tongue!
"If in the vision of my dapper Lord
"So prominent my beauty does appear,
"Bid him no more unaptlie note it down
"Upon the chilling canvas of an art,
"But conjugallie give from Nature's touch,
"More glowinge copies of my lovelie self,
"Though they be framed in little!" --
PAGE 34. -- GENUINE. CLXXXVII. -- Lord M -- LMS -- Y.
-- "Oh, Sir, their choice did well devolve on him, so artfullie ordained to
nibble things asunder! -- Marked you not, in Regencies of yore, how well he did
essay to gnawe the ligatures in twain, which had so long upheld the canopie of
the State? -- Who then so fit to try his skilfulle toothe upon the newer
cordage that does more slightlie bind the destinies of France! -- Trust to
't, the deed he 'll do, if that his ratteish nose be not ensnared within the
fresh-filed trappe of their new republique!"

PAGE 108. -- Not GENUINE. CLXXXVIII. -- Miss ST -- RT.
"Though elder borne of her that gave me life,
"Her vain propensities I never did share!
"Soon as the midnight orgies of our house,
"With all the revelries of lustfulle play
"Doe'gin their baneful course, with traverse slow
"Within my chambered privacie I hie,
"And there corporeallie obtain repose,
"Awhile my painful and affrighted mind
"Does dream of all the wicked world below."
PAGE 12. -- Not GENUINE. FORTY-SIXTH DAY's TRIAL.
CLXXXIX. -- Sir WM. P -- LT -- Y.
-- "Naie, and what of that? -- If manne be borne of earthly mind, let him be
forthwith nominated Purveyor-General in peccadilloe of that duste, to which
worm-like he must return; -- I knew me such an one, the strange inhabitant of
a venerable dwellinge, who did escape taxation of all window lattices, by
contenting himself with the simple luminations of his own brain! -- there
satre he, time out of patience, exorbitantlie measuring forth to needy
trowel-menne, his own soil by the inch square! -- thus he grew abundant in
his wealth, until the maine beams of his mansion did becracke with the
sterling weighte of gold, incontinently piled up!"

PAGE 63. -- Not GENUINE. CXC. -- Madame S -- W -- L -- GH.
"Mine Got! but dey do belie his royalle youth most marvelouslie! -- By mine
trute, but he be grown both a sveete, and a goote Prince! Vhy -- in his grace
he now be so font of me, that he does wisitre de bed in mine affliction, and
play with efferie littel hair upon mine cheek! -- then he does talk of
mine ducattes so kindly, az eef dey ve^ his own! -- naie, I do belief dat
he vould kindl^e take them into his own royalle keepinge, for de comfort of
mine old age! -- Oh! he be de sveeiest, and de visest Prince that ever did
spring from the Royalle stock of Yarmanny!"

PAGE 37. -- GENUINE. CXCI. -- Alderman C -- MBE.
-- "Sir, I tell you, though I am a brewer of brown stout, these civique
honors sit not lightly on my shoulders. True it is, that I have raised
myself, from a man of the Common Liverie, to be a chief over Common
Counselors in the East, while my companions in the West did declare unto me,
that 'robes and fuired gowns hide all!' Marry, Sir, if that were so, the
Cittes had not espied the shaking of my elbowe beneath an Aldermanique
gabardine! -- I tell you once again, these civique honors sit not light
upon me!"

PAGE 28. -- GENUINE. CXCII. -- Lady H -- S -- YM -- R.
"Who saw ROWENA in her maiden state,
"When all the beauties of a modest mind
"Began to peer, and innocentlie blende
"Their tintes with those, which decked her lilly cheek?
"So still she keeps her captivating stores,
"Though on a lovelie race she has bestowed
"Unnumbered graces from her parent stock!"
PAGE 14. -- GENUINE. FORTY-SEVENTH DAY's TRIAL.
CXCIII. -- Bishop W -- TS -- N.
-- "Suppose that he be an ABBOTTE clothed in priestehoode, he will prove no
worme-eaten buttrasse to our Mother Church on this side the grave, or I have
mista'en his Reverence hugelie! Whilst his brethren in the hour of jeopardie
did turn their mitres into night-cappes, from their meek propensitie to
dozeing, he bestirred lustilie in his vocation, and stood him forth the true
defender of our Christianne faith! -- Hence is yclep'd the holy Al-hymiste,
because he does extracte for men's minds, the purity of earthly comfort
from the cruscible of his own benevolence!"

PAGE 55. -- GENUINE. CXCIV. -- Lord C -- M -- LF -- D.
-- "Avaste, my brinie messemates! -- if you thwa^e, and turn him blufflie nose
to tide, the spraye of his wrath will souse some of you sore and afte, I tell
ye! -- Only ease him, do you see, a point or two from the wind, and you 'll ride
safely with him through the roughest weather! -- Neither your Courts nor
crownettes, bilboes nor bastinadoes, can warpe him from sait water, which he
delights in like a wild-ducke! -- He met the Algerine but the other day, who gave
him so short an allowance of comfort on board his corsair! -- my limbs! but he
rubbed out the old score with his rattan upon his Barbary shoulders, till the
Sea-calfe roared out for mereie he had never ^ew^! -- The younker is a pickled
fish, that is certain -- but a good office goes with him through life, while a
dirtie one never slip, his reckoninge!"

PAGE 27. -- GENUINE. CXCV. -- Miss M -- L -- S.
"If I could trust his Grace's melting eyes
"Which do so busily befellowe mine,
"I might the ^onde interrogating heart
"Now set a^ (...), and sweet assurance give
"That it has sealed its sov'raigne hope! -- Whatever
"The frail accomplishments I boaste,
"These let me (...) the best of boones,
"In fondest w^ ^at they may treasure up
"The nuptial blestinge thus so proud^ie won!"
PAGE 22. -- GENUINE. CXCVI. -- Lord R -- LLE.
-- " Certes, SIRE, a man may play the fool in low life in order to his
exaltation; but having attained a Lordshippe paramount, he cannot continue to
execute the humble things that appertain themselves to simple common-hoode! --
True it is, my LIEGE, that our vassalage of DEVONNE have swerved from their
betrothed allegiance to the Ruler of your State. Deign you to ask, why I, with
all my might and zeal, did not prevent it? -- my answer, SIRE, is shortly
this: I could have dispersed the sturdie knaves with the bare breathe of my
lordly nostrils, though they had swarmed like pilchardes on our coaste; but
since it did beplease your Highness to shape from me a PEER of Brittaine's
realm -- marry I Have other fish to fry!"

PAGE 12. -- GENUINE. FORTY-EIGHTH DAY's TRIAL.
CXCVII. -- Lady ELIZ. L -- T -- L.
"What an Irishe howl is here set up, about the departure of a paltrie
rouleau of light guineas, for which I gave a draughte upon my monie-holder's
bank, for value not received! -- A Bill of Plai^, not being stamped for
honorable purpose, ought not, by legalle custom of exchange, to be duly
honored; therefore did I counter-cheque my order, which, in the weakness of
womanhoode, I had issued; and for this only has my saire fame been
scandalouslie beslurred throughout the capital! -- But if I have not ample
veng^ance on that dealer in odd tricks, may I never set cock upon a card
again!"

PAGE 321. -- GENUINE. CXCVIII. -- Mr. T -- RN -- Y.
-- "Canvasse me the voters wives of Southwarke, for I must batter the
hustinges once more with the cuckoldie heads of their Lords and Masters! --
Since no law, dead or living, can denominate this a treat, kiss me also
their spinster daughters throughout the Mint, being heedful that the hussies do
not warmlie pay you back in your own coin! -- Having stayed the trencher
work of my opponent, perchance I may the electors starve into a just opinion
of mine own desert. -- I have told them roundly, that a freed-man must come to
the polle with an empty stomach, to preserve a sound constitution, and that
he can swallowe naught but my words without a deep transgression of the
statute law: -- if this avail me not, there will be no trappinge the wary
knaves, either full, or fasting!"

PAGE 123. -- GENUINE. CXCIX. -- Hon. Miss H -- Y.
-- "By my knighthoode but she is a comlie less! and so expert a mistress in
the art of signalles, that she can make you a mirror of her own 'kerchiefe,
and, by the quickness of her eye, read its reflected answers from one
streete's end to the other. In good soothe, this fair dame is in a fair way
to be marvelouslie signalized!"

PAGE 73. -- Not GENUINE. CC. -- Mr. W -- LB -- F -- CE.
"Mark me now, Honorable Sirs! although manne's conscience be enslaved, may
not his body still be free, and active to the wary purports of his mind! --
For mine own part, I had, in Christianne verity, an early call unto the
humbler paths of grace; -- whatever the proffitte of it be in this vain
world, I take it as a foretaste of my future recompense in that which is to
come! -- Nay, and it be our sacred privilege, good Senators, to traffic in
piety, we must be allowed to barter the superfluxe of spiritual concerns, to
insure our own political salvation!"

PAGE 37. -- Not GENUINE. FORTY-NINTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCI. -- Lady S -- MP -- N.
-- "If she be an old Puss too proud and stately to catch a mouse in the
barn, she were as well, for the quiet of the house, to be without her claws!
-- A murrain seize your tabbie CATTES, say I! -- what a spittinge and meweinge
do they set up, to make the brawlinges of a high wind more hideous! Woe
betide the restless tenants of that roose, over the pann-tiles of which these
whiskered wizzardes do rantipole it so shrewishlie!"

PAGE 10. -- GENUINE. CCII. -- Mr. C. ATK -- N.
-- "Bless the poor manne's odd wits, that will never let his head rest
but in stations too exalted! Here have they thruste it once more into our
Senate House, where the wagges do throw their jokes and jibes more cuttinglie
about them, that your poulterers wives their filthy eggs at Martin-masse!"

PAGE 57. -- GENUINE CCIII -- Ald -- n P -- CK -- T.
-- "When they did expunge those empty heads from off the frontler of our
Citie's gate, mine own was set thereon, and did most wittinglie devise how to
dismantle our Temple's bar to pub^ique inter cursion. It does seem, to
build a civique fame, one must be constrained to pull you down the stouter
works of ancient men! -- But the mind, my masters, must be kept in
concussion, or the brain of an ordinary citizen would soon curdle over, like
green duck-weede on a gardenne ponde!"

PAGE 1. -- GENUINE. CCIV. -- Lady H -- THC -- TE.
-- "Oh she does sweetly bend
"The mirthfulle gaieties of polished life
"Unto the meede of Christian charity!
"Mark where she leads the rural masque, or balle,
"And view her fair companions in the scene;
"Though rich incharmes, in simple vestes they are cladde,
"Wrought all by spinsters' hands in hamlettes round!
"'It Is thus that mirthe and innocence do twine
"Their staple virtues to adorn the mind!"
PAGE 37. -- GENUINE. END OF VOL II.
S. Gosnell, Printer, Little Queen Street.


