THE HISTORY OF NEWCASTLE upon TYNE.

OR, THE ANCIENT and PRESENT STATE OF THAT TOWN.

By the late HENRY BOURNE, M. A. Curate of ALL-HALLOWS in NEWCASTLE.

-- Haec -- alias inter Caput extulit Vrbes -- VIRG. Ecl. 1. NEWCASTLE upon
TYNE: Printed and Sold by JOHN WHITE. M.DCC.XXXVI.

To the Right Worshipful WALTER BLACKETT, Esquire Mayor, JOHN ISAACSON, Esquire
Recorder, Aldermen.
William Ellison, Esquire Matthew Fetherstonhaugh, Esquire Richard Ridley, Esquire Francis
Rudston, Esquire Nicolas Fenwick, Esquire William Carr, Esquire Nathanael Clayton, Esquire
Cuthbert Fenwick, Esquire Robert Sorsbie, Esquire Matthew Ridley, Esquire
JOHN WILKINSON, Esquire Sheriff;
AND TO THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE Town of Newcastle upon Tyne:
This WORK is most humbly Dedicated, By the AUTHOR 'S Children,

Henry Bourne, Eleanor Bourne.


A LIST OF THE SUBSCRIBERS.
A
ALLEN Thomas, Esquire Allen, Mr. Richard All good, the Rev. Mr. Anderson, Mr.
Joseph Anesley, Mark, Esquire Anesley, Mr. William Armstrong, Mr. John Askew, Dr.
Adam Atkinson, Mr. Henry
B
BELL, Mr. James Bell, Mr. Matthew Biggs William, Esquire Binks, Mr. Thomas
Blackett, the Right Worshipful Walter, Esquire MAYOR Blackston, Mr. John Bland, Dr.
Dean of Durham Blinkinsop, Mr. William Bolton, Mr. Silvester Boulby, Mr. Adam
Bows George, Esquire Bridgman William, Esquire Brook Philip, Esquire Browell, Dr.
Browell, Mr. Mark Buck, the Rev. Mr. (York) Butler, the Rev. Mr. Benjamin
Butler, Mr. Benjamin.
C
CALEY, Mr. Samuel Chambers, Mr. Robert Campbell, the Hon. Alexander Hume, Esquire
Clark, Mr. James Clavering James, Esquire Clayton Nathaniel, Esquire Alderman Clennell
Percival, Esquire Clennell Thomas, Esquire Colpits, Mr. George Cooper, Mr. Challoner
Coulson, Mr. Henry Cunningham, Mr. of Beadale, Surgeon Cuthbert, the Rev. Mr.
Cuthbertson, Mr. George
D
DAWSON, Mr. Christopher Dawson, Mr. John Davison William, Esquire Dennet Robert,
Esquire Dick, Mr. Andrew Dockwray, the Rev. Mr. Thomas Dunn, Mr. Anthony
E
EDEN, Sir Robert, Bart. Eden, the Rev. Mr. Ellison Henry, Esquire
F
FAIRLESS, Mr. Edward Farrington, the Rev. Mr. Firebrace, Sir Cordell, Bart.
Fenwick Cuthbert, Alderman Fenwick, Mrs. Esther Fenwick the Rev. Mr. George,
Vicar of Bolam Fenwick John, Esquire of By well. Fenwick, Mr. Thomas Foster, Mr.
Henry Foster, Mr. Timothy Foster, Mr. -- Jun. of Alnwick
G
GAPE, Tho. Esquire of St. Alban 's. Gent, Mr. Thomas (York) Graham, Mr. William
Gray George, Esquire
H
HALL, the Rev. Dr. Prebendary of Durham Hall Charles, Esquire Hall, Mr. James
Hanby, Mr. William Harle, Mr. Edward Harper, Mr. William Hawden, Mr. Thomas
Hedworth John, Esquire Henderson, Mr. William Henzell, Mr. Peregrine Heron, Mr. of
London Hildyard, Mr. John, of York Hinkster, Mr. George Hobson, the Rev. Mr.
Vicar of Bosall Holden, the Rev. Mr. of Morpeth Hopkins, Mr. Lancaster
Huddleston, Mr. John Hudson, Mr. John Hudspeth, Mr. Robert Hull, Mr. John
Hunter, Dr. Christopher, of Durham Hunter, Mr. Hutchinson, Mr. Hylton John, Esquire
of Hylton
J
JENNISON Ralph, Esquire (Walworth) Johnson, Mr. Richard Johnson, Mr. Robert
K
KEMP, Sir Robert, Bart. Kennedy, Mr. Archibald
L
LANGSTAFFE, Mr. Joseph Lattany, Mr. Joseph Lawson Robert, Esquire of Chirton.
Lewen George, Esquire Lewin, Mr. Thomas, Barrister at Law Liddell, Sir Henry, Bart.
Liddell George, Esquire Liddell, Mr. Joseph Linton, Mr. William Lowther, Sir
William, Bart. Lowther, Dr.
M
MABELL, Mr. Edward Maddison, the Rev. Mr. Marshal, Mr. Thomas Midford, Mr.
George, Milbank John, Esquire Moncaster, Mr. James Morris, Mr. John Mowbray George,
Esquire
N
NEWTON, Mr. William Nichols Francis, of Lintz Green, in the County of Durham,
Esquire
O
OLIVER, Mr. John Ord, Mr. John Oyston, Mr. Thomas, of Bishop Auckland
P
PAWSON, Mr. John Packer Winchcomb Howard, Esquire Peacock, Mr. Joseph Preston, Mr.
Cuthbert Probyn, Mr. Henry (London) Pie William, Esquire Pie, Mr. John
R
RAMSDEN, Mrs. of York Rawling, Mr. Thomas Rawlison Richard, LL. D. F. R. S.
Ray, the Rev. Mr. Vicar of Warden Reay Henry, Esquire Alderman. Ridley Richard, Esquire
Alderman Ridley Matthew, Esquire Alderman Richardson, Mr. Cuthbert Richardson, Mr.
John Robinson, Mr. John Rogers John, Esquire Rudd John, Esquire Rudston Francis, Esquire
Alderman Rutter, Mr. Christopher
S
SCARBOROUGH, the Right Hon. Richard Earl of Scourfield, Mr. John, of
Washington Selby, Mr. William Shaftoe John, Esquire Shaftoe, Mrs. Anne Shaftoe,
Mrs. Sarah Sharp, the Rev. Dr. Shields, Mr. Thomas Shipley, Mr. Thomas (London)
Simpson, the Rev. Mr. John Simpson, Mr. John Smith George, Esquire Smith, Mr.
Joseph Smith, Mr. Thomas Snowden, Mr. John Soresbie Robert, Esquire Alderman
Sowerby, Mr. Ralph Spearman Robert, Esquire Spoor, Mr. Christopher Stafford, the
Rev. Mr. Staples, Mr. Alexander, Bookseller in York Stillingfleet, the Rev. Mr.
Robert Steel, Mr. John. Surtees, Mr. Robert. Swaddell, Mrs. Mary
T
TALBOT, the Hon. William, Esquire Talbot William, Esquire Thompson, the Rev. Mr.
William, Curate of St. Nicholas Thornton John, Esquire Thornton Tempest, Esquire of
Wakefield Thorold John, Esquire Son of Sir John Thorold, Bart. of Marston in
Lincolnshire Thorsby, Mr. Thomas Toker, Mr. Walter (London) Tomlinson, Mr.
Richard Tomlinson Robert, D. D. Trefusis Robert, of Trefusis, Esquire Trewit, Mr.
William Trinity-House Trotter, Mr. Ralph, of Durham
U
VAUGHAN, Mr. Shaftoe Usher, Mr. William
W
WALLIS, Mr. Thomas Walph, Mr. Timothy (London) Walton, Mr. Samuel (London)
Waring, Mr. Waters, Mr. Henry Waters, Mr. Thomas Watson, Mr. John Weddell, the
Rev. Mr. Wheeler Granville, Esquire Whitfield Utrick, Esquire Widdrington, Mr. John
Wilkinson, Mr. Jacob, of South Shields Wilkinson, Mr. John Wilkinson Thomas,
Esquire of Durham Williams, Mr. Edward Williams, Mr. John Wilson, Mr. Chilton
Woodbourne, Mr. Henry, of Wolverston Wrightson William, Esquire of Cusworth
THE PREFACE.
I Am sensible that this Performance will come into the World much more
imperfect than I at first thought it would. But I have labored under so many
Difficulties in the compiling of it, that when but a few of them are mentioned,
I hope for a candid and favorable Judgment.

AFTER I had collected in private what Materials I could, I was then obliged to
go publicly in Quest of more. Upon this I published an Advertisement, desiring
the Assistance of such as had ancient Writings, or Deeds, or any other Things
that might contribute to the helping of the Work.

THIS immediately, occasioned the following Reflections, that it might be of
dangerous Consequence to show ancient Writings, that He was but a Curate that
undertook the Work, that his Abilities therefore of Pocket and Mind must be
vastly unequal to such a Task; in short, above 12 Months before the Publication
of it, some have made it their Business, (so great has been their Ill Nature
and Prejudice) as to take all Ways and Methods of decrying it; by Print, by
Manuscript, lessening it in all Companies to hinder it is Publication, and
speaking as freely of of it, as if they were acquainted with every Line of it is
Composition, and by a Prophetic Spirit knew it to be as they talked of it.

BY these Means I am certain I have been hindered of many Materials.

BUT there are two grand Disappointments I met with in the Compiling of this
Performance, which must not be untaken Notice of. The One is my not being so
happy as to see Dr. Ellison's Collection of the Antiquities of this Town. A few
indeed were sent me, but having the same Copy from Mr. Douglas, they were of no
Service; and excepting these I saw no more. It Is to be hoped, as the Dr. must
have made a large Collection, having been about it, as is said, for many Years;
that the present Possessor of them will oblige the Town with the Publication of
Them, and cure the Imperfections of the present Performance.

THE other Disappointment is the not Meeting with those large Collections of
Sir Robert Shaftoe, taken Notice of by Bishop Nicholson in his English
Historical Library. I endeavored after a Sight of them, but they were then
either lost, or so mislaid, that there was no coming at them.

AND if I add to all this, an Illness of many Months, and which it pleases God
still to continue, The Author did live but few Months after he wrote this
Preface, dying Feb. 16. 1732.
which too frequently obliges me to trust the Copies of others, and depend upon
them, I hope a few Errors and Failings will fall gently to my Share.

HOWEVER in the midst of all this Malice and Ill Nature and these
Disappointments, there were some so communicative, and generously assisting, as
to give all the Help they could. They are the Gentlemen following.

MR. JOSUAH DOUGLAS, who assisted me with a great Number of Materials. JOHN
MILBANK, Esquire who sent me a Manuscript which is frequently mentioned. CHRSTOPHER
HUNTER of Durham, M. D. who has obliged me in the kindest Manner, with several
curious Manuscripts which are acknowledged in their proper Places. The Rev. Mr.
SMITH of Melsonby, who sent me a Book of ancient Deeds and Charters copied from
one in University College in Oxford, relating to some Lands in this Town. JOHN
THORNTON, Esquire of Nether-witton, who obliged me with a Sight of some ancient
Writings, particularly the Will of his famous Ancestor Roger de Thornton.
ROBERT SHAFTO, of Benwall, Esquire who contributed some ancient Writings,
particularly One relating to the Chanteries of the Churches of this Town.
The following Gentlemen have also been very kind and ready in assisting me
with Books, Transactions, Modern Papers, etc.
The Rev. Dr. THOMLINSON, Rector of Whickham. The Rev. Mr. DOCKWRAY, Lecturer
of St. Nicholas. The Rev. Mr. LODGE, Master of the Free School. The Rev. Mr.
COWLING, Curate of St. Nicholas. EDWARD COLLINGWOOD, Esquire WILLIAM CUTHBERT, Esquire
JOHN LOWTHER, Esquire M. D. GEORGE GRAY, Esquire Mr. CHARLES CLARK, Jun. Mr. THOMAS
WATERS. Mr. CHARLES ATKINSON. Mr. HENRY ATKINSON. Mr. GEORGE CUTHBERTSON.
IT will neither be necessary nor proper for me at this Time to answer the
trifling Objections abovementioned. I shall therefore only add, that I have
spared no Pains; but that as in my Health I laid out all my Endeavors, in the
Collecting of Materials from all Quarters I could possibly come at any, so I
have now finished it according to the best of my Abilities and Judgment.

map of Newcastle upon Tyne Close Gate A White Friar Tower B White Friar Gate
BB Nevil Tower C Westspittle Tower D Stank Tower E Gunner Tower F Forth Gate OF
Pink Tower G Westgate H Durham Tower I Herber Tower K Black Friar Gate L Mordon
Tower M Ever Tower N Andrew Tower O Newgate P Bertram Mumboucher Tower Q Ficket
Tower R Pilgrim Street Gate S Carliel Tower T Plummer Tower V St. Austin Tower
W Corner Tower X Pandon Gate Y Carpenters Tower Z Wall Kell and Habkin Tower
Sandgate etc Ratten Raw 1 Fennel Street 2 St. John's Church 3 An Alma House. 4
Westmorland Place 5 Back Raw 6 Fouthill 7 Batliss Gate 8 White Friars 9
Newgate Street 10 St. Andrews Church 11 High Friar Chare 12 Parn Crock 13
Hucksters Booths 14 Back gate of the 15 Black Friars 15 White Cross 16 Friar
Chare 17 Vunn^^ Gate 18 The Earls Inn 19 Bigg Market 20 Poultry Market 21
Pudding Chare 22 Rose mary Lane 23 Great Market 24 Wool Market 25 Penton Chare
26 Iron Market 27 Flesh Market 28 St. Nicholas Church D Nether Dean Bridge 29
Franciscan Friars AA Upper Dean Bridge 30 The Pilgrim's Inn 31 Wheat Market 32
Painter Hugh 33 All Hallows Church 34 Dog Bank 35 Butcher Bank 36 Herb Market
37 Fish Market 38 Masen Dieu and M Merchant's Court M Guild Hall Y St. Tho^ ye
Mu^y^ Chapel 39 The Close 40 Mayor's House X.E Sail makers Meeting house FO
Yawe^ Grappe 41 The Dark Chare 1 Granden Chare 2 Blew Anchor Chare 3 Pepper
(...) Chare 4 Palester Chare 5 Colum's Chare 6 Horns by Chare 7 Plumber Chare 8
Fenwick's Chare 9 The Dark Chare 10 Bread Garth 11 Peacock Chare 12 Trinity
Chare 13 Remcastle Chare 14 Broad Chare 15 Spicer Aim 16 Bourne Bank 17 Byker
Chare 18 Cockis Chare 19 Lore Lane 20 Minor Chare 42 St. Austine Friars 43
Barber Sur^^ans Hall WH The Hospital of clergy Men's St. Merchant Widows 44
M^ey's Island 45 Stock Bridge 46 Fisher gate 47 Wall Knoll, 48 St. Michael's
and Mount 49 Gulleram Green 50 Cowgate 51 Blith's Nook 52 Trinity House TXG
Duckhill in Bread Chare 53 Pants or Fountains P.




THE Ancient and Present STATE OF Newcastle upon Tyne.
CHAP. I. Some Account of the Roman Walls in the Country of the OTTADINI;
particularly the Walls of HADRIAN and SEVERUS, which went through this TOWN.
The most ancient Name of this TOWN.
IT was about an hundred Years after the Landing of Julius Caesar in this
Island, when the Brigantes, a populous and warlike Nation of the Britains,
whose Country extended from the North of Humber to the River Tyne, containing
the present Counties of Yorkshire, Durham, Lancashire, Westmoreland, and
Cumberland, were first assaulted by the Romans. The Britains behaved themselves
in the War with great Courage and Resolution, 'till at last, in the Reign of
Vespasian, the greatest Part of them were conquered. After this in the Reign of
Titus, Julius Agricola, the Lieutenant of Britain, who was at least equally
Famous for his Conquests over the Customs and Manners of the Britains, as for
his many Victories over them in Battle, did in the third Year of his
Lieutenancy make a Discovery of other Parts of this Island, which were not
brought under the Roman Yoke. Upon which he marched Northward into the Country
of the Ottadini, which extends from the North of Tyne to the River Taus,
wasting and destroying all before him, 'till he came to the Tay it self. And
now according to some was the first Wall made in Britain: But it was not
properly a Wall, it was only a Line of Garrisons placed upon that Slip of Land
between Edinburgh-Frith and Dun-Britain-Frith, for the Security of what they
had already gained; and if the Valor of Agricola's Army, and the Renown of the
Roman Name could have suffered it, there was no Need of a further Search after
the Bounds and Limits of Britain. The Friths abovementioned, called then Glota
and Bodotria, might have been very sufficient, being the Arms of two opposite
Seas, and only separated by a small Space of Land, which was well fortified
with the Roman Garrisons; so that the Romans were Lords of the whole South, and
had cast the Enemy as it were into another Island Tacit. in vit. Agricol.
. But what could ever bound the Roman Glory, and limit their never satisfied
Ambition? It was not enough that they had entirely secured themselves for any
Attempts of the Caledonians, but They also were to be subdued. This was
effected in the 8th Year of Agricola's Lieutenancy in the reign of Domitian.

HOWEVER after this, Cambd.
that further Part of the Island was left to the The inhabitants went naked,
had no Houses to live in, neither did they Till the Ground. As one writes, de
praeda and venatione, Frondibusque Arborum vivant, degent in Tentoriis Nudi and
sine calceis. Gray ex Xiphilin'.
Barbarians, as neither Pleasant nor Fruitful; but this nether Part was fairly
reduced to a Roman Province; which was not governed by Consular, or Proconsular
Deputies; but was counted Praesidial, and appropriate to the Caesar's, as being
a Province annexed to the Empire, after the Division of Provinces made by
Augustus, and having Propraetors of its own.

HADRIAN, who was made Emperor about the Year of our Lord 117, made the second
Wall. Cambd.
He drew a Wall, says Spartian, of eighty Miles in Length, to divide the
Barbarians from the Romans; which one may gather, from what follows in
Spartian, to have been in the Fashion of a Mural Hedge of large Stakes, fixed
deep in the Ground, and fastened together with Wattles. The same Authority from
the Scotch Historian who wrote the Rota Temporum, tells us, that Hadrian did
first of all draw a Wall of a prodigious Bigness, made of Turf (of that Height
that it looked like a Mountain, and with a deep Ditch before it) From the Mouth
of the Tyne to the River Eske, i. e. from the German to the Irish Ocean. This
is supposed to have been done about the Year 123.

THE Cambd.
Third Wall was built by Lollius Urbicus, Lieutenant of Britain, under
Antoninus Pius, about the Year 144, who by his great Success removed back the
Bounds to where Julius Agricola had set them, and raised a Wall there.

THE Cambd.
Fourth Wall was that of This Emperor died at York about the Year 211, Feb. 4th.
Severus, which was built about the Year of Christ 210, which extended from Sea
to Sea, quite cross the Island. This was a Wall of Stone, built much about the
same Place where the Wall of Hadrian was. It had it is Beginning at Bulness on
the Irish Sea, and crossing the Island, went as far as Walls-End, a Village
about 3 Miles East of Newcastle.

A Cambd.
Fifth Wall was built between the two Arms or Bosoms of the Seas for many Miles
together, that where the Waters did not defend them, the Wall might be a
Security against the Incursions of the Enemy. This Wall was made by Carausius,
Governor of Britain, in the Reign of Dioclesian, and stood in the same Place
where Lollius Urbicus had built his.

THIS being finished, the Romans left the Britains to their own Valor and
Conduct, being called away for the Defense of Gaul; But no sooner were they
gone, than their Enemies returned, and slew all before them: Upon this they
sent Ambassadors to Rome to solicit the Assistance of the Romans, which was
granted them. For Valentinian sent three Companies under the Conduct of Gallio
of Ravenua, who routed the Enemy and relieved the Province. After this Cambd.
p. 86. ex Gild'.
they made a Wall of Stone (not raised at the public and private Costs, as the
other was) with the Help of the poor Natives, built after the usual Manner,
quite cross the Country from one Sea to another, by those Cities which were
perhaps built there for fear of the Enemy: They exhorted them to be courageous,
and left them Patterns to make their Weapons by. Upon the Southren Shore of
Britain also, where their Ships lay, (because the barbarous Enemy might enter
there) they built Turrets at some Distance from one another, that looked a long
Way to the Sea. And so the Romans intending never to return more, about the
Four Hundred Seventy Sixth Year from the coming of Julius Caesar, took their
last Farewell.

THIS last Wall, according to Bid, was eight Foot broad and twelve Foot high,
and stood in the Place where the Walls of Hadrian and Severus had stood. Cambd.
It had great Number of Towers or little Castles, a Mile one from another,
called now Castlesteeds; and on the Inside a Sort of fortified little Towns
called Chesters. The Inhabitants tell you there was also a Brazen Trumpet or
Pipe, (whereof they now and then find Pieces) so artificially laid in the Wall
between each Castle and Tower, that upon the Apprehension of Danger at any
single Place, by the sounding of it, Notice might be given to the next, then to
the Third, and so on.

THESE are all the Walls of the Romans; and that three of them went through
this Town is something more than probable. For Severus's Wall was in the Place
of Hadrian's, and the last Wall mentioned, in the Place of Severus's, and that
last Wall went through this Town. Mr. Camden is so sure of this, that he
declares, It Is most certain that the Rampire, and afterward the Wall passed
through this Town; and that at Pandon-Gate there still remains, as it is
Thought, one of the little Turrets of that very Wall. There is indeed to this
very Day a Part of that Turret in being, above Pandon-Gate, which, as the same
Authority justly observed, is different from the Rest both in Fashon and
Masonry, and undoubtedly carrys along with it a very great Age.

NEAR this Turret is the Wall-Knoll, a very ancient Place, which our Historian
Gray says positively, Was a Part of the Picts-Wall; and indeed the very Name of
it speaks as much. For the Word Wall upon the Knoll, which signifies an Hill or
Eminence, cannot be understood of any other than the Roman-Wall; Because it had
this Name from very ancient Times, long before the Building of the Town-Wall,
to which it almost adjoins.

A little above this Place is a Tower, commonly called the Vide Wall-knoll
Tower.
Carpenters-Tower. This was one of the Roman-Towers, as was very Visible,
before the taking down of the Upper Part of it. Lib. de rebus Novocast'.
For it was of the same Size, Model, and Stone with the Tower of This Village
is now in the Possession of John Rogers, Esquire of Newcastle, who has turned the
inner Part of the Tower into Modern Rooms, but left the Walls of it still
entire.
Rutchester in Northumberland, which was undoubtedly one of the Roman Towers,
by the Picts-Wall.

IT must also not be omitted, that there is an ancient Tradition among the
Inhabitants of this Town, that the Roman-Wall went through the West-Gate, and
the Vicar's Garden, along that Ground where St. Nicholas-Church now stands,
along Nether-Dean-Bridge, by the Wall-Knoll, Sally-Port, and so on to Walls-End.

NOW to these Reasons and Authorities let us add what Hollins. Descrip. of
Brit. p. 128.
Hollinshead says, where he gives an Account of the Course of the Roman-Wall.
It begins he says at Bolness upon Burgh, and so he brings it from Place to
Place, 'till he brings it to Rutchester, then to Heddon, then to Wallbottle,
then to A small Village about 3 Miles West from Newcastle, belonging to John
Rogers, Esquire
Denton, and to Newcastle, where it is thought St. Nicholas Church stands on
the same.

TO this I shall add the Authority of a Manuscript, I am obliged to a very
worthy John-Milbank, Esquire
Gentleman for; Hadrian built a Wall of Turff or Sods, from the Seaside beyond
Carlisle unto Tinmouth. It was demolished after he was gone, and after him
Severus built near the same a Wall of Stone, and made Towers and Watching
Places at every Miles End, and a Passage all along by the Help of an Horn, or
such an Instrument, that they might speak through the Wall, and tell where the
Enemy was. This ended at the River of Tyne near Walls-End. This Authority goes
on, I my self have seen it at Thirlwall, and it comes by Portgate, near
Stanchebank, by Halton, near the Long-Lane, where both the Walls are Apparent;
as also at Denton, over Bonwell-Hill, down to the Westgate. And he also adds,
you may see it down the Hill by Mr. This House was in Pilgrim-street on the
West Side, a little before you come to Silver-street.
Leonard Carr's House, and over Walker-Moor to It has been a Vulgar Error in
many, who from the Name Wallsend, have imagined that the Wall did actually end
at that Village; but it could never have been so, because that Place is half a
Mile from the River Side. It is therefore not presumable that the Romans would
have begun or ended the Wall but at the Side of the said River, seeing all to
the Eastward of this Place, the River was the Continuation of the Praetentura
or Fence, from hindering the northerly Incursions. The first Track is half a
Mile South from Wallsend, near Cousins's House, beginning a little to the East
of it, at the Side of the River Tyne; and here certainly the 1st Station of
Segedunum was originally placed. For 162 Paces a saint Track of the Wall
appears running North twelve Degrees and a half Westerly; then forms an Angle,
Pointing south westerly for 135 Paces to the abovementioned Mansion of
Cousins's House. About 131 Paces West of this, the Fossa begins to appear
pretty distinct, measuring about 20 Foot in Breadth, and a little beyond it, is
the Foundation of the Stone Wall, from hence it passes by a few Houses called
the Bee-Houses, next through a small Village called Walker: Here the Fosta is
40 Foot broad, beyond which the Foundation of the Stone-Wall appears plain,
then it ascends the Byker-Hill, running betwixt the Village of Byker and the
Windmill, thence going down the Hill, passes through the Euesburn, crossing the
Rivulet there; then I found it ascend the high Ground to the Westward of it,
passing by the Mansion House and through the Garden to the Red-Barnes; from
thence it is visible through the Fields, going Straight to the Sally-Port Gate
of Newcastle. Gordon. Itiner. Septent. p. 70. -- This Place where the End of
the Wall is, belongs to Mr. Henry Waters of Newcastle.


Walls-End.

THUS I think it very clear that these Roman-Walls went through this Town. Let
us now see what this Town was in these ancient Times. p. 779
Mr. Cambden gives his Opinion thus: Gateside is commonly believed to be of
greater Antiquity than Newcastle it self. And if I should say further, that
this and Newcastle (for they seem formerly to have been only one Town parted by
the River) were that Frontier-Garrison, which in the Times of the later
Emperors was called Gabrosentum, and defended by the second Cohort of the
Thraces; and that it retained it is old Name in a due Sense and Signification,
notwithstanding this Newcastle has changed it is Name once or twice, I hope it
will be no ways inconsistent with Truth. For Gaffr is used by the Britains for
a Goat, and Hen, in Composition for Pen, which signifies an Head: And in this
very Sense and Meaning it is plainly called Caprae Caput, or Goats-Head by our
old Latin Historians.

THUS far this learned Antiquary. But notwithstanding this his Judgment, and
that no tolerable Reason can be brought against the two Places having been but
one; yet some will still have it, that Gateside, exclusive of Newcastle, is the
ancient Gabrosentum, because of it is Name. For my Part I cannot help being of
Mr. Cambden's Opinion, and for this, among other Reasons; that if the Name of
Caprae Caput discovers the Gabrosentum, then it is more probable that the
principal Part of it lay on the North-side of the River than on the South:
Because Gabrosentum was one of these Frontier Garrisons, which lay ad Lineam
Valli, within the very Range of the Wall. For all these Garrisons ad Lineam
Valli, were placed on the same Side of the River with the Wall it self,
consequently Gateside could but at most have been a Part of Gabrosentum, and
the meanest Part of it too; a Sort of Suburbs to it, as it actually was to this
Town of Newcastle, in the Reign of Edward the Sixth, as shall be shown
hereafter.

BUT if this is not allowed, (and yet it must be allowed, if Gateside has it is
Name from the Gabrosentum) yet most certainly it was a Vide Chap. of the upper
Parts of the Town.
garrisoned Fort in these very Times. For still there is the Remains of a Roman
Turret, and the under Part of one of the Roman Towers to be seen, and the Name
of Pandon is no small Corroboration of the Truth of it, as may be seen in our
Account of that Place.

THUS I think whatever is boasted of the Antiquity of Gateside, it plainly
appears, that if Caprae Caput, or Gateside Points out the ancient Gabrosentum,
Newcastle must be her elder Sister; forasmuch as a Town must be earlier than
it is Suburbs. And if it does not Newcastle is by Mr. Cambden called the old
Gabrocentum where the 2d Cohort of the Thracians lay; but according to the
Course of the Forts in the Notitia Imperii, Gabrocentum is the seventeenth
Station on the Wall; if therefore we follow the Noticia strictly, Newcastle
would rather seem to be the Pons-Aelii, the 2d Station on the Wall, where the
Cohort of the Cornovii lay. In this I have the concurring Opinion of the
learned and judicious Antiquary Dr. Hunter of Durham. Gord. Itin. Septent. page
71. The ancient Orrhea, mentioned by Ptolomy has been thought by some to have
been the Original of this Town, but for what Reason I know not.


Point it out, it will then be a certain Conclusion, that there is an
indisputable Account of this Town in these very Times of the Romans, which was
some Hundreds of Years before Caprae Caput, or Gateside is mentioned by the
most early of our Latin Historians.

CHAP. II. Of this TOWN, after the Time of the ROMANS.
AFTER the Departure of the Romans, it seems to have changed it is Name, as I
shall show immediately; and probably by the latter Part of it is after Name
Monkchester, it was a Place of Defense, or Garrisoned Fort, during the Times of
the Saxons and Danes. This Name of Monkchester it retained 'till after the
Conquest. Thus we are told from Simeon Dunelmensis, a Monk of the Church of
Durham, that Newcastle upon Tyne was anciently called Monkchester, civitas
Monachorum, or the Town of the Monks, not because it belonged to the Monks, but
because the Monks of those Parts dwelt there. Ex Collect. Mr. J. Douglas.


SOME, are of Opinion, that Newcastle got it is Name of Monkchester, because the
Monks in Time of Danger came for Protection to it, and not from their
inhabiting it. This is quite contrary to the Authority abovementioned, and all
others that I have met with. Mr. Eachard in his History of England says, that
Monkchester was so called from certain Monks who lived there in great Austerity
and Retirement; and the Monasticon gives us the following Account. In the Year
1074, there was a certain Man in the Province of the Mercians, a Presbyter and
Prior of the Monastery of Winchelescumbe, who was a Monk, whose Name was
Aldwin: This Man preferred a voluntary Poverty and Contempt of the World to all
it is Honors and Riches; and having learned from the History of the
Northumbers, that that Land was formerly famous for Multitudes of Monks and
religious Men, who though in the Flesh, lived not according to the Flesh, but
whilst they were on Earth, had their Conversation in Heaven: He desired greatly
to visit the Monasteries of these Places, (though He knew they were forsaken and
left desolate) and there to lead a poor Life in Imitation of them. Coming
therefore as far as the Monastery of Evesham, he made known his Purpose to
certain of the Brethren; upon which, two of them associated with him; one of
them was named Elfwie, who was a Deacon, and after that a Priest; The other's
Name was Renifrid; he was ignorant of Letters. These the Abbot gave leave to
accompany him, but not 'till he had set Aldwin over them, and committed to him
the Care of their Souls. After this, they set forward on their Journey a Foot,
having an Ass to carry their Books, Necessaries, and their Sacerdotal
Vestments, to celebrate divine Service in. At length they came to York,
desiring of Hugh, the Son of Baldrick, who was then Sheriff, Ut eis ducem
itineris inveniret usque locum qui Monkcester, i. e. Monachorum civitas
appellatur, nunc Novum-Castellum nominatur. Quo per ductum venientes, ad tempus
ibidem sunt morati, ubi nullum antiquum Sanctorum Christi reperirunt Vestigium.
Dugd. Mon. Tom. 1. p. 41.


that he would procure them a Guide to Monkchester, that is, the City of the
Monks, which is now called Newcastle, whither being brought by their Guide,
they staid awhile, but found not any Remains of it is former Sanctity, no
Footsteps of the Religious People who had formerly dwelt there. Walcher Bishop
of Durham hearing of this, sent for them, and gave them the Monastery of
Jarray, which at that Time was unroof'd, and had scarce any Thing remaining of
it is ancient Grandeur.

AND now how long it had been in this desolate Condition we may gather from
Mag. Brit. Nov. and Antiq. ex Holbius.
Hollingshead. By the Invasion of the Danes, says he, the Churches and
Monasteries throughout Northumberland were so waisted and ruined, that a Man
could scarcely find a Church standing at this Time in all that Country; and as
for those that remained, they were all covered with Broom or Thatch: And as for
any Abbey or Monastery there was not one left in all the Country; neither did
any Man, for the Space of Two hundred Years, take Care for the repairing or
building up of any Thing in Decay; so that the People of this County knew not
what a Monk meant. And if they saw any, they wondered at the Strangeness of the
Sight. One Place there was in this County, famous for being the Habitation of
Monks, from whence it was called Monkchester, but that also was so ruinated and
destroyed, that when the Monks of Mercia (the Monks mentioned before) came to
it, they found no Token or Remnant of any Religions Persons who had had an
Habitation there; all was defaced and gone.

NOW with respect to Monkchester this seems to be punctually true. For as
Hollingshead observes that it was about 200 Years from the Ruin of the
Monasteries to this Time after the Conquest Anno 1074
; so it must be taken Notice of, that the Danes, in the Year Hollin.
875, which was the 4th of the Reign of King Alured, divided themselves. So
that King Haldon with one Part thereof went into Northumberland, and lay in the
Winter Season near He sat down with his Men at Tamesmouth, which is between
Gateside and Whickham. Sim. Dunel'.
to the River of Tyne, where he divided the Country amongst his Men, and
remained there for the Space of two Years, and oftentimes fetched thither
Booties and Preys out of the Country of the Scots and Picts.

IT appears then from this, that the Monasteries of Monkchester had been in
Ruins about 200 Years, that is to say, from the Year 875 to the Year 1074, the
Time of the Coming of the Mercian Monk.

LET us now see if we can form any probable Conjecture when it was first
inhabited by Monks, and got the Name of Monkchester. And this I imagine
happened toward the later End of the 7th Century. For in the Year 635, the
Monastical Life was brought in among the Northumbers by Aidan, who was that
Year made Bishop of Northumberland, and had his Seat at Lindisfern is a small
Island on the Northern Shore of England, made only by swelling Tides, for at
Ebb it is joined to the main Land of England, by a Ridge of sandy Earth. It is,
as we are informed called the Holy-Island, from it is first Bishop living in an
Holy Society with his Clergy. He died Aug. 31st, Anno 651 and was buried in the
Church of Lindisfern. He was succeeded by Finan a Monk of the Monastery of Hy,
who died Feb. 12, in the Year 601. Coleman succeeded him, and was Bishop about
3 Years. But being worsted in the Controversy about the keeping of Easter, he
gave up his Bishopric, and left Lindisfern. Tuda succeeded him, and died the
same Year he was made. After this the Sea was vacant fourteen Years, and then
filled up by Eata in the Year 678, who continued 'till the Year 685, being then
chosen to the Sea of Hagustald. He was succeeded by St. Cuthbert, who was
consecrated at York by Theodore, Archbishop of Canterbury upon Easter Day,
which happened March 26. The Archbishop was assisted by seven other Bishops,
and King Egfrid, and many of his Nobles were present. When he had been Bishop
about two Years, he gave up his Charge, and foreseeing his Death approaching he
resigned his Bishopric, and retired to his former Solitude, the Island of
Fern, where he died in two Months Time, viz. March the 20th 687, and was buried
at Lindisfern. Eadbert was chosen after him, he governed the Sea about ten
Years, and died in the Year 697. Eadfrith or Egfrith succeeded him, who is said
to have wrote a very fine Book with his own Hand, containing the Gospels in
Latin, which Ethelwold, his Successor, adorned with Gilding and Jewels, Bilfrid
the Anchorite painted, and Aldred the Priest enlarged, with an interlineary
Version in the Saxon Tongue: My Authority says further, that this very Book is
still preserved in the Cotton-Library. -- This famous Library had the
Misfortune this last Year 1731 to be set on Fire, and part of it, and its
Manuscripts were burnt, but we hope this valuable Piece of Antiquity has escape.

This Bishop died Anno 721, and was succeeded by Ethelwold, after the Sea had
been vacant near three Years. He died in the Year 740. Keneuif, or Kenulf
succeeded him the same Year, who died in the Year 783. Henulf was succeeded by
Higbaldus, who died May the twenty fifth, 803. Ecgbert succeeded him, who was
consecrated by Eanbald, Archbishop of York, Eanbert Bishop of Hagustald, and
Baldulf, Bishop of Whithern, at Bigwell, June 11th 803. He died Anno 821.
Heathured succeeded him, and died Anno 830. Ecgredus was his Successor, who
died in the Year 845. He was succeeded by Eanbert, who died in the Year 854.
Eardulph succeeded him. This Bishop left Lindisfern in the Year 875, on Account
of the Invasion of the Danes, and wandered up and down for some Years. At
length he and his Company fixed at Cunacestre (now called Chester in the
Street) which is a Village about seven Miles distant from Newcastle, Southward.
This was in the Year 883, and there the Sea continued 113 Years. This Bishop
died in the Year 900. He was the first of the Bishops of Lindisfern that
exercised Episcopal Authority over the Sea of Hexam; which he did in the first
Year that he settled at Chester: The Sea of Hexam continued 'till the Reign of
King Henry the first, under the Jurisdiction of the Bishops of Lindisfern.

Eardulph was succeeded by Cutheard, who died in the Year 915. Tilred succeeded
him, and died in the Year 928. Tilred was succeeded by Wigred, who died in the
Year 944. Wigred was succeeded by Uhtred, who sat above 3 Years. Senhelm
succeeded him; who seems to have been removed from his Bishopric in the year
957. He was succeeded by Aldred, who died in the year 968. Aldred was succeeded
by Elffig, who is also called Ellfinus, who died in the year 990. Aldwin
succeeded him, and in the year 995 was obliged to remove the Body of St.
Cuthbert, and the Clergy that were with him, from Chester to Rippon, because of
the Danes; But Things becoming peaceable again, they left that Place about four
Months after their coming thither. In their Return, they passed through Durham,
which at this Time was a Place wild and not habitable, being all a Wood, full
of thick Bushes and Trees, saving only a little Plain upon the Top of the Hill,
which was wont to be sowed, and is the very Place where now the Church
stands,) and were mightily taken with the Situation of it. Here Aldwinus
first deposited the Body of St. Cuthbert, and resolved to make this Place his
Episcopal Seat. Having therefore grubb'd up the Wood, he began to build a
Church of Stone, Mag. Britt. p. 742. ex Godwin.
and Houses about it for his Company. The Governor of Northumberland, then
named Uthred, and the People from the River Coqued to the Tees, came in so
readily to his Assistance, and continued their Help so long, that the Wood was
soon grubbed up and the Church and Houses finished, insomuch that Aldwin
dedicated the Church in the 3d year after he began the Work, upon Sept. the
4th. This was the Beginning of the Church and City of Durham or Dunhelm more
properly, which takes it Name from Dun, which signifies a Mountain, and Holm a
River-Island in the Saxon Language, because the River Were, with it is circling
Stream, washes the Hill on which it stands on all Sides, so that it makes it
almost an Island. -- Aldwin died in the year 1017, and was succeeded by
Eadmund, who was elected the year 1020, after the Sea had been vacant about 3
years, he died Anno 1040, and was buried in the Church of Durham. Eadred
succeeded him, but enjoyed that Honor no great while; for in 10 Months time he
died, He was succeeded by Egelric, Anno 1049, who built a Church at Chester
upon the Street, in Memory that the Bishops of Lindisfern had rested themselves
there, together with the Body of St. Cuthbert, 118 years, during the Time of
the Danish Wars: He resigned in the year 1056, and was succeeded by Egelwyn,
who died in the year 1071. Walter or Walcher succeeded him, who was slain at
Gateside (as a shown in our Account of that Place) May 14th, 1080. After this
the Sea was void for 6 Months; and then on the 9th of November was filled up by
William Kairlipho, who died Anno 1095. This Man, as Godwin goes on, pulling
down to the Ground the Church of Durham, which Aldwinus had first built, began
to erect another far more magnificent, but lived not to finish it himself,
Malcolme, King of Scots, and Purgot Prior of Durham, laid the 3 first Stones,
July 30, or (as some deliver Aug. 11.) 1093. This Bishop, after the Sea, had
been vacant 3 years, and 4 Months, was succeeded by Ranulf Flambard, Anno 1099,
who died Sept. ^, 1128. Geoffry Rufus was his Successor, who died May the 6th,
1140. After him succeeded, William de Sancta Barbara, who died Nov. 14, 1153.
He was succeeded by Hugh Pudsey. Vid. in Regu. Reg. Au. 1195.


Lindisfern, Hexam is a Town about 16 Miles West of Newcastle. It was in the
Times of the Romans, as Cambden says, the Axelodinum, where lay the 1st Cohort
of the Spaniards. It had among the Saxons the Name of Hextoldesham, from the
Rivulet Hextold, which runs by it. In the year Dugd. Vol. II. page 70.
674, Etheldreda, Wife to King Egfrid, assigned it for an Episcopal See to St.
Wilfrid, who built here a Church, and dedicated it to St. Andrew the Apostle.
The Order of it is Bishops is as follows; 1st Eata, who is also reckoned the 3d
or rather the 4th of that See, he was ordained Bishop of Hexam at York, by
Theodore, Archbishop of Canterbury, Anno 678, and governed that See three years
whilst he was Bishop of Lindisfern. In the year 681 Tumbert the 2d Bishop was
consecrated; but he was deposed the same year, St. Cuthbert was chosen into his
Place; but being better pleased with the Situation of Lindisfern; Bishop Eata,
in respect to him, left the Sea of Lindisfern, and became the 4th Bishop of
Hexam. The 5th was St. John of Beverly, who was Bishop about the year 685, He
continued Bishop about one year, and was then translated to York. After the
Translation of John, King Alfrid restored the Church of Hexam to Wilfrid the
6th Bishop, who died Anno 709. St. Acca succeeded him, who was the 7th Bishop,
he was deprived in the year 733; he died Nov. 20, Anno 740, and was buried, as
is said, near the Consistory of the Church of Hexam. Frithubertus the 8th
Bishop succeeded Acca, and came to the Sea Anno 735; he died Anno 766.
Alkmundus the 9th Bishop succeeded him, Anno 767, and died Sept. the 7th, 781.
Tilbert the 10th was the next Bishop; he died 789, and was buried in his own
Church. To him succeeded Ethelbert the 11th Bishop; he died October 16, 797,
and was buried in the Church of Hexam. Heardred 12 succeeded him; who died in
the year 800. To him succeeded Eanberth 13th Bishop; who died Anno 806. To him
succeeded Tidferth, the 14th Bishop; who died about the year 821.

After this, the Sea of Hexam, because of the Danish Wars, lay neglected for
above 63 years together. But at length it was united with Lindisfern, under
Eardulph, the 15th Bishop of Lindisfern. This happened in the year 883. Under
this Jurisdiction it continued 'till the Reign of King Henry the 1st, when the
Town of Hexam and the Church, Anno 1113, were taken from the Diocese of Durham
and given to that of York, the King being highly displeased with Ranulph Bishop
of Durham.

Ex. Mag. Brit. p. 737.
This Church at the Time it was built, was supposed to exceed all the Churches
on this Side the Alps, for it is Pillars, Porches, and Allies leading round it;
afterward in the Time of Bishop Acca, that Bishop superadded to the Buildings
of his Church many Decorations and curious Works; he got from all Parts some
Relics of the Apostles and Martyrs, and erected several Altars in Reverence to
them, and for that End made distinct Porches in the Walls of the Church. He
also with great Diligence and no small Charge, gathered the Histories of of
their Sufferings, with many Volumes of Ecclesiastical Writers, and of them he
made a very large Library. He also provided several sacred Utensils, as
Flaggons, Cups, Pattens, Candlesticks, and other Vessels of the like Nature,
which belong to the Service of God. He also brought a famous Chorister who had
been taught to sing in the Church of Canterbury, whose Name was Maban, to
instruct those of his Church of Hexam. Mag. Brit. ex Bed. lib. 5. c. 21. He is
also said to have gilded the Walls with Gold and Silver, and covered the Altars
with Purple and Silk.

That Part of this Church which is now standing (for the West End of it, is
entirely demolished) is still grand and noble, and speaks what it was in
ancient Days. About 3 years ago it was repaired by Contribution, no small Part
of which was raised in the Town of Newcastle. -- This Church was honored with
the Sepulcher of the good King Alfwold, who was murdered by Sigga, (a certain
Nobleman) at Silcester, Some Remains of which Place are yet to be seen on the
West Side of the North Tyne, in the Grounds belonging to Walwick Grainge,
between that Place, and the Roman Wall. Rich.
and lies buried under the Arch, at the South End of the North East Isle; a
Monument is erected since the Foundation, in Honor of that Prince. Rich. p. 61.

Stav. p. 173. ex Richard. Pri. Hagulst. de Stat. Eccl.
Stavely in his History of Churches gives us the following Account. That
Privilege which I read to have been granted unto the Church of the once eminent
Monastery of Hagulstad is very remarkable: That is, there were 4 Crosses set up
at a certain Distance from the Church, in the four Ways leading thereto. Now if
any Malefactor flying for Refuge to that Church, was taken or Apprehended
within the Crosses, the Party that took or laid hold on him there, did forfeit
Two hundredh; (in Hundredh viii. Librae continentur) If he took him within the
Town, then he forfeited Four Hundredh; if within the Walls of the Church Yard,
then Six Hundredh; if within the Church, then Twelve Hundredh; if within the
Doors of the Quire, then Eighteen Hundredh; besides Penance, as in case of
Sacrilege; but if he presumed to take him out of the Stone Chair near the
Altar, called Fridstol, or from amongst the Holy Relics behind the Altar, the
Offense was not redeemable with any Sum; but was then become sine emendatione
Botolos (i. e. Bootles, vid. Gloss. W. Somner) and nothing but the utmost
severity of the offended Church was to be expected, by a dreadful
Excommunication, beside what the secular Power would impose, for the
presumptuous Misdemeanour.

The Canons Dug. Mon. Vol. II. p. 91.
Regular of this Church, which were appointed by Thomas the 2d, Archbishop of
York about the year 1109, continued 'till they were displaced by King Henry the
8th, Anno 1539. when the Revenues of the Monastery was valued at 122 l. 11 s. 1
d. It was of the Augustine Order. Several Rents were paid to it out of the Town
of Newcastle. -- It is still very stately and magnificent, and by far exceeding
any Thing in that Town. It is now inhabited by Sir Edward Blacket, Bart. but is
the Property of Walter Blacket, Esquire Among the eminent Persons of this Place, I
meet with two in particular. Stephen. addit. Vol. 1. p. 203.
The 1st is John of Hexam born in that Place, and first Monk, then Prior of the
Monastery there. He was a Man, grave, modest, meek, courteous, assable, yet
severe and rigid in punishing the Faults of those under his Charge; learned and
eloquent, and a diligent Searcher of History and Antiquities, and though he
taught Philosophy and Divinity publicly in his Monastery, yet in private He,
as much as Time would permit, read Historians, and particularly venerable Bede.
He made an Addition of 25 Years to the History of Simeon of Durham, beginning
at the 9th Year of King Henry the 2d, and proceeding to the first of King
Richard, calling it an History of 25 Years. He also writ of Signs and Comets: A
Description of the Scottish War: Sermons, and some other Things; and flourished
in 1190.

The other is Richard of Hexam, first Monk, and then Prior of that Monastery,
educated there in Monastical and School Learning, and in all Sorts of Piety; so
diligently imitated his Master, John, Prior of that Place, that he succeeded
him in that Employment, and in Teaching. When made Prior, he in all Things most
exactly copied after his said Master; for though he in public taught his
Brethren Philosophy and Divinity; yet in private he read History, and
accurately writ the Affairs of his Time, especially in England, by the Titles,
The Actions of King Stephen; The Actions of King Henry the 3d, and proceeding
to the 1st of King Richard; The War of the Standard; A short Chronicle from
Adam to Henry the Emperor; Of the State and Bishops of the Church of Hexam. He
died and was buried in his Monastery, about the year 1192.


Hexam was made a Bishopric in the Year 678, and had Eata for its first
Bishop; Churches and Monasteries were built in several Places, and Religion
flourished in this whole Kingdom. This Account Hollingshead gives in the
following Words: Great Numbers of Persons daily offered themselves to be
baptized, insomuch that within the Space of 7 Days (as is left in Writing)
Aidan christened 15 Thousand Persons, of the which no small Part forsaking the
World, betook themselves to a Solitary kind of Life. Thus by continual
Preaching the Gospel in that Country, it came to pass in the End, that the
Faith was generally received of all the People; and such Zeal to advance the
Christian Religion daily increased amongst them, that no where could be found
greater. Hereupon were no small Number of Churches built in all Places abroad
in those Parts by Procurement of King Oswold, all Men liberally consenting
(according to the rated Substance) to be Contributors toward the Charges. By
this Means the Kingdom of the Northumbers flourished, as well in Fame of
Increase of Religion, as also in civil Policy and prudent Ordinances.

When now it is considered that the Business of Religion went on so Briskly
throughout the whole Kingdom of the Northumbers; it is rational to suppose that
this Place, as it was not only convenient for the monastical Life as to
Retirement, but also a Security to it too, (being at that Time a garrisoned
Fort) was certainly as early inhabited by the Monks as the abovementioned Time;
and besides if we consider the Veneration it is mentioned with by many
Historians for the severe rigid Lives of it is Monks; how it was the most
eminent Place in the North, for the monastical Life, so very famous on that
account, as to change it is former Name to that of Monkchester: There can scarce
be allowed it a later Time to arrive at such a Pitch of Eminency and Glory.
Before the Name of Monkchester, I imagine, from it is being a Place of
Fortification, that it had the Name of Chester, as Weremuth was the original
Name of that Place, but was afterward called Monkweremuth, from the Monks
inhabiting there. It seems all along to have been a Place of Defense and
Fortification. It was the Ancient Gabrosentum, according to Mr. Cambden; or as
others more justly imagine the Pons Aelii of the Romans; was a garrisoned Fort,
'till inhabited by the Monks; and was such from the Time of the Monks 'till the
Conquest.

THE Name of Monkchester continued 'till the Building of the Castle, and after
that, from the Building of it, it got the Name of New Castle: The Occasion of
which was this. Malcolme King of Scotland having entered with his Army into the
Confines of England, came with it into Northumberland, and waisted and
plundered the whole Country as far as the River Tyne; the Conqueror being all
the while in Normandy, and also his Son Robert Curtois. But no sooner were the
King and his Son come into England, than Robert was sent with an Army against
Malcolme to drive him out of the Country. The Scots being appriz'd of this,
retired into their own Country, and Robert with his Army encamped upon the
Banks of the Tyne, where he built the Castle to defend these Northern Parts
from the Incursions of the Scots, for the Mag. Brit. p. 608. Poly. virg. etc.
Future. The Chronicle of Mailros says, that the Conqueror sent his Son Robert
into Scotland, against Malcolme, in the Year 1080, who, having done nothing,
upon his return, built the New Castle. From hence it is easy to conclude, that
the Castle was founded the same Year, toward the latter End of it. For Dugdale
tells us in his Monasticon, that Anno Domini MLXXX Rex Willielmus Autumnali
Tempore Robertum Fillium suum contra Malcomum misit; sed cum pervenisset ad
Egglesbreth, nullo consecto negotio, reversus Castellum Novum super flumen
Tynae condidit. Dug. Mon. Tom. 1. p. 42.
King William in the Year 1080, about the Time of Autumn, sent his Son Robert
into Scotland against Malcolme. But having got as far as Egglesbreth, he
returned (having done no Exploit) and built the New Castle upon the River Tyne.

THUS the Town lost it is Name of Monkchester for that of Newcastle, which it
retains to this Day. But however by the building of the Castle it lost nothing
else; for the Building of the said Castle did not destroy or take away the
Right or Interest which the Townsmen had before; but that still remained as
before.

AFTER this the Town grew more populous, and increased in Trade and Wealth; had
great Privileges granted them by the Kings, built Churches, Monasteries, Walls,
Bridges, etc. as shall be seen in the following Treatise.

CHAP. III. Of the WALLS of this TOWN.
NEW CASTLE is seated on the Northern Bank of the River Tyne; and is bounded on
the East by the Land of Byker; on the West by the Lands belonging formerly to
the Prior of Tinemouth; on the North by the Lands of Kenton, and Coxlodge, and
on the South by the County of Durham.

IT is surrounded with a Stone-Wall, which at the Time it was built, and for
many Ages after, was undoubtedly of very great Strength. This has several Gates
belonging to it, Round Towers, and Square Turrets, which shall by and by be
considered. On the Outside of it is a Ditch or Trench, and on the Inside it is
ramper'd with Earth.

Gray.
THE Cause of Building this great Wall was the often Invasion of the Scots into
this Place and Country; they continually infested it and the rich Monasteries
in these Northern Parts; the religious Houses of this Town, and the adjacent
Places being above Forty.

SOME are of Opinion, that the Walls were begun in the Reign of King Henry the
Third. But the Author just now mentioned, imagines Them to have been earlier.
King John, he says, gave great Privileges to this Town, and probably the
Newgate, and Walls thereabout, were built in his Time; the North Part of the
Wall being the oldest, and of another Fashion than the other Walls.

IN the Reign of King Henry the 3d, the same Author says, the West part of the
Wall was built; but I am rather inclined to believe, that that Part of the Wall
was not built 'till the Reign of Edward the 1st. The Wall from the Time it was
begun, went on but slowly 'till this Reign, when an Accident happened, which
revived the former Fears of the Townsmen, and put them in Mind of the
neglected Wall, which, 'till that Time had got no farther than Ever-Tower, as
appears by the old Part of the Wall, ending thereabouts. The Accident was this,
Cambden.
in the Reign of Edward the 1st, a very rich Burgher being carried off a
Prisoner by the Scots, out of the Middle of the Town, first paid a round Ransom
himself, and afterward began the 1st Fortifications of the Place.

IT is true, that this Accident was the Occasion of carrying on the Wall; but
Mr. Cambden is mistaken in saying it occasioned the Beginning of it. For it was
begun some Years before the Reign of Edward the 1st. For from Newgate to the
Ever-Tower as has just now been observed, is a Work older, and vastly different
from what the Wall is from Ever-Tower toward the West-gate. This Wall, leading
to the West-gate, was it which was begun in the Reign of Edward the 1st, for in
this Reign it was, (when Leave was granted to the preaching Friars to break out
that Little Gate which now leads into the Wardens-Close, then their Garden,
that this Wall was called the Vid. Durham-Tower and Blackfriars.
New-Wall; and surely a New-Wall, will imply that there was an Old one before,
was the thing itself not still a Matter of Fact as it really is to any Observer.

HOW long the Walls were a Building, or who they were in particular that
contributed toward the Building of them, is a Matter pretty much in the Dark.
However, it is Gardener, chap. 4.

This Author, whose Name was Ralph Gardener, lived at Chirton, a Village East
of Newcastle, near the Town of Shields, which Village is now in the Possession
of Robt Lawson and Edward Collingwood. Esqrs. He was a bitter Enemy to this
Town, and did all the Mischief to it that lay in his Power, as appears in every
Page of his Book. In which are Numbers of Falsities.


supposed, that King Edward the 1st, was a Contributor to them. The Names of
some of the Round-Towers also give us some Light, which to this Day do
seemingly bear the Names of their ancient Founders, which may in some Measure
occasion a Guess at the Time of their Building.

THE Town, after the completing of the Walls, was divided into 24 Wards,
according to the Number of the Gates, and round Towers in the Wall, which
Towers and Gates were wont be defended in Times of Hostility with the Scots, by
the particular Wards appropriated to them.

THE 1st Gate I shall begin with is the Close-gate, which is so called, because
it stands in a narrow Street called the Close, it had in Ward, from the
Close-gate upon the South-rawe, so going Eastward unto the Javil-grippe, but
nothing of Javil-grippe, then going Westward upon the North unto the Close-gate.

FROM the Close-gate there are Stairs leading up to a Round-Tower called the
White-Fryer-Tower. This Tower had in Ward, from the East End of Bailiff-gate,
opposite to the Javil-grippe, with all that dwell upon the High-Stairs in the
Close, unto and with the West Side of these Stairs that lead unto the
South-Postern of the Castle, with all Javil-grippe Eastward, and from the
Javil-grippe to the South-rawe of the Close, and with all the Bridge-End.

THIS Tower, with the Wall leading to the little Gate, (commonly called the
Postern-gate, but originally the Gate of the White-Fryers, or White-Fryer-gate)
were together with the Gate itself, probably built by the White-Fryers; for the
White-Fryers were situated in the South-west-end of the Street of West-gate, in
the same Grounds were are now the Houses of Mr. Anderson, George Gray, Esquire and
others. And as it is reasonable to believe, that whatever Religious House, or
Nobleman, built a Tower or Piece of the Wall, that it would be built chiefly
for their own Security; so the Buildings now mentioned, being so situated as I
have just now observed, are a Proof that the White-Fryers were the Founders.
And if it be considered that the White-Fryers were See White-Fryers.
founded by King Edward the 1st, in whose Reign the abovementioned Accident
happened, which occasioned a fresh Beginning of Building of the Wall; it will
appear still more probable, that these Friars were the Builders. It may indeed
be said, that as they were sounded in this Reign, it cannot be imagined they had
sufficient Riches for such an Undertaking. This is readily granted, but when it
is considered, that these Friars were newly founded by King Edward the 1st,
that they were the first of that Order that had been in this Place, that they
were Carmelites, or originally coming from Mount Carmel in Syria, and that the
Prayers of all Monasteries were thought more particularly available for the
Souls in Purgatory; it will follow I think rationally, that they were more able
then to do such a Thing by getting the Contributions of others, than they could
have been of themselves 200 Years after. The Name given to these Walls is also
another Argument; it is more probable, that the White-Fryer-Tower, the Wall and
Gate now mentioned, were so called, (as other Towers were) from their Founders,
than from their bare Situation. For the Walls behind the Blackfriars are not
called after their Name, because they were not built by them, but by King
Edward the 1st, as shall be shown below.

THIS Tower is now the Meeting House or Hall of the Company of Masons.

GRAY in mentioning the Ports or Gates of Newcastle, says, there were besides
These, Postern-Gates belonging to the Religious Houses; I have met with no more
than three, and this White-Friers-gate is undoubtedly one of them. It seems to
be much of the same Kind with that which leads into the Warden's-Close. It has
been an Outlet to the Friars, that they might walk to the Forth and the
neighboring Fields; and that it might be of Use and Service to the Castle, in
Times of Hostility with the Scots. I imagine it was out at this Gate, that the
Townsmen made that famous Sally, mentioned by Gray, who says, that in the Reign
of Edward the 3d, See a more perfect Account in the Year of the Mayors, 1342.
Three hundred valiant Men issued out of the Town through a Postern-gate, and
came suddenly in the Night upon a great Army of the Scots, which lay in the
West Part of the Town, and raised the Army, put them to flight, and took Earl
Murray Prisoner in his Tent, and others.

THE next Round Tower to White-Fryer-gate is Denton-Tower, or Nevil-Tower,
which had in Ward all the Hairy-Hugh, on the South Side of the White-Fryers,
with all the Houses standing there, upon the Burn-bank, betwixt the Fryer-Kirk,
and a Burn, unto the Stone Bridge in Bailiff-gate, with all Bailiff-gate,
upward that same Raw unto Denton-Chare, with Denton-Chare.

WHY it was called Denton-Tower, I can give no Reason, unless it was from it is
having in Ward the Lane called Denton-Chare; but it has the Name of
Nevil-Tower, from the Nevil Family of Raby who built it, which Family was
honored with the Title of Earl in the Reign of Richard the 2d, Ralph Nevil
Lord of Raby, being created Earl of Westmoreland, in the 21st of that Reign:
His House in West-gate, called Westmoreland-place, which shall be considered
when we treat of that Street, had this Tower built behind it for it is Security
and Defense. The Tower is now the Hall of the Wallers, Brick-layers and
Plaisterers, and was repaired by them Anno Dom' 1711, Richard Fletcher, and
William Johnson, Wardens.

THE next Round Tower is West-spittle-Tower, which had in Ward the Side upon
the West Raw under the Castle Moat, from the Castle-gate, so downward on that
Raw, to and with a great Waste belonging to Laurentius Acton, opposite to a
Corner Shop of a Chauntery in St. John's Kirk, next the Pant; also from that
Pant upwards upon the East-Rawe in the Side, with the South Kirk-Style of St.
Nicholas, by the East Side of St. Nicholas.

THIS Tower has it is Name from St. Mary the Virgin's Hospital, which was
otherwise called West-spittle, to which it almost adjoins; it must have been
built by the Master and Brethren of that Hospital for the same Reasons that the
other two Towers beforementioned were built by their supposed Founders.

THE Tower next to this has the Name of Stank-Tower. It had in Ward all Now
called Back-rawe.
Gallowgate; opposite to the Castle-Yates, so going Northward, from the
East End of Gallowgate, upwards that same Raw, unto the East End of
Denton-Chare, with the Iron-market, with all the Houses opposite to the
Iron-market, down to St. Nicholas Pant, as their Doors open toward the
Iron-market, or toward the Pant, or toward St. Nicholas Kirk-Yard.

GUNNER-TOWER, is the next; it had in Ward, from All-Hallow-Pant, beside
Cordiner, so going downward the same Raw toward Cale-Cross, and so going
upwards by that Flesher-Rawe, unto Painter-hugh beside Swin-burne-place, unto a
Place called Pencher-place, beyond Painter-Heugh, as it stands beyond
Lorkburne.

BETWEEN this Tower, and one next to it, is a Postern which leads to the Forth.
It was made Anno 1705, when Thomas Wass, Esquire was Mayor, Matthew Matfin, Esquire
Sheriff. There is also another Passage from it into Westgate.

PINK-TOWER. This Tower had in Ward in the Close, from the High-Stairs that
lead from the South Postern of the Castle toward the Close, so going Eastward
on that same Raw, by the North-side of Sandhill, unto and with St. Mary-lane,
with the Houses upon the Corner, called St. Mary-Lands in All-hallow-kirk, and
so going upwards all the West-rawe in the Side, to a great Waste upon the
Castle-hugh, sometimes called old Laurentius Acton's Waste, opposite to the
Pant at Lorkburne.

WEST-GATE, is the next, which is the Highway West into the Counties of
Northumberland and Cumberland, and is Gray.
said to have been built by Roger de Thornton, in Memory that he came from the
West-country, according to the old saying, At the West-gate came Thornton in,
With a Hap, and a Halfpenny, and a Lamb-skin.


THIS Gate had in Ward from the Vennel that leads into White-Fryer-Kirk, so
going upon the West Raw of Westgate, unto the Westyate, with all that dwell
without that Yate. Also from the West End of Denton Chare, so going upward upon
the East-Rawe of Westgate unto the Westyate, with all that dwell in St. John's
Kirk-yard, and with all that dwell from the said Kirk unto the West-gate. It is
now the Hall of the House-Carpenters.

DURHAM-TOWER is the next, and it had in Ward from St. John's Chare to going
upward by Urd-place, upon the West-Rawe of Beer-market, unto the
Shod-Frier-Chare, with all the Shod-Frier Chare.

HEBER-TOWER is the next; it had in Ward all the Meal-market from Denton-Chare,
to Pudding-Chare, with all Pudding-Chare and St. John's Chare.

THIS Tower is now the Hall of the Armourers, Curriers and Felt-makers, who
were made one Fellowship in the 36th of Henry the 8th. They were ordered to
associate themselves in the Feast of Corpus Christi, and go together in
Procession, as other Mysteries, and sustain the Charges of the Lights Pageant,
and Place, on the same Feast; according to old ancient Custom. And the
Ordinance therein was to be devised by Their Wardens when the Hour was
assigned, upon Pain to lose and forfeit one Pound of Wax, to be applied to the
Use of the whole Fellowship of the said Occupations. The best Account I have
met with of these kind of Plays, is of one that was played in the City of
Coventry. Step. 1st V. p. 138.
Before the Suppression of Monasteries, the City of Coventry was very famous
for the Pageants that were played therein upon Corpus Christi Day, which
occasioning very great Confluence of People to it from far and near, was of no
small Benefit thereto; which Pageants being acted with mighty State and
Reverence by the Franciscan-Fryers, had Theaters for the several Scenes very
large and high, placed upon Wheels, and drawn to all the eminent Parts of the
City, for the better Advantage of Spectators: and contained the Story of the
old and new Testament, composed into old English Rhimes, as appears by an
ancient Manuscript, entitled Ludus Corporis Christi, or Ludus Coventriae, that
is, The Play of Corpus Christi, or The Play of Coventry. in Bibl. Cotton. sub
Effigy Vesp. D. 8.

A Specimen of them is as follows; Vexillator I. NOW Gracyous God groundyd of
all Goodness,
As thy great Glory nevyr beginning had;
So You succor and save all those that sytt and sese
And Lystenyth to our Talking with Sylens stille and sad
For we purpose no pertly Stylle in yis prefe,
The Pepyl to plese with Pleys full Glad.
Now Lystenyth us lonly both mar and lesle
Gentillys and emanry off Goodly Liff Lad
Yis Tide,
We xall ou show as that we can,
How this yis a Werd first began,
And how God made both Mold and Man,
If that e will abide.

Vexillator 2. IN the first Pagent we yeuke to play,
How God deed make You his owyn Myth,
Hevyn so clar upon the first Day,
And therein he set Angel full Bryth
Thou Angel with Song yis no nay,
Xall worchep God as it is ryth;
But Lucyfer, that Angel so gay
In such Pomp Yan is he Pyth.
And set in so great Pride
That Goddys set te Gynnyth to take,
Hese Lordys per Himself to make
But Yan be fallyth aftend full Blake
From Hevyn to Hell to a -- bide, etc.

A little beyond this Tower, opposite to the Monastery of the Blackfriars is a
little Gate in the Wall, which I imagine to be one of those which Gray calls
Postern-Gates. It leads into the Warden's- Close, and was made in the Reign of
King Edward the 1st. The Black Friars petitioned the King, he being then at
Durham, that they might have a Passage though his New Wall into their Garden,
which was accordingly granted. The original Grant is still in Being, with the
King's Seal at it, in the Hands of Mr. Joshua Douglas, who obliged me with the
following Copy of it.

EDWARDUS Dei gratia Rex Angliae Dominus Hiberniae Dux Aquitaniae Omnibus ad
quos presents Literae perveniunt salutem.

Sciatis quod de nostra Gratia speciali concessimus dilectis nobis Fratribus
praedicatoribus de Novo Castro super Tynam, quod per medium Novum Murum
circumagentem Villam praedictam, quem per medium Gardini Praedictorum Fratrum
fieri opertebit, ut dicti facere possint quandam strictam Portam ad ingressum
in Gardinum suum habend' Portam sust' sibi and successoribus suis tenere in
perpetuum. Dum tamen Porta illa ad voluntatem nostram, Vicecomitis Northumbriae
aut Constabuli nostri ibid' qui pro tempore fuerit, obstruatur. In cujus Rei
Testimonium has Literas nostras fieri Patentes; Tests me ipso apud Dunelm'
decimo octavo die Septembris, Anno Regni nostri Octavo.

MORDEN-TOWER had in Ward both the East-Raw of Spurrior-gate, Sadler-gate, and
over Flesh-shambles, from the North-West Kirk-Stile of St. Nicholas unto
Fish-shambles, and the said Raws opened either to the Cloth-market, or the
Meal-market. This Tower was granted to it is Companies Anno 1619. The Ordinary
was granted them 1536. In that it is ordered, that they shall go in Procession
on Corpus Christi Day, and maintain the Play of the Three Kings of Colleign. In
the Year 1700, this Tower was by the Plumbers, Glaziers, etc. made a beautiful
Hall.

EVER-TOWER, which is now the Hall of Colliers and Carriage-Men, with Pavers,
had in Ward the Shod-Frier-Yate, so going up that Raw beside White-cross unto
Newgate, with all the Darnecrook, and with all the Gallow-gate without Newgate,
unto the Barriers, as Men go to the Gallows.

ANDREW-TOWER, so called, because it is almost contiguous to St. Andrew's
Church, had in Ward from the Great Nun-gate, so upwards upon that East-Rawe,
unto a Burn, beside Lam-place that runs to Lorkburne, with all the
Cockstale-Booths, and with all the West-Rawe of Sidgate without Newgate from
Gallows-gate unto the Water-Mill beside St. James's Kirk.

NEWGATE had in Ward all Ratten-Rawe, as it opens toward the Pillory in
Cloth-market, with them that dwell in the North of St. Nicholas upon that
East-Rawe of the Cloth-market, unto the Over-dean-bridge end.

THIS Gate of all the others is not only the strongest, but also the most
ancient. It is of the same Masonry and way of Building with that Part of the
Wall which leads to Westgate Westward, as far as Ever-Tower, which is visibly
the oldest Part of the Wall. From this Gate is a Causey that leads to the
Town-moor, and toward the North Parts of Northumberland and Scotland; it is
now, and has been many Years a Prison for Debtors and Gray.
Fellons. The new Buildings on each Side of it were built, the one Anno 1702,
William Ramsey, Esquire Mayor, William Boutflower, Esquire Sheriff; the other Anno
1706, Sir Ralph Carr, Mayor, William Ellison, Esquire Sheriff.

BERTRAM-MUMBOUCHER-TOWER. From Newgate toward the East we pass to the Tower
of Bertram Mumboucher, which was so called from Bertram Mumboucher the Founder
of it, Ex Fuller Worcester.
who was High Sheriff of the County of Northumberland, in the 49th of Edward
the 3d, and in the 1st, 2d, and 3d of the Reign of Richard the 2d.

This Tower has to Ward all the West End of Over-dean-bridge with the Shops
between the Fish-shambles and the Beer-market, and from the same Bridge-end
unto the Great Nun-gate.

FICKET-TOWER had in Ward from Whelpington-barn, beside the Great Cross
standing within Maudlin-Barras without the New-yate, so coming upon the
East-Rawe of Sidgate, without the New-yate, unto the New-yate, and also within
the New-yate, and so going up the East-Rawe Southward unto a Burn beside
Lam-place, that runs toward Lorkburn, with all Grey-Frier-Chare from the
Barras over against Ficket-Tower, and their North Kirk Door of the said Fryery
Westward, and no further Eastward in that Lane.

PILGRIM-STREET-GATE had it is Name from the Pilgrims who were wont to lodge in
that Street, and go out of that Gate when they came to visit the Shrine of the
Virgin Mary at Gesmunde; to which Place with great Confluence and Devotion they
came from all Parts of this Land in these Times of Superstition. It is now the
Hall of the Company of Joyners, who repaired it 1716, Thomas French and Paul
Cook being Wardens. This Gate had in Ward without the same Gate beginning at
the great waste Barn, called Emeldon-barn, opposite to the Maudlins, coming
downward and inward upon that West-Rawe of Pilgrim-street-yate, within the
Yate, and within the Yate unto All-Hallow-Pant, besides Cordiner's- place
beside the South-Kirk Style of All-Hallow's Kirk, with all Painter-hugh, and
with all Neither-dean-bridge, and with all the North-end of Upper-dean-bridge,
both Sides thereof from Lorkburn Eastward to Pilgrim-street, with Pencher-rent,
and in Grey-Fryer Lane from Ficket-Tower Eastward.

THE Tower next to this Gate is that in the Corner of the Carliol Croft, now
the Hall of the Weavers who repaired it Anno 1682. It got it is Name very
probably from it is Founder: For the Carlills or Carliols were several of them
Magistrates of Newcastle: and as this appears probable from the Name, so it is
also equally probable that the Founder of this Tower had his House somewhere at
the Head of Pilgrimstreet, nigh his own Tower, as Nevel's Tower was behind his
House; and that the Field called vulgarly Carling Croft, had it is Name of
Carliol Croft, being at that Time of Day the Property of this Founder. The last
Mayor of this Town of that Name, before the Completion of the Walls, was
Nicholas de Carliol in the 2d Year of Edward the 3d, so that this Tower could
not be much later in Building, to say the least of it is Antiquity imaginable;
but it is rather probable it was built a good while earlier. It has to Ward all
the East Raw of Pilgrim-street within the Yate, and without the Yate, from and
with the Maudlins, so coming inward upon the East-Raw, unto the Austin-Chair.

CARLILL-CROFT-TOWER, otherwise called Plummer-Tower, it has in Ward from the
Austin-Chare in Pilgrim-street, upon that East-raw of Pilgrim-street, unto the
Kirk-Garth of All-Hallows, with all Temple-Gate, otherwise called
All-Hallows-Gate, beneath All-Hallow Kirk, unto a Burn called Cogo, with all
Cowgate and other Places between Cogo and the King's Wall unto the Stone-Brigg
over Pandon-Burn, also upon the Sandhill on the East Side of Lorkburne,
beginning at the Barber's- Shop upon the Corner, in Booth's-Rent, over against
the Mason-Dieu, so going up that East Side of Lorkburne, all that Raw toward
Cale-Cross, to and with the Corner called Oliver-Rent, and so upward, all that
Corner unto the North-End of Grindon-Chare.

AUSTIN-TOWER; this Tower was built by the Friars of St. Augustine, commonly
called Austine-Fryars, and has its Name from them. It stands opposite to the
Monastry that built it, as the White-Fryer-Tower and Wall does to that of the
White-Fryers, and West-Spittle-Tower to that of St. Mary the Virgin, or the
West-Spittle. It seems to have been built in the Reign of Edward the first.

IT has in Ward from the North-end of Grindon-Chare, so up that South-Raw of
the Neither All-Hallow's- Bank unto Galeway-Rent with them that Dwell in
Brown-Chare, Grindon-Chare, Tud's- Chare, Norham-Chare, Philip's- Chare,
Shipman's- Chare, Oliver-Chare, Galeway-Chare, with half of the Friar of
Austin. This Tower is now the Hall of the Ropers, and was repaired at the
Charge of the Company, School, John Langlonds, and John Dawson being Wardens.

CORNER-TOWER had in Ward all the House-side upon the Key, as their Doors open
Southward toward the King's Wall upon the Key-side from the Stone Stairs
beside the Common; so going Eastward upon the Key-side, to the South-end of
Broad-Chare-Yate, in the said King's Wall.

PAMPEDEN-YATE is so called from the Ancient Town of Pampeden, where was the
Picts-Wall, and a Roman Turret, part of which is still to be seen. Out of this
Gate is a Causey that goes into a Place of Recreation and Perambulation,
called the Shields-Field, and a Way to a Village called Walls-end is a Village
Fast from Newcastle about three Miles; nigh it was the Station of the 1st
Cohort of the Fraxagi as the Liber notitiarum says, which calls the Place
itself Vindobola, or as Antoninus names it, Vindomora, which last seems in the
Provincial Language of the Britons to have signified the Walls-end, as the
later does the Rampier's-end. For they anciently named a Wall Mur, and a Ditch
or Rampire Gual, or Val, or Bal. Cambden.

But with this a late ingenious Author cannot agree, because Mr. Cambden brings
no Proof from Inscriptions, and also because Pancirolus, in the same Notitia
places Vindomora at the ninth Station per Lineam Valli, where the fourth Cohort
of the Galli lay, and which appears by Inscriptions to have been the Little
Chesters upon the Wall; He concludes therefore, that where the Wall begun,
which has already been shown, the first Station of Segedunum was certainly
placed. Gord. Irinerar. Septontion. p. 70.

The present Wals-end is a very agreeable Place, having about it very good
Grounds, and in it some beautiful Houses and Gardens. Some of the Possessors of
which, are Mr. Henry Waters of Newcastle Hoastman, Mr. Charles Atkinson of
Newcastle, Hoastman, Mr. Thomas Waters of Newcastle, Merchant, Mr. James
Monkcaster of Newcastle, Merchant, Mr. William Dixon of Newcastle, Brewer, etc.

There is a Chapel belonging to this Village, which is very inconveniently
situated, on the Top of an Hill, the present Incumbent is the Reverend Mr.
Thomas Dockwray, Lecturer of St. Nicholas in Newcastle.


Wals-end, by Bid, Villa ad Murum, This is certainly a Mistake. For according
to Mr. Cambden, that was Wall-town, which from the agreeableness of the Name,
and (as he goes on) it is 12 Miles Distance from the Eastern Sea, was the Royal
Burrow, which Bid calls ad murum.

But the learned Dr. Smith upon this Passage of Bid is of another Opinion. He
says, it is commonly supposed to be Walton, but this, he adds, cannot be true.
For it answers not the Distance at which Bid places the ad murum from the Sea.
But Wallbottle, both as to it is Name, and as to it is Distance, which is not far
from Newcastle, and from the Sea about 12 Miles, will answer exactly well.

But be this is it will, certain it is, that the ad murum is famous on Account
that Sigebert King of the East Saxons, and Penda King of the Mercians, together
with his whole Train of Courtiers and Attendants were baptized in it by the
Bishop Finanus. -- One Matilda, of this Village of Walls-end, had some Lands in
Pampeden confirmed to her at a Court held at Byker, Anno 1285.

In a Charter of William de Carilepho, Bishop of Durham, which he granted to
the Monks, we have mention made of this Place. For the Bishop is said to have
given this and Willington to the Monks. Ultra ampnem Tinam duas villas
Wyllynton and Walleshend cum suis Appendiciis.


and so into Tinemouth-shire. This Gate had in Ward from Galeway-Rent in
Cross-gate, beside All-Hallow Pant, both the Rawes of that Cross-gate, so
going-Eastward down to the Pant called Broad-Chare Pant, with Bell-place that
stands upon the Pant; and with all the Broad-Chare, and Narrow-Chare,
otherwise called Collier-Chare, with Michael-place, cutting upon the West Side
of Pandon-bourne.

WALL-KNOWL-TOWER and HABKIN-TOWER, are now but one Ward, and they have in Ward
from the Broad-Chare part, beside Bell-place, so going to a Burn called Cogo,
both the Towers unto the South Side Cogo-Burn, as it runs beside the Stone
Brig unto Pandon-Burn, from Pandon-yate, to the Sand-gate either in Pandon or
Fisher-gate, or in other Places from the said Burn Eastward, with the Wards,
with all that dwell upon North Raw in Sandgate.

THIS Tower commonly called the Carpenters Tower, because the Company of
Carpenters or Ship-wrights meet in it, was one of the Towers of the Old Romans.
This Company in the Year 1716, built upon the under Part of it a very grand and
stately Square-Tower, adorned at the Top Corners with 4 fair Turrets built in
the form of a Lanthorn.

Lib. de Reb. Novocast'.
BUT before the taking down the Top of the old Tower, it was much of the same
Size, Model, and Stone with the Tower of Routchester in Northumberland, which
was certainly one of the Towers belonging to the Picts-Wall.

THERE is under it an ancient Postern-gate, which leads into the Field called
the Garth-Heads, the most part of which was last Year enclosed and turned into
Garden-ground, by Richard Ridley, Esquire the Owner of it.

FROM Sandgate, which is so called because, it was built upon the Sand, or the
Riverside, is a Wall, having many little Gates in it, extending itself as far
as the Merchant's Hall, along the Street called the Key-side.

IT must not be forgot what is mentioned in the Manuscript of Mr. John Milbank,
that between every one of these Towers, there were for the most Part 2
Watch-Towers made square, with the Effigies of Men cut in Stone upon the Tops
of them, as though they were watching, and they were called Garret, which had
Square Holes over the Walls to through Sons down.

WHEN these Walls were finished is not exactly found. Gray Gray 7.
seems to think they were finished some little Time before the Reign of Henry
the 6th.

BUT this I imagine is a Date too late for the finishing of them; for Henry the
4th, in the 4th Year of his Reign, Aug. 16, granted at the Castle of
Port-tefract, that all Fines, Redemptions, Amerciaments, Issues, Forfeitures
and Profits, as well of Pleas as that of Justices of the Peace, etc. be
received by the Mayor and Burgesses of this Town and their Officers, for
supporting, amending, and repairing the Walls, Bridges and Gates of the Town.
The Walls then in this Reign must have been completed, forasmuch as they then
probably wanted Repairs.

BUT further had Gray remembered his own Story abovementioned, of the 300
valiant Men, that issued out at the White-fryer-gate, and put the Scottish Army
to flight, he would surely have concluded that the Walls were finished before
that Accident, which happened in the Reign of Edward the 3d. Certainly the
Scottish Army, which is said to have been a great one, would not have lodged
without the Town if they could have lodged in it, and what should hinder their
lodging in it, but the Walls of the Town well guarded? I conclude therefore
that the Walls of the Town at the latest were completed in the Reign of King
Edward the 3d, before the Year 1342 for it was in this Year that this
Transaction happened.

AFTER they were finished, it Gray 27.
was famous for being a Bullwark against the Scots, all the Power of Scotland
could never win it, but of late, viz. in the Time of the Civil Wars, being
assisted by the English, it was stormed, and our Churches and Houses defaced,
and the Ornaments of both taken away.

IT is now going fast into Ruins, several of the Turrets and some of the round
Towers being fallen; but the Towers which stand, together with some little
Parts of the Wall adjoining to them, are kept in good Repair by their
respective Companies.

THE Circumference of this Wall, from the Close-gate, to the same, is two Miles
and 175 Yards.

CHAP. IV. WEST-GATE.
THIS Street has it is Name from it is being on the West Part of the Town.

FROM the Gate Eastward is a Little Street called Ratten-Rawe, at the End of
which is a narrow Passage, turning up to the North, which leads to the
Monastery of the Blackfriars.

Sect. I. Of the BLACKFRIARS.
THE Dominicans commonly called Blackfriars, Preaching-Fryers, and Jacobine
Friars, came over into England in the Year of our Lord Fuller C. Hist.
1221, or as others say, 1217, and had their first Residence in Oxford, they
were a Prior and 12 Brethren; their Prior's Name was Gilbert de Fraxineto; the
Name of the Order was taken from St. Dominick, born at Cologona in Spain: Of
this Order were no sewer than fourscore famous English Writers.

De reb. Novocast'.
This Monastery was founded by Sir Peter Scott, who was the first Mayor of
Newcastle, Anno 1251, and Sir Nicholas Scott his Son, who was one of the 4
Bailiffs of the Town, 1254, 1257, and Capital Bailiff, 1269; but the Site of it
was given by 3 Sisters, whose Names have long since been ingratefully buried in
Oblivion.

WHEN was the particular Time of it is Building, I have met with no Account; but
it is not difficult to give a probable Guess; the Order itself of the
Dominicans or Black-Fryes came into England, as is mentioned above, in the Year
1221; consequently it must have been founded after that Time: And that it must
have been founded some Years before the Year 1280, is plain to a Demonstration.
For in that Year, which was the Eight of Edward the First, the Blackfriars had
License from the King to break a Door through this New Wall, Vid. Town Wall.
into their Garden; which proves them a regular settled Body at that Time; and
therefore that their Priory was built some Years before that License.

Blackfriars.
Gray 20.
WE are told, that this Monastery was in old Time called the Grey-Fryers; which
in my Opinion is a Thing highly Improbable; for the Grey-Fryers, or
Franciscans, came not into England 'till about the Year 1224; and if as I have
proved above, the Blackfriars were a Settled Body some Years before the Year
1280; how is it possible to have been called of old Time the Grey-Fryers? This
is therefore a Mistake, and beside, the Dominicans came into England before the
Franciscans or Grey-Fryers, and therefore more probably were sooner in this
Place.

IT has been a very stately and Beautiful Building, as appears by the present
Remains of it. The Area or Grass-plat is about 87 Foot in Length, and as many
in Breadth; on the East Side of it was the Chapel, which is now the Hall of the
Company of Smiths in this Town. On the West Side of it is a curious Old Well,
which served the Monastery with Water, called our Lady's Well. On the South may
still be seen the Ruins of a curious Front, on which Side is the Hall of the
Cordwainers, in which I saw a Pair of winding Stairs, which they told me
(before they were walled up) led by a Vault as far as the Nunnery of St.
Bartholomew. On the North of it were their Gardens, a Part of which was the
Warden's Close, before the Building of that Part of the Towns-wall. This
appears by the Charter granted to this Monastery in the Reign of Edward the
first, about breaking out that Narrow-Gate in the Wall between Westgate and
Newgate; in which Grant it is said, that the Wall went through the Middle of
their Garden. This Monastery was dependant upon the Priory of Tinmouth.

IN the Reign of Edward the 2d, the Brethren of this Monastery had License
granted them for the Building of a Drawbridge, beyond the New Ditch of the
Castle.

WHO were the Priors of this Monastery, what eminent Men belonged to them, or
what Things were transacted by them from their Beginning 'till their
Dissolution, were Things undoubtedly preserved among themselves whilst they
were a Body; but, after their Surrender, were either destroyed, or have not yet
come to Light.

ONE of the Priors of this Monastery was one Richard Marshall. I take this
Gentleman to have been the last Prior of this Monastery, for in the 28th of
Henry the 8th, a Grant of a Tenement, nigh the White-Cross, (signed by Friar
Richard Marshal, Dr. and Prior; and Friar David Simpson, and Friar John Sowrby)
was given to Anthony Godsave, upon his paying to the said Priory or Monastery 9
s. per Ann. This Grant is now in the Possession of Mr. Thomas Marshal, of
Newcastle, Joyner, who purchased this Tenement, and has lately rebuilt it. He
pays the same Rent to the Town of Newcastle, which the Tenement paid to the
Monastery.

ABOUT 2 Years after the Signing of this Deed, in January the 30th of this
Reign this Monastery surrendered; it consisted of a Prior, and Twelve Friars.

THE Nature of surrendering was this, according to Bishop Burnet, who says,
Burnet's Records, p. 146.
at the surrendering of Monasteries and Abbeys, etc. there was generally a
Confession along with the Surrender. Few of them are remaining, the following
one is one of the Six the Bishop had seen, and is a Copy from him, Page 150.
Coll. Rec.

FORASMUCH as we the Prior and Friars of this House of Carmelites in Stamford,
commonly called the White-Fryers, in Stamford, in the County of Lincoln, do
profoundly consider, that the Perfection of Christian living does not consist
in same Ceremonies, wearing of a White Coat, disguising of our selves after
strange Fashions, Dockying and Becking, wearing Scapulars and Hoods, and other
like papistical Ceremonies, wherein we have been most principally practiced,
and Nose-led in Time past; but the very true Way to please God, and to live a
true Christian Man, without all Hypocrysie and feigned Dissimulation, is
sincerely declared to us by our Master Christ, his Evangelists and Apostles;
being minded hereafter to follow the same, conforming ourselves to the Will and
Pleasure of our Supreame-head, under God, on Earth, the King's Majesty, and are
not to follow henceforth the superstitious Traditions of any Forensecal
Potentate or Power, with mutual Assent and Consent, do submit ourselves unto
our said Sovereign Lord, and with the like Assent and Consent do surrender,
etc. Signed by the Prior, and Six Friars.

WHAT became of the Brethren of this our Fryery, after their Surrender, what
they had allowed them annually for a Maintenance, or whether they had any Thing
allowed at all, I have no where met with. Some Account indeed I meet with
afterward of the Prior himself, but none of the Friars. It is this which
follows.

Collier Eccl. Hist. Vol. II p. 302.
RICHARD Marshal, Prior of the Blackfriars in Newcastle, about the Year 1551,
went into Scotland and preached at St. Andrews, that the Pater Noster should be
addressed to God, and not to the Saints. Some Doctors of the University being
disgusted at this Assertion, prevailed with one Tofts, a Grey-Fryer, to
undertake to prove that the Paternoster might be said to the Saints; whose
Ignorance in doing the same was so manifest, that he became the common Jest,
and quitted the Town.

AFTER the Surrender of the Monastery on Jan. the 10th, 30th of Henry the 8th,
the Blackfriars was granted to the Town of Newcastle, in Consideration of 53
l. 7 s. 6 d. The annual Value of it, was 2 l. 19 s. 6 d.

The King says in the Grant, that He gives to the Mayor and Burgesses of
Newcastle, the whole House and Site, lately a Priory, or a House of Brethren,
called vulgarly the Blackfriars in Newcastle upon Tyne; The Chapel, Houses,
Edifices, Gardens, etc. the Hall, two Chambers, a Chamber called the
Cross-Chamber, and the two Gardens, with their Appurtenances, and the whole
Close within the West-gate, and another Close near the Site of the said Priory
on the North. And a Close containing 3 Acres, and a House in the same Close
without the Walls of the said Town, and a House called the Gate House, situated
near the Street.

IT also appears from the Grant, that the King reserved to himself and
Successors, the Bells and Lead that was upon the Church belonging to this
Fryery, and the other Buildings of it; the Lead in the Gutters, together with
the Stones and Iron of the Church, etc.

THE Nine Crafts of this Town had their Meeting Houses or Halls in it, and
still have, except two of them, the Tailors and the Cordwainers, who have
bestowed these upon some poor Widows, and got themselves others in other
Places. These Halls are of great Service to this ancient Building, in
preserving it from an entire Ruin. Such is the Hall of the Smiths, which was
repaired by them in the Year 1709, John Kellet, Thomas Turner, Jonathan Gibson,
Roger Haddock being Wardens; The Hall of the Dyers, The Hall of the Bakers and
Brewers, which was repaired Ann' 1711, Christopher Rutter, Lionel Dixon,
William Dove, John Make-piece, being then Wardens: These Halls are on the
East Side of the Fryery. Such also are those on the West Side of it, viz. the
Hall of the This Company has belonging to it, an ancient Manuscript,
beautifully wrote, in Old English Rhyme; it relates to our Savior's
Sufferings. I take it to be the play they were obliged by their Ordinary to
maintain on the Feast of Corpus Christi.
Sadlers, which was repaired by them in the Year 1729, Cuthbert Berkley and
Matthew Anderson, Wardens; and the Hall of the Skinners and Glovers, which was
repaired by them in the Year, 1712, John Emmerson, Robert Barnes, Robert Shutt,
Philip Smith being Wardens. Such are those also on the South Side of it, viz.
the Cordwainer's Hall, which was turned into Appartments for three Widows, in
the Year 1729, John Wheatley and George Alder being Wardens; the Hall of the
Butchers, and the Hall of the Tanners, was repaired in the Year 1717, Thomas
Anderson, William Harrison, Thomas Dixon, William Slaiter then Wardens.

BY Means of these Halls, there is still some Visage of the Fryery remaining,
which had otherwise been entirely in the Dust. It Is a Pity that those People
who are permitted by the Companies to reside in some of those Rooms are not
threatened into more Cleanliness, and that the Companies themselves are not at
the Expense of repairing the Area; were these Things done, it would be a
Beautiful Piece of Antiquity, and an Entertainment to the Curious, from
whencesoever they came.

Sect. II The VICARAGE.
IN coming back by the narrow Lane which led to the Blackfriars, we face a
little Street called Fennel Street, which leads into Westgate; a Street more
retired than any other in this Town; there being no Artificers or Mechanics in
this Street, nor any Market. It is chiefly inhabited by the Clergy and Gentry;
and indeed it seems all along to have been inhabited by such more than by
others. In some Writings above 400 Years old, we meet with the Names of some
Clergymen who lived in this Street, viz. Robertus de Gonwerton, Thomas Abelot,
etc. not to mention those who belonged to the Monasteries and Hospitals; and
Gray tells us, that the Men who lived in this Street in his Time, had
Employment for both Town and Country, he says also that in old Time the Earl of
Westmoreland had his House in this Street.

AT present several of the Houses in it, are large and beautiful; such are the
Houses of the Lady Clavering, of Utrick Whitfield, Esquire Thomas Ord, Esquire Mr.
Abraham Dixon, etc. in the Upper Part of it; and of George Gray, Esquire and others
adjoining to him in the lower Parts of it.

ON the North Side of this Street, a little above St. John's Church, is the
Vicarage House, the Dwelling of the Vicars of Newcastle. It stands, at least
equally pleasant with the other Houses in this Place, being situated in the
middle of Fields and Gardens, and more retired, being at some Distance from the
Street.

WHO it was that built this House, I have not been able to learn; but it is not
improbable that it was the Town of Newcastle, who has been always famous for
it is Generosity to it is Clergy; as the Vicarage itself in particular must
always acknowledge. It is at present more beautiful and convenient than it was
wont to be, having been repaired and enlarged in the Year 1694, by the Rev. and
Worthy Dr. Ellison, the then Vicar.

THERE is a Hall belonging to this House, built in a very grand and stately
Manner, according to the Hospitality of the Times it was built in. In
particular, it was the Place where the Vicars of Newcastle were wont to
entertain the inferior Officers of Churches, the Clarks, Sextons, etc. at the
Season of Christmas. If I am not very much mistaken, there are many still
living, who remember this laudable Custom.

The Garden belonging to this House, though beneath some others in this Street
for Art and Curiosity, and Beauty of Flowers; yet in this it glories above all
the others, that the Roman-Wall, which was undoubtedly one of the great Works
of the Roman Empire, is said to have passed through the middle of it.

Sect. III. Of St. JOHN's CHURCH.
THIS Church is situated almost close to the Vicarage. It is dedicated to St.
John the Baptist; but who was the Founder I never met with: I am inclinable to
believe it was founded by the Towns-people, notwithstanding a Conjecture of an
Anonymous Gentleman, which is, that Robert Rhodes was the Builder of this
Church. But this I think is impossible; for the earliest he can be supposed to
have lived, is about the Year 1430, in the Reign of Henry the 6th, when John
Rhodes, who was perhaps his Father, was Mayor; whereas it is certain this
Church was built at least an Hundred Years before. For the Grant of Adam of
Durham, to the the Priest of St. Thomas the Martyr's Chantery in this Church,
bears Date the 26th of March, 1319, in the Reign of Edward the 2d; consequently
then the Church must have been in being at this Time, and so could not have
been built by Robert Rhodes. Nay, in a Charter dated 1287, belonging to the
Rev. Mr. Smith of Melsomby, to whom I have been obliged for a Sight of a great
many Writings, I meet with these Words, Venellum quo itur ad Ecclesiam Sancti
Joannis. So that this Church was still earlier in Being, viz. in the 15th of
Edward the 1st. However, it is supposed that the Steeple of this Church was
either built, or at least beautified by him, as also the South-Cross of the
Church; for his Coat of Arms, as also these Words, Orate pro Anima Roberti
Rhodes, are upon both of them; which indeed makes it somewhat probable.

THIS Church, as Gray informs us, was commended by an Arch-Prelate of this
Kingdom, because it resembles much a Churches were usually built in form of
the Cross, to represent and commemorate the Cross on which our Lord died.
Cross; which indeed it does more than any other in this Town.

THERE were three Chanteries consisted of Salaries allowed to one or more
Priests to say daily Masses for the Souls of their deceased Founders, and their
Friends. These were Adjectives, not able to stand of themselves, and therefore
united (for their better Support) to some parochial, Collegiate, or Cathedral
Church. Full. Chapter Hist. p. 350.
Chanteries belonging to this Church, one of which was the Chantery of Sciant
presents, etc. quod Ego Adam de Dunelm', Burgensis Villae Novi Castri super
Tynam, etc. pro salute Animae meae, and pro animabus Rogeri patris mei, etc.
hac presenti Carta Mea confirmavi Domino Rogero de Burneto Capellano --
Singulis diebus ad altar Beati Thomae Martyris in Ecclesia Parochiali Sancti
Joannis de Novo-Castro divina Celebraturo; totum illud messuagium, etc. Et volo
quod post decessum meum, Major and Ballini praedictae villae Novi-Castri,
quicunquae pro tempore suo fuerint, habeans Jus patronatus dictae Cantariae,
and quod ipsi nun cum quatuor de Prebioribus and Discretioribus hominibus
Parochiae praedictae ad hoc Eloctis possint ad dictam Cantariam, quotrescunque
ipsam Vacatam contingat, vtrum capellanum Honestum, Discretum, er Honestum
eligere and instituere, etc.
St. Thomas the Martyr, which was founded about Anno 1319, in the Reign of
Edward the 2d. For Adam of Durham, Burgess of this Town, (according to the
Opinion of the Times he lived in) for the Sake of his own Soul, and the Souls
of his Father Roger, and Agnes his Mother, etc. gave an annual Salary to Such
Priests as have the Addition of Sir before their Christian Name, were Men not
graduated in the University; being in Orders, but not in Degrees; whilst others
entitled Masters, had commenced in the Arts. Note, that generally Founders of
Chanteries preferred Priests not beneficed to those Places, as best at Leisure
constantly to attend the same. Fuller C. Hist. p. 352.


Sir Roger de Burneton, the Chantry-Priest, for celebrating Divine Service
every Day, at the Altar of St. Thomas the Martyr, in this Church. I take this
Chantry to have been situated on the North Side of the said Church, extending
as far as, and adjoining close to, the North-Cross of the Church.

WHEN this Priest of the Chantry dyed, another was to be chosen (after the
Decease of the Benefactor Adam) by the Mayor and Bailiffs of this Town for the
Time being, together with four of the most discreet, and judicious Men of the
Parish of St. John elected for that Purpose. The Mayor, etc. had also the Power
of turning out the Priest of this Chantry, St. JOHN's Church.
and putting another in his stead, if he neglected his Duty upon any Canonical
Impediment, beyond 40 Days. If he was taken with a Fit of Sickness, he was
obliged to provide another at his own Expense to wait upon the Altar. They had
a Power also of turning him out, and putting another in his Stead, if any
Scandalous Crime was proved upon him.

THIS Writing was sealed by the Seal of the Benefactor, and the Common Seal of
the Town of Newcastle; and Witnessed, by Richard de Emelden, then Mayor, Thomas
de Frismarisco, Richard de Acton, William de Burneton, Gilbert de Hankyn,
Bailiffs of the Town, Sir Nicholas Scot, Knight, Nicholas de Carleol, Thomas de
Carleol, Peter Graper, etc.

THE yearly Value of this Chantry was 4 l. 3 s. which was raised out of certain
Tenements in the Sandhill and Westgate.

ANOTHER Chantry belonging to this Church, was that of our Lady, founded by
Edward Scott, in the Reign of Edward the 3d; the yearly Value of which was 4 l.
4 s. 4 d. which arose out of Tenements in the Sandhill and Westgate.

THE 3d Chantry was that of the Holy Trinity, founded by John Dalton, William
Atkinshawe, and Andrew Accliffe, Clerks; the yearly Value of which was 5 l. 13
s. 4 d. which arose out of Tenements in Westgate, Side, without Westgate, and a
Close without Westgate.

I have been told, that the Painted Glass on one of the South Windows of the
Quire of this Church, had on it the Representation of the Trinity. It does
indeed still resemble some such Thing, but, if the Knowledge of it was needful,
it might be Queried whether it ever was any such Representation.

THERE is another Thing at the Top of this Quire, which though little known, is
yet of greater Certainty; and that is, the Funnel, or Wood Box, in the Form of
a Spout, which hangs from the Top of this Quire. This was a Conveyance for an
Artificial Dove, on the Day of Pentecost, in the Times of Popery, to represent
the Descent of the Holy Ghost. That there were such Things in Churches, though in
none that I know of in this Town, but this; is Matter of Fact. For thus we are
told, that Bee-Hive of the Romish Church.

Geo. Gelding, p. 207.


on Whitsunday the Papists begin to play a new interlude. For then they sent
down a Dove out of an Owl's Nest, devised in the Roof of the Church. But first
they cast out Rosin and Gunpowder with Wildfire, to make the Children afraid;
and that must needs be the Holy Ghost, which comes with Thunder and Lightning.

THERE was formerly an Organ in this Church. This appears from the last Will
and Testament of Mr. John Wilkinson, Merchant of this Town, who was one of the
Ancestors of the present Mr. John Wilkinson Merchant, to whom I am obliged for
a Sight of this Will. It bears Date Feb. 1, 1570, and has these Words, I, John
Wylkinson, etc. commend my Soul unto Almyghtie God, and my Body to be buried
in Saint Iohn-Church, on the North Side of the same Church, nygh where the
Organes doithe stand. A little below this he thus orders, I will have the
dyvyne Service at the Day of my Buryal, according to the Laws and Custom of
this Realm. Item I will have dealt and gevyn to the Poor the Day of my
Buryal, fortye Shillings. Item I will that mine Executors shall in the Day of
my Burial make a Dynner for my Brethren the Aldermen, and for my
Neighbour-heade in the Myddle-Streete, etc.

M. S. Milbank.
IN the Year 1639, when the Scots sought to deface the ancient Monuments, and
said they were Papistry, and Supestition, they began with the Spoon of this
Church's Font, and broke it all to Pieces. It had been given by one John
Bertram. For there was written about it; For the Honor of God and St. John,
John Bertram gave this Font Stone. Cuthbert Maxwell, a Mason, observing the
Barbarity of the Scots, came in Haste to St. Nicholas, and saved the Spoon of
that Font in it is Vestry, and also that of All-hallows. He lived, after the
King returned, to set them up again.

THE Porch of this Church was rebuilt in the Year 1710, Thomas Fletcher; Robert
Percival, John Quincy, John Fairlam being then Churchwardens. In the Year
1723, the Steeple was new pointed at the Expense of the Corporation, Matthew
Featherstone, Esquire being then Mayor; and the same Year was the Body of the
Church pointed at the Charge of the Parishioners. There are two Galleries in
this Church; one on the West End of the Church, and the other on the
North-Side. The Latter Gallery was built in the Year 1710, for 33 Persons, by
Mr. Robert Percival, Pin-maker, of this Parish, who was a great Lover of the
Church, and an industrious Promoter of every good Design toward Her. In the
Year 1707, when the Parishioners took down the 3 old Bells belonging to this
Church, and contributed to the 6 they have at present; Mr. Percival contributed
three Pounds. In the Year 1710 he beautified the Altar at his own Expense. He
dyed on the 8th of February, 1729, and lest by his last Will and Testament to
the Parish of St. John for ever; a House which stands in the Wool-market, which
is let at the yearly Rent of 20 l.

THE Communion Table of this Church was given by Mr. Robert Crow, Merchant,
Anno 1712.

MR. Robert Rymer of this Town left to this Church in the Year 1722, a large
Flaggon, a Chalice, and a Plate, all of Silver, valued at 60 l. to be used at
the Holy Communion.

LEGACIES left to the POOR of this Parish, are these following.
HENRY Hilton of Hilton, Esquire left 4 l. Yearly for Ninety Nine Years. He died in
February, 1640.

SIR William Blackett, Bart, left 2 l. yearly for ever, to be paid on the 1st
of December, out of a House at the Tyne Bridge-end: To be distributed by the
Minister.

l. s. d. Sir Alexander Davison 02 00 00 Mr. William Carr 01 00 00 Sir Thomas
Davison 01 00 00 Sir Mark Milbank 03 00 00 Mr. John Rumney 03 00 00 10 00 00

ALL these are paid out of the Town Chamber, the one half at Michaelmas and the
other half at Lady Day.

ISABEL the Wife of William Wrightson, Esquire left 50 l. the Interest paid yearly
out of the Town's Chamber on the 30th of September.

MR. Aldworth left 1 l. to be paid out of Lands in Oakwell-gate, yearly, for
Ever.

NICHOLAS Ridley, Esquire left 1 l. to be paid out of Lands in Heaton, yearly, for
Ever.

MR. Thomas Davison left 1 l. 6 s. 8 d. to be paid out of the Merchant's
Company, yearly, for Ever.

MR. Timothy Davison left 1 l. 5 s. to be paid out of the Merchant's Company,
yearly, for Ever.

MATTHEW White, Esquire left 1 l. to be paid out of a House in Pilgrim-street,
yearly, for Ever.

MR. William Carr left 1 l. 2 s. 4 d. to be paid out of Houses in Westgate,
yearly, for Ever.

MR. William Harrison left 50 l. the Interest paid out of the Town's Chamber,
yearly, for Ever.

MARGARET Percival. Widow, left a House in the Back-row (in the same Parish)
Let at the yearly Rent of 3 l. 7 s. 6 d.

MR. Robert Percival left a House in the Wool-market, (after the Death of his
Daughter in Law) Let at the yearly Rent of 20 l.

BURIED in this CHURCH. Near the Altar Table.
SEpulchrum Roberti Fenwick Mercatoris, and Dorotheae vxoris ejus Suorumque
Filiorum and Filiarum, Ille Obijt Sept die Octav. A0 D. 1689. Aetatis Suae 61.
Robert Filius natu maximus Obijt 23 die Martii 1690 Illa Obit 15 Julii 1701
Petrus Potts Geners Annam Filiam eorum natu maxima Duxit Vxorem Exqua Liberos
Suscepit Quorum Sex Sibi Fuere Superstites (viz) Dorothea, Jana, Maria, Petrus,
Robertus, Johannes; Illa Obijt 30 April A. D. 1719. Aetatis Suae 63.

THE Burial Place of Mr. John Bell, Merchant Adventurer, and Margaret his Wife.
Margaret Bell died the 21st of November, 1710; Aged 55. John Bell died the 22d
of June, 1716; Aged 62.

Sepulchrum Radulphi Scourfeild Gennerosi qui obijt Februarij 16th 1675 Et Jane
Uxoris ejus quae obijt Maij 120 1689. Quorum filius Radulphus Scourfeild
Armiger de Comitatu Northumbriae quondam Vicecomes Obijt Septembris 1st 1728.

THE Burial Place of John Clutterbuck, Gent. and Barbara his Wife, and their
Children. Hannah buried July the 16th, 1683. Catherine buried July 23, 1683.
James buried April 3d, 1692. Barbara his Wife buried Sept. 2d, 1695. Richard
their Son departed the 9th of Nov. 1702. He departed the 3d of July 1717.

In the CHANCEL.
THIS is the Burial Place of Thomas Errington, Merchant Adventurer. These Words
are writ about the Arms cut upon the Stone; Remember Death God's Word never
shun With Wings Time slieth Whilst Glass does run.


THE Burial Place of William Wallas Mercer, and Merchant Adventurer of England,
He departed this Life the 23d Day of Sept. 1664. William Wallas Son of the said
William, departed this Life the 11th Day of January, Anno 1688. Aetatis Suae 23.

THE Burial Place of Charles Clark Barbar Chyrurgeon; He departed the 2d of
August, 1667. Margaret his Wife, departed this life the 30th Day of March 1683.
At the Bottom of the Arms,

De Pretient Dei. THE Burial Place of the Rev. Matthew. Forster, Lecturer of
this Church, who died October the 23d, 1723. Aged 46.

OSWOLD Chayter, Lining Weaver, 38 Year Clerk of this Church, departed to the
Mercy of God July 21, A. D. 1623. Aged 68 Years.

HERE lies the Body of John Dixon, Plummer, who died April the 12th, 1728.
Aged 42.

NORTH ISLE.
LIES the Body of John Wilkinson, Merchant Adventurer.

THE Minister of the Church is the Curate and Lecturer of it. He is Curate to
the Vicar, for which he receives 3 l. per Annum, and the Surplice-Fees; and
Lecturer to the Corporation, for which he receives 90 l. per. Annum. The other
Minister of this Church is the Assistant Curate, who is paid by the Minister
himself.

I have not been able to collect more of the Ministers and Curates of this
Parish, than these following.

ROBERT Urguart, who suffered in the Beginning of the Civil-Wars. He afterward
went beyond the Seas, turned Papist, and dyed in a Convent.

JOHN Shaw. He was the Son of a Clergyman, born at Bedlington, was first of
Queen's College; from whence he removed to that of Brazen-Nose in Oxford. In
the Year 1645, he was both instituted and inducted to the Rectory of Whalton,
but not permitted to enjoy it. However, with much ado he afterward got the
Church of Bolton in Craven in Yorkshire: Which being but half the Value of
Whalton, they allowed him to keep it.

IN 1661 he returned to Whalton; was made Preacher also of the Parish Church of
St. John's in Newcastle; twice chosen a Member of the Convocation for
Yorkshire; and if I mistake not, served once for the Clergy of the Archdeacoury
of Northumberland. He was a Man of good Learning and of an unblameable Life, a
strict Observer of the Orders of the Church: Somewhat warm in his Temper;
equally zealous against Popery and Presbytery, with it is Brood of Sectaries; as
appears by his Writings: The Gout confined him to his House, and at last to his
Bed, some Years before his Death. He bore his Affliction with Christian
Fortitude; being patient, resigned, and cheerful under it; more solicitous for
God's Church than for himself, and died in a good old Age, in the Year 1689. I
had almost omitted to say, that he was imprisoned no less than four Years by
the Rebels.

HE lies buried near the Altar, with this Inscription on his Tombstone.

Hic Quod Remanet Johannis Shaw Hujus Ecclesiae Pastoris; Deo, Ecclesiae,
Patriae Regi, Pie Fidelis. Obijt Maij 220 A. D. 1689. Aetatis Suae 77.
ANTHONY Proctor was his Curate, who was buried at St. Nicholas's Nov. 7. 1688.

ANDREW Bates, A. M. Minister. He was of the Family of the Bates's of
Northumberland. He was a Man of good sound Principles, and an excellent Parish
Priest; being very diligent in his Parish, in taking Care of the Poor and
visiting the Sick.

MR. Bullock was Curate to him, who was succeeded by John Potts, A. B. of St.
John's Coll. Camb.

MATTHEW Forster, A. M. of St. Peter's Coll. Camb. A Worthy generous Man, who
delighted in good Works, and Acts of Charity. He died Oct. 23, 1723.

JOSEPH Carr, M. A. of Trinity Coll. Camb. was his Curate after the Decease of
Mr. Potts abovementioned.

HENRY Featherstone-Haugh, B. D. of St. John's College, Camb. succeeded Mr.
Forster as Lecturer. He was removed from St. John's to the Afternoon
Lectureship of All-Hallows, Sept. 27, 1731.

JOHN Thompson, A. M. of St. John's College Camb. is the present Assistant
Curate.

THE Curate or Minister of this Church has paid him annually from the Crown 5 l.

THE Town of Newcastle was wont to give to this Church at Easter 15 Gallons of
Wine.

THE Weekly Prayers of this Church are on Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday: On
the two former Days in the Morning, at 9-o'Clock, and at 2 in the Afternoon; On
the latter at Two in the Afternoon.

THE Sacrament is administered at this Church every third Sunday of the Month.

The CHARITY-SCHOOL of this Parish.
THE Charity-School of St. John's consists of Forty four poor Boys, but no
Girls, and was endowed by the late Mr. John Ord, in the Year 1705, which Matter
was transacted between him and Dr. Thomlinson, whom he consulted and made privy
to his Design, but enjoined to Secrecy; and the Founder of that School was not
known 'till after his Death. He gave toward supporting it a large Close
without Pilgrim-street-gate, called Great Magdalen Close, alias the Mill-Close,
which is held by Lease of the Master and Brethren of St. Mary Magdalen
Hospital, under the Rent of 4 l. per Annum. The Close is Let at 25 l. so that
the neat Rent to the School is only 21 l.

MRS. Margaret Allgood, Widow, by Will dated the 15th of July 1707, devised to
this School 100 l. to be put out at Interest, and which is accordingly put out
at Interest for the Benefit of this School.

AND there is annually raised by Subscription toward the Maintenance of this
School 33 l. 14 s.

THE Master's Salary is 24 l. per Annum and 40 s. for teaching the Boys to
sing, and 16 s. per Annum for Pens, Ink, and Paper.

THE Subscriptions were raised to cloth the Boys, and to bind them out
Apprentices; but the Endowment being short of paying the Master, part of the
Subscriptions are applied that Way.

THE School-house was provided by, and is repaired at, the Expense of the
Corporation.

THE Boys are supplied with Hose, and Shoes twice A Year, (to wit) Midsummer
and Christmas, and with a Coat, Shirts, Bands, and Cap, once A Year only, at
Midsummer.

THE Anniversary Sermon is preached on the Sunday next after the 24th Day of
June, being the Feast of St. John Baptist.

THE School is to be governed by the Heir of Mr. John Ord, the Mayor of
Newcastle, the Vicar, the Forenoon Lecturers of All-hallows, St. John's, and
St. Andrews, and the Afternoon Lecturers of St. Nicholas and All-hallows, or
any five of them, and they have the choosing of a Master.

THE Rules and Orders for the better governing of the School, and directing the
Choice of a Master, and his Qualifications, were made by Mr. Ord the Founder,
and approved by Dr. Thomlinson, to whom he communicated his Thoughts from Time
to Time by Letter, and those Letters, with the Doctor's Answers, are
transcribed in the School-Books.

SUBSCRIBERS Names.
l. s. d. LADY Clavering 02 02 00 Mrs. Swinbourn 01 00 00 George Gray, Esquire 01
00 00 John Bacon, Esquire 01 00 00 Thomas Ord. Esquire 01 00 00 Mr. Charles Clarke 01
00 00 Mr. Richard Coats, by Will 01 00 00 Mr. James Bell 01 00 00 The Lady of
Cuthbert Fenwick, Esquire 01 00 00 Mr. James Ilderton 01 00 00 Mr. George Anderson
01 00 00 Mr. William Wharton 01 00 00 The Rev. Mr. Fetherston-haugh 00 12 00
Mr. Henry Wilkinson 00 10 00 Mr. Ralph Fetherstone 00 10 00 Mr. Anthony Proctor
00 10 00 Brought from the other Side 15 04 00 The Rev. Mr. Edmund Lodge 00 05
00 The Rev. Mr. James Fern 00 05 00 Mr. Thomas Milbourn 00 05 00 Mr. Lionel
Dixon 00 05 00

COMPANIES.
Bakers and Brewers 01 10 00 Tailors 01 00 00 Barber-Chirurgions 01 00 00
Sadlers 01 00 00 Plumbers and Glaziers, etc. 01 00 00 Skinners 01 00 00 Cord
wainers 01 00 00 Tanners 01 00 00 House-Carpenters 01 00 00 Rope-makers 01 00
00 Smiths 01 00 00 Joyners 01 00 00 Slaters 01 00 00 Butchers 01 00 00
Bricklayers 01 00 00 Hatters 01 00 00 Weavers 01 00 00 33 14 00

Sect. IV. St. MARY 's Hospital.
OPPOSITE to St. John's, on the other Side of the Street, is the Hospital of
St. Mary the Virgin, which contains two Foundations, an Old one, Lib. Cart.
and a New one; as they were called upon the Founding of the latter. The old
one must have been founded, not many Years after the Nunnery of St.
Bartholomew, which was founded by King Henry the First: For in a Charter
granted by King Henry the Second, to the Nuns of St. Bartholomew, there is
mention made of St. Mary's in this Town, as may be seen in our Account of these
Nuns. But this Conjecture will be more confirmed, if it be considered that a
Charity was bestowed on this Hospital by the Lord Walter de Bolbeck, (as is
mentioned below) who, Gib. Camb. p. 855.
as we are told, in a Charter dated the first Year of King Stephen, conveyed
some Lands to the Church of Winchester. If this was the same Walter with him
below, and there appears nothing to the contrary; then it is a strong Reason,
that this Hospital was founded in King Henry the First's Reign. The latter
Hospital and Chapel, were founded by one Ego Aselack de Killynghowe fundavi
Hospitale Sancta' Mariae Virginis and Capellam super Terram meam, in Novo
Castello super Tynam, and ibi posui duos fratres regulares and unum Capellanum
ad serviandum Deo and pauperibus; reddidi meipsum Deo and Beatae Mariae and
Fratribus eju^dem Hospitalis ibidem Deo serventibus, ad Hospitandum Pauperes,
and egenos Clericos, and Peregrinos transeuntes pro Salute animae. Patris mei,
Matris meae, and omnium pertinentium, and pro salute animarum Omnium Hospitalis
Benefactorum. Lib. Cart.


Aselack of Killinghow or Killingworth, as he himself acknowledges in his
Charter for that Purpose: I Aselack of Killinghowe have founded the Hospital
and Chapel of St. Mary the Virgin, upon my own Land, for Two Brethren to be
Regulars, and one Chaplain to serve God and take Care of the Poor.

WE learn also from the same Charter, that the Founder devoted himself to God
and Religion, as he himself says, (according to the Way of that Age) I render
my self to God, and the Blessed Virgin Mary; and the Brethren of the same
Hospital there serving God; to do Works of Hospitality to the Poor, the Needy
Clergy and Pilgrims. And this, he says, he does for his own Soul, St. MARY's
Hospital.
for the Soul of his Father and Mother, and his other Relations; together with
the Souls of all the Benefactors of the Hospital.

SOME of the Witnesses to this Foundation Charter, were Gilbert, Parson of
Eland, Richard, Parson of Standfordham, Waldon Parson of Newburne, Eustachius,
Parson of Benton.

THE particular Time when it was founded cannot be exactly learned; there being
no Date at the Charter. But it is probable from a Charter of King Richard the
First, that it was founded some little while before he began to Reign; for when
he confirms the Sciatis me dedisle and concessisse Domino and Sanctae Mariae
and Sanctimonialibus de Novo Castello, pro salute Animae meae and antecessorum
meorum, Aselack Burgeum meum de Novo Castello, etc. Lib. Cart.
Foundation of Aselack, he speaks of him as then living, otherwise he would not
call him his Burgess of Newcastle, as he does in the Charter.

WE meet also with an Account of a Third Foundation belonging to this Hospital,
which Account is this. The Hospital of our Lady, called Westgate Spittle, was
founded by the Inhabitants of Newcastle, for a Master and Chaplain to say
Divine Service for 6 Bid Folks in the Almshouse, and to lodge Poor and
wayfaring People, and to bury such as happened to die there, and to distribute
yearly Nine Chaldron of Coals among poor People. The yearly Value of this was
33 l. 15 s. De Rebus Novocast'.

AFTER the founding of this Hospital and Chapel, there were several Donations
and Charities bestowed upon it, as had been before upon the old one; some of
the Benefactors of both which, and Masters among a large Number which might be
mentioned, are these following.

Benefactors. Mayors. Other Witnesses. Masters. Robert de Heddon, Clerk, gave
by the Will and Consent of his Lord Walter de Bolbec, a yearly Sum, on
Condition that the Fraternity would pray for the Souls of his Lord and his
Ancestors; and also for his own Soul and his Ancestors: This was confirmed by
the said Lord to this Hospital. It is no small Confirmation of the Conjecture
abovementioned, the Antiquity of this Hospital, from the Donation of Walter de
Bolbeck, that there is no mention made here of the Mayor of Newcastle; which is
a Proof that this Donation was before the Time of Mayors, and consequently that
this Hospital was founded at the Time supposed, Reginold de Benwell. John
Morress. And several others. Julian, Daughter of Agnes Blanch, gave a Charity
to this Hospital, that her Soul and the Souls of her Ancestors might be prayed
for, and that she might be entit'led to a Lodging in the said Hospital when she
came to Town. Henry de Carliol, Mayor, about the Year 1257, in the Reign of
Hen. 3d. Adam Clerious. Thomas de Carliol John Flemmynge. John Sante. Bailiffs
of the Town. Robert Lacy was now Rector of the Hospital. Martin Corman gave a
Message to it for the Sake of Charity, as he himself says in his Grant, and
for the Sake of his Soul. To this Writing was annexed the Seal of the Town of
Newcastle, Henry of Carliol being Mayor that Year, which probably was the Year
1259, the 6th Year of his Mayoralty, for he was Mayor 10 years together. Robert
de Mitford, who was probably one of the Northumberland Family of that Name, was
Witness to this Deed; as was also Adam de Blakedene. Roger de Quintingham.
Nicholas Scott, 1269. Gilbert de Tindale. Robert Scott. Nicholas Essot. Hugo de
Carliol, 1292. William de Oggel. Walter de Cowgate. Hugo de Pandon Magister,
1292. Robert Tunmbysiman and Matilda his Wise. Peter le Graper, 1305. Nicholas
Scott. Walter de Cowgate. Richard Emmelden. Hugo de Pandon. William Herringe.
Richard de Immelden. Thomas de Morpeth. James Magister, 1317.

THERE were a great many more BENEFACTORS which would be tedious to mention
here, such as Alan de Wylam, Alan de Gateside, John Porter, Thomas de Gosforth,
Radulphus de Causi, William Son of Robert de Corbrigg, Gilbert de Mora, etc.

BESIDES the Masters already mentioned, I meet with one Radulphus, Master, but
at what Time is not said.

SIMON was Master 1251.

ANOTHER Simon was Master in the Year 1264.

ROBERT Lacy being Master between them.

JOHN Norrys was Master about the Year 1267.

JAMES, Master 1333.

ROBERT Morden was Master about the Year 1371.

WILLIAM de Burnham, 1401.

JOHN Colman, 1415.

JOHN Fitzherry was Master about the Year 1444.

BOBERT Davell was Master about the Year 1534.

JOHN Raynes was Master 1575.

HENRY Dethick, L. L. D. 1581.

HENRY Ewbank, Clerk, 1590, he resigned 1615, Oct. 18.

EDWARD Wigham was Master 1627.

JOHN Bewick was Master 1669.

EDWARD the Third sent Letters Patents to this Hospital, to Compensate for the
Losses it had sustained by the frequent Incursions of the Scots in these Days;
and therefore gave them Liberty to receive to the Value of a hundred Shillings;
tam in Feodo suo quam in alieno.

RICHARD de Bury Bishop of Durham, granted a Confirmation of all Lands, Rents,
Rights, Privileges, etc. belonging to St. Mary's in Westgate; it was given at
Gateside, Jan. 8, 1335, in the Second Year of his Consecration.

IN the Year 1444, when William Harding was Mayor, we have an Account of the
Things belonging to this Hospital, some of which were as follows.

Imprimis, Tres Calices Deaurati, etc.

THREE Chalices gilded with Gold, one entire Vestment of Bloody Velvet, woven
about with Goldon Fringe, with one Cap, one Casule, three Albs, for the
Principal Festivals.

ALSO one Cap of Cloth of Gold of red Color, wrought with Golden Images, with
one Casule, three Albs.

Item, One Cap, of a Black Color, woven with Dragons and Birds in Gold.

Item, One Single Vestment wrought in with Peacocks with a Corporal belonging
to the same.

Item, Another Single Vestment for the Priest, only of White, bordered about
with Roses, and with a Corporal belonging to it.

Item, another Single Vestment for the Presbyter of a Bloody Color, with a
Corporal belonging to the same.

Item, another Vestment for the Presbyter of Cloth of Gold.

Item, another Vestment of Cloth of Gold interwoven with Leopards and Birds.

Item, One Hood or Cap, one Casule, one Alb, with a Stole.

Item, One Single Vestment for one Priest in the Hands of John Fitzherry the
present Master.

Item, One Single Vestment for the Priest of St. Nicholas.

Item, One Hood.

Item, A Cover of Bloody Velvet for a Sepulcher.

Item, Two Casules, the middle Part of the Casule of white Color.

ALSO one Hood of a red Color for an Ornament to the Altar of St. Nicholas.

ALSO TWO Linen Clothes of a red Color for the Side Ornament of the Altar.

ALSO One Frontale of Satan of a Bloody Color, woven with golden Images for
the Altar.

Item, One Quadrigessimal Vale of Linen Cloth of white Color, with a red Cross
below in the same.

Item, One Table set apart as an Ornament for the Linen of the Altar.

Item, One Table gilded, with the Image of the blessed Virgin Mary.

Item, Two Tables with the Pax, one of them gilded and beset with precious
Stones, etc.

IN the 24th of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, the Hospital of St. Mary in
Westgate, and St. Mary Magdalene without Pilgrim-street-gate, were granted to
Theophilus Adams and James Woodshaw, under the yearly Rent of 3 s. 4 d.

IN the 9th of King James the First, a Charter was granted for the Hospital of
St. Mary the Virgin.

THE Grammar School of this Town, which is now at West-spittle, was originally
founded by Thomas Horsly, who was Mayor of Newcastle, in the Year of our Lord
1525. By his last Will he devised all his Lands in Newcastle, after the Death
of him and his Wife, to erect a Grammar School, which was to be free for any
one within and without the Town, in the Manner directed by the said Will.

BUT in the Year 1559 it was removed from St. Nicholas's Churchyard, (from
that House which is on the North Side of the Church, over that Place where the
Privy now is, M. S. Milbank.
where it had been from the Time of it is Institution) to the West-spittle. The
Reason of which was this, Queen Elizabeth ordained and granted, that within
this Town of Newcastle, and the Liberties thereof, there should be erected, and
for ever there be, one Free Grammar School, which should be a Free
Grammar School of Queen Elizabeth in Newcastle, and should consist of one
Master and Scholars, to be instructed in the same, and that they, the Master
and Scholars of the same, should for ever be one Body Corporate in Law, Fact,
and Name, by the Master and Scholars of the Free Grammar School, of Queen
Elizabeth in Newcastle upon Tyne, etc. and by that Name should have perpetual
Succession, and should be in perpetual Times to come able and capable in the
Law, of having, purchasing, etc. Lands, Tenements, etc. to them and their
Successors, in Fee-simple, or for Term of Years, so they exceed not the yearly
Value of 40 l. and so they were not holden of the said Queen, her Heirs and
Successors in chief, nor by Knight Service. And that the Mayor and Burgesses of
Newcastle, and their Successors, or the greater Part of them, etc. should have
Power to make an honest, learned and discreet Man to be the First and Modern
Usher in the said School, there to continue during the good Pleasure of the
said Mayor and Burgesses, etc. and that if the said Master and Usher should die
or leave the said School, etc. then they might choose other Men to be Master and
Usher, etc.

IT is very probable that the Town of Newcastle, who always presented a Master
to this Hospital, as it did to St. Mary Magdalen's and St. Thomas the Martyr
upon Tyne-Bridge, did at this Time make the Master of the Grammar School,
Master also of the Hospital. Gray tells us, that the first Master of the head
School, was the Rev. Master Robert Fowberry, a learned and painful Man, to
indoctrinate Youth in Greek and Latin: To be sure he was the first Master after
the Removing of the School to the West-spittle. For undoubtedly there were
Masters before that, as the School was so much earlier founded; And accordingly
in the Manuscript abovementioned, it is said, that when Mr. Burras gave over
the the Free School in St. Nicholas Churchyard, the Mayor and 24 more sent for
Mr. Fowberry to Hull, and he came and first taught in the Writing-School, until
the Chapel of St. Mary's Hospital was made into a School-house, and the
Election-house was at the East End of it, which had been the Vestry; But Sir
George Selby who was then Mayor, set up his Arms on the East-Window, made a
Traverse over it, and sent to London for 24 Chairs of Mustinie Leather, and
there is the Election, though the Mayor lays down his Staff in the old School.

THE Masters of this Hospital and School since Robert Fowberry, M. A. 1599, are

EDWARD Wigham, Clerk.

FRANCIS Gray, Clerk, 1630.

Walk. Suff. Clergy.
AMOR Oxley had the Free School of Newcastle upon Tyne, in the Time of the
Great Rebellion, and was both Sequestered and Plundered.

NICHOLAS Hall, B. D. 1649.

JOHN Bewick, Clerk, 1669.

RICHARD Garthwaite, M. A. 1671.

JOHN Cotterell, M. A. 1690.

THOMAS Rud, M. A. 1699. now Rector of Washington, in the County of Durham.

JAMES Jurin, M. A. 1709/10; now M. D. and F. R. S.

THE present Master of this Hospital is the Rev. Dr. Thomlinson, D. D.
Prebendary of St. Paul's in London, and Rector of Whickham in the County of
Durham, near Newcastle upon Tyne; who is also Master of the Chapel of St.
Thomas the Martyr, upon the Bridge-end, and the Hospital of St. Mary Magdalen,
at the Barras-bridge. He became Master in the Year, 1715. The present Master of
the School is the Rev. Mr. Edmund Lodge, who has under him Two Ushers; the Rev.
Mr. James Fern, and the Rev. Mr. George Carr. The three last mentioned
Gentlemen have each of them Appartments where the Hospital was; which is a
pleasing Situation, and in some of the best Air of this Town. There is also in
this Place a Writing-School, erected by the Town for the Children of Freemen:
The present Master, Mr. Henry Benson, has also an Appartment here.

THE Town allows to the Master 50 Pounds per Annum.

TO the first Usher 35 Pounds per Annum.

TO the second Usher 32 Pounds 10 Shillings per Annum.

THE Writing Master is allowed 35 Pounds per Annum.

THIS Town allows to every one who goes from the Grammar School, to either
University, 5 Pounds per Annum.

IN our Lady's Chapel, which still carrys it is Name along with it, having the
Effigies of the Virgin Mary, with her Son upon her Knees, at the East End of
it, is now the Place of Electing Mayors, Aldermen, Sheriffs, and the other
Officers of the Town, and is therefore now called the Election-House; but
formerly the Mayor was chosen in the Writing-School. This is constantly done
the Monday after Michaelmas Day, which is therefore in this Town called
Michaelmas Monday.

Sect. V. EARL of WESTMORELAND 's House.
NEXT to St. Mary's, on the same Side of this Street, is a very old Building,
which was lately the Dwelling House of Sir Robert Shaftoe, Knight. Recorder of this
Town, now the Property and Dwelling House of Mr. Charles Clark, Junr. It has
the Magnificence and Grandeur of Antiquity in it is Looks, but what it has been
formerly I could never find out. Gray tells us, That in this Street the Earl of
Westmoreland had his House, which indeed is true. It was built by the Baron of
Bywell and Bolbeck, about the 9th of Edward the Third. Much about the same Time
he built a House within the Bounds of the Castle, for the Defense of it, as may
be seen in our Account of the Castle. This House in Westgate was called
Bolbeck-Hall; but afterward, upon it is Founder's being created Earl, which was
in the Reign of Richard the Second, in the Year 1398, when Ralph Nevil, Lord of
Raby was created Earl Marshall, it got the Name of Westmoreland-Place in
Wesgate. Some have conjectured, that Sir Robert Shafto's House,
abovementioned, was part of it, and indeed it looks much liker a Part of such
a Building, E. Westmorland 's house.
than any other Thing remaining thereabouts. I am sure much more so than the
House which is supposed to have been it, which I am told was the House opposite
to the West End of Denton-Chair, which the Rev. Mr. Cowling lately lived in,
and which belongs to Mr. Ord.

HOWEVER, be this as it will, whether it was this House now mentioned, or
whether Westmoreland-Place reached from this House to Sir Robert Shafto's,
including it, which some have conjectured; yet this is certain, that it must
have been hereabouts: for Nevil Tower is directly behind this Piece of Ground
we are speaking of, which is a sure Token this must be the very Place, because,
whoever in the Town built a Tower at their own Expense, it was generally nigh
them for their own Security. Thus the White-Fryers; the Brethren of St. Mary's
Hospital; the Brethren of St. Austin, etc. Built their Towers over against
their Monasteries, for their own Safeguard and Security. But what I think puts
it out of Dispute, that Sir Robert Shafto's House was no Part of it, is that in
the Eleventh of Queen Elizabeth, upon the Attainder of Charles, Earl of
Westmoreland, this House where Mr. Cowling lived, was in Charge, which the
other never was, before the Auditors; and in the Third of Charles the First,
was sold to the Citizens of London.

Lib. de rebus Novocast.
IT was afterward in the Tenure of James Bertram, and after that in the Tenure
of Robert Bertram.

OPPOSITE to this House, is a Chair or Lane, called Denton-Chair, which leads
into the Groat-Market, Middle-street, etc.

THIS Street is continued 'till you come to the Street leading Westward to the
Postern, and Eastward to the Back-raw: From thence the Street changes it is
Name, and is called Tuthill, 'till you come to the Tuthill Stairs, which lead
into the Close.

Sect. VI. BAILIFF GATE.
ON the East Side of this Street, is a Street facing the West Side of the
Castle, called Bailiff Gate, which is said to have got it is Name from the
Coming of the Fellons, of the County of Northumberland, along that Street
attended by the County Bailiffs. They came, as is said, to the Westgate, then
down an old Way, close by the Outside of the Town-Wall, and so in at the
White-Fryer Gate, from whence they went along Bailiff Gate, and so were
conveyed in at the Postern-Gate, on the West Side of the Castle, opposite to
this Street of Bailiff Gate. This is only Traditional, and has been therefore
denied by the Town of Newcastle. Grey's Account is, That at this Gate the
Prisoners were brought in, who were taken in Times of Hostility with Scotland,
and carried from thence privately into the Castle, where the Goal for the
County is now.

THE same Author also tells us, that this Street of Bailiff Gate, formerly
belonged to the Castle and County of Northumberland. But I imagine, had this
been true, the King would long ago have had his Right. The Town of Newcastle
indeed has sometimes been made uneasy about that, Bailiff-gate.
but still had it surer fixed to her, as her undoubted property.

IN the Year 1649, the Year after the King was beheaded, there was a Survey
taken of Bailiff Gate, etc.

IN the Year following, April 25th, 1650, an Order was sent down for annulling
and vacating the Survey made, etc. which was as follows;

25th April, 1650. At the Committee of Parliament in removing Obstructions, in
the Sale of the Honors, etc. of the late King, Queen, and Prince.
WHEREAS the Mayor, Burgesses, and other the Inhabitants of the Town of
Newcastle upon Tyne, did prefer their Petition unto this Committee,
complaining, that certain Persons employed for the Common Wealth, have returned
a Survey to their Trustees, for Sale of the late King's Lands, of and
concerning diverse Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments within the said Town of
Newcastle, and Precincts thereof, to the Value of 2000 l. 3 s. 4 d. per Annum,
for which they have paid only a Fee Farm Rent to the Crown; and in which the
Petitioners declare, they had an indoubted Inheritance: Further complaining,
that the Premises in Question, were not in the Possession of the Crown, Anno
1635, neither was there returned any special Matter in the Survey, whereby to
entitle the late King to the same: The Petitioners being the undoubted
Proprietors and Owners of the Things in Question. And whereas upon reading of
the said Petition, and the Certificate of the Trustees and Survey, made in
pursuance of an Order of this Committee, grounded upon the said Petition, and
the hearing of this Cause this Day before the Committee, concerning the
Premises in Question, in the Presence of Council for the Common Wealth, as
also the Council in behalf of the said Town: The Council in behalf of the
Common Wealth did acknowledge, that the said Survey was returned without any
just Grounds: And forasmuch as the Council for the said Town of Newcastle were
ready to produce their Charters and Evidences, whereby to make it evidently
appear, that the Inheritance of the Premises in Question, have been for 300
Years and upwards in the Possession of the Petitioners and their Predecessors.
It is therefore this Day ordered by the Committee, that the Original Survey
returned of diverse Messuages, Lands and Tenements, and Hereditaments, within
the Town of Newcastle upon Tyne, and Precincts thereof, held by the said Town,
now remaining with the Trustees, Surveyor, and Register, for Sale of the said
Lands, be annulled and void; and is hereby vacated, and that no further Sale,
or other Proceedings he had, or made thereupon; and that an Entrance of this
Order be made upon the said Survey, and a Memorandum be made thereupon: That
the said Survey is vacated, to the Intent that the Mayor, Burgesses, and other
Inhabitants of the said Town of Newcastle, may not for the Future be questioned
or molested concerning the Premises mentioned in the said Survey; and the
Transcript of this Order be likewise entered with the said Trustees, and
Contracters for Sales of the said Lands.

JAMES CHALONER, NATH. RICH. JOHN GARLAND, THO. LISTER, JO. JONES.


AT the East End of this Street, upon the Right Hand, is a Way to the Long
Stairs, which lead into the Close, and on the left you go to the Side, and St.
Nicholas Church, etc.

THE South Side of this Street is mostly the Property of Mr. Joshua Douglas.

White-fryers.
Sect. VII.
LOWER down a little, almost at the End of the Street, on that same Side of the
Street, where are the Houses of George Gray, Esquire Mr. Anderson, etc. was the
House of the Carmelites, or White Friars.

THE Carmelites are so named from Mount Carmel in Syria: They were first
brought into England by Ralph Freeborne, and by him placed near Alnwick, at a
Place called Holm in a Wilderness; which was in his Opinion likest to Mount
Carmel in Syria, the Place they came from. The first Provincial of this Order
was Ralph Freeborne himself, who began his Rule in the Year 1240, and ruled 14
Years. He lies buried at Alnwick. Fuller's Hist. of Abbeys.


Speed.
THis Monastery was founded by King Edward the First, and dedicated to St. Mary.
I have met with little else relating to them, except that they were a Prior,
seven Friars, and two Novices, and that they surrendered Jan. 10th, 30th of
Henry the Eighth: It was valued at 9 l. 11 s. 4 d.

THERE are not now the least remains of this Priory to be seen, except a small
Part of the ancient Building facing the White-Fryer Tower Walls.

KING Henry the Third, by his Letters Patents, dated the 20th of November, in
the 51st Year of his Reign, at the Instance of Robert de Bruce, dedit Fratribus
de Penitentia, I Christi quandam Placeam Vocatam Constable Calgarth, in Villa
Novicastri super Tinam, and quae contigua erat Clauso and Placeae Dictorum
Fratrum in eadem Villa.

THIS Place called Calgarth, which the abovementioned King gave to the
Brethren of the Penance of Jesus Christ; otherwise called Brethren of the
Sack, was supposed by Sir John Fenwick, to be in the Close of the White-Fryers,
late in the Holding of Sir Ralph Delaval, then called by the Name of Domus
Fratrum de Penetentia I Christi. P. 13. de Reb. Nov.


FROM the White-Fryery, this Street leads to the Tuthill Stairs, which is a
Passage into the Street called the Close.

CHAP. V. NEWGATE-STREET. Of the upper and higher Parts of this Street, toward
the North.
THE old Part of Newgate, together with that Part of the Wall, leading as far
as Ever-Tower, being visibly older than the other Towers, and the Rest of the
Wall; is a sure Sign that when the Walls were began, this Part of the Town was
then inhabited.

IT is probable that hereabouts was the ancient Monkchester, where the Monks
and religious Men inhabited. This appears from a Place in this Street, viz.
That Row of Houses which stands almost in the Middle of the Street, called to
this Day the Huckster's Booths: For the People who dwelt in these Houses, were
Hucksters, and supplied the Religious Houses with Provisions. There is a
Tradition still among the Inhabitants of this Part of the Town, That in old
Times there were many Markets between the Newgate and the White-Cross; nay,
some of them, according to the Tradition they have received, will Point out the
very Ground where such and such Markets were.

NOW this, I think, is a sufficient Proof that these Upper Parts of the Town
were first inhabited by the Monks, the Lower Parts, as far as the Castle Yard,
were the Habitations of the Town's People: The Castellum, or Fortification
having been thereabouts, from the Beginning of Hadrian's Wall, as we are
informed, by a Mr. Horsely of Morpeth, who died a few Months ago, a little
before the publishing of his Romana Britannia, the Book referred to.

This Gentleman was of he was of the Public Grammar School of this town, and
afterward studied in one of the Scotch Colleges. He was Master of Arts there,
and Fellow of the Royal Society. He is supposed to have been equally Knowing
with any in his Time, in the British Roman Antiquities. Romans Britt. 132.


late ingenious Author. He says there must have been a Station in this Town,
for these Reasons: If we consider the Importance of this Place, it is Distance
from the first Station at the End of the Wall, and the Turns the Wall makes,
(especially at the East Side of the Town) in Order to it is passing through the
Heart of it; we can scarce Question but there has been a Station here: And it is
old Name of Monk-Chester seems to put it out of Doubt. The former Part of the
Name is taken from the Settlement of the Monks in this Place, and the latter
Part from the Word Castra, which is a pretty sure Mark of a Station: Besides
the Name Newcastle, (given first to the Castle it self, and then to the Town)
has been thought to imply (as in other Instances) that there was an old Vid.
Chap. of the Castle.
Castle or Fort there before, and near the Place where the new One was erected.
And as this Newcastle was built by Robert, Son of William the Conqueror, the
old Castle must have been undoubtedly Roman. And some Years ago, a Coin of
Vespasian was found near the Castle, as I was told by the Person himfelf that
found it.

THE same learned Author goes on thus: The next Thing is to determine the
Boundaries and Situation of this Station, which I persuade my self may be done.
I hinted before that there was a Traditionary Account of the Walls passing
through St. George's Porch, near the North West Corner of St. Nicholas Church.
But it is certain that the Line of the Wall lies a little to the North of this
End of the Church, and I think has not touched this Porch, though it comes near
it. And therefore I conjecture, that the Wall which has passed through this
Porch, must have been the East Rampart of the Station; for the Supposition will
reconcile these seemingly differing Accounts: And if a Line be erected
Perpendicular to that of Severius's Wall, so as to pass through that Porch, and
be continued along the Brow of the Hill, at the Head of the Side, 'till it meet
the Line of Hadrian's Vallum, near the East End of Balygate, and not far from
the Castle. This Line seems to answer so well in Respects, that I cannot much
Doubt it is having been the Eastern Limits of the ancient Station: For this
brings the Station near to the Castle, which probably has been built a little
more to the South East, in order to bring it nearer to the Top of a Steep Hill.
And fixing the Eastern Boundary of the Station here, leaves a Plain and Level
Area for the Station it self, and without it, a Descent toward the South and
the River, for the Town to stand upon, which might extend it self to the
Bridge, supposing the ancient Bridge to be near the same Place where the
present one stands: From which Bridge the ancient Town and Station might
probably take the Name of Pons-Aelii This Eastern Boundary of the Station must
at that Time have been nearer the River, than it is now now; since it is
certain, that the River formerly flowed farther up toward this Part of the
Town. The Position of the Eastern Rampart of the Station being thus determined,
the other Boundaries may be also defined; for the Distance here between the
Lines of the Walls seems to be about six Chains; and it is not much to be
questioned, but the two Walls here, (as in other Cases they frequently did)
have fallen in with the Northern and Southern Ramparts of the Station; so that
these six Chains have been the Breadth of the Station. And if we suppose the
Station to have been of a middle Size, we must make it a Square, and allow six
Chains for the length of it. If at this Distance another Line be drawn equal
and Parallel to the former, and between the Lines of the Wall, it will be the
Western Boundary of the Station, as the two respective Parts of the two Walls
make the Northern and Southern Limits. And upon this Supposition, a Line drawn
from the Foot of the Flesh-market to Baily-gate, near the east End of it, will
be the Eastern Limits of the ancient Station. That Part of the Vallum which
reaches from Baily-gate to Mr. Ord's House, will be the Southern Limit; and a
Line drawn from hence, to that Part of the Line of Severus's Wall, which is
about thirty Yards East from the End of Rosemary-lane, must be the Western
Boundary, and the Part of Severus's Wall included between this and the Foot of
the Flesh-market, remains for the Line of the Northern Rampart.

Sect. I. Of St. ANDREW'S CHURCH.
NIGH to Newgate, on the West Side of the Street, is St. Andrews Church. This
is questionless the oldest Church of this Town, not only from it is Situation,
which is that Part where was principally the ancient Monkchester; St. Andrew's
Church.
but also from the Model and Fashion of it is building, it appearing in these
Things older than the others.

De Reb. Novocast'.
IT is supposed to have been built by one of the Kings of Scotland. David King
of Scots is mentioned in particular as it is Founder; but for what Reason I know
not. Indeed, that David, who died in the Year 1153, was a great Benefactor to
Churches and Religious Houses, and he is said in particular to have founded in
this Town Collier Eccles.
two Religious Houses, but there is not a Word of his being the Founder of St.
Andrew's, which in all Probability would as soon have been taken Notice of, and
handed down to Posterity, had it been true; as the Building of two Religious
Houses. But besides, if St. Andrew's be the oldest Church in this Town, and
this I think ought to be allowed for the Reasons already given, as also from
the constant Tradition of it is being so, then it is undoubtedly older than St.
Nicholas's, and if so, it must have been built before the Time of Henry the
First; for St. Nicholas's was built in that Reign, at latest; and therefore it
will follow, that this Church of St. Andrew's was built before David King of
Scots was born.

I am therefore rather inclinable to believe, that it was founded by the Town's
People, and the Religious Houses, which at that Time of Day were chiefly in
those higher Parts of the Town.

THERE were three Chanteries belonging to this Church; one of which was
dedicated to our Lady, which was of the Yearly Value of 6 l. 12 s. 10 d. No
Deed of Foundation is showed, but however it must at least have been founded in
the Reign of Edward the First; for in the latter End of that Reign, in a
Charter which one Roger Amyas granted to one Stephen --, it is ordered, that he
shall have such a particular Booth for the Term of 30 Years: Provided he pay so
much to the Tyne Bridge, and to the Altar of St. Mary in the Church of St.
Andrew's in Newcastle upon Tyne.

IT had a House of Seven Shillings per Annum belonging to it; it abutted on the
North, next to the Newgate and on the East on the High Street, on the West on
St. Andrew's Churchyard, and on the South on a Tenement, which in the
Nineteenth Year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth belonged to Robert Hallyman.

THERE belonged also to this Chantery a House, and a Rig lying in the Croft,
value 6 s. 8 d.

ANOTHER was the Chantery of the Trinity, which was of the yearly Value of 4 l.
2 s. 10 d. There is no Deed of Foundation to be seen of it; But however to give
some Account of it is Founder, it may not be amiss to Copy what I writ a few
Years ago on Parchment, and presented to the Church of St. Andrew's.

To the Rev. Mr. John Ellison, Minister, And To the Churchwardens of St.
ANDREW's in Newcastle upon Tyne, Mr. Christopher Rutter, Mr. Fenwick Lambert,
Mr. Thomas Shevil. Mr. Percival Bell.

GENTLEMEN,
I Had the Curiosity lately to search among the Old Writings in your Vestry,
for that famous Indulgence, which is said to have been Vid. Gray. p. 12.
granted to your Church by the Pope for Nine thousand Years to come; but found
no such Thing.

THERE is however another Indulgence which discovers a Piece of Antiquity,
relating to your Church, which I chused to acquaint you with in this Manner,
that the ancient Name of a Part of your Church, now worn out of the Memories of
our Townsmen, and almost entirely lost, might again be brought to light.

THIS Indulgence was granted in the Reign of King Richard the Second, in the
Year 1392, an Age in which Indulgencies were common, and when they were of
Particular Service toward the Building or repairing of Churches. For at that
Time of Day, when the Building, or repairing, or adorning of a Church was
requisite, an Indulgence was granted for such a Term of Years or Days, to all
such as would be assisting in the Things aforesaid; by which Means many
Churches have been built, repaired and beautified, and accordingly this
Indulgence of yours was granted partly for the same End, that the Church of St.
Andrew's might be kept in sufficient Repair: For it promises an Indulgence or
Pardon for Qui ad reparationem, seu ornamentum sive emendationem Ecclesiae
Sancti Andreae villae Novocastri super Tynam, lin. 50 Indul. -- Quadraginta
dies Indulgentiae concedimus.
40 Days to every one, who shall contribute toward the repairing or
beautifying of the Church of St. Andrews in Newcastle upon Tyne; and then
follows the Antiquity designed.

THAT whoever Ac Capellae Sanctae Trinitatis in part Aquilonari ejusdem
Ecclesiae aurum argentum, etc. Lin. 60 Indulg'.
offers or sends, or Causes to be sent to the Chapel of the Holy Trinity in the
Northern Part of the same Church, either Gold, Silver, Vestments, Books,
Chalices, or any other Ornaments, which are wanting to the aforesaid Chapel, or
Altar, or Image of the Holy Trinity, which is in the same Chapel. -- Or who
shall fall down upon their Knees before the Image of the Holy Trinity,
aforesaid, and pray for the Health of Sir Adam de Athol, Knt as long as he
lives, and for his Soul after his Decease, and for the Soul of the Lady Mary
his Wife, whose Body lies buried in the same Chapel of the Holy Trinity, shall,
as often as they perform those Things, or any of the Things beforementioned,
have the Benefit of a Forty Days Indulgence.

NOW from this it is observable, that that waste Place in the Northern Isle,
which opens into the Quire must be the Chapel here spoken of. For there lies
the Body of Sir Adam's Wife, which is said in the Indulgence to be buried in
the Et pro Anima Dominae Mariae sponsae suae cujus Corpus in eadem Capella
sanctae Trinitatis Qutescit. Lin. 9. Indulg.
Chapel of the Holy Trinity; as also the Body of Sir Adam himself. The Building
itself is after the Manner of Chapels, which were added to parish Churches; and
it is still observable, that at the Top of the North Window in the Chapel there
seems to be a Picture of the Holy Trinity, represented according to the
Superstition of these Times by the face of an old Man, our Savior upon the
Cross, and the Figure of a Dove; it having been always Customary in these
Times, not only to have the Image of the Saint set up to whom the Church was
dedicated, but also to adorn the Windows with it.

I am of Opinion, that Sir Adam de Athol himself was the Founder of this
Chapel, and my Reasons for it are these,

1st, It was customary formerly for People of better Figure, to build a small
Chapel, at a convenient Part of their parish Church, that they might have a
convenient Place to Worship God in, or that it might be a burial Place for them
and their Families. Now it is evident, that this Chapel of the Holy Trinity is
such a one. For if you suppose the Chapel away, the Church itself will appear
exactly uniform; which shows the Chapel has been added to the Church; and as
Sir Adam and his Lady are buried in it, is pretty clear that They were the
Founders. It may also be presumed, that He built it, because it seems to have
been built when Sir Adam lived: For it is said in the Indulgence to want Books,
Chalices, Vestments, etc. which implies it, at that Time, to have been a new
Chapel. And besides, Indulgences were granted toward the adorning of Churches
or Chapels, immediately after they were built. This Chapel was therefore built
a little before the granting of this Indulgence, which was when Sir Adam was
living. And as his Wife was then dead and buried in this Chapel; so she seems
to have been the first that was buried in it, and consequently her Husband must
have built it.

BUT my last Reason, I think, makes it amount to a Demonstration. It may be
observed in all Indulgences of this Kind, that it was not only required of the
People to offer Church Ornaments, but also to put up Prayers for the Founder.
Thus for Instance; in an Indulgence granted in the Reign of King Henry the
Eighth for the Repairing and Maintaining of the Church and Convent at Kirby
Belers in the County of Leicester, it was not only required that Money should
be given, but that they should also say a Stavely Chapter Hist. pa. 100.
Pater Noster with an Ave for the Souls of Sir Roger Beler and Alyce his Wife,
Founder and Foundress.

NOW from hence it is plain, that Sir Adam and his Lady must have been the
Founder and Foundress of this Chapel, because they alone are mentioned in this
Indulgence, and Prayers were to be put up for them, as they were for Sir Roger
and his Lady just now mentioned.

THUS I think I have found out the ancient Name of your Chapel, and who was the
Founder it. It may perhaps be somewhat Satisfactory to those who are curious in
those Things, may retrieve the ancient Name of your Chapel, and establish the
deserved Remembrance of it is Founder. But be this as it will; as I have only
these Things in View in making these Observations; so I hope you will be so good
as to accept of them, and allow them a Place among the Parchments of your
Church.

I am, Gentlemen, Your most humble Servant, Henry Bourne.
Silver-street, Oct. 27. 1726.

THE Indulgence on which these Observations are founded are granted by Oswald,
the Bishop of Candida casa, which is in Gallaway in Scotland; it is dated at
York 1392, the 12th Year of his Consecration.

THE 3d Chantery belonging to this Church was dedicated to St. Thomas. This I
learn from an Account I have met with of a House in this Street, which is said
to have belonged to the Chantery of St. Thomas, in the Church of St. Andrew's.

IT bounder'd on the West by St. Andrew's Church end, and on the North by a
House, which in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth was in the Possession of Richard
Atkinson, and on the East by the High Street, and on the South against the
Church-Style. It was valued at ten Shillings per Annum.

THAT there was such a Chantery in St. Andrew's (notwithstanding the two former
are supposed to be all belonging to this Church) is further evident, because I
meet also with an Account which says, that the Chantery of St. Thomas in St.
Andrew's, had an Orchard belonging to it, which paid a yearly Rent of Three
Shillings and Four Pence to it; but where it stood is not mentioned. It was
occupied by Sir Robert Brandlin.

THAT there were Lands belonging to the Chantery of St. Mary in this Church,
which were situated in this Street, is certain. But where to fix them at this
Time of Day is pretty Difficult. But wherever they were situated, there was an
House situated near them, which paid to the Priory of Hexham Six Shillings per
Annum.

THIS is mentioned when Rowland was Prior, in the Year 1490, in the Reign of
Henry the 7th. De Reb. Novocast'.


I meet with no account of the Lands belonging to the Chantery of the Trinity,
except that of an House, situated in a Place called le Cow-garth in this
Newgate-street, which paid one Shilling per Annum to this Chantery, and a
Tenement in Westgate which paid 4 s. 4 d.

THE Altar of this Church is very pretty and decent, it was beautified a few
Years ago at the Charge of the Parish.

THERE is at the West End of this Church a Beautiful Gallery, which was built
in the Year 1711, at the Charge of the Parish. In the Year 1726, the Old Porch
was taken down, and the present one built, Mr. Christopher Rutter Mr. Fenwick
Lambert Churchwardens.
Mr. Thomas Shevil Mr. Percival Bell Churchwardens.


IN the Year 1726, the old Bells were taken down, and the present 6 were
procured by a Collection made in the Town for them. The Corporation gave
toward them 50 l. They are exceeding Tunable, and have a soft melodious Sound.

THE Floor of the Body and the Isles of this Church, were flagg'd in the Year
1707, which before they never had been.

BURIED in this CHURCH. In the Chancel, near The Altar.
JAMES Ogle of Causey-Park, Esquire upon whose Tombstone, which is of Marble, is
the following Inscription. Hic Jacet Jacobus Ogle de Causey-Park in Comitatu
Northumb. Armiger. Antiquitate Domus, Ut pote ex prenobili Baronia Ogle, de
Ogle Stirpe Recta Linea Oriundus, vere clarus; Sed invicta in perduelles,
Grassentibus nuperis Civilibus Bellis, animi Magnitudine, Constantia in Regem
etiam in Tristissimo Authoritatis Deliquio Fidelitate in Superiores
Observantia, in Pace Comitate, in Inferiores Benignitate, quae omnia Justissimo
Titulo sua vocare poterat, Multo Illustrior. Obij Dec. 4 die Annoque Dom. 1664.
THOMAS Harrison, Barber Surgeon, who died Feb. 24th, 1679. THOMAS Bednel, 14
July, 1701. CHRISTOPHER Barker, October. 26, 1718. ROBERT Tod, Oct. 5, 1730.
In TRINITY-CHAPEL.
SIR Adam de Athol, and his Wife Mary, under a very large Stone; which has
originally been plated very curiously with Brass. The Remains of their Effigies
are still to be seen. He is pictured at length in Armor, having a Sword on his
left Side, and a Dagger on his Right. Her Effigies has no thing remaining of
it, but from the Shoulders upwards. The Arms of both their Families are still
to he seen on the Tombstone.

WHAT remains of the Inscription, is this, Hic Jacent Dominus Adamarus de
Atholl, Miles, and D'na Maria, Uxor ejus quae obiit Quarto decimo Die Mensis --
Anno Domini Millesimo Tricentesimo -- Animarum propitietur.

THE remaining Part of the Date is broken of: However Gray, in his Account of
this Stone, tells us, It was in the Year 1387, which is very probably the Time
that his Wife died; for it is a Mistake that he died then, as appears by the
Indulgence abovementioned.

JOSHUA Twizell, June 23d, 1718. THOMAS Winship, Tanner, September 2d, 1695.
CHRISTOPHER Rutter, Baker and Brewer, March 17th, 1714. MRS. Elizabeth Davison,
Mother of Mr. Thomas Davison, January 20th, 1724, aged 84 Years. NICHOLAS
Fenwick, Merchant, 14th December, 1725. MR. John Dawson, Tailor. MRS. Barbara
Davison, January 8th, 1730.
NORTH ISLE.
ROBERT Mills, House-Carpenter.
SOUTH ISLE.
DOROTHY Harrison, May 27th, 1702.
LEGACIES left to the POOR of the Parish of St. ANDREWS.
LEFT by Sir William Blackett, Bar't, One Thousand Pounds, the Profits, etc. of
the Whole, in three Parts, equally to be divided, and yearly to be disposed off
at Christmas, as follows, viz.

ONE third Part to binding of Apprentices to Trades.

ONE other third Part to poor House-holders.

THE remaining other Third to a Schoolmaster to teach 30 Children.

l. s. d. LEFT by Madam Margaret Allgood, in Moneys, now in the Hands of Mr.
John Ord, the Sum of 100 00 00 PAYING yearly to the Churchwardens at Christmas
the Sum of 006 00 00 LEFT by Mr. Thomas Davison, to be yearly paid in December,
out of the Merchant's Company 001 00 00 LEFT by Mr. Timothy Davison, to be
yearly paid at Christmas, for 15 poor Freemen or Widows, not Merchants; out of
the Merchants Company, the Sum of 001 00 00 LEFT by Mr. Andrew Aldworth, to be
paid at the Feast of St. Andrew yearly, out of a House in Akewell-gate, in the
Possession of Edward Wetherly, the Sum of 001 00 00 LEFT by Henry Hilton, Esquire
to be paid yearly at Christmas, for four poor Widows, the Sum of 004 00 00
PAID out of the Town of Newcastle, at two Payments, viz. half at Michaelmas,
and half at Lady Day 004 00 00

The NAMES of such who pay out Rents.
l. s. d. JOHN Barnes 1 00 00 Mrs. Harrison 0 03 04 Robert Bell 1 04 00 Mary
Bell 0 10 00 John Dawson 0 16 00 Robert Bell 0 04 10 Widow Oliver Darn Crook 0
03 08 Widow Dixon Darn Crook 0 05 04 Anthony Hixon, Huxter-Booths 0 02 08 John
Stobbart Big-market 0 04 09 John Makepeace Big-market 0 04 09 Mrs. Cook,
Groat-Market 0 13 04 Mr. Pigg 0 00 06 Robert Davison Pilgrimstreet 0 02 00
Nicholas Waugh Pilgrimstreet 0 04 00 William Varey 0 02 00 Mrs. Fetherstone,
Pilgrim-gate 0 02 00 Nicholas Robson 0 03 00 Richard Kirkhouse 0 03 00 William
Stephenson, Sidgate 0 02 00 Widow Tate 0 02 06 Widow Forster 0 02 06 Robert
Armstrong 0 03 00 Richard Robinson 0 03 04 John Stephenson 0 04 00

CHARITY-SCHOOL.
THE Charity-School of this Parish was founded by Sir William Blackett, Bart.
and the first Boy entered the School in January 1707/8: The Number of Boys it
was founded for is Thirty. About the Year 1719, the late Sir William Blackett,
the Son of the Founder, began the Clothing of them.

THE Vicar of this Town, and the Churchwardens have a Power of putting in the
Master of this School, if their Choice is approved of by the Heir at Law.

THE Sallary of the Master is 20 l. per Ann. but out of it he pays School-Rent.

MINISTERS.
THE Minister of this Church is, as the Minister of St. John's, Curate and
Lecturer. As Curate, the Vicar pays him 3 l. per Annum, and as Lecturer he is
paid by the Town 100 l. per Annum. The other Minister is the Assistant, and is
paid by the Minister of the Parish.

THE Register of this Church has been so badly kept, that I meet with the Names
of none of it is Ministers in it but one, viz. one Stephen Dockwray, Anno 1656;
who succeeded him I know not, but one Pottinger was Minister here, and I
remember Mr. Richards and Mr. Shadford.

JOHN Ellison, A. M. of University-College, Oxon. the present Minister.

Curates I am told, were Mr. Perkins, Mr. Straghan, Mr. Stoddard, Mr. Lion, Mr.
Simkoe.

WILLIAM Wilkinson, the present Assistant Curate, A. M. of Christ-College, Camb.

THE Crown pays to the Minister of this Parish Five Pounds two Shillings and
Sixpence per Annum.

THE Town was wont to give to this Church 12 Gallons of Wine every Year at
Easter.

THE Town allows the present assistant Curate of this Church 10 Pounds per
Annum for reading Prayers to the Prisoners in Newgate.

THE Prayers of this Church in the Worky-days are on Wednesday and Friday in
the Morning.

THE Sacrament is administered here every 4th Sunday in the Month.

Sect. II.
ON the East Side of this Street, near the Newgate, is a Tenement which was
given by Mrs. Alice Belaysys to University-College in Oxford. The Site of it is
thus described; Situatum est infra praedictam villam juxta Novam Portam ejusdem
villae in quo quidem Tenement' Thomas Gray Lidster modo inhabitat, (viz.) Inter
Tenementum Roberti Daunt ex part Boreali, and vicum Ducentem ad fratres
minores ab Ecclesia Sancti Andreae ex part australi; But the same Writing goes
further, ac Tria Tenementa and duo Tofta, inde in simul situantur in eodem vico
ducente a dicta Ecclesia Sancti Andreae usque Fratres praedictos, etc.

OPPOSITE to St. Andrew's Church is a Lane, which leads to Pilgrimstreet Gate,
called the High-fryer-chare, because of a Friar which was in it, and because it
is higher up in the Town than the other Friar Chare.

IN coming down this Street Southward from the Church of St. Andrew's, on the
Right Hand, is an ancient Street called Darn-crook; in which Street were some
Wastes and House belonging to the Nuns of St. Bartholomew, as there were in
almost every Street in the Town. Opposite to this Place, on the East Side of
this Street of Newgate is a little running Water which goes into Lorkburne.
This little Bourn is taken Notice of in the Account of the Ward belonging to
Ficket-Tower, and is called there, a Bourn beside Lam-place, that runs
toward Lorkburne. To this Bourn it is, that the Prisoners belonging to
Newgate, have Liberty to walk during the Time they are not confined to the Goal.

FROM thence, going still Southward, the Street changes it is Name from Newgate
to Huxter's -Booths; for thereabouts it was that the Huxters lived, as has been
observed above, who supplied the Religious-houses, and the other People of this
Part of the Town with Provisions. A Part of these Houses are still to be seen,
they stand by themselves almost in the middle of the Street, nigh the
White-cross. Gray says, That this Part of the Town was in his Time called the
Huxters-Booths; that is, as I understand him, from the Bourn abovementioned, to
those Houses.

OPPOSITE to the Booths was a great Gate that led into the Blackfriars. It was
situated between the House of William Wilkinson, Smith, and the House of
Elizabeth Bell, Widow. The Place now is the Entrance of a Garden belonging to
Mr. Nicholas Baily of Newcastle. This I think is evident from a Grant of a
Tenement from the Blackfriars, now in the Hands of Mr. Tho. Marshall, of this
Town; wherein in describing the Situation of the Tenement, are these Words;
Sicut jacet in villa antedicta prope crucem vulgariter vocatam Whyttcross inter
magnam portam praedictorum Fratrum e Regione praedictae crucis ex part
Boreali, etc. The Tenement described is the House lately rebuilt by Mr.
Marshall aforesaid. Since this Conjecture from the Writing abovementioned, I
have met with the Manuscript of Mr. Milbank, which very much corroborates it.
The Words are these; the Gate-way to this House was from the Whitecross, and
was called when our Author lived, Wind's -hole. The way was a narrow Lane to
the Fryery, which in his Time was joining to Mr. Brandling's Ground, whereupon
there was, (and still is) a Mill.

THE Business and Trade of this upper Part of the Street, is chiefly that of
the Tanners.

WHITE-CROSS.
FROM the Huxters Booths to almost the Nun-gate, the Street changes it is Name
again, for the Name of the White-Cross, because of a Cross which stood there;
to which, from the Huxster's Booths, was the ancient Market of this Town, as
there is at this Day at the Cale-Cross. This Cross was pulled down that very
Night after Sir George Selby dyed, and King James, of Sacred Memory, March 24.
Milbank, M. S.


ON the Place where the Cross stood was a Cistern for receiving of that Water,
which goes by the Name of the New-Water. This was lately pulled down, and there
is now in the Place where the Cross was, a Pillar of Stonework. The Street
hereabouts is wide and spacious, and having in it several good Buildings; such
are the Houses of William Carr, Esquire Thomas Clennell, Esquire etc. There are four
Fairs kept in this Street in the Year, one at Lammas for Horses, and another at
St. Lukesmass for Horses: The other two are for Black-Cattle, the one on
All Souls Day, and the other at Martinmas.

NEAR the Cross is a Lane called the Low-fryer-chare; it got the Name of
Fryer-chare from it is being situated near the Blackfriars, and of the
Low-fryer-chare; because it is not so high up the Town as the other Fryer-chare.

IT was also called formerly Shod-fryer-chare, because the Blackfriars were
also called Shod-fryers.

Sect. III. NUNN-GATE.
FROM the White-cross Southward the Street leads to the Nun-gate, which gives
Name to a small Part of the Street thereabouts.

THIS Gate was not the Great-gate of the Nunnery, but a back Passage to it; for
Nunnery was situated lower down, as may still be seen by the Ruins of some old
Walls in their Garden: Probably it was situated about the Place where Mr.
Hebdon, a few Years ago built a large House, which is built upon the same
Ground where the old stone House stood, inhabited by Mr. Green, which seemed to
have been built out of the Ruins of this Nunnery. Here it was that King Speed
Hist.
Henry, the First founded the Hospital of St. Bartholomew the Apostle, for the
Nuns of Newcastle. In H. Rex, etc. Sciatis me concessisse and Charta
confirmasse monialibus Sancti Bartholomei de Novo Castello super Tynam omnes
Donationes, quae eis rationabiliter factae sunt: Videlicet, Ecclesiam Sancti
Bartholomei, and Hospitale Sanctae Mariae de praedicto Castello and Terram,
etc. Et XX acras de scala and IX Tosta and Horseyol, and duos Solidos de
Gatisheved and omnia alia quae eis Rationabiliter data sunt vel Dabuntur. Quare
volo and firmiter precipio, etc. Test' Will. de Mandavilla, Reginald. de
Curtnay, Willielmo de Scuttevilla, Thomas de Bardulf, Robert de Scutevilla,
Richard Gosfard.


a Charter granted them some Time after they were founded, Nuns of St.
Bartholow.
which I take to be a Charter of King Henry the Second's, they had all the
Things bestowed upon them, confirmed: The 20 Acres mentioned in the Charter I
have not been able to find out. A Manuscript of Mr. Joshua Douglas's says, that
probably all that Side of the Street, from the Nuns to Newgate, belonged to
these Nuns, for their Garden reaches to High-fryer-chare. This indeed is highly
propable, for the nine Tofts or Crofts confirmed to them in this Charter, seem
to be a good Proof of the Truth of it.

IN the Garden which belonged to them, called still the Nun's -Garden, is a low
Square Vale, at the South West Corner of which Tradition says, there is a
Vault, which leads to the Blackfriars. Mr. Richmond, the present Steward of
Mr. Blackett, told me, he had seen the Entrance into it; but that now it was
filled up with Earth.

De rebus Novocast'.
STELLA, an ancient Village, situated on the South of the River Tyne, belonged
to the Nuns of this Hospital,

ON September the 12th, 2d of Charles the Second, after the Death of Sir
Nicholas Tempest, of Stella, of the County of Durham, Knight and Baronet, it
was found that he dyed possessed of the Manor of Stella, in the Parish of
Ryton, in the County of Durham, which had been Part of the Lands of the House
or Monastery of St. Bartholomew in Newcastle upon Tyne. The following Writing,
for which I am obliged to the worthy Dr. Hunter, of Durham, and from which I
had this Confirmation, is as follows.

120 Die September. Anno 20 Caroli Regis Compertum post Mortem Nicholai Tempest,
de Stelley, in Com' Dunelm' Milit' and Baronet' Quod fuit Seissatus de and in
Manerio de Stellingley, all is Vocat' Stelley, situat' Stant' and existen' prope
aquam de Tyne in Parochia de Ryton, in Ep'tu Dunelm' cum suis Juribus, Membris
and Pertinenciis Universis: Ac de omnibus terris arabilibus Pratis, Pascuis,
Pasturis, Boscis, Subboscis, Communiis, Piscationibus, Mineris Carbonum, infra
solum and Fundum ibidem comoditatibus, Prosicuis, emolumentis, and aliis
advantagiis, eidem Manerio de Stellingley, all is Stelley, pertinentibus Vel Ullo
modo Spectantibus Nuper parcello Possessionum Domus five Monasterii S.
Bartholomei infra Villam Novi Castri super Tinam Dissoluti.

THERE were, as is observed above, Wastes and Houses, in the Side, in
Pilgrim-street, in the Flesh-market, Oat-market, Darncrook, and almost all the
Town over, which belonged to the Nuns. The Piece of Ground above the Town-moor,
called from them the Nun-moor, belonged to them. Mr. Riddle's House and Chapel
in Gateside, (commonly called Gateside-house) was, according to some, a Sort of
Infirmary for the Nuns of this Hospital.

DR. Smith, in his Ecclesiastical History of Bid Ubi nulla remanent antiqui
monasterii Uttani: vestigia Resentioris quidem, Pulcherriniam videmus Capellum
vix adhuc Ruinis Succumbentem. Traditio est, cellam fuisse sanctimonialium
Novocast rentium, licet ejus Historiam apud Autores vix inveneris. Smith in
Not' Bed. lib. 3. C. 21.


says, that in Gateside there are no Footsteps remaining of the ancient
Monastery of Uttanus; but of a more Modern one, we see a most beautiful Chapel,
which is not as yet in Ruins. There is a Tradition that this was a Cell of the
Nuns of Newcastle, though we cannot readily Quote any Authority for it.

THE Tradition mentioned by these Gentlemen appears somewhat probable, for in
the Charter before-metioned the Nuns of St. Bartholomew received two Shillings
annually from this Cell.

IT is also not improbable but St. Mary's Hospital in Westgate, was also a Cell
to this Nunnery: It appearing plainly from the Charter above, that St. Mary's
was dependant on it.

AND it is said in Leland, that the Hospital of St. Mary in Newcastle upon Tyne
was given to the Use of these Nuns. Lel. Vol. 1. p. 41.


IT appears also from the Charter just abovementioned, that among the other
Things confirmed to this Hospital, the Church of St. Bartholomew was one. I may
be asked therefore where this Church was Situated. In answer to this I dare
venture to say, that there never was any such Church in this Town; I mean a
Parish Church: And therefore it must have been the Church or Chapel belonging
to this Hospital; and consequently must have been seated where the Hospital
was. And this appears to be the rather true, because we have no other mention
made of their Chapel, and because when it is mentioned in the Charter it is
said to be given them, that they may serve God in it.

IN the Year 1355, Thomas Hatfield, Bishop of Durham, confirmed to the Nuns of
this House, the Abbess they had elected; her Name was Alice Davill. She had
been not duly elected, and therefore he made the Election void; but however, as
she was a Person the Convent very much approved of, the Bishop of his special
Favor ordered her to preside over them.

THIS was granted at Aukland, May the 9th, in the Tenth Year of his
Consecration.

DR. Hunter of Durham obliged me with the following Copy of the Bishop's Grant.

THOMAS permissione divina Dunelm' Episcopus Religiosae mulieri Dominae Aliciae
Davill salutem gratiam and Benedictionem. Licet Electionem quam dilectae Filiae
moniales and Conventus Domus seu Prioratus S. Bartholomei in villa Novi Castri
super Tynam nostrae Dioces' de Te in Priorissam earundem and Domus suae
praedictae fecerant; propter peccatum in forma ejusdem Cassaverimus, justitia
suadente Considerantes tamen quod praedictae moniales in Te tanquam habilem and
idoneam ad regimen Prioratus praedicti Direxerant vota sua, Te in Priorissam
Domus praedictae de nostra speciali gratia, praeficiamus and ordimamus, Tibique
curam and regimen ejusdem committimus, cum suis juribus and pertinentiis
universis, In cusus Rei, etc. Dat' in Manerio nostro de Aukland die nono Mensis
Maii Anno Dom' 1355, Et nostrae Consecrationis Decimo.

IN the Year ^ladox Firm. Burg. p. 4.
1486, the Prioress and Convent of St. Bartholomew, granted Land to Thomas
Lokwood and his Heirs, ad Feodi Firmum.

AGNES Lawson, the last Prioress, surrendered up this Convent the 3d of January,
154^, 31st Henry 8th, and had a Pension of 6 l. per Annum allowed. It was
valued 26th of Henry 8th at 36 l. 10 s. per Ann. Dugdale 37 l. 4 s. 2 d.

IT was after this in the Hands of the Lady Gaveere, who sold it to Mr. Robert
Anderson, who pulled down all the Houses therein; it being a Recepticle for
Scots and Unfreemen, and he bought it on Purpose to dislodge them. He also
bought the Garden, and after having raised the Dean that went through it, he made
it a very pleasant Place; it was from Corner to Corner Eleven Score Yards.
Milbank M. S.


IT is now the Property of Walter Blackett, Esquire and is a very delightful Meadow.

Sect. IV. SCOTCH INN.
OPPOSITE to this Nunnery, on the West Side of the Street, is an ancient
Building with a large Gate, which has formerly been a Piece of stately
Workmanship. De rebus Novocast'.
This Sir Robert Shaftoe, Recorder of this Town, was of Opinion, was the House
of the Earls of Northumberland, and was called the Earls Inn. Gray says it was
called the Scotch Inn; because it was there that the Kings, Nobility, and Lards
of Scotland lodged in Time of Truce or League with England.

THIS Street from the Scotch Inn, or thereabouts, takes the Name of the Bigg
and Oat-market; because in the Middle of it is kept a Market of Bigg and Oats
every Tuesday and Saturday. Here the Street is broader than almost any Street
in the whole Town, and adorned with good Houses: At the End of it Southward, is
a very great Market for Poultry, which gives the Name of the Pullen-market to
this Part of the Street.

CHAP. VI. Of the Division of this Street.
HAVING now got as far as the End of the broad Part of this Street, we have the
Breadth of it divided into Three Streets. The first Street, or that on the
Right Hand, is called the Meal-market, the Oatmeal-market, or Groat-market,
because of the Oatmeal, which is sold there every Day of the Week, but more
especially on the Saturday's. What Name it had formerly, or whether it ever had
any other, I cannot say; but this is certain, that it has retained it is present
Name above two hundred Years.

AT the Upper-end of this Street, or the North-end of it, is the Post House of
this Town, which is adorned with a pretty Area of a Quadrangular Figure,
together with a good Garden: It belongs to Mr. James Bell, the present
Postmaster.

AS you descend from this End of the Street, you turn the Corner of this House
upon the Right Hand, into a Lane called the Pudding-chare, or as I have seen it
in some ancient Writings Budding-chare, which leads into Westgate. There were
three Houses in this Lane which paid an Annual Rent to the Chantry of the Holy
Trinity in St. John's Church; one paid 20 d. per Ann. another 2 d. and the
third 4 d. The Lane called Rosemary-lane, which turns upon the Right Hand as
you go down this Chare into Westgate, was formerly called St. John's Chare;
because it led from the Pudding-chare to St. John's Church.

IN this Lane there is a Waste, which belonged to the Nuns of St. Bartholomew,
boundering on the West on the Common Gutter, and on the North on the Chantery
Lands.

THIS Waste is the Ground where are now the Gardens of Mr. James Bell,
Postmaster, and the old Houses on the North of these Gardens, now the Property
of Mr. Ralph Trotter, are the Chantery Lands here mentioned.

OVER against the South-end of this Lane, which so leads to St. John's Church,
is an ancient Almshouse, in which live seven poor People, who have a small
Allowance at Christmas from the Town.

HAVING past the East End of the Pudding-chare, we go Southward, which leads
into the Body of the Meal-market, aforesaid.

THERE is little in this Street worth taking Notice of; the Houses generally
are very ancient and mean, the few good ones are one which was built the last
Year by Mr. Prior of this Town, Cooper, an ancient Inhabitant in this Street;
and another the House below it, which belongs to Mr. William Harrison, Dyer,
which was formerly the Dwelling House of Timothy Robson, Esquire Alderman of this
Town, and sometime Mayor; and some few others.

IN the Reign of Queen Elizabeth a House in this Street belonging to one
William Penrith, whose Site is now lost, paid an annual Rent to the Chantery of
our Lady in the Parish Church of Long-benton.

Romans Britann. p. 132.
THE late Mr. Horsely tells us of another House in this Street, in the laying of
the Foundation of which, about 15 or 16 Years since, the Masons struck upon the
Roman Wall at each of the Side Walls, so that the Building stands cross the
Roman Wall. But where the Site of it is he does not say.

TOWARD the lower end of this Street is a large open, where is a Market every
Saturday for Wool, below this again a Lane leading into Westgate, called
Denton-chare.

PASSING by the East End of this Chare, we come to the ancient Iron-Market,
which was opposite to St. Nicholas Church, in that Piece of Ground leading to
the Side, from the House of Mr. Charles Clark, and from below the Shop of the
late Mr. John Kellot, Smith.

ANOTHER Street which the broad Street of the Big-market is divided into is the
Middle-street, so called because it stands in the Middle of the Streets in this
Part of the Town; for it has on the East Side of it the Flesh-market and
Pilgrim-street, and on the West, the Oatmeal-Market, and Westgate.

THIS Street bore anciently three Names, the upper Part of it was called
Skinner-gate, the lower Part of it Spurrier-gate and Sadler-gate.

IT is a Street as it was in Grey's Time, where all Sorts of Artificers have
Shops and Houses.

WE come now to the 3d Street, (viz.) the Flesh-market, at the upper-end of
which is the Upper-dean-bridge, so called because of the two Bridges which
cross this Dean or Rivulet, which runs into Lorkburne, this is that which is
the higher or upper one.

HAVING passed by the West End of this Bridge we go Southward into the
Flesh-market.

GRAY tells us, that when the Good-men of this Town began to trade and venture
beyond the Seas, they built many Ships, and procured a Charter from the Kings
of England to carry Fells beyond Seas, and to bring in foreign Commodities. The
Staple was then at Antwerp in Brabant, called Commune totius Europae Emporium.
The Charter of the Merchant Adventurers was the first Charter that was granted
by any King to any Town.

AFTER this Grant this Town flourished in trading, built many fair Houses in
the Flesh-market, then called Cloth-market. The Merchants had their Shops and
Warehouses there, in the Back-parts of their Houses: The River of Tyne flowed
and ebbed, where Boats came up with Commodities; which Trade of Merchandises
continued many Years.

IN this Street the Mayors, Aldermen, and richest Men of the Town lived.

PART of the present Flesh-market was called the Cloth-market, and part of it
the Flesh-market and Fish-market. An Anonymous Authority says, that in
Pilgrim-street was the Market for Fish, that came up to the Nether-dean-bridge.
But this in my Opinion is a Mistake. For in the Ward belonging to Morden-Tower,
part of it is over the Flesh-shambles from the North West Church Style of St.
Nicholas, unto the Fish-shambles. Consequently the Fish that came up to the
Nether-dean-bridge must have been sold in the Flesh-market, not in
Pilgrim-street. The Shops of this Street are at present the Shops of
Artificers, and the Houses either chiefly Coffee-houses or Taverns, or
Alehouses.

IN some ancient Writings belonging to that worthy Gentleman The Rev. Mr. Smith
of Melsonby, I find that several Houses in this Street paid an annual Rent to
University College in Oxford; one of them in particular nigh the Church Yard
paid 6 s. in the Year 1304, and so did many Houses in the other Streets of this
Town to the same College. Several of these were the Gift of the Lady Ann
Bellasys to this College, An. 1444.

THE Flesh-market in this Street, which is held every Saturday, is a very great
Market, not only as it supplies the Town in a great Measure, but as it also
furnishes the Country for several Miles round. Besides there are several
Thousands of People belonging to the Coal-Works, such as Staith-Men, Waggoners,
Pit-Men, Wrights, Keel-Men, etc. all which for the most part have their
Provisions from this Market.

THE Provision also for Ships, is got from this Market. And this indeed must be
very considerable, when there will be sometimes 3 or 4 hundred Sail in at a
Time.

THERE are 2 Fairs kept in this Market every Year for 8 Days together, the one
begins upon Lammas Day, or the First of August, which Gray calls a remarkable
Time of the Year, but why he calls it so, he gives no Account. This Fair is in
some Measure of an ancient standing. For we meet with some Account of it in the
Reign of King John, mentioned in a Charter of another of our Kings. The Words
are these, Insuper cum Dicti Burgenses per Chartam praefati Joannis Regis
habeant in dicto Burgo unam feriam singulis annis per duos dies duraturam, viz.
in vigilia and in die Sancti Petri ad Vincula, etc.

NOW from this it appears that King John granted to the Town of Newcastle,
Lammas Fair, which he ordered should be held on the Eve of St. Peter ad
Vincula, and upon the Day it self. Blount in Verb.
I suppose Gray calls it a remarkable Time of the Year, as well because it is
called Lammas Day as because it is called St. Peter advincula. As it is Lammas
Day, it is a remarkable Time of the Year, for it is called Lambmas because
Lambs were not then fit to eat, they were grown too big: aliter from the Sax.
III asmaesse q. d. Loafmas, because on that Day the English made an Offering of
Bread made with new Wheat. On this Day it was, that Tenants that held Lands of
the Cathedral Church of York (which is dedicated to St. Peter ad Vincula) were
bound by their Tenure to bring a Live Lamb into the Church at High-mass on that
Day.

IT is also a remarkable Time, as it is St. Peter ad vincula, and as it is
called the Gule of August, from the Latin Gula, a Throat. The Reason is set
down in Durand's Rationale ( Lib. 7. c. 19.) who says, that one Quirinus, a
Tribune, having a Daughter that had a Disease in her Throat, went to Alexander,
then Pope of Rome, the 6th from St. Peter, and desired of him to borrow, or to
see the Chains, that St. Peter was chained with under Nero; which being
obtained, the said Daughter kissing the Chains, was cured of her Desease, and
Quirinus with his Family baptized. Tunc dictus Alexander Papa hoc Festum in
Calendis augusti celebrandum instituit, and in honorem beati Petri Ecclesiam in
Urbe Fabricavit, ubi vincula ipsa reposuit, and ad Vincula nominavit, and in
calendis augusti dedicavit. In qua, Festivitate Populus illic ipsa vincula
hodie Osculatur. So that this Day being before called only the Calends of
August, was upon this Occasion termed indifferently either St. Peter's Day ad
Vincula, from the Instrument that wrought the Miracle; or the Gule of August
from that Part of the Virgin whereon the Miracle was wrought. Blount in verb.

AFTER this Fair granted by King John, it was by a succeeding King, ordered to
begin at the same Time, and to continue 28 Days. When it was reduced to the
Time abovementioned I have not met with.

THE other Fair held in this Market is at St. Lukesmas, it was granted to the
Town in the Reign of Henry the 7th. During the Time of these Fairs there is a
Court of Pye-powder. All the Privileges and Power that a Court Leet can have,
is granted to this Court. Gray 17.

TOWARD the South-end of this was a large Cross, with a lead Cistern at the
Top of it to hold the Water, called the New-water; which was pulled down about
3 Years ago. Beyond this, at the End of this Street is the Cordiners
Meeting House.

CHAP. VII. Of St. NICHOLAS Church.
AT the End of the Flesh-market, on the South Side of the Cordiners
Meeting House, just now mentioned, stands the Church of St. Nicholas. It is a
very grand and magnificent Building, being in length 79 Yards, two Foot, three
Quarters; in breadth 24 Yards, two Foot, three Quarters; and of an Height equal
and proportionable. Who it was founded by I have no where met with, but if a
Conjecture may be made, it was perhaps founded by Henry the First: But be this
as it will, it is certain it is as old as his Days. For Henricus Rex, Angliae
Archiepiscopo Ebor' and Episcopo Dunelm' and Vicecomiti de Northumberlanda
Salutem. Sciatis me dedisse and concessisse Deo and Sanctae Mariae de Cairlelia
and Canonicis ejusdem loci, Ecclesiam de Novo Castello super Tynam and
Ecclesiam de Newburna and Ecclesia quas Ricardus de aurea Valle de me tenet'
post obitum ejus, and Ricardus, and Clerici qui ipsis Ecclesiis deserviunt,
recognoscant de Canonicis ipsius and faciant eis servitium quod mihi facere
solebant and Post obitum eorum redigantur Ecclesiae in Manus Canonicorum. Ita
quod Clerici qui eis Deserviant, habeantinde Necessaria and Canonici habeant
reliquum. Dugdal. Monast. P. 2. p. 73.


it was this King that gave it to the Church and Canons of St. Mary's of
Carlisle; and also at the same Time the Church of Newburn.

IN a Book belonging to the Vestry of St. Nicholas, it is said to be founded in
the Year 1091; but what Authority this Account depends upon, I know not;
however it is somewhat probable.

THE ordering of the Vicarage was not 'till some Years after. The King indeed
in his Charter makes a general Provision of what is necessary for the Minister
of this Church, but does not say what that is. This was done by Hugh Pudsey,
Bishop of Durham, as Thomas Hatfield, one of his Successors gave it under his
Episcopal Seal at Auckland, June 6th, 1360. For having searched the Register of
Hugh, his Predecessor, he found, that he with the Consent of the Prior, and
Convent of Carlisle, ordered the Vicarage of St. Nicholas in Newcastle upon
Tyne, on the Day before the Conversion of St. Paul, or January 24th, 1194, and
gave the Vicar, for the Time being, a Portion, or Maintenance, viz. all the
Fruits, annual Profits, Oblations, Obventions whatsoever, of what Kind or Thing
soever they were, belonging to the Church of St. Nicholas, except the great
Tithes belonging to the same Church.

THIS Account I am obliged to Dr. Hunter of Durham for, who favored me with
the following Transcript from Bishop Hatfield's Register.

Ordinatio Vicariae B. Nicholai, de Novo Castro.
NOverint Universi quod Nos Thomas, Permissione Divina Dunelm' Episcopus
inspecto Registro Bonae Memoriae Hugonis dudum Dunelm' Episcopi Praedecessoris
Nostri, comperimus in eodem quod dictus Hugo, Episcopus Vicariam Villae Novi
Castri super Tynam, Nostrae Dioces' Ordinavit, and Portionem, pro sustentatione
Vicarii ejusdem qui pro tempore fuerit in eadem de fructibus ad dictam
Ecclesiam pertinentibus taxavit Statuit and Limitaviti sub hac forma.

HUGO Dei Gratia Dunelm' Episcopus omnibus Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae Filiis ad
quos Literae istae pervenerint Salutem. Noverit Univeritas Vestra quod Nos Anno
Dom' 1194 Pridae ante Gonversionem Sancti Pauli, Vicariam Ecclesiae Beati
Nicholai de Novo Castello super Tynam. Nostrae Dioces' alias in eadem Ordinatam
de Unanimi consensu Dilectarum Filiorum Nostrorum Prioris and Conventus
Karliol' Dictam Ecclesiam Beati Nicholai in Usus suos Canonice obtinentium,
Portionem infra scriptam pro sustentatione Vicarii ejusdem, qui est, et pro
tempore erit in eadem ex Nostri Pastoralis Officii Debito taxamus, Statuimus
and Ordinamus; viz. quod quilibet Vicarius illius Ecclesiae qui pro tempore
fuerit, pro sustentatione sua and Portione congrua percipiat and Habeat omnes
Fructus, proventus, oblationes, obventiones quascunque ad Dictam Ecclesiam
qualitercunque pertinentes de quibuscunque rebus existentes, Decimis Garbarum
Dictae Ecclesiae duntaxat exceptis. In quarum Inspectionis and Compertionis
testimonium Sigillum Nostrum fecimus hiis apponi. Dat' in Manerio Nostro De
Auckland, Sexto Die Mensis Junii, Anno Dom' 1360, and Nostrae Consecrationis
quinto decimo.

THE Steeple of this Church is in Height 64 Yards, one Foot, three Quarters. It
is supposed, as to it is Model, to be the most curious in the whole Kingdom: It
is adorned with 13 Pinacles, and a large and beautiful Lanthorn, which stands
upon two very bold Arches of Stone, and at the Top of the said Lanthorn stands
the tall Spire, by much the largest belonging to the Steeple. On the Corners of
the old Tower, upon which stands the said beautiful Structure, are four Images,
one at each Corner, cut at length in Stone. It Is said that Been Johnson, the
Poet, made the following Lines upon it.

My Ex Gray.
Altitude High, my Body, four Square,
My Foot in the Grave, my Head in the Air,
My Eyes in my Sides, five Tongues in my Womb.
Thirteen Heads upon my Body, four Images alone;
I can direct you where the Wind does stay,
And I tune God's Precepts twice A Day.
I am seen where I am not, I am heard where I is not,
Tell me now what I am, and see that you miss not.
IT is said, and indeed confessed, that Robert Rhodes was more probably the
Builder of this Steeple than any other Person: His Name being at the Bottom of
the Belsry.

Orate pro anima Roberti Rhodes. BUT who this Robert Rhodes was, is more
uncertain. Gray tells us, that Robert de Rhodes was the Lord Prior of Tinmouth,
in Henry the 6th Days. And an Anoymous Authority seems to suggest, that this
Robert Rhodes was one of the Bishop of Durham's Justices; because in a Register
at Durham, there is mention made of Robert Rhodes, ab Anno 1486, ad An' 1537,
and Agnes his Wife.

BUT neither of these seem to me to be the true one. I am rather inclinable to
believe, that one Robert Rhodes, Esquire who lived in this Town in the Reign of
Henry the 6th was the true Person. We meet with this Gentleman's Name in an
Inquisition that was taken at the Castle of Newcastle, in the 25th of Henry the
6th, 1447; for two of the Gentlemen present were Roger Thornton, the Son of the
famous Benefactor of that Name, and Robert Rhodes, and they were also first
mentioned after the Mayor.

Lib. de Reb. 11.
IN the Year 1451, we meet again with the same Person, who together with the
said Roger Thornton, by an Instrument bearing the same Date, conveyed some
Houses for the Use of a Chantery Priest to pray for the Soul of William
Johnson. We have also a further Account of this Gentleman in the Year 1500, for
an Instrument bearing that Date informs us, that the Mayor and Inhabitants of
Newcastle, gave a Tenement to a Priest to live in, who was to pray for the Soul
of Robert Rhodes and Agnes his Wife, at the Altar of St. John the Baptist, and
John the Evangelist in St. Nicholas Church.

NOW when it is considered that this Robert Rhodes, I am speaking of, was so
great a Man in this Town, that he lived in the same Reign in which Gray
acknowledges the Lantern to have been built, namely in the Reign of Hen. the
6th, and that he was so commemorated by the Mayor and Inhabitants after his
Decease, I dare say it will appear much more probable that he was the Builder
than either of the others.

THERE might indeed be, and probably there was a Robert Rhodes, Prior of
Tinmouth, in the Reign of Hen. the 6th, but I never met with any Benefactions
of the Priors of Tinmouth to the Town of Newcastle. They were on the contrary
mortal Enemies to this Place, and always jealous of it is increasing Glory. As
to the other Robert Rhodes, one of the Bishop's Justices, he was alive in the
Year 1537, which was the 29th of Henry the 8th, and so comes too late to build
a Steeple in the Reign of Henry the 6th. I have been told by a worthy
Gentleman, and one who is curious in these Things, that this Robert Rhodes, so
taken Notice of by this Town, was Escheator.

THERE is a traditional Story of this Building I am now treating of, which may
not be improper to be here taken Notice of. In the Time of the Civil Wars, when
the Scots had besieged the Town for several Weeks, and were still as far as at
first from taking it, the General sent a Messenger to the Mayor or of the Town,
and demanded the Keys, and the Delivering up of the Town, or he would
immediately demolish the Steeple of St. Nicholas. The Mayor and Aldermen upon
hearing this, immediately ordered a certain Number of the chiefest of the
Scottish Prisoners to be carried up to the Top of the old Tower, the Place
below the Lantern, and there confined; after this they returned the General
an Answer to this Purpose, That they would upon no Terms deliver up the Town,
but would to the last Moment defend it: That the Steeple of St. Nicholas was
indeed a beautiful and magnificent Piece of Architecture, and one of the great
Ornaments of their Town; but yet should be blown into Attoms before ransomed at
such a Rate: That however, if it was to fall, it should not fall alone; that
the same Moment he destroyed the beautiful Structure, he should Bath his Hands
in the Blood of his Countrymen; who were placed there on Purpose either to
preserve it from Ruin, or to die along with it. This Message had the desired
Effect. The Men were there kept Prisoners during the whole Time of the Siege,
and not so much as one Gun fired against it.

THERE were only five Bells originally belonging to this Church, but of late
Years the Number is increased to Eight. The great Bell, called the common Bell,
was sent to Colchester to be new cast in the Year 1615, it weighed 3129 lb.
They are very large ones, have a bold and noble Sound, and yet exceedingly
sweet and Harmonious. The three latter Bells were given to this Church by the
Corporation.

IN the Year 1723, William Ellison, Esquire Mayor, and Robert Sowersby, Esquire
Sheriff, the Steeple was repaired at the Expense of the Corporation.

AT the North Door of this Church, it is observable, that the large Flagg which
is the first Step into the Church, is cut all along the Surface with uneven
Lines, in Imitation of the Waves of the Sea. This is a silent Remembrancer of
the Saint the Church is dedicated to; for St. Nicholas, the Bishop of Myra, who
lived in the Time of Constantine the Great, is so famous among some for his
Miracles and Apparitions by Sea, that he has merited the Title of the Patron of
the Sailors.

THERE were no fewer than 9 Chanteries belonging to this Church, which are
valued at 48 l. 4 s. 6 d. per Annum.

THE Chantery of St. John the Baptist, and St. John the Apostle, was on the In
Ecclesia Sancti Nich. de dicta villa Novicastri ad altar Boreale Joannis
Baptistae and Joannis Apost. and Evangel. lib. Cart. p. 121.
North-side of the Church. It is said to have been founded by Robert Rhodes and
Agnes his Wife, and licensed by King Henry the 6th. If there be any Truth in
this, it is that he was a third Founder. He allowed a Priest 7 l. 7 s. 10 d.
per Annum to pray for his Soul, and the Soul of his Wife; and the Town of
Newcastle, as it is said above, out of Respect to his Memory, gave the Priest a
House to live in; but it is a Mistake that this Chantery was not founded before,
for Richard de Emeldon who had been above 12 Times Mayor of Newcastle, was
permitted by Letters Patents from King Edward the 3d, to build upon a Piece of
vacant Ground, over against the Chapel of St. Thomas the Martyr, that he might
present it to Three Chaplains, to procure their Prayers for him whilst he was
living, and after he was dead, and also for the Souls of his Wives and his
Father and Mother, etc. every Day at the Altar in St. Nicholas, which was
dedicated to John the Baptist, and John the Apostle and Evangelist. This
Gentleman died about the 6th or 7th of the Reign now mentioned, as is clearly
gathered from the Authority above; and the Letters in which this Chantery is
mentioned bear Date the 6th of this Reign: and therefore it is a Mistake to
suppose this Chantery founded in the Reign of Henry the 6th, which was almost
an hundred Years after.

THE Priests set apart to attend this Altar, were every Day to pray for his
Soul, and the others abovementioned; and by an Order from the Then Richard,
Lord Bishop of Durham, the Chaplains for the Time being, were obliged on the
Anniversary Day of his Death, every Year for Ever, to celebrate his Memory with
a Solemn tolling of the Bells, and devoutly singing by Note in the Evening of
the Anniversary, and on the Anniversary itself, and solemnly to sing Mass for
the Soul of Richard himself, and the Souls abovementioned, and the Souls of
all the Faithful departed. And after Mass, one of the Chaplains was to
distribute among an hundred and sixty poor People, the Sum of Six Shillings and
Eight-pence, and this annually for ever. This, together with several other
Things, was ordered by Richard, Bishop of Durham, in the 3d Year of his
Consecration, Anno 1335, which was, with all other Things mentioned in the
Charter, confirmed by Edward the 3d, in the 10th Year of his Reign.

THUS then it appears that this Chantery is of a much older Date than the Reign
of Henry the Sixth. But this is not all; Richard de Emeldon, was but a second
Founder of this Chantery: It boasts still an higher Antiquity, and is said to
have been founded by Laurence of Durham, who was Prior of Durham in the Year
1149, which, by the way, is a further Proof of our Conjecture of this Church's
being founded by King Henry the First, or in that Reign at latest.

2. THE Chantery of St. Catherine was founded by William Johnson and Isabel his
Wife, in the Reign of Edward the Third; it is yearly Value was 6 l. 15 s. Roger
Thornton, the Son of Roger the great Benefactor, in a Deed dated December the
20th, 1451, is made, together with some others, a Trustee by a Feoffment of
Roger booth, the surviving Feoffee of William Johnson, who gave the Lands and
Tenements therein mentioned, for the better Support of a Perpetual Chaplain to
attend the Chantery of St. Catherine, which is said to be ab Alano-Durham ab
antiquo sundat:

IN the Reign of King Henry the 6th, one Robert Mitford was the Chaplain of
this Chantery, who succeeded Peter Angram, a former Chaplain.

3. ANOTHER Chantery of St. Catherine, was founded by Nicholas and John
Elliker. The Deed of Foundation is said to have been imbezeled by Richard
Wallas, late Incumbent there: The yearly Value 3 l. 14 s. 8 d. which arose out
of certain Tenements situated in the Close, Castle-mote, in the Side, and in
Sandgate.

4. THE Chantery of St. Peter and St. Paul, was founded by Adam Henrother, and
Allan Hilton, and licenced by King Henry the Fourth; the yearly Value 4 l. 13
s. 4 d. which arose from some Tenements in the Close, Side, and Westgate.

5. THE Chantery of St. Thomas, was founded by John Thapecape, and licenced by
Edward the Third; the yearly Value of it was 4 l. 12 s. 6 d.

6. THE Chantery of our Lady, whose Deed of Foundation is said to have been
imbezeled by Thomas Ireland, late Incumbent there. But however we may give some
Guess at the Time of it: For Lib. Cart. p. 48.
there is mention made of it, and of two Shillings a Year given to it, in a
Charter which was signed by Nicholas de Carleol, then Capital Bailiff of the
Town, in the Year 1328; and in the Year 1305, Peter Graper, then Mayor of the
Town, gave Et cuidam Capellano celebranti divina ad altar Beatae Mariae
Virginis in Ecclesia Beatae Nicholai de Novo Castro duos Solidos argenti etc.
Lib. Cart.
two Shillings a Year to the Chaplain that waited upon the Altar of the blessed
Virgin Mary, in the Church of St. Nicholas. So that it must at latest have been
founded in the Reign of King Edward the First. That large Porch on the
South Side of the Church, or the South-Cross of the Church, as it is called, is
the Chantery of St. Mary's; the yearly Value of it was 5 l. 16 s.

7. STEPHEN Whitgray, and Mary his Wife, founded the Chantery of St. Margaret,
in the South Side of the Church of St. Nicholas, in the Reign of Richard the
Second. I take that Square Place, called Bewick's Burial-place, now the
Burial-place of Utrick Whitfield, Esquire near the Porch-Door of this Church, to
have been this Chantery.

THEY constituted John de Etell, Chaplain of this Chantery, to pray for their
Souls, and the Souls of the faithful departed. The Value of this Chantery was
10 Marks yearly, which was raised out of certain Tenements, viz. out of one
near the Cale-cross, and from a Tenement which paid somewhat to the Chantery of
St. Eligie, in the Church of All-Hallows in this Town; and from another
Tenement near the Cale-Cross, which lay near Grundon-chare; and from another
Tenement over against St. Nicholas Church; and from another Tenement in
Hackergate, near the Chapel of All Saints; and from a Tenement near Kirk-chare;
from a Tenement in Pampedon; from a Tenement in Broad-chare; from a Garden near
Pampedon-burne; from a Tenement in Calegarth in Broad-chare, etc.

THE Chaplain of this Chantery, after the Decease of the Founder, was to be
chosen by the Vicar of St. Nicholas, the Mayor and Bailiffs of this Town, and
Four of the honest Parishioners of St. Nicholas. Witnesses of this Charter,
were Laurentius de Acton, Mayor of this Town, Henry de Carliol, Thomas de
Gryndon, John de Newbiggyng, John de Appreton, Bailiffs, Thomas de Herington,
John de Coket. Given at Newcastle the 20th of April, Anno Dom. 1394, in the
17th of Richard the Second.

8. THE Chantery of St. Cuthbert, was founded by Thomas Harrington and William
Redmarshall, in the Reign of Richard the Second; yearly Value 7 l. 3 s. 2 d.
which was raised out of certain Tenements situated in the Sandhill, Side, and
Close.

9. THE Chantery of St. Loye, was founded by Robert Castle, in the Reign of
Edward the Third: Yearly value 4 l. 10 s. which arose from Tenements in the
Close, Westgate, and from a Close without the West-gate, called
Goose-green-close.

THE Font belonging to this Church has either been built or repaired by Robert
Rhodes the Builder of the upper Part of the Steeple; for his Coat of Arms (and
probably his Wife's too) is quartered on the Basis of it.

ON the North-Isle, answering to the Nave or Body of this Church is a large
Gallery, which is chiefly for the Use of the Boys of the Grammar School. At the
East End of which an Addition was made to it by the Rev. Dr. Tomlinson, for the
Use of his Successor, the Lecturer of St. Nicholas, and his own Family.

IN the Rood-loft, or the Gallery which seperates the Chancel from the Nave of
the Church, now called the Organ-loft, is a Double Organ.

ON the North-side of this Organ, is a Porch called Saint George's Porch, which
was built, as Gray informs us, by one of the Kings of this Land. It has
undoubtedly been one of the ancient Chanteries; for several of them were
situated thereabouts, between the Gallery and this Porch; as some others of
them were in St. Mary's Porch, or the South Cross of the Church. It has under
it a Vault, and there is on the North Windows the Head of the King, the Father
of the Lady which St. George delivered from the Dragon.

ON the East Windows is still remaining some of the painted Glass. There is
particularly the Picture of Saint Laurence, and some Skin-marks, and Coats of
Arms. It has been a beautiful little Place: It is ceiled at the Top, and has
been surrounded with carved Work in Wood; some of which still remains, to speak
the Curious Art and commendable Expense of the Days of old.

THE Chancel of this Church is a very noble and stately one. The Altar was in
the Year 1712, very sumptuously and yet decently adorned. At the (...)
Top, is the Word Jehovah, and under that, in a Glory, a Part of the Name of
Lord which he himself proclaimed before Moses. The Lord God merciful and
gracious. What is below that again, see in the Altar of All-hallows.

The PLATE for the Altar.

TWO Flaggons; Three Challices and Covers; Three Salvers; A small Spoon Drainer.

ON the South Side of the Chancel is the Vestry, above which is the Library.
The Keeper of which is the Rev. Mr. Stoddard, Assistant Curate of this Church.

IN this are several good Books, and some Manuscripts: But it is not at present
any way comparable to what it will be hereafter, either for Variety or Number
of Books of all Kinds of Learning; The worthy and learned Dr. Tomlinson, being
expected to leave at his Death, to this Library, his whole Study, which is
perhaps (considering the vast Number of Books, their being so well chosen, so
neatly and curiously Bound, their great Variety, being of all Manner of
Subjects, treating of all Arts and Sciences) a Library outdone by few private
Gentlemen in the Kingdom.

Gray 10.
IN this Church are many sumptuous Windows, but that in the East surpasses all
the Rest in Height, Largeness, and Beauty. This Author says, that there were in
this Window the Twelve Apostles, and the seven Deeds of Charity: I suppose he
Means, painted upon the Glass. He tells us also, that this Window was built by
the Beneficent Roger Thornton, the Elder, and that there was this Inscription
on it. Orate pro anima Rogeri de Thornton, and pro animabus Filiorum and
Filiarum. At present there is nothing remaining of these Pictures, but two
Heads, which, if we may Judge of the Rest by them, will speak them to have been
very Tall, and curiously done: The Inscription is entirely gone.

AN Indulgence of 40 Days was granted by twelve Foreign Bishops, 1359, and
confirmed by Thomas Hatfield, Bishop of Durham, to all such (having repented
and confessed their Sins) as performed the following Things, viz. If they came
to this Church to Mass, to Prayers Morning or Evening, or other Divine offices,
on the Feast of it is Patron, and the others below written, viz. on the Feast of
Christmas Day, the Circumcision, the Epiphany, Easter-Eve, the Ascension,
Pentecost, Trinity, Corpus Christi, the Invention and Exaltation of the Holy
Cross, St. Michael the Archangel, the Nativity and Decollation of John the
Baptist, the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, and all other Apostles and
Evangelists; the Commemoration of All Souls, and on the Feast of the Dedication
of the said Church of St. Nicholas; and also on the Feasts of St. Stephen,
Lawrence, George, Martin, Dionysius, Blasius, Mary Magdalen, Catharine, Agatha,
Margaret, and in the Octaves of all Feasts, and on every Lord's -Day and
Sabbath through the Year. They also were entitled to this Indulgence who
followed the Body of Christ, and the Holy-Oyl, when they were carried to the
the Sick; or who went round the Churchyard, praying all the while for the
Dead; Those also were entitled who assisted in the Repairing of the said
Church, or Gifted it with Lamps, Books, Chalices, Vestments, or any other
necessary Ornaments; or gave, or left to it by Will, Gold, Silver, or any Part
of their Substance: Those also shared in it, who on the Sundays said their
Prayers when the Bell rung at High Mass, at the consecrating of the Body of
Christ; and lastly those who devoutly prayed for the Soul of Catherine de
Camera, whose Body was buried in the said Church, and for the healthful Estate
of John de Camera, Gilbert de Dukesfield, and Agnes his Wife, as long as they
lived, and for their Souls when they were dead. St. Nicholas Vestry.


Some of the Inscriptions on the Tombs, Monuments and Graves of this Church.
The East End.
ON the North-East Corner of the Church, is the Tomb of Sir George Selby. His
Effigies and that of his Lady are at length, resting upon Pillows, with
uplifted Hands. On the South of the Tomb are the Effigies of his Children in a
Posture of Prayer, kneeling with raised Hands. Upon a Marble Stone, placed in
the Wall, a little above the Tomb, is the following Inscription,

Georgius Selby Eques auratus ab antiqua and clara Selbeiorum de Selby in
Comitat' Ebor. Familia oriundus, quater hujus villae preator, Vicecomes
Comitat' Palat' Dunelm'. Serenissimi Regis Jacobi Hospitio and Servitio
Nobilitatus. Ob Lautum certe and affluentem perpetuo apparatum, and
Liberalissimae Mensae communicationem merito passim celebratissimus. Margaretae
Uxoris Joannis Selby de Twisell Militis filiae consorcio apprime Faelix. Ex qua
suscept' quinque filios, immatura morte Sublatos and sex filias superstites;
Quatuor ante illius obitum nuptas; Margaretam primam Gulielmo Balasys de
Morton, Elizabetam Secundam Joanni Delavale de Dissington, Equitibus Auratis;
Barbaram tertiam Roberto Delavale Haeredi Radulphi Delavale de Seaton Equitis
Aurati, Isabellam quartam Patricio Curwen de Workington Armigero, and duas
innuptas Dorotheam and Mariam, per totum Vitae Cursum Lautissima usus fortuna.
In hoc vere beatus, quod sub indubitata Spe plenae peccatorum omnium
remissionis, and suae ad eternam vitam Resurrectionis, spiritum in manus Domini
commendavit in coque placide obdormivit 300 Martij 1625 An' Aetatis 68. Corpus
Sepultum jacet in Crypta sub hoc Tumulo charae uxoris cura extructa.

Amoris, Honoris and Memoriae ergo.
Under the Coat of Arms. -- Mortuus vivo.
Within the Pallisadoes, upon a Flat Marble Stone -- t^u have Mercy of the
Sowlle of George Selbe Merchant Adventurer sometime Alderman of this Town, and
Margaret his Wife, and their Children.

In the Margin on his Side Anno 1542. on her Side Anno 1562.

IN the North-side of the Middle Porch, under the grand Eastern Window, are the
Nitches of several pulled out Statues; on the South Side of it is the Monument
of George Carr, with this Inscription

Orate pro Anima Georgij Car quondam Majoris istius villae qui obijt Anno
Domini Millesimo CCCC Cujus animae Propitietur Deus.

THE Effigies of him and his Wife are at length, resting on Pillows with their
Hands raised. Above them is an arched Canopy, with a defaced Inscription; but a
Manuscript in this Church tells us that the Words were

For George Car's Sawil his Wyffes and Chylders Sawlls all and to make a solemn
Dyrge Mass with all-his Bruchern in the Qwyre and Dirsse to sing as apecyth in
his Writing of Rimae:

AT the Feet of the Effigies are the Ruins of a large Image of our Savior upon
the Cross, with an Inscription equally dark as the other, but said to be this

Our Lady prays him to say at the Day. WHEN the Scots took the Town they
plundered the Churches, and these and many more were defaced; for they broke
down the Carved Work thereof with Axes and Hammers.

IN the North-side of the South-East-Porch, is a very pretty Monument
commemorating the Wife of William Wrightson, Esquire

NEAR this Place lies the Body of Isabel, the Wife of William Wrightson, Esquire
one of the Burgesses in several Parliaments for this Town and County of
Newcastle upon Tyne, she died the 13th of March, 1716.

ALMOST contiguous to this, is the beautiful Monument of Mr. Matthews the 1st
Husband of Isabel beforementioned, he died April 6, 1697.

THE Burial Place of Timothy Davison, Alderman, sometime Mayor of this Town and
Governor of the Merchant's Company, and Elizabeth his Wife, by whom he had
Issue 16 Children, of which survived them 6 Sons and four Daughters; she
departed this Life the 10th Day of September, 1694, and he the 20th Day of
December 1696, in the 55th Year of his Age.

HERE lies the Body of Robert White, Merchant, he departed October, 1644.

THE Burial Place of Sir Ralph Jennison of Elswick, in the County of
Northumberland, Knt. sometime Mayor of this Town. Obijt tertio die Aprilis Anno
1701, Aetat. suae 88.

THE Burial Place of Mr. John Stephenson, Merchant Adventurer, who died the
20th of April 1725.

ROBERT Bulman, Feltmaker, 16 May, 1716. Rachael his Daughter, who was Wife of
William Henderson, Upholster, died 22d of Aug. 1730.

THE Burial Place of John Ogle, Esquire his Daughter Mary Lisle, Relict of Robert
Lisle, of Hazon, Esquire dyed 19th December, 1728.

ROGER Raw, twice Mayor of this Town, 1596.

ROBERT Barker, sometime Mayor of this Town, and his four Wives; he departed
the 4th of August, 1588.

RALPH Cock, Esquire Alderman, and sometime Mayor of this Town, 27 Jan. 1652, his
four Daughters survived him, and Judith his Wife, viz. Dorothy, Jane, Ann,
Barbary: The Wives of Mark Milbank, William Carr, Thomas Davison, Henry Marley,
Merchants.

ROBERT Jennison, Merchant, 27 October, 1668.

FRANCIS Brandling.

WILLIAM Carr, Merchant Adventurer, and Jane his Wife, by whom he had Issue 11
Children; he departed April 14th, 1660; she departed Jan. 31, 1666.

BARTRAM Anderson, Merchant Adventurer, June 24, 1605.

JESU have Mercy of the Sawlles of Hendry Anderson, M. A. sometime Mayor of
this Town, 1562.

ISABELL Anderson, his Wife, was buried under the next Stone to him; she dyed
in August, 1582.

BERTRAM Anderson, Merchant Adventurer, August, 1606.

MARK Shafto, Merchant Adventurer, sometime Mayor of this Town, April, 1593.

UNDER the same lie -- Shafto, who dyed December, 1581, and Robert Shafto,
Alderman, of this Town, who dyed September, 1623.

JESU have Mercy of the Soul of Mark.

SIR Peter Riddell, Knight, Twice Mayor of this Town, 18th April, 1641.

LANCELOT Hodgshon, 1667; Margaret, his Wife, Daughter to Sir Thomas
Haggerston, Baronet, departed 1663.

SOUTH-ISLE.
IN this Isle, opposite to the Altar, against the Wall of the Church, is a
beautiful and curious Monument of William Hall, Esquire sometime Mayor of this
Town, and Jane, his Wife, which was erected in Commemoration of them, by Sir
Alexander Hall, Knight, their only surviving Son. At the Top of the Monument is
the Arms of their Family, with an Angel on each Side of them. The Body of the
Monument has on each Side of it a Pillar, of the Corinthian Order; between
which is the Representation of a Desk, with open Books upon it, and he on the
one Side of it, and his Wife on the other, in the Posture of Prayer, kneeling
before it, with their folded Hands upon the Books: Below this are the Effigies
of their Children, in the same Posture; one of which is represented kneeling
alone, at one Side of a Desk, with an open Book upon it; and other Five on the
other Side of it, kneeling one after another: The Former, I take to be designed
for their Son, the other for their Daughters. Below these again, is the
following Inscription; Gulielmus Hall, Armiger quondam Major hujus villae and
Jana Uxor ejus Charissima; faelice prole ditati, Juxta hoc Monumentum in Domino
requiescunt. Ille vicesimo Octavo die Julii Anno Domini 1631, Aetatis suae 63.
Illa duodecimo die Augusti Anno Domini 1613, Aetatis 36. In quorum memoriam
Alexander Hall eques ^ratus unicus little filius superstes hoc merito posuit.

WILLIAM Bonner, sometime Sheriff of this Town, Jan. 22. 1626.

JAMES Coward Glasier.

WILLIAM Gray, Esquire 1707.

GEORGE Dawson, Alderman.

EDWARD Johnson, Alderman, and sometime Mayor, March 12, 1726, aged 69.

JESU have Mercy on the Sowlle of Edward Surtis, Merchant-Adventurer.

THOMAS Gibson, Mason, Feb. 7th, 1699.

PRAY for the Sawlle of John Todd, Mer. Ad. and Elizabeth, his Wiyf, Daughter
was unto Wm. -- Merchant, and his Children.

IN this Isle against one of the Pillars is a Marble Monument with this
Inscription.

Memoria Patricii Crow olim de Ashlington Armigeri. Cujus Corpus haud procul
Marmore Isto Sepultum Jacet. Obijt die Januarij Tricesimo Primo Anno Domini
M:D:CXCIV.
MR. Chapman's Stone, Mr. Wilkinson's Place, Henry Chapman, Merchant
Adventurer, Alderman, and 4 Times Mayor of this Town; Alderman likewise of the
famous City of London, and one of the Commissioners for the Realm of England to
treat with Commissioners of Scotland for the Wealth of both Kingdoms; departed
to the Mercy of God the 1st of April, 1623.

ROGER, Jane, Susannah, and Thomas, the Children of James Clevering, Merchant
Adventurer, and sometimes Mayor of this Town: Roger departed 1592, Jane 1592,
Susannah 1599, Thomas 1602.

MICHAEL Kirlair, Mer. Ad. 31 July 1620.

THOMAS Bows, Mer. Ad. he departed 1593, his Wife Agnes, 1624.

HENRY Bows, Mer. Ad.

ROBERT Bower, Mer. Ad. 1621.

WILLIAM Johnson, Alderman and sometime Mayor, departed 1678.

ROBERT Ledgard, Draper.

WILLIAM Sheerwood, Mer. Ad.

THIS is the new burial Place of Alderman Sowerbie.

HUMPHRY Pibus, Mer. Ad. April 1691.

HIS Daughter Elizabeth, was the Wife of John March, Vicar of this Town, she
departed in April 1680; he the 2d of December 1692.

ROBERT Hessilrigg, March 28, 1728.

RICHARD Wright, Sheriff, 1671.

THIS is now the burial Place of Mr. Roger Wilson, Merchant.

A Stone dated 1531.

WILLIAM Jackson, sometime Sheriff, 1630.

ON the North-side of this South-Isle, at the South-end of the Organ Gallery is
the Monument of the Family of the Maddisons. It is very beautiful, sumptuous,
and magnificent. The Statues are so devoutly postur'd on bended Knees, with
uplifted Hands, that whilst we view them with our outward Eyes, we are inwardly
struck with a Religious Awe, and secret Wishes after Piety and Devotion.

AT the Top of it, which is pretty high, are three Statues; that on the West in
a sitting Posture, with a Cross in the left Hand, and a Book in the Right, is
the Representation of Faith; that on the East in a sitting, expecting Posture,
with an Anchor at her Feet, is the Representation of Hope, and that in the
standing Posture, with a Flaming Heart in her Hand, (the Emblems of Action, and
Fervency and Love) is the Representation of Charity. Above the Statue on the
East, is Memorare Novissima, and above that on the West, Memoriae sacrum.

BELOW these three Statues, is the Body of the Monument, having in it 6 large
and beautiful Statues, three Men and three Women, on their bended Knees, with
folded Hands in the Posture of Prayer; who these are designed for may be easily
learned from the Inscriptions below; the Lady of the Westend, which has on the
right Hand of her a Pillar of the Corinthian Order, is Elizabeth the Wife of
Henry Maddisson; The Gentleman next to her is Henry her Husband; for he is
clothed in the Scarlet-Gown of the Aldermen of Newcastle, because he was
sometime Mayor of this Town. Next to him is his Father Lionel Maddison,
clothed in the same Manner (for he was thrice Mayor of this Town) kneeling
before a Desk, with an open Book on it; on the other Side of this Desk is his
Wife Jane, kneeling in the same Manner, with her face to him; next to her, is
their Son John, who died in the Expedition to Cadix, and who is therefore
clothed in Armor. Then we have the opposite Pillar of the Corinthian Order,
on the other Side of which is the Effigies of one of Henry's Daughters,
probably Barbara, who dyed at the Age of 17 Years, as is said on an adjoining
Stone.

The Inscription. Here rests in Christian Hope the Bodies of Lionel Maddison,
Son of Rowland Maddison, of the County of Durham, Esquire and of Jane his Wife; she
died July the 9th, 1611, he having been thrice Mayor of this Town, departed
December 6th, 1624, aged 94 Years, he lived to see his only Son Henry Father to
a fair and numerous Issue; here interred also are the Bodies of Henry Maddison,
and Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter of Robert Barker of this Town, who lived
together most comfortably 40 Years, he was sometime Mayor of this Town, and
having lived in good Name and Fame 60 Years, deceased in the true Faith of
Christ the 14th of July 1634. Elizabeth his only Wife, had Issue by him ten
Sons, (viz.) Sir Lionel Maddison, Knight, Sir Lionel Maddison, Knight, Ralph,
Robert, William, Henry, Peter, George, Timothy, and Thomas, and Six Daughters,
Jane, Susan, Elizabeth, Barbara, Eleanor, and Jane, all the Sons at his Death
were living; but John who died in his Expedition to Cadix. She lived his Widow
19 Years, died 1653.

Below the Inscription, under Elizabeth is Animae super Aethera vivunt.

Under Henry and Lionel, Decus vitae est Honorata Mors.

Under Jane and John, Beati mortui in Domino moriuntur.

And under Barbara, Serius aut metam Properamus a unam.

THE smaller Statues surrounding the Tomb, are designed for the Children of the
Family.

THE whole is surrounded with a strong Iron Rail, as being one of the greatest
Monumental Ornaments of the Church.

THIS Tomb was about two Years ago cleaned and beautified at the Expense of Mr.
Robert Percival, whom we have commemorated amongst the Benefactors of St.
John's Church.

LIONEL Maddison, Mer. Ad. Mayor of this Town, July 1624.

JANE Tempest, Wife of William Tempest, Esquire second Son of Sir Nicholas Tempest,
Knt. and Bart, and Daughter to Henry Maddison, sometime Mayor, departed 29th
December 1616, Aetat. 20.

BARBARA Maddison, Daughter of the said Henry Maddison, 1617, aged 17 Years.

On Mr. Forster's Stone. Ive kept the Faith a good Fight fought have I,
My God and Sovereign served here quartered lie;
With Dust disbanded 'till the last Trump hence,
Rally these Atombs by it is Influence,
Then with the Loyal Bands received I may
A Crown of Glory for the general pay.


THOMAS Loraine, Esquire his Epitaph. About the Border, Hic jacet Thomas Loraine
olim de
Kirkharle Armiger qui obijt vicessimo
quarto die Octobris, Aetatis suae 35 Anno Domini
MDCXLIX.


Upon the Copper Plate, Ite precor, Musae, vos and Dolor iste requirit
Iste Labor circum tempora Taxus eat
Plangite Solicitis Moerentia Pectoni Palmis
Rumpat and Ornatus quique (...) suos
Publica quippe vocat clamantia publica virtus
Hujus erat (...) hic Dolor (...) minor
Fata Magistratum rapiunt cum ferrea Regnum
Debilitant Mundum cum rapuere bonos
Et bonus and Laurus modo cum decesserit orbis
Non satis ad Fletus, si Lachrimarit, erit.


St. MARY 's PORCH.
P. M.
ALEXANDRI Davison Equitis Aurati and Annae Filliae Radulphi Cock, ejus
Conjugis Charissimae.

Ex qua Filios quinque, Thomam equitem auratum; Radulphum Davison de Thornley,
Samuelem Davison de Wingate Grange, Josephum Centurionem cordatum (in hujus
oppidi contra Scotos Rebels propugnatione strenui ad mortem usque Dimicantem
hic juxta tumulatum) Edwardum Mercatorem Caelibem, defunctum,

Filias etiam Binas
Barbaram primo Radulpho Calverley
deinde Thomae Riddell de Fenham in Comitatu Northumbriae Equitibus auratis,
ac Margaretam Henrico Lambton, armigero Enuptas, Suscitavit.
Qui quidem Alexander Grassante tunc conjuratione perfidissima,
Optimo Regi, Causaeque Regiae semper
Fidelissimus
Gravem rei familiaris Jacturam Maximo animo perpessus,
tandemque in hujus Novicastri obsidione cum Scotorum Rebellium exercitu
irruenti magnanimiter Confligens,
Novissimum Spiritum (octogenarius fere) fortiter effudit.
Undecimo die Mensis Novembris anno ab Incarnatione Domini 1644 hoc monumentum
posuit Thomas Primogenitus
Eques Auratus
M. S.
Egregio Adolescenti Thomae Hamiltono, animi Indole, forma Corporis and robore
praecaeteris insigni, Domini Patricii Hamiltonii a Preston filio dignissimo a
nobilissima familia Hadingtonia oriundo, Centurioni sub Domino Alexandro
Leslaeo Exercitus Scoticani Faederis Imperatore, excellentissimo Domino Alex.
Hamiltonus Rei Tormentariae praefectus, Avuunculus Maerens posuit,

Cum totius exercitus Panctu Maximo obijt Anno Domini 1640 Octobris 29.

Aetatis suae 20.
The Motto of the Coat of Arms above,
Mihi Palma Cupressus.
SIR Richard Stote's Burial Place.

Quinto Die Februarii Anno, 1615 Richardus Stote quondam hujus Villae Mercator
obijt.

Decimo sexto Die Aprilis Anno 1589 Hellinor Uxor ejus 2, ex hac vita decessit.

In Sacra Memoria Parentum suorum Edvardus Stote hoc Monumentum posuit.

Richardus Stote, Miles, Serviens Domini Regis Caroli Secundi ad Legem objit
vicessimo quinto die Decembris. Anno Domini 1682.

Near this Place is interred the Body of Joseph Huddldleston late Citizen and
Fishmonger of London, (Second Son of Andrew Hudleston of Huttonjohn in the
County of Cumberland, Esquire) who departed this Life the 14th of June Anno Dom'
1679. He married Mary Daughter of John Emmerson, Merchant, sometime Mayor of
this Town, and by her had issue Joseph (who died in his Infancy) and Dorothy
who survives.

UNDER the South Window of this Porch lies the Effigies of a Man, at his full
length with his Legs across, and his Dog at his feet, having his Escutcheon of
Arms and Sword. This we are informed was the Fashion of burying those only, who
took upon them the Cross, and were marked with the Badge of the Cross, for
sacred Warfare, in recovering the Holy Land from the Turks.

HE is supposed to have been one of the Family of the Scroopes.

JOHN Lawson, Esquire of Cramlington in the County of Northumberland, 5th Nov. 1680.

ANTHONY Isaacson, Esquire

ROBERT Roddam, Alderman, and sometime Mayor of this Town, July 1682.

JONATHAN his Son, sometime Mayor of Newcastle, dyed 21st August, 1712. he left
Issue by Jane his Wife a Son and a Daughter.

THE Burial Place of Paul Cook, Joyner.

JOHN Emmerson, sometime Mayor, died

THOMAS Jennison, sometime Mayor, departed, December, Anno 1676.

ISABEL Riddel, 1663.

RICHARD Huddleston and Elizabeth his Wife, he died June 1707, she 1730, aged
82 Years.

CHRISTOPHER Nicholson, Alderman, departed 29th Sept. 1670, in the 68th Year of
his age.

AGAINST the Wall stands a Monument of Michael Welden, Son of Michael Welden of
Welden, Esquire and Sarah his Wife, who departed this Life 3d Ap. 1680.

St. MARGARET's Chantery.
THE Burial Place of the Family of the Bewicks.

West End of the CHURCH.
THE Burial Place of William Errington, Master and Mariner.

JOHN Gill.

WILLIAM Boutflower, Merchant Adventurer.

In the MIDDLE-ISLE.
THE Burial Place of William Rutter, Merchant Adventurer.

At the East End of the MIDDLE-ISLE.
RICHARD Wright, Merchant Adventurer, and sometime Sheriff, departed this Life,
5th May 1671.

CUTHBERT Ellison, Merchant Adventurer. Now the Burial Place of Mr. Richard
Wall, descended from the Elder Brother of Robert and Benjamine Ellison.

THE Burial Place of Robert Ellison, Merchant Adventurer, sometime Sheriff, he
dyed Jan. 12th, 1677.

THE Burial Place of Benjamine Ellison, who departed this Life 25th June, 1676.

ABRAHAM Anderson, Merchant.

JOSEPH Ellison, Merchant, who dyed 21st of Jan. 1686.

In the NORTH-ISLE.
THOMAS Partis, Tobacconist, who died 9th May, 1684.

THE Burial Place of Roger Ive, Citizen and Stationer of London, who died 6th
August 1675.

ROGER Procter, Merchant Adventurer, who died 20th Nov. 1664. Now Mr.
Mallburne's Burial Place.

JOHN Winship, Tanner, 1607.

AGAINST the North-wall a Monument of Major Robert Bugg, Citizen and
Habberdasher of London, who died 22d May 1688.

GEORGE Winfield, Merchant Adventurer, Alderman, and twice Mayor, died 18th
Nov. 1684.

MICHAEL Hall, Gentleman, 25th July 1647.

NICHOLAS Stricker, who died Aug. 5th, 1689.

BARBARA Riddell, Wife to William Riddell, Merchant, and sometimes Mayor, 1627.

St. GEORGE's PORCH.
SAMUEL Gill, Esquire who died 26th Oct. 1720.

WILLIAM Warriner, 1706.

-- Marlay, Esquire 1676. Now Mr. Perith's.

ANOTHER of John Marlay, Merchant, who departed October 1561.

UNDER which lies also William Marlay, who departed 16th Jan. 1609.

AND also Sr. John Marley, Knight, Son of William, who had been 5 Times Mayor,
and departed Anno 1673, aged 83 Years and 3 Days.

JESU have Mercy on George Byrde's Soul, is on the Border of Matsen's Stone.

MATTHEW Matsen, Merchant Adventurer, died 1st October 1697.

TIMOTHY Robson, Alderman, twice Mayor, departed 30th Dec. 1700.

THE Burial Place of George Heron, Merchant. On the Top of which Stone is, Jesu
have Mercy on the Soul of John Ord.

ON the Wall a handsome Marble Monument, on which is the following Inscription;
Hic Sitae sunt exuviae
Roberti Shafto Equitis aurati,
Nee non ad legem Servientis
Et hujus Municipij, Propraetoris
In Desideratissimi Patris Memoriam
Hoc Mamor Posuit Unicus Defuncti silius
Marcus Shafto de Whitworth
In Comitatu Dunelmen Arm.
Obijt Maij XXI
A.D. M:DCCV
Vixit annos LXXII.


MATTHEW Jefferson, sometime Mayor of this Town, departed March 1st, 1687.

In the QUIRE.
THE Burial Place of Nicholas Ridley, Esquire twice Mayor of this Town, and
Governor of the Merchant's Company, and Martha his Wife, by whom he had Issue
9 Children, viz, John, Mary, Richard, Ann, Nicholas, Edward, Ann, Martha and
John: He departed this Life the 22d. of January 1710, John their eldest Son
dyed April the 14th, 1686.

M. S.
Janae
Yeldardi Alvey
Hujus Ecclesiae Vicarii
Uxori Lectiss. and dilectiss. December Liberorum
Utriusque Sexus aequaliter Faecundae Matri
Cultu in Deum,
Obsequio in Maritum
Pietate in prolem, dilectione in Proximum
Charitate in Pauperes, ad exemplum celebri,
Quae Postquam 34 Aetat. Ann.
Complevisset
Pie and Placide in Domino
Obdormivit
Denata est tempore Antelucano Magni
Paschatis sesti 1643
Maritus maerens hoc in amoris aeternum
Duraturi Testimonium merito
Posuit.
Radulphus Jennison quondam Major hujus Oppidi qui tempore Praeseturae suae e
vivis decessit Anno Domini 1597 hoc tumulo sepultus Jacet.

Prudens, Pacificus I argus justusque piusque
Sydera qui quaerit, sis Ubi quaerit Ubi
Jacet and hic Robertus Filius ejus, quandam
Theologiae Doctor and Minister verbi Dei.
MR. Thomas Robinson's Burial Place.

Here Lies buried under this Stone
Of John Bennet both body and bone
Late of these North Parts, Master of the Ordinance,
Which deceased by God's Providence,
The Eight Day of the Month of July,
In perfect Faith Love and Charity;
A thousand five hundred sixty and Eight
Whose Soul to Heaven he trusted went straight
Through God's great Mercy, Bloodshed and Death
Which only he trusted to during his Breath,
So trust we his Wife and Children that caused this
And Captain Carvel, a Friend of his.
HERE lies the Body of Sir William Blacket, Bart. Alderman and sometime Mayor
of this Town, and Burgess in Parliament for this Corporation, and Dame
Elizabeth his Wife, by whom he had Issue 9 Children, of which survived him 3
Sons and 3 Daughters, viz. Edward, Michael, William, Elizabeth, Isabel and
Christian; she departed this Life the 7th of April, 1674, and he the 16th of
May, 1680. Michael his Son, sometime Alderman, departed this Life the 26th Day
of April, 1683; who had Elizabeth only, she departed this Life the 12th Day of
January, 1677.

THE Burial Place of John Rumney, Merchant.

THE Burial Place of William Jennison, Merchant Adventurer.

WILLIAM, Isabel, Edward, Christian, Michael, John, William, and Christopher,
the Children of William Blacket, Alderman, and Elizabeth his Wife. John buried
the 4th of May, 1654, William buried the 9th of August, 1954, Christopher
buried the 8th Day of July, 1678.

IN this North Part of the Church of St. Nicholas was a Shrine of Henry Earl of
Northumberland, who in the 4th of Henry the 7th was Lieutenant of Yorkshire,
and being commanded by the King to levy those Moneys which were then extorted
from the Country to carry on the War of Britany; the Vulgar conceiving him to
be the Cause of that Task, tumultuously murdered him at Cockledge, near
Threske, eighteen Miles north of York, upon the Day of St. Vitalis the Martyr;
whereupon he was buried at Beverley, where he has a stately Monument, but much
defaced. This is Shrine at present much more so, being no where to be met with;
bull Gray tells us, that in this Part of the Church there was such a Monument in
his Time, that was made in Memory of him in his own Country; he having a House
in this Town and Parish, and that Part of the Inscription upon it was, Orate
pro anima Hemici Percy 4 Northumbriae qui per Rebbelium Manus occabuit, etc.

THE Milbank Manuscript says it was in the north Corner of the Church: That it
was a Monument of Wood; on which was painted an old Man, our Savior on his
right Hand, and the Virgin Mary on his Left. There came a Labil from her Mouth,
but what it was this Authority had forgot; but that from our Savior's was
Quaeso Patri sac, qued rog it mea Matter.

THEN followed some Latin Verses, done in the rhiming Way of the Monks, but
they are so dark and obscure, that little can be made of them. the Manuscript
goes on; When Mr. William Selby was buried, this Monument was removed out of
that Corner, and Sir George Selby did set his magnificent Tomb there. Alter
that it was placed against the Wall, next to Sir George's Tomb, and so
continued 'till Mr. Lane. Hodshon got leave of Vicar Nailor to remove it and
place his Father. Where it is now I know not.

Gray tells us, that the Parson of the Town is the Bishop of Carlisle, who has
his Vicar or Substitute. How this Bishop came to have this Living in his Gift,
I have showed in the Beginning of our Account of this Church.

UPON this Church depend the other Churches; for the Vicar has Dues from them
all: And yet they are each of them a distinct Parish from St. Nicholas.

THIS Vicarage is reckoned 150 l. per Ann. and the Corporation makes an annual
Addition of 90 l. per Ann. to it, which was granted by this generous and worthy
Body, that the Vicar might live in a more plentiful and hospitable Manner than
he could otherwise do. The Vicar's Assistant in this Church is the Curate of
it; who is styled in an ancient Writing the Parish Priest, absque Impedimento
Vicarii aut Presbyteri Parochialis. Lib. Cart. 124. He receives from the Vicar
4 l. per Ann. from the Town 35 l. per Ann. and from the Crown 6 l. 16 s. 8 d.
besides the stated Fees of the Church.

IN the Year 1724, the upper Clerk of this Church died (for it had been the
Custom to have two) Upon which it was thought more beneficial to the Parish to
have an Assistant to the Curate, which was accordingly done in the Month of
October, the same Year. His Salary arises from the Fees of the Clerkship. The
Lecturer of this Church, whose Duty is to preach on the Sunday afternoon, has a
Salary of 100 l. per Ann. paid him by the Corporation.

ALL the Vicars, Curates, and Lecturers of this Church, that I have met with,
are these following,

Magister Joannes de Hirlaw Vicarius in the Reign of Edward 3d.

MATTHEW Bolton, 1374.

NICHOLAS de S. 1401.

ROGERUS de Thresh, 1418.

JOHN Heyworth, 1436.

WILLIAM Clym, 1438.

THOMAS Harelred, 9th Hen. 7th.

JOHN Sanderson before the Year 1532.

JOHN Heron, Ob. 1543. he alienated the Tithe of Cramlington, for a Cheese, and
a Couple of Capons to be tendered May the 9th, in St. Nicholas Church Porch.

HENRY Aglionby, 1543.

WILLIAM Purge, 1549.

WILLIAM Salkeld, A. M. Sepult. August 25, 1568.

JOHN Magrey, 1568.

RICHARD Holdsworth, 1585, he was buried at St. Nicholas, Sept. 5, 1594.

THE Worshipful Dr. Morton, Archdeacon of Durham, and Vicair of Newcastle, was
buried at Newcastle, July 18th, 1620.

HENRY Pool, Vicar, was buried at St. Nicholas's, Sept. 3d, 1623.

DR. Jackson, Vicar, he left the Vicarage, and dyed in the South of England,
Anno 1640, Eachard the Historian gives this Character of him.

DR. Thomas Jackson, the Ornament of the University of Oxford, was President of
Corpus Christi College, and Dean of Peterborough, he was a Man of great Piety
and Worth, Industry and Ability, a great Master of the Fathers, and profoundly
read in Theology, as appears from his many learned Treatises.

YEILDARD Alvey, Vicar, was buried at St. Nicholas, 1648, he succeeded in the
Vicarage of Newcastle in the Year 1630, when the most learned Dr. Jackson was
elected President of Corpus Christi College, in Oxford, his Sufferings began
very early in the Troubles, Vide Ann. 1645.
as I find by a Letter of his, written to his Grace the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and dated from York, Oct. 16, 1640, wherein he sets forth what he
then had suffered, in the following Manner. I am for the present outed of all
my spiritual Promotions, to the yearly Value of 300 l. and have most of my
moveable Goods seized upon by the Rebels, being forced (upon some threatening
Speeches given out by them, that they would deal more rigourously with me than
others) suddenly to desert all, and to provide for the Safety of my self, Wife,
and seven Children, by a speedy Flight in the Nightime; how they would have
dealt with me they have since made evident, by their harsh dealing with two of
my Curates, whom I left to officiate for me in my Absence; who have not only
been interrupted in reading Divine Service; but threatened to be Pistol'd, if
they would not desist from the Execution of their Office: And whereas I had
lately purchased 60 Pounds per Annum in Northumberland, and hoped to have been
supplied that Way in these calamitous Times, 'till I might with Safety return;
they have, since I presented my Petition to his Majesty, seized upon that also,
and commanded my Servant to be accountable to them for it: This is my Case at
this Time. Afterward, as might be expected, it was far worse, for, as I am
otherwise informed he was not only pulled out of this Pulpit by two Holy
Sisters, but imprisoned at Newcastle, at Holy-Island, and at Norwich; his
Family increased under his Troubles, if I mistake not, to ten Children, (for so
many I find his Wife bore him in all) which were reduced to great Streights,
and subsisted in good measure by Charity; I perceive by the Letter
abovementioned, that he had been active as well as passive in the Service of
his Majesty; by both which Means he had so far recommended himself to the
Favor and Esteem of that Prince, that he had designed some Reward for him,
which in all Probability the Rebellion prevented the King from bestowing. Nor
did Mr. Alvey live to receive it from his royal Son, on the Restoration, for
his Death happened in the Year, 1648, and was hastened, as it is thought, by his
Sufferings. He was a very Honest Good Man, and a true Son of the Church of
England; as, I am told, appears by a little Tract which he wrote, and which I
have not yet been able to get a Sight of, entitled, The Humble Confession and
Vindication of them who suffered much, and still suffer, under the Name of
Malignants and Delinquents, Published in 1647.

DR. Robert Jenison, 1645, buried at St. Nicholas, November 8, 1652.

SAMUEL Hammond, 1652, he left the Vicarage upon the Restoration.

JOHN Knightbridge.

THOMAS Nayler, 1662, buried at St. Nicholas, April 15th, 1679.

JOHN March, Vicar, B. D. he was born in this Town. He was an admirable
Scholar, a Man of strict Piety, and a most powerful Preacher. The last Sermon
he preached was in the Epistle to the Hebrews, 2d Chap. V 3d. How shall we
escape if we neglect so great Salvation? He preached it on the Sunday Morning,
and on the Sunday following was buried.

THIS Sermon, together with eleven more, were published and recommended to the
World by Dr. Scot, the Author of the Christian Life. There were several other
Sermons of his published in his Lifetime, (viz.) one entitled The false
Prophet unmasked, or, The Wolf stripped of his Sheep's Clothing, preached on
the 30th of January, 1683, before the Mayor and Aldermen of this Town, and
dedicated to them, another on the 30th Jan. 1676/7, dedicated to the Mayor and
Magistrates. Another upon the 29th May, 1684, dedicated also to them, etc. He
was buried at St. Nicholas, Dec. 4, 1692.

LEONARD Welstead, Vicar, was buried at St. Nicholas's, Nov. 15th, 1694.

NATHANIEL Ellison, D. D. Vicar, died May 4th, 1721, and was buried at. St.
Nicholas's. He was born in this Town. He was a Man of good Learning, and an
exemplary Life; and was looked upon to be one of the best of Parish Priests,
for his Constancy and Usefulness in Preaching; he was besides Vicar of
Newcastle, Archdeacon of Stafford, Rector of Whitburne, in the Country of
Durham, and Prebendary of Durham.

IN the Year 1700, he Published at London a Sermon preached before the Mayor
and Magistrates of this Town at St. Nicholas's Church, October 8th, 1699, being
the Sunday after the Election of the Mayor. It was Entitled, The Magistrates
Obligation to punish Vice.

IN the Year 1701, his Sermon of Confirmation, preached June 23, 1700, before
the Lord Crew, Bishop of Durham, at St. Nicholas's Church in this Town, was
printed at London.

IN the Year 1710 he printed his Sermon at London, which was preached at
Ali-hallows Church, on All Saints Day, 1709, at the Opening of a Charity-School
in that Parish. It is Entitled, The Obligations and Opportunities of doing Good
to the Poor.

WILLIAM Bradford, M. A. of Bennet College, Cambridge, succeeded Dr. Ellison in
this Vicarage. He was Son to Samuel, the late Bishop of Rochester. He dyed July
15th, 1728. in the 32d Year of his Age, and was buried in Westminster Abbey. A
little before his Death he was preferred to the Archdeaconry of Rochester. He
was universally beloved, being a Man of great Humanity and Condescension, and
of an open generous Temper; and very much lamented at his Death on account of
these, and his many other good Qualities. He was succeeded in the Vicarage by

THOMAS Turnor, A. M. of St. John's College, in Cambridge, the present Vicar.

The CURATES.
CHRISTOPHER Forster, Curate, 1629

NICHOLAS Stote, 1663.

RALPH Astell, 1667.

WlLLIAM Drake, 1678, A. M.

FRANCIS Woodmas, M. A. afterward Vicar of Bedlington, famous for his Skill in
the Greek Tongue.

MICHAEL Fenwick, M. A. afterward Rector of Long-Newton, in the County of
Durham.

EDMUND Lodge, removed to the Mastership of the Grammar School of this Town,
1716, and was succeeded by

JOHN Cowling, M. A. of St. Peter's College, Cambridge, the present Curate.

LECTURERS.
THOMAS Stephenson resigned 1639.

JOHN Bewick, 1639.

DR. George Wishart, 1643.

CUTHBERT Sydenbam and William Durant, 1645.

CUTHBERT Sydenbam, alone, 1648.

JOHN Tylesley removed.

JOHN Knightbridge, 1656.

DR. Wishart again 1660.

HE was a Native of the Kingdom of Scotland; and was by the House of Commons (
June 18th, 1642) resolved unfit to be Lecturer of St. Nicholas; and soon after,
as I presume, turned out of that Place. He was plundered also, and suffered a
long and tedious Imprisonment, in the nastiest Part of the Tolbooth at
Edinburgh, called the Thieves-hole. After his Sequestration, having returned
into his own Country, he became Minister of the Church of St. Andrew; at length
accompanied the noble Marquess of Montross in his Conquest of Scotland, and
upon the Declension of that immortal Person, became Chaplain to the Queen of
Bohemia. On the Restoration of his Majesty he returned to his Lecture of
Newcastle, where he continued in great Esteem and Veneration for his unspotted
Loyalty, until 1662, at which Time he was promoted to the Bishopric of
Edinburgh, where he dyed about the middle of the Year, 1671. He was a Person of
great Religion, and very charitable to the Poor; and having been a Prisoner, he
was always careful at each Dinner that he made, to send the first Dish from his
Table to the Prisoners. He wrote the Complete History of the Wars, etc. under
the Marquess of Montross.

JOHN Bewick again, 1662.

WILLIAM Mair, 1671.

JOHN March, afterward Vicar, 1676.

JOHN Rawlet, M. A. 1679. He was a very pious and Charitable Man. He seemed to
have imitated the Example of Onesiphorus to St. Paul, in making it his Business
to find out the Sick and Needy, that he might have the Pleasure and Happiness
of assisting them. For he sought them out very diligently and found them, and
therefore the Lord will show Mercy unto him in that Day.

HE printed several Things. In the Year 1682, his Sacramental Covenanting, at
London. His Solomon's Prescription against the Plague, in the Year 1685. His
Dialogue between two Protestants, in answer to a Popish Catechism, called a
Short Catechism against all Sectaries. A Book of Divine Poems, etc.

JONATHAN Davison, 1686.

GEORGE Tully, M. A. 1687.

ROBERT Tomlinson, D. D. 1695; Now Rector of Whickham.

THOMAS Dockwray, M. A. of St. John's College, Cambridge, 1724, the present
Lecturer.

THE Lecturer of this Church is also the Holyday Lecturer, for which this Town
allows 20 l. per Annum.

IN these Weeks in which are no Holydays, there is a Catechetical Lecture in
this Church, for the Instruction of the Boys of the Grammar School, and those
of the Charity Schools, who are examined in their Turns.

THIS is done by the Vicar, the Morning Lecturer of All-hallows, the Lecturer
of St. John's, and the Lecturer of St. Andrew's, in their Order.

THIS Cathechetical Lecture ceases during the Seasons of Advent and Lent,
because during these Times, there is a Sermon in this Church twice a Week, on
the Wednesday, and Friday, which is preached by the whole Clergy of Town, every
one preaching in his Turn and Order.

MORNING and Evening Prayers are every Day read at this Church, at 10 in the
Morning and 3 in the Afternoon. The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper is
administered here every first Sunday in the Month.

THE Town was wont to make a Present to this Church of 13 Gallons of Wine every
Year at Easter.

LEGACIES left to the POOR of the Parish of St. NICHOLAS.
LEFT by Thomas Davison, Esquire yearly to be paid in December, as follows, viz.

l. s. d. OUT of a House at the Foot of the Side, the Sum of 01 03 00 OUT of a
House near the Sandhill Corner 00 07 00 OUT of a House on the Sandhill 00 09 06
OUT of a House on the Long-Stairs 00 04 00 02 03 06

LEFT by William Carr, Esquire to be paid at 2 Payments, (viz.) St. Eleanor Day,
being the 3d Day of May, and St. Martin's Day, the Bishop, in Winter, as
follows, OUT of a House in the Bigg-Market, 01 06 08 OUT of a House in
Gunner-ward 00 13 04 02 00 00

LEFT by Mr. Andrew Aldworth, to be paid at the Feast of St. Andrew.

OUT of a House in Akewelgate 01 00 00

LEFT by Sir William Blacket, Bart, to be paid in December, OUT of a House at
the Bridge-end 02 00 00 LEFT by Mr. Robert Ellison the Sum of 33 06 08

THE Interest yearly to be paid to the Vicar and Churchwardens.

THIS was put into the Hands of John Bourne upon his own Bond, who failing,
both Principal and Interest were lost. The last Interest was paid A. D. 1708.

LEFT by Henry Hilton, of Hilton, Esquire by his last Will, dated Feb. 26th, 1640,
yearly to be paid at Michaelmas, the Sum of 06 00 00 REDUCED by Act of
Parliament to 04 00 00

LEFT by Sir Alexander Davison, Sir Thomas Davison, William Carr, Esquire Mark
Milbank, Esquire John Rumney, Esquire and Sir Mark Milbank, to be paid at two Payments,
viz. Lady Day and Michaelmas, as follows.

Lady Day Payment.
SIR Alexander Davison 01 00 00 SIR Thomas Davison 00 10 00 WILLIAM Carr, Esquire
00 15 00 MARK Milbank, Esquire 01 10 00 JOHN Rumney, Esquire 01 05 00 SIR Mark Milbank
03 00 00

Michaelmas the same Payments for each.
LEFT by John Jefferson the Sum of 02 00 00

THIS is paid yearly in March, by his Executors, as follows, viz.

MR. Matthew Bows 00 13 04 MRS. Mary Varnel 00 13 04 MRS. Elizabeth Brumell 00
13 04

LEFT by Timothy Davison, Esquire yearly to be paid in December, OUT of the
Merchant's Company 01 05 00

LEFT by Mrs. Jane Brokesby a Quit-rent of 20 s. per Ann. out of Houses in
Trinity-Chare, now held by Mr. Fenwick and others.

ALSO 50 l. out of her Lands in Forest-hill, to secure the Payment of 3 l. per
Annum; the said Sum of 4 l. per Annum to be distributed at 20 s. per Quarter.

LEFT by Nicholas Ridley, Esquire yearly to be paid in December, OUT of Grounds in
Heaton, the Sum of 01 10 00

LEFT by Joseph Atkinson, Esquire the Sum of 50 l.

THE Interest yearly to be paid on Sept. 30th 02 10 00

LEFT by Matthew White, Esquire yearly to be paid in December, OUT of a House in
Pilgrim-street, lately in the Possession of Thomas Marshall, the Sum of 01 10 00

LEFT by Isabel Wife of William Wrightson, Esquire the Sum of 50 l.

THE Interest yearly to be paid on Sept. 30 02 10 00

LEFT by Leonard Wetherly, Gent, the Sum of 20 l.

THE Interest yearly to be paid on Sept. 11th 01 00 00

LEFT by Mr. Richard Randal the Sum of 7 l.

LEFT by Mrs. Ann Davison the Sum of 200 l. The Interest of which to be
distributed at two Doles, 5 l. each, (viz.) on St. Thomas's Eve, and on the 7th
of February.

LEFT by Mr. William Harrison the Sum of 50 l.

THE Interest yearly to be paid on St. Andrew's Day 02 10 00

LEFT by Mrs. Margaret Ramsey the Sum of 20 l.

THE Interest to be yearly distributed for ever 01 00 00

LEFT by Mr. James Coward the Sum of 20 l.

THE Interest to be yearly distributed for ever 01 00 00

MRS. Eleanor Allan of the Town and County of Newcastle upon Tyne, Widow, did
by a Deed of Gift, bearing Date Feb. 20th, 1705, assign a Farmhold and
Tenant-right, in Walls-end, in the County of Northumberland, held under the
Dean and Chapter of Durham, of the yearly Value 61 l. 19 s. 5 d. to Trustees,
in Trust to herself for Life, and after her Death (which happened Jan. 21st
1708) for setting up a School for teaching 40 Boys and 20 Girls, of the Parish
of St. Nicholas, and Chapelry of St. John; which was accordingly done, A. D.
1709. The Boys are taught to read, write, and cast Account; and after they have
for that End been a sufficient Time in the School, they are, by the Trustees
for the said School, put out to some Trade, or put to Sea, and have 40 s.
a-piece allowed them for that Purpose, as also a Bible and Common Prayer bound
up together; a whole Duty of Man, and Mr. Lewis's Explanation of the Church
Catechism. The Girls are taught to read, write, few and knit, and when they are
perfect therein, they are put out to Trades, or to Service; and have 20 s.
allowed them, with a Bible, Whole Duty of Man, and Catechism, as the Boys. The
Boys are taught by a Master, who has a Salary of 25 l. per Ann. and 20 s. for
Coals. The Girls are taught by a Mistress, who has 10 l. per Ann. and 10 s. for
Coals.

A. D. 1718. The Inhabitants, of the Parish of St. Nicholas resolved upon an
annual Subscription for Clothing the poor Children belonging to the said
School, and they are accordingly clothed new every Year upon the first Day of
May.

THIS Charitable Foundation has received some Addition, by the generous
Benefaction of some other well disposed Christians; for A. D. 1723 Mr. Gilbert
Campel, Inn-holder, in the said Parish, left by his Last Will 20 l. and Mr.
Samuel Nichols, Organist of the Parish Church of St. Nicholas, left in the same
Year 10 l. both which Sums of Money are ordered to be put out at Interest, for
the Benefit of this School.

MRS. -- Chisholm, Widow of the Rev. Mr. Chisholm, of Wooler, in the County of
Northumberland, did A. D. (...), pay to the Corporation of Newcastle, the Sum
of 500 l. to receive the Interest of the same to herself for Life, and after
her Death to go to the Use of this School for ever.

NETHER-DEAN-BRIDGE.
DIRECTLY opposite to the East Window of St. Nicholas Church is the
Nether-dean-bridge, which you descend into by some Stairs, that lead from the
Churchyard.

IT is called so, because it goes over the Dean or Syke lower down the Town
than the other Bridge; for as the Higher-bridge has the Name of the
Upper-dean-bridge, because it is higher in the Town, so this being lower in the
Town, has the Name of the Nether-dean-bridge. It is a little narrow Lane which
leads into Pilgrim-street. Formerly, when the Merchants had their Shops and
Warehouses in the Flesh-market, the River ebbed and flowed above this Bridge,
and the Boats came under it with the Wares and Commodities of the Merchants.
But it is chiefly Famous because the Roman Wall went along it. It came from the
Vicar's Garden, through the Body of St. Nicholas Church, then along this
Street, and so on into Pandon.

As you descend the Stairs afore-mentioned into this Lane, there is an
Almshouse on the left Hand for two or three poor Women, but it has no
Allowance.

CHAP. VIII. Of PILGRIM-STREET.
THIS Street got it is Name from the Pilgrims, who came from all parts of this
Kingdom to worship at our Lady's Chapel at Gesmond, or Jesumunde, or as it is
called in some ancient Writings Jesumuth, is it pleasant Village, on the
North-East of Newcastle, Distant from it about 2 Miles; it appertained to the
Barony of Robert de Gaugy, as appears by a Certificate given in the Third of
Hen. the 3d. of such Manours, as his Barony did consist of, for which he was
obliged to the Service of Three Knights Fees. Mag. Brit. Vol. 3. Adamus de
Athol, who lies buried in the Chapel of the Holy Trinity, in St. Andrew's
Church, lived in this Village, and is called Dominus de Jesmond: The Orde's
Family was also in Possession of it.

There are still to be seen the Ruins of the Chapel and Hospital of our Lady in
this Village. The Hospital is now a Dwelling House; but the Chapel is changed
into something worse, being turned into a Stable.

I am told, and it is very probable, that this Chapel and Hospital are at
present the Property of Mr. Robert Andrew of Gateshead.


Gesmond.

THERE was an Inn in this Street, which the Pilgrims in their Journey were wont
to call at, which occasioned their constant coming up this Street, and so it
got it is Name of Pilgrim-street, as the Inn did that of the Pilgrims Inn. As
you descend this Street, you have on the left Hand a Passage to the
Carliol-croft, which is a large Field (formerly the Property of the Carliols,
now of John Rogers, Esquire) bounded on one Side with the Town's Walls, and on the
other by the Gardens on this Side of Pilgrim-street.

ON that Side of it, next the Town-Wall is a very agreeable Walk, generally
frequented in a Summer's Evening by the Gentry of this Part of the Town; The
Prospect of the Gardens, some of which are exceeding Curious, affording a good
deal of Pleasure.

THERE is a Passage from this Field into the Manour-Chare.

In the Year 1351, Sir In the 23d, 24th, and 25th of Edward the First, Robert
de Hilton, of Hilton, in the County Palatine of Durham, had Summons to
Parliament amongst the Barons of this Realm; and in the 4th of Edward the 2d
was in that Expedition then made into Scotland. This Robert married Margaret,
one of the Three Coheitesses to Marmaduke de Thwenge, and left issue Two
Daughters his Heirs, viz. Isabel, married to Walter de Penwardyn, and Maud to
Hotham.

After this, there is mention made of Alexander de Hilton, who in the 7th of
Edward the Third, served in the Scottish Wars with Ralph Lord Nevil, and had
Summons to Parliament in the 6th and 9th of Edward the Third, but no longer.

This is in all Probability the same Alexander with him above mentioned.

The present Gentlemen, John Hilton, Esquire a regular Descendant of this ancient
Family, lives in the Place of his Ancestors, which he has adorned and
Beautified beyond what was done in past Ages; in particular the Chapel, famous
in this Country for it is Irish-Wood, is so furnished with Place and Books, and
other Necessaries, that it Merits the Character of a very beautiful Chapel.
This Family is the ancientest in England, that bears a Coat of Arms.


Alexander of Hilton, and Matilda his Wife, the two Patrons of the Chapel of
Gesmonde, presented to it one Sir William of Heighington to be Chaplain, who
was accordingly instituted by Thomas Hatfield, Bishop of Durham, and after that
inducted; as was attested at Auckland, June the 12th, 1351. But on the 27th of
the Month following he gave it up, declaring he had no right or Title to it.
The Copy of the Original of this Account I had from Dr. Hunter of Durham, and
is as follows.

UNiversis S. Matris filiis, ad quos praesentes, Literae pervenerint. Thomas
permissione Divina Dunelm' Episcopus salutem in amplexibus Salvatoris. Noverit
Universitas Vestra quod nos dilectum nobis in Christo Dom' Willielmum de
Heighyngton Capellanum ad Liberam Capellam de Jesmuth infra Parochiam
Novocastri Dunelm' Dioces' situatam, ad quam per Dom' Alexandrum, de Hilton
Militem and Matildam Uxorem ejus veros Patronos ejusdem nobis presentatus
existit, admissimus and ipsum in capellanum perpetuum ejusdem Canonice
instituimus in eadem, ipsumque Corporalem possessionem ejusdem induci fecimus,
cum suis juribus and pertinentiis universis. In cujus rei Testimonium Sigillum
nostrum fecimus hiis aponi. Dat' apud Auckland, 120 Die Mensis Junii Ao Dom'
1351, and nostrae consecrationis septimo.

Memorand' quod 27 die Mensis Julii Anno Dom' 1351 infra Manerium de Auckland,
Dictus Dominus Willielmus renunciavit omni Juri and omnimodi auctoritati quod
and quam in praedicta Capella vel ad eam habuit, seu quovis modo habere poterit
in futurum, asserens se nullum habuisse unquam nec habere titulum in hac part.

To this Village it was that a great Number of the People of Newcastle, headed
by some of the Aldermen, and principal Men of the Town, came to kill the Prior
of Tinmouth, in the first of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth; as may be seen
in that Year.

In the 3d of Edw. 6th, the Town got a Grant of the Chapel of the Blessed Mary
of Jesmond, and some Messuages and Lands in Jesmond; under an annual Rent of 3
s. 4 d. payable out of some Lands in old Heaton, and the Chapel or Chantery of
St. Laurence, with the Messuages called St. Laurence and Little St. Anne's
Close, and Lands in Byker, then in the Possession of Henry Winklive, and Lands
in Killingworth, then in the Possession of John Humley, an annual Rent 4 s.
payable oat of the Lands of the then Christopher Mitford, in Old-Heaton.

These were granted in Consideration of 144 l. 13 s. 4 d.

In the same Year the Mayor and Burgesses granted the Hospital of the Blessed
Mary of Jesmond, with the Lands and Grounds belonging to it, to Sir John
Brandling, his Heirs and Assigns for ever.

The Gentleman of this Place at present is William Coulson, Esquire who lately
built a very pretty House, and accommodated it with Gardens.

St. Mary 's Well in this Village, which is said to have had as many Steps down
to it, as there are Articles in the Creed, was lately enclosed by Mr. Coulson
for a Bathing-Place; which was no sooner done than the Water left it. This
occasioned strange Whispers in the Village and the adjacent Place. The Well was
always esteemed of more Sanctity than common Wells, and therefore the Failing
of the Water could be looked upon its nothing less than a just Revenge for so
great a Profanation. But alas! the Miracle's at an End, for the Water returned
awhile ago in as great Abundance as ever.

Sect. I.
ON the Right Hand, as you descend from this Gate of Pilgrim-street, is the
High-Frier-Chare, which leads into Newgate-street. There was in this Lane a
Fryery, which occasioned it is Name.

IT was situated somewhere about Ficket-Tower, which is the next round Tower to
Pilgrim-gate.

THIS appears from the Account of the Ward belonging to this Tower, a Part of
which is as follows; It shall have to Ward, etc. with all Grey-Fryer-Chare,
from the Barras, opposite to the Ficket-Tower, and the North Kirk Door of the
said Fryery, Westward, and no farther Eastward in that Lane.

GRAY in this Part of the Town says, that in the Upper Part of this Street is a
Princely House, built out of the Ruins of the Blackfriars.

THIS is contrary to the Authority above, where it is called the
Grey-Fryer-Chare.

AND besides it is contrary to several ancient Writings, which call this Chare
Vicus qui ducit ad Fratres minores, or the Chare of the Vide Newgate.
Grey-Fryers, so that it is as great a Mistake to place the Blackfriars here,
as to say the Grey-Fryers were placed in Westgate. Their Situation, according
to the Authority above, must have been in the Garden of Walter Blacket, Esquire in
that Part of it which is opposite to Ficket-Tower, and the rest of that Garden
must have been the Garden and other Conveniences of this Monastery. This House
was founded by the Family of the Carliols, in the Reign of King Henry the 3d,
for they were (as appears from ancient Writings) a Regular and well settled
Body in the Year 1267.

THEY were originally Merchants of this Town, and afterward landed Men.

TWO of this Family succeeded Peter Scott, (who was the First Mayor of
Newcastle, and Mayor for three Years) from the Year 1254, to the Year 1269.

THIS Situation is also confirmed by the Milbank Manuscript which says, that
this Fryery was near to Pilgrim-street-gate, and that there is a little Lane
between it and the Walls, wherein there is an Almshouse; but now both the
Fryery and it are converted to private Uses.

THIS Almshouse flourished as late as Queen Mary's Days, for it is said in a
Writing belonging to Mr. Richard Wall of this Town, the Proprietor of these
Houses, that in the Year 1555/6, in the Reign of Philip and Mary it was
inhabited by poor Religious Women; Inhabitant nunc -- Pauperes mulieres Deo
servientes.

THE Grey-Fryers, or as they are properly called the Franciscans, received
their Name from St. Francis, born in the Duchy of Spoletum in Italy, who was
canonized by Pope Gregory the Ninth; about two Years after whose Death the
Franciscans came into England, and one Diggs, (Ancestor of Sir Dudley Diggs)
bought for them their first Seat in Canterbury.

THIS Order for School Divinity beat all other Orders, and had a Curious
Library in London (built by Richard Whittington) in that Age, costing 550 l.
They afforded in England 110 learned Writers. Fuller.

WHILST this Order flourished in England, this Province was divided into 7
Pacts or Districts called Custodies, because each of them was governed by the
Provincial, who had charge of them all, by a particular superior, called
Custos, or Keeper, who had the Power over all the Convents within his District
or Custody. The 7 Custodies are as follows, The Custody or Wardenship of London
had nine Convents, That of York seven Monasteries, That of Cambridge seven
Monasteries, That of Newcastle nine Monasteries (viz.) The Custody or
Wardenship of Newcastle of the English Province of the Franciscans,
Grey-Fryers, or Friars Minors, had nine Monasteries.

NEWCASTLE Monastery in Northumberland dedicated to St. Francis. DUNDEE,
DUMFRIES HADDINGTON
Monasteries in Scotland. CARLISLE Monastery Cumberland. HARTLEPOOL Monastery
in the Bishopric of Durham. BERWICK Monastery in Northumberland. ROSEBURG
Monastery in Scotland. RICHMOND Monastery in the County of Richmond in
Yorkshire.
THIS Monastry of Newcastle was conventual, but Henry the 7th made them
Observants, Observant, is a Branch of the Franciscans, which are Minores tam
Obsrevantes quam Conventuales and Capuchini. These we find spoken of Anno 25.
Hen. 8. c. 12. who are called Observants, because they are not combined
together in any Cloister, Convent or Corporation, as the Conventuals are, but
only by themselves to observe the Rules of their Order, and more strictly than
the Conventuals do; and upon a singularity of Zeal separate themselves from
them, living in certain Places of their own choosing, of whom you may read
Hospinian de Orig. and Progress' Monachatus cap. 38. fol. 878.


and therefore by Harpsfield is said to be built by him. Stephens, 2 Addit.
Vol. 2d.

AMONGST the learned Men of this Order, we meet with those of Newcastle.

JOHN Scotus alias Duns, or Duns Scotus; there was much Controversy whether he
was an Englishman, a Scot, or an Irishman. He was a Man of a mean Fortune, of
a Wit made for Learning, and wonderful Subtle and Sharp. When he had studied
some Years with great Advantage at Oxford, he returned into Northumberland, his
native Country, as some will have it, and took upon him the Habit of St.
Francis at Newcastle. Being afterward sent to Oxford, he again fell to his
Studies with great Vehemence, 'till he arrived to be Doctor and Professor of
Divinity. Thus he 1st expounded the Master of Sentences at Oxford; and
afterward, in the Year 1304, being appointed Professor at Paris, by the
General of the Order, in the Chapter in Toulouse, he there taught a Course of
Divinity. Thirdly, he did the same at Cologne with wonderful Applause; at which
Time there arose at Cologne the Controversy about the Conception of the Blessed
Virgin Mary, whether she was conceived in original Sin or not? All the
followers of Albertus Magnus affirmed, that she was; Scotus and his Adherents
positively asserted the contrary. Here it was that he gained the Title of Dr.
Subtilis; he published a Lecture on Genesis. Commentaries on the Gospels in 4
Books. Several Books on the Epistles of St. Paul. Sermons of Saints, and of
Particular Times. Two or three Pieces on the Master of Sentences. Quodlibets.
Theological Disputations, Of the Knowledge of God. Of the Perfection of States.
On all Aristotle's Works; and many other Things. Addit. Seph. Vol. I. p. 98.

HE died miserably, 1309, being taken with an Apoplectick Fit, and too hastily
buried: For, Nature having too late wrought through the Distemper, he vainly
mourned for Assistance, 'till, at last, beating his Head against the
Tombstone, he dashed out his Brains, and so expired. Whereupon a certain
Italian wrote thus of him;

Quaecunque humani suerant, jurisque Sacrati
In dubium veniunt cuncta vocante Scoto
Quid? quod and in debium illius sit vita vocata
Morte illum simili ludificante Stropha.
Quum non ante virum vita ingularat adempta
Quam vivus Tumulo conditus ille foret.
What sacred Writings or profane can show,
All Truths were (Scotus) called in doubt by you,
Your Fate was doubtful too: Death boasts to be
The first that choused you with a Falacy;
Who, least your Subtle Art your Life should save,
Before she struck, secured you in the Grave.
THAT he was born here in England I affirm upon the Authority of his own
Manuscript Works in the Library of Merton-College, Oxford, which concludes
thus, Explicit Lectura, Subtula, etc.

HERE ends the Lecture of John Duns, called Doctor Subtilis in the University
of Paris, who was born in a certain Hamlet in the Parish of Emeldon, called
Dunston, in the County of Northumberland, belonging to the House of the
Scholars of Merton-Hall. Gib. page 860.

HUGH of Newcastle, is so called, that being the Place of his Birth: he was
commonly Surnamed the Scholastic Doctor; he was a Franciscan, and a diligent
Follower, and zealous Defender of John Scotus; he took upon him the Habit at
Newcastle; he was one of the Fourteen about Scotus's Tomb; he published some
Things on the Master of Sentences, of the Last Judgment, of the Victory against
Antichrist; he lived about the Year 1320. Stephens's 1st Add. Vol. P. 99.

MARTIN Alnwick, of the Town of that Name in Northumberland, took the Habit of
St. Francis, at Newcastle, in his Youth; being afterward sent to study
Philosophy and Divinity at Oxford, he acquired notable Knowledge in both, and
was made Doctor of Divinity, and Reader of the same among his own Brethren; he
writ Disputations on the Master of Sentences, and died in the Monastery at
Newcastle. He flourished about 1336, 1st Addit. Vol. P. 99.

THE Franciscans of Newcastle were prevailed upon to surrender (for the Abbeys
above the Value of two hundred Pounds, were not within the Statute of
Suppressing, as were the lesser Abbeys) on January the 9th, in the 30th Hen.
8th, it consisted of a Warden, eight Friars, and two Novices.

Sect. II
THE House Gray mentioned, was built out of the Ruins of this Fryery; except
the North and South Ends of it, which were built by Sir Wm. Blacket, Bart, the
Grand Father of the present Possessor Walter Blacket, Esquire

THE Authority above says also, that it is a Princely House, and indeed it is
no less than very stately and magnificent; being supposed the most so of any
House in the whole Kingdom, within a walled Town. It is surrounded with a vast
Quantity of Ground; that Part of it which Faces the Street, is thrown into
Walks and Grass Plats, beautified with Images, and beset with Trees, which
afford a very pleasing Shade: The other Part of the Ground on the West Side of
it, is all a Garden, exceedingly neat and curious, adorned with many and the
most beautiful Statues, and several other Curiosities.

BUT this House is not more remarkable or memorable, upon any Account, than for
it is having been the Lodgings of King Charles the First, whilst he was Prisoner
at this Town.

ON this same Side of the Street, a little below the House now mentioned, is
the Upper-Dean-Bridge, which leads into the Middle-street, Pullen-market,
Flesh-market, etc. From hence downwards is the most beautiful Part of the
Street, the Houses on each Side of it being most of them very pretty, neat, and
regular; such are the Houses of Mr. Edward Harl, Mr. Thomas Biggs, John Rogers,
Esquire Thomas Clennell, Esquire Nicholas Fenwick, Esquire Nathaniel Clayton, Esquire Edward
Collingwood, Esquire Mr. Perith, Mr. John White, John Ogle, Esquire Mr. Thomas Waters,
Matthew White, Esquire etc. But there is one House in particular, which must be
distinguished from the others for it is great Antiquity, and that is the House
abovementioned, called the Pilgrim's Inn: It is on the West Side of the
Street, and adjoins to the North Side of the House of Mr. Edward Callingwood,
just now mentioned, and is exactly 116 Yards one Foot, from the Southmost
Corner of Upper-Dean-Bridge: It is holden of the Dean and Chapter of Durham,
and belongs at present to Mr. James Hargrave.

Sect. III.
BELOW this House, on the other Side of the Street, is a Lane called, Manor
Chare, which leads from Pilgrim-street to St. Austin Friars.

A little below the East End of this Chare, on the Right Hand, is the Tailors
Meeting House: It was formerly at the very End of the Chare, in that House
which Fronts Pilgrim-street, which by the Marks still remaining of a large
Window, seems to have been a Chapel, as well as by the Tradition of the People
thereabouts. There is a Writing in the Custody of this ancient Fraternity,
which I have copied for the Curiosity of it, and is as follows.

TO THE WORSHIP OF GOD, and the Sustentation of the Procession of Corpus
Christi Plays in the Town of Newcastle upon Tyne, after the laudable and
ancient Custom of the said Town; and for the avoiding of Disention and Discord
that has been amongst the Crafts of the said Town, as of Manslaughter and
Murder, and other Mischiefs in Time coming, which has been lately attempted
amongst the Fellowship of the said Crafts of the Tailors of the said Town: And
to induce Love, Charity, Peace, and right amongst the said Fellowship from
henceforth, the Eight Day of October, in the Year of our Lord GOD 1536, it is
assented, agreed, and fully concluded, and accorded by all the whole Fellowship
of the said Craft of Tailors then being, and that in Time to come, shall abide
and dwell in the said Town of Newcastle, Robert Brandling, then Mayor, John
Wren, Sheriff, Thomas Horsley, James Lawson, Gilbert Middleton, Henry Ainsley,
Peter Chater, and Andrew Bewick, Aldermen, and Sir Thomas Tempest, Knt.
Recorder of the said Town; that is to say, First, it is agreed and ordained,
that every Man that has been an Apprentice in the said Town, and has fully
served his Years of Apprenticohood, by the Purport of the Tailors register and
record of his Master, shall be admitted to set up Shop of Tailors Craft and
Work, paying at the Beginning, after the old Use and Custom to the Fellowship
of the said Craft, a Pot of Oil to the said Fellowship, and Yearly to the
Stewards of the said Fellowship, Thirteen Pence to our Lady Light, whilst he
shall be of Power, and Dwelling in the said Town, or within 12 Miles of the
same; Thirteen Pence to the Play every Year, when it shall be played; and that
every Steward, Apprentice, Journeyman, or Hireman, working by the Week Four
Pence a Year; and that every Hireman by the whole Year, or half Year, Three
Pence to the Play every Year, when it shall be played.

ALSO, it is ordained, that every Man of the same Craft, Born and Free within
the said Town of Newcastle, that was never an Apprentice in the said Town,
shall be admitted to set up Shop of Tailors Craft within the same Town, for
Forty Pounds, and to pay one Pound of Wax to the Fellowship of the said Craft,
and a Pot of Oil at his first Admittance; saying also Thirteen Pence to the
Lady Light, Eight Pence to the Play, as is aforesaid: And if any of the said
Fellowship would take excess for their Hand Labor, or if any will not give
them a reasonable Rate for their Hand Labor, the said Twelve Sworn Men shall
ponder and assess, duly and truly the Hand Labor, at reasonable Prices for
their Work; And that none of the said Fellowship Work in their Craft upon the
Saturday after Eight of the Clock at Evening, and keep Holy the Sunday, the
Vigils, and Festival Days, upon Pain of Six Pound of Wax for every Default.

ALSO, it is ordained, that every Man of the said Fellowship, upon Corpus
Christi Day, shall come to the Procession of the Time assigned, and if he come
not to the Fellowship before the Procession past, to pay a Pound of Wax; and if
he come not before the Procession be ended, to pay two Pound of Wax. Also that
he come in his Livery, if he be warned so to do, upon Pain of a Pound of Wax:
And also that none of the said Craft shall have Livery, nor go in Procession
with the said Fellowship, before he has holden Shop in the said Town by a
whole Year; to the intent, that his good Conditions and Demeanours shall be
known.

ALSO, it is ordained, that he that pays not his Yearly Thirteen Pence to our
Lady Light, upon St. John's Day in May, he shall pay a Pound of Wax to the same
Light, over and above the said Thirteen Pence; and if he pay it not by Corpus
Christi Day, then we and Fellowship following, if he be of Power so to do; and
that amongst the Fellowship well known, he to be discharged of his Livery, or
to make reasonable Fine for it.

ALSO, it is ordained, that all the Tailors now in Being, and that in Time
coming, shall be dwelling as Fellows in the said Town, shall every Year, at the
Feast of Corpus Christi Day, go together in a Livery, and play their Play, at
their own Costs, after the Ordinance of their Stewards.

ALSO, it is ordained that every Brother of the said Fellowship come in his
Livery, when he shall be warned by their Beadle; that is to say, to the
Procession upon Corpus Christi Day, St. John in May, the Day that the Plays
shall be played, and upon the Day of their general Meeting; and that the
Fellowship dispose them to have a Mass and a Dirge for the Brethren of the said
Fellowship, and other Meetings to be assigned; and that at the Even of the Day
of the making of the same, shall a Dirge be done, and a Mass for the Brethren
of the said Fellowship; and likewise shall a Dirge be done, and a Mass upon the
Morn for all the Brethren and Sisters of the said Fellowship, passed, present:
And that he that is of the said Craft, and not admitted to their Fellowship,
who for any Cause induceing him, will have the Fellowship assembled, shall pay
to their Beadle Two Pence for assembling them.

ALSO, it is ordained, that when any Man of the Livery of the said Fellowship
dies, their Light shall go a-fore him to the Church at his Burial, and abide in
the Church lighted the Mass Time, and whilst he be buried; And if there be a
Dirge done, the Light not to be lighted at the Dirge Time: And when a Man's
Wife of the said Livery dies, the half of the Light shall go before her, in the
said Form; and if the whole Light go a-fore her, then to pay Forty Pence to the
said Fellowship, for the burning of the Light and warning it, and that the
Stewards shall be there to govern the Light: And if any of the said Fellowship,
reasonably warned to be there, abide not while the Mass be done, he shall pay a
Pound of Wax, if he has not a reasonable excuse, to be allowed by the Stewards.
And when any of the said Liveries shall be Wedded, if any of the said
Fellowship, reasonably warned to be there, comes and abides not while the Mass
is done, he shall pay a Pound of Wax, unless that he have a reasonable Excuse
to be found, at the Discretion of the Stewards.

MOREOVER, if it happens that any of the said Fellowship, being in the Livery,
do Dye, and his good Friends will cause a Mass and a Dirge to be done for him,
of their proper Cost, every Year of the Day of their Burial: If it please the
said Friends of the said Brother, so Dead, to warn the Stewards; then the
Beadle shall go to all the Brethren of the said Craft and Livery, and warn them
to be at the Mass and Dirge, if it be done on one Day of their Livery, and them
to abide the Dirge and Mass Time, upon Pain of Three Pence, without a
reasonable Excuse provable; and if the Dirge be done the Night a-fore, to be at
the Mass on the Morrow, and at the Dirge at their Pleasure.

IN WITNESS whereof to the said whole Fellowship and Brethren of the said
Craft, severally have set their Seals, and the said Mayor and Sheriff have set
their Seals of Office, and likewise the said Alderman to this Ordinance have
set their Seals, and written their own Names with their own Hand, the last Day
of January, and in the Twenty Eighth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
King Henry, after the Conquest of England, the Eighth.

A little below this Hall of the Tailors, and the Appurtenances thereof, was
probably the House of Laurentius Acton, which bordered on the South, upon the
House of the present Mr. Thomas Waters. This Laurentius was Mayor of Newcastle
1433, 1435, 1436, 1437, in the Reign of Henry the 6th. Opposite to this House
of Laurentius Action, is the Market for Wheat and Rye, every Tuesday and
Saturday.

BELOW this again are three narrow Lanes, two on the West Side of the Street,
and one on the East: Those on the West are the Nether-Dean-Bridge, leading into
St. Nicholas Churchyard, which has been spoken of before, and the
Painter-Hugh, or as it is called in a Writing, as old as Edward the Third's
Reign, Payntourhogh, which leads into the Street called the Side. It is from
Pilgrim-street a very great Descent into the Side; but it is made tollerably
easy, by having Stairs on one Side of it. It seems to have got it is Name from
the River flowing by the Bottom of it up to the Nether-Dean-Bridge, etc. For
Hugh signifies a Steep-Hill, or Bank, and Painter is a Term made use of by the
Sailors for a Rope, which they fasten the Boat with. This Street therefore was
called the Painter-Hugh, because it was the Hugh which the Painters were made
fast to.

ONE William Porter had a House at the End of this Street, which he granted to
John de Chambers, a Burgess of this Town, in the Reign of King Edward the
Third, Anno 1361, on Condition that he paid to the Prioress and Convent of
Lambly, eighteen Shillings per Annum.

THE other Lane or Street, on the East of this Street, is Silver-street, close
by the North-side of All-hallows Churchyard; it leads into Pandon. It is said,
but very improbably, to have got it is Name of Silver-street, because of the
Fish-market, which was kept a little below it, at the Stock-Bridge. It was
anciently called All-Hallowgate, for All-Hallowgate is said to be Ex part
Boreali Ecclesiae omnium Sanctorum; it was also called Temple-gate. Mr.
Nicholas Lamb, whose House is in this Street, finds it called Jewgate, in his
Writings; but when, or for what Reason it bore that Name, I know not.

WE come now to the Church of All-Hallows, which stands a little below
Silver-street, and on the same Side of the Street with it, viz. at the very
Bottom of this Pilgrim-street.

Sect. IV. Of ALL-HALLOWS CHURCH.
WHO this Church was founded by, I have met with no Account, nor any of the
Time it was built in; only this is certain, it must have been built before the
Year 1286, but how long before, I know not. For in that Year I meet with an
Account of Mr. Smith, P. 245.
the Churchyard of All-Hallows, which is a plain Proof that the Church was
then in Being.

GRAY is of Opinion that it was dedicated to All-Hallows, or All Saints, from
the ancient Name of that Part of the Town Pampedon, which he says was so called
from (...); imagining, I suppose, that it was so called of the Romans,
All-Hallows Church.
(who inhabited this Part of the Town) after the Temple at Rome, the Pantheon,
which was dedicated to all the Gods.

THIS Church is seated upon a Hill, which is much about the same Height with
the Situation of St. Mary's in Gateshead, and upon the same Line with it.

IT is not so long as St. Nicholas, being only 55 Yards, one Foot, a Quarter
long; but it is broader, as being 25 Yards, two Foot broad. The Steeple is but
or a mean Height, being a Square Tower, with only one Spire arising from it.
The Bells belonging to this Church were founded in the Year 1696. They were
cast out of the Metal of that famous Statue of King James the Second, which
stood on the Sand-Hill. They were founded in the Ground belonging to St. Austin
Friars, in that Part of it, which is in the Backside of the Hospital of the
Holy Jesus. Their Sound is not so Melodious as the others in this Town, but the
Note is exceedingly exact, and more tuneful than the others.

WHATEVER Robert Rhodes did to this Steeple, his Name is under the Belfry of
it, as at St. Nicholas. In one of the Registers belonging to this Church of
All-Hallows, we have the following Account. About the Round where the Bells are
drawn up into the Bell-house in the Steeple, there is written, Orate pro anima
Roberti Rhodes. His Arms are also without, at the East End of the Church, on
the Breast of an Angel; which, as I take it, is a Tiger, or Greyhound on a
Chief, and three Annulets on the Escutcheon. The like is in St. Nicholas
Church, etc. In St. John's also, on the Outside of the South Porch,
over against the Almshouse, there is on a Square, Orate pro anima Roberti
Rhodes. I have also seen the same in Tinmouth Castle in a Round, on the
North-side, after you are within the Gate, upon the Wall; which be-like was in
some Part of that great Church, when it was a Cell of St. Alban's.

UPON the East End of the Chancel, in the South-east Window, there was the
Picture of our Savior at large, but in the Time of the Rebellion it was wholly
taken away.

NEXT to it, as you go up the South Side; there was the Picture of a Boy
standing upon checkered Pavement, as it seemed, and on the Glass under him,
Like as the Jamen moist and cold,
Is full of Tempest Day by Day,
So is one Child of ten Years old,
Has no Understanding, but all on Play.


THE same Authority adds, I suppose the rest of the Months were also in this
Window in former Times, but I have seen it only; and it was taken away also in
the Time of the Rebellion.

IN the Window above the South Door, which leads into the Quire, toward the
Porch, were the Pictures of Roger Thornton's Children, Two Men and Three Women
Kneeling at Altars. There remain now only Two of the Women.

THERE are higher up this Isle, in the Windows toward the Porch some
Characters, one is like an (I) with an (S) through it, and other Three
Characters, which are the Merchants Skin-mark, for they are but a little
Different from the Skin-mark, which is upon the Stone of Christopher Elmer. It
is a Token that some Merchant was a Benefactor to the Church, and perhaps some
Part of the South Wall of the Church: I take it to be the Skin-mark of Roger
Thornton, for the very same is in the Chantery of St. Peter, over against his
Tomb.

TRADITION says, that from the West End of the Vestry to the Porch, the old
South Wall was taken away, and rebuilt further into the Churchyard by Roger de
Thornton. That the old Wall was farther into the Church than the Wall now is,
is plain from the Piece of it now remaining, which is on the East End of the
Vestry; and I think the Pictures in the Windows abovementioned, is a good
Confirmation of the Truth of the Tradition of the Builder. In that Window next
the Porch Door, but one, there have been the Pictures of the Twelve Apostles.
There are now only remaining St. Matthew, St. James the Less, St. Andrew, St.
Philip, St. James Major, and another.

THERE are three Galleries in this Church, one on the West End, and, another on
the East End of the Nave, and the other in the North-Isle. That on the West End
was built in the Year 1712. The Organ which was placed in the middle of it was
built at the same Time. It is a very long Gallery, and by much the most
beautiful in the Church. On the North-end of it are the Seats of the Children
belonging to the Charity-School. The Gallery on the West End, is called the
Butchers Gallery.

THE other Gallery on the North-Isle is the Sailors Gallery. It is said in a
Memorandum made at the Bottom of it, to have been built and finished by the
Trinity-house in Newcastle upon Tyne, in the Year 1618, John Holbourne then
Master. It was beautified in the Year 1720, Robert Bailiff being then Master,
with three or four Devices on the South Side of it. One Panel has the Picture
of St. Paul 's Shipwreck; another, our Savior's being asleep in the Storm;
then there is the Arms of the Trinity-house; another Draught is that of our
Savior's taking Peter by the Hand when he was sinking in the Waves; and the
other is that of Jonah vomited up upon the dry Land.

THE Chancel of this Church stands upon a large Vault, which consists of a
pretty long Entrance, arched at the Top, and of a pretty large Square Room,
with a curious Pillar in it, which is the grand Support of eight large Stone
Arches. The Entrance into this vault is in the Churchyard, on the North-side
of it.

AS you enter into the Chancel from the Nave of the Church, you have on the
left Hand of you, an old Pair of Stairs, to which are adjoining the Stairs of
the Butchers Gallery: These Stairs formerly led into the same Place, but then
it was into a Gallery different from what the Butchers Gallery is now. They led
into a Loft or Gallery called the Rood Loft.

THE Rood was an Image of our Savior upon the Cross, made generally of Wood,
and placed on a Loft made for that Purpose, just over the Passage out of the
Church into the Chancel; out of this Mystery, they say, that the Church
represents the Church Militant, and the Chancel the Church Triumphant; and who
will pass out of the Former into the Latter, must go under the Rood Loft, that
is, they must go under the Cross, and suffer Affliction. This Image was wont to
have the Virgin Mary on one Side of it, and St. John on the other. Stavely, C.
Hist. P. 199.

A few Years ago the Chancel was beautifyed. It is pannel'd round with
Wainscot. The Table is a large curious Marble Stone, which was given to the
Church for that Use by an unknown Hand. On the large Panel, immediately above
the Altar, is this Figure; I. H. S. or, Jesus Hominum Salvator: Above that
again is the Picture of a Dove, curiously carved in Wood; and above that again,
in a Golden Glory, is the great Name of God (...), which signifies his most
absolute self Existence: He was, and is, and is to come.

THIS is to point out, by way of Emblem, the Persons of the Trinity. God the
Father, by the Word JEHOVAH, he having ordered Moses, when he went to the
Israelites, to bring them out of Egypt; to say, I Exodus iii. 14.
AM has sent thee, or the Lord Jehovah, who exists eternally, or always is.
The Dove is the Emblem of the Holy Ghost; for he is said to have descended in a
bodily Shape like a Mark iii. 16.
Dove. And the Letters with the Cross in the Middle of them, Point out the
second Person of the glorious Trinity, who dyed upon the Cross for the Sins of
the World.

ON the Top of the East End of the Altar, above the Things now mentioned, are
the Representations of Three large Candles, which are an Emblem of the Light of
the Vid. Vulg. Antiquit' P. 133. and Wheatley Com. Prayer. Pa. 109.
Gospel, which either is, or should be read at the Altar.

ON the South Side of the Altar is a Prothesis, or Side-Altar, that the Priest,
according to the Rubric, may more conveniently Place the Elements upon the
Altar.

PLATE belonging to ALL-HALLOWS, and their Inscriptions.
The greater Flaggon.
IN usum Ecclesiae Omnium Sanctorum apud Novicastrenses Lagenam hanc dono dedit
MICHAEL MIDFORD Mercator, in Testimonium Pieatis erga Deum and Patriam. An.
Sal. MDCXCVIII.

Underneath that,
Calix Benedictionis cui Benedicimus, nonne Communicatio Sanguinis Christi est?

The lesser Flaggon.
D^o O. M. and Omnium Sanctorum Sacello Dicat Consecratque This Gentleman was
the Town's Physician, and had a Salary allowed him from the Corporation. He was
confessed a Man very knowing in his Profession, and of great Piety and
Religion. The Rev. Mr. T. Atherton, his Son, B. D. who was born in this Town,
and Educated at the great School here, Fellow of Christ College in Cambrid^e.
and for many years the chief Tutor of that Society, is now Rector of Little
Canfield in Essex. The Place of Town's Physician, was after the Death of Dr.
Atherton disposed of, and still is, to such a Number of Surgeons to attend the
Poor, as the Mayor for the Time being thinks proper.

Whilst I am upon this, and commemorating a worthy Physician of this great
Town, I must not omit to observe that this Place was probably never better
served this Way, than at present. The following Gentlemen, viz. John Lowther,
Esquire M. D. of Sidney College in Cambridge; Adam Askne, M. D. of St. John's
College in Cambridge; William Cowper, M. D. of Leyden; Cuthbert Lambert, M. D.
educated at D^^way in France; are Men eminent in their Profession, and shine
among the Crowd of those who always frequent a Place so populous.


H. Atherton, M. D. Dec'r 25, 1697.

Two Challices marked A. S.H. with Covers.

Church Wardens, 1628.
Robert Blenkinsop, Laurence Carr, Wm. Gibson, Wm. Duxfield,
Two other Callices, which have been gilded with Gold, with Covers, 1571.

A Silver Dish, Weighing 34, 14. Gilded with Gold.

Dicavit Deo Ecclesae O'ium Sanctorum infra Villam Novicastri super Tinam, Anno
Salutis, 1718.

Two Salvers marked A. S.H. with this Inscription, Corpus meum hoc est.

Neman Shafto, Church Wardens, 1629. Robert Young, Church Wardens, 1629. Hen.
Rowcastle, Church Wardens, 1629. Tho. Roderforth, Church Wardens, 1629.
THERE were Seven Chanteries belonging to this Church. The Chantery of St.
Thomas; The Chantery of our Lady; The Chantery of St. John, the Evangelist; The
Chantery of St. Peter; The Chantery of St. Catherine; The Chantery of St. Elgie
or St. Loye, and the Chantery of St. John the Baptist and St. John the
Evangelist.

1. THE Chantery of St. Thomas was founded by John Puthore, Clerk, the Yearly
Value 4 l. 8 s. 4 d.

2. The Chantery of our Lady, no Deed of Foundation to be shown; 4 l. 5 s. 10 d.

3. THE Chantery of St. John the Evangelist, founded by Richard Willisby and
Richard Fishlake; the Deed of Foundation is lost; which arose out of some
Tenements situated in the Sandhill and Side; 4 l. 15 s. 4 d.

4. THE Chantery of St. Peter is that waste Place above the Vestry, opposite to
the Tomb of Roger de Thornton. This was founded by the said Roger de Thornton,
as appears from the License granted to the said Roger Vide Foundation of St.
Catherine 's Hospital.

Licentiam Dedimus praefato Rogero quod ipse quandam Cantariam de Uno Capellano
Divina ad Altar Beati Petri in Capella omnium Sanctorum celebraturo, etc


by King Henry 4th. It was erected about the Year 1411, that he might be prayed
for whilst he lived, and his Soul when he was dead (by a Priest set apart for
that Purpose) together with the Souls of his Father and Mother; and Angnes his
Wife, and also of his Ancestors and his Children, and the whole Company of the
Faithful departed, as is mentioned in the King's Grant to him.

ON the East End of this Chantery there are still remaining the Pictures of St.
Lewis, St. Barbara, and St. Elisabeth.

THE yearly Value of this Chantery was 6 l.

5. THE Chantery of St. Catherine was founded in the Reign of Edward the Third,
by Robert of Chirton, Burgess of Newcastle, and Marriot his Wife, who was the
Daughter and Heirefs of Hugh Hankyn and Beatrix his Wife; The yearly Value of
it, 5 l. 3 s. 8 d. All-Hallows Vest.

IN the Book abovementioned, belonging to the Church of All-Hallows, we are
told, that there is at the South-East End of the Church, upon the Outside, a
fair E and F, and on each of them half a Catherine-Wheel; but what they signify
no Man living knows. At present there is no such Thing. Whose Name the
Letters were placed for, I believe it is indeed impossible for any Man living
to tell: But as for the Catherine-Wheels, it is easy to conclude that they are
placed on the South-East end of the Church to signify that St. Catherine's
Chantery or Altar was under the South-East Window.

6. THE Chantery of St. Loye or St. Elgie, founded by Richard Pickering in the
Reign of Edward the 3d, the yearly Value 3 l. 8 s. 4 d.

JOHN Dent, Esquire by Deed dated 12th of Feb. in the 35th Year of Hen. the 6th,
granted an annual Rent of 8 s. issuing out of his Houses, to Richard Doxforth
the then Priest of this Chantery.

7. THE Chantery of St. John the Baptist, and St. John the Evangelist by John
Ward. 7 l. 15 s. 8 d.

AMONGST the Chanteries of this Church we meet with none of the Holy Trinity;
but in the 16th of the Reign of King Hen. the 8th, after the Mariners became a
Body, and their House was called the Trinity-house, we find an Altar in it
dedicated to the Trinity; for in one of their Writings it is said, that Thomas
Hebborne should be Partaker of all Masses, Good-Prayers, and Suffrage, which
should afterward be celebrated, said, and done by the Chaplain and Priest of
the said Fraternity within the Trinity-house, and at the Trinity-Altar within
the Church of All-Hallows for evermore.

I know not where to fix the Place of this Altar, any more than I can fix
particularly, the Places of some of the ancient Chanteries; except it was, as
some will naturally Conjecture, in the Porch behind their Gallery. And yet
there are some Reasons against this Supposition; For this Porch was a Chantery,
they had only an Altar; and as a Chantery, it must have been filled with a
Priest, who had an Altar to himself and consequently their Altar must have been
some where else. If it be said that they perhaps built this Porch, I answer,
that if they had done so, it would have been called a Chantery not only an
Altar. Besides, the Building is visibly older than their Chapel, their Priest,
or their Altar. For they can scarce be supposed to have had any one of the
Three, before the Beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, and that is a
Date too late for so old a Piece of Building.

Of the Burial Places and Monuments in the South-Isle; some of which are these
following.
NIGH the Church Porch is a large Blue Stone, the Burial Place of Mr. William
Milbourne, Hoastman, who dyed in the Year 1662. This Stone formerly belonged to
St. Austin's Fryery, and was removed from thence by Thomas Ledger, when he was
Mayor, in the Time of the Civil Wars. He brought it to St. Nicholas Church, and
ordered one Milbourne, a Mason, to erase the ancient Inscription. But ^inding
no Room to lay it where his Father was buried in St. Nicholas, he sold it to
the Mason, who sold it again, to the Person whose Name it still b^ars.

HENRY Milbourne; Hoastman, 1^98.

JOHN Binks, Master and Mariner. Dorothy, his Wife departed, March the 11th,
1722.

MARCUS Browellus, Generos' Attorn^t' de Banco, Soc' Hospit' Furnival, Lond'
Hoc sibi et suis posuit, et caelis Parata Aeterna Mansio.

Ipse Obiit secuudo Die Novembris, Anno Domini, 1729.

STEPHEN Coulson, Merchant Adventur^^, married Mary, Daughter of Mr. Henry
Waters, Hoastman: She departed, July the 6th, 1728. He the above named Stephen
Coulson, Esquire Alderman, and sometime Mayor of this Town, departed this Life,
October 25th, 1730.

SEPULCRUM Wolstani Paston.

WILLIAM Harrison, Hoastman, July 10th, 1721.

AS you go from the South-Isle into the Body of the Church, there is a large
Blue Stone, which was the Stone of Christopher Elmer, as appears from the
Beginning of the present Inscription.

ANOTHER Authority in this Church, calls this Stone an ancient Stone, and says
the ancient Inscription was, Jesus have Mercy of the Souls of Christopher
Elmer, his Wife and Children, and of all Souls, Mercy, Mercy, Lord.

THERE was on it the Elmer's Arms, the Merchants Arms, and his Skin Mark which
was 4

JOHN Henzell, 1725.

THE Burial Place of John Morris, Hoastman.

SUB hoc Marmore tumulantur Exuviae Edwardi Collingwood, de Byker, Armigeri
Northumbrae Vice comitis Anno 1699. Qui obijt 11mo Aprilis, 1701, Annoque
Aetatis 71. Una cum Uxoris Annae Exuvijs, Quae obijt 30 Novembris, 1694, per
quam Hos habuit liberos, Radulphum, and Martinum Mortuos, Edvardum and
Dorotheam Superstites.

DOROTHEA Collingywood, Vita decessit duodecimo die Decembris, 1701. and hic
Sepulta. Gulielmus Filius Secundus dicti Edvardi Filij obijt Secundo Die
Martij, 1709. Edvardus Filius obijt primo Die Martij, 1720. Maria Filia Natu
Prior Dicti Edvardi Filij obijt Decimo Die Junij, 1724. Maria Filia Gulielmi
Bigg Generosi Uxor dicti Edvardi Filij obijt duodecimo Die Octobris, 1727,
Quinque Enixa Liberos, viz. Edvardum, Mariam, Annam, Isabellam, and Gulielmum,
Isabella Filia Natu minima dicti Edvardi, Filii obijt nono die Octobris, 1728.

AT the East End of this Tomb of the Family of the Collingwood's, under a Stone
with a Latin Inscription on it, which formerly belonged to one Blount, lies
interred the Body of Margaret Bourne, Wife of Henry Bourne, Curate of this
Church of All-Hallows. She dyed August the 8th, 1727, in the 30th Year of her
Age.

(...) D. O. M.
M. S.
THOMAE HOCKIN,
Gen' and ROGERI CLARKE,
Proponetis ejus Devonia nati una
Eodemque die Sept. Scilt. Octo Salutis
Anno MDCLXVIII. Aetatis Autem
Thomae LXX. Rogeri XIX.
Novocastro super Tinam,
Invicem moriere.
JOHANNES CLARKE,
Posteriori patruus
Utrique charus.
H. M. M.
Hie cecidere duo, queis
Non Separavit amata
Sors eadem vivis thalamo
Morientibus Urna.
NEAR to this Monument of Thomas Hockin, is an old Stone, with this Inscription
upon it.

Here lies Buried under this Stone,
The Right Worshipful Mr. Robert Ellison,
Merchant Adventurer, of this Town Twice
Right Mayor he was
All worldly Pomp for ever thus must pass.
Elisa, his Wife, his Children, and Friends him by,
With all shall rise at the last Cry.
One Thousand six hundred seventy and seven,
The last of January he went to Heaven.
SEVERAL Years ago the Church Wardens were desired by one Matthew Blount, to
sell this Stone; but they loathed the Request, because it bore the Name of a
Mayor of Newcastle, which they knew, after the Sale of it, would not be long
there.

JOHN Armorer, Hoastman,

CHRISTIAN Bulman, Oct. 8. 1723.

RALPH Soursby Merchant Adventurer.

NEAR the Quire-Door is an old Stone, which formerly belonged to Mr. Robert
Brandling; upon which was the Brandling's Arms, with this Inscription.

Here lies laid under this Place,
Robert Brandling, Merchant Adventurer, by God's Grace,
Margaret, his Wife, and Children dear,
In fear of God they lived here.
Like as the Brand does flame and burn,
So we from Death to Life must turn.
MR. Nicholas Fenwick had this Stone given him by one Mr. Brandling, who lived
at Ipswich, and caused the said Inscription to be obliterated; after that he
set upon it the Arms of the Fenwicks.

NIGH to this is another Stone belonging to the same Family of the Fenwicks.

CHARLES Atkinson, Hoastman.

THERE is an old Stone which lies between the Vestry and Quire-Door, with it is
Inscription erased. It belonged to Alderman Leonard Carr, who gave 5 l. yearly
for ever to the Poor of this Parish, and appointed it out of diverse Houses in
the Butcher-bank. He was an Alderman of the Town before the Rebellion, and
turned out by the Rebels.

HE deserves a better Monument.

OPPOSITE to the Vestry, on the South Side of the Altar, is a large Stone of
that Kind called Touchstone, raised above the Level of the Church. It is
covered with Brass on the Top of it, which has cut in it the Effigies of Roger
Thornton, and his Wife, and also the Pictures, of the Apostles and other
Saints, together with the Arms of his own Family, and that of the Family of the
Lamleys. Because the Arms of the Lumleys are on the Tomb, along with Thornton's
Arms, it has been concluded, that the Daughter of this Roger married into this
Family; but this is a grand Mistake. This Roger died in the Year 1429. in the
Reign of Hen. the 6th. Whereas Sir George Lumley, who married Elizabeth, the
Daughter of Roger Thornton, died in the 23d of Hen. the 7th, 1508.

It was therefore Roger Thornton's Granddaughter, the Daughter of his Son
Roger Thornton, that was married into this Family.

Dugdale in his Bar. Lumley, gives the following Account. Thomas Lumley, having
been summoned to Parliament from the first of Edward 4th to the 12th of Hen.
7th inclusive, by Reason he had married a Bastard Daughter of King Edward the
4th, departed this Life, leaving Issue George his Son and Heir, which George
took to Wife Elizabeth, one of the Daughters and Heirs of Roger Thornton, Esquire a
very wealthy Merchant of Newcastle upon Tyne, by whom he had the Lordships of
Witton, in Com' Northumbr' Lulworth and the Isle in the Bishopric. This Roger
founded the House of White-fryers in Newcastle. But after this Marriage,
possessing these Land, in the Right of his Wife, there happened great Suits,
and sharp Contests, between Giles Thornton, a Bastard Son to the said Roger,
and him, concerning the Inheritance of them: In which Quarrel this George
killed the same Giles, in the Ditch at Windsor-Castle.

This George lies interred amongst his Ancestors in Chester Church, in the
County of Durham; He had Issuely the Daughter of Roger Thornton, Sir Thomas
Lumley; he died Anno 23 Hen. 7.

John Thornton of Netherwittton, Esquire is a Descendant of this Family of the
Thornton's of Newcastle, and a very regular Possessor and Proprietor of the
Manor of Witton.




The Inscription upon the Stone is as follows.

Hic jacet Domisella Agnes quondam Uxor Rogeri Thornton, quae obijt in Vigelia
sanctae Katerinae, Anno Domini MCCCCXI propitietur Deus. Amen.

Hic jacet Rogerus Thornton Mercator Novicastri super Tinam qui obijt Anno
Domini Millesimo CCCCXXIX and iii Die Januarii.

AS he was in his Lifetime a great Benefactor to Churches, Religious Houses,
the Poor, etc. so he forgot them not in his last Moments, as appears by his
last Will and Testament. Vide Anno Christ. 1429.

JOHN Gibson, Merchant Adventurer, died 17th of Feb. 1594.

WILLIAM Robinson, Goldsmith, 1652.

WILLIAM Ramsey, sometime Mayor of this Town, 1653.

WILLIAM Ramsey, Jun. sometime Mayor of this Town, 1716.

Vivimus and Vitae Mors mala Fausta Subit GEORGE Bulman Baker and Brewer. 1710.

Naught can exempt from Death's Imperial Hand;
When it arrests the Soul at God's Command;
Each State and Sex, as well the High as Low,
Must once salute the Grave and thither go.
RALPH Gray Merchant Adventurer, sometimes Sheriff of this Town, May 30, 1666,
aged 82.

The East End of the CHURCH.
HENRY Rawlin Merchant Adventurer, Alderman, and sometime Mayor of this Town,
May 8th, 1666.

Sepulchrum Richardi Burdus, Obijt 20th Dec. 1719.

JESUS be merciful to the Souls of Richard Borrel, his Wife and Children he
Obijt 20 Nov. 1508. This is also the burial Place of Mr. Abraham Dixon, Master
and Mariner, who died Nov. 11. 1700.

THOMAS Andrew, 5 Oct. 1708.

THOMAS Wallis's burial Place, Shipwright.

MATTHEW White, Esquire twice Mayor of this Town, Governor of the Merchant's and
Hostman's Companies. He had Issue 10 Children, Nicholas, Margaret, Elizabeth,
Martha, Nicholas, Matthew, Mary, Isabel, Robert, and Jane. He departed Oct. 10,
1716.

WILLIAM Aubone, Esquire Merchant Adventurer, Alderman, and sometime Mayor of this
Town, Sept. 20, 1700.

On Marble on the Wall.

UNDER the adjacent Marble is interred the Body of Thomas Wrangham, the famous
and beloved Ship-builder of this Town, he married Jane the Daughter of Mr.
Robert Carr, by whom he left Issue two Sons and one Daughter; Thomas, William,
and Jane. He built Five and Forty Sail of Ships, and dyed of a Fever in the
42d Year of his Age, May the 26th, 1689. He was a Man of a most generous
Temper, of a plain and unaffected Conversation, and a sincere and hearty Lover
of his Friend.

Statutum est omnibus semel mori. THE Stone of the Wrangham's belonged formerly
to the Family of Mr. Robert Babington, and had his Arms on it.

About a Blue Stone is inscribed, All Worldly Pomp away does Pass,
Like fading Flowers, and withered Grass.
George Borne, Cooper, and his Wives,
When Death does end all mortal Strifes,
Trust by the precious Death and Bloodshedding
Of Christ, to have Life everlasting.
THE Date of this is worn off, but I meet with him in the Quality of
Churchwarden of All-Hallows, in the Year 1578.

In the NORTH-ISLE.
JOHN Cosyn, Draper and Alderman, died the 21st of March, Anno Dom' 1661.

HERE lies interred the Body of George Morton, Draper, Alderman, and twice
Mayor of this Town, he departed this Life the 26th Day of November, Anno Dom'
1693.

THIS John Cosyn, as well as Mr. Rawlin, (whose Monument is over against his in
the South Corner) was an Alderman in the Time of the Rebellion, of whom Sir
George Baker said, they were not truly Justices, though in the Place of Justices.
This Cosyn was the first Exciseman that ever was in this Town, and a Captain
against the King; yet upon his Stone Mr. Pringle (as they say) caused this to
be written, A Conscience pure, unstained with Sin
Is Brass without, and Gold within.


BUT some took Offense and said thus, A Conscience Free he never had,
His Brass was naught, his Gold was bad.
Milbank.


THE Burial Place of Henry Waters, Hoastman, and Dorothy his Wife, she departed
24th of Feb. 1719.

GARRET Cock, 1637.

ROBERT Young, Merchant Adventurer, 1670.

Post mortem aeternitas. JOHN Johnson, Hoastman.

ROBERT Cook Master and Mariner, Nov. 1673.

Sepulchrum Thomae Potts, Genesis et Margarettae uxoris.

WILLIAM Liddel, 1580.

THOMAS Brown, Non mortuus sed Dormio:

WILLIAM Dawson, 1707.

THOMAS Crawforth, 1690.

MICHAEL Clerk.

THOMAS Dawson, Ropemaker.

THE Burial Place of Thomas Monkhouse, Tin-Plate Worker.

JOHN Colvil, Baker and Brewer, 1689.

TIMOTHY Rawlet, Hoastman.

JESUS have Mercy on the Souls of John Hodshon Tailor, Margaret his Wife, and
their Children; he departed the 11th of Nov. 1505.

JOSEPH Colepits Hoastman, 27 May, 1729, aged 41 Years.

ROBERT Watson, 1724.

CUTHBERT Snow, 16 Aug. 1694.

SEAMEN'S Porch.
JAMES Brankstone, 23 Nov. 1727.

WILLOUGHBY Hall, Shipwright.

JACOBUS Metham Generosus vitam pro aeternitate mutavit 23 Apr. 1684.
Willielmus Bigg Generosus, et Johannes Hindmarch, Armig: Humanae sortis et
fragelitalis memores, hoc sibi suisque Deo volente supremum in Terris posuerunt
domicilium, usque Festum Resurrectionis mortuorum alta Pace Gaudendum Maxima
nosce mori vitae est Sapientia, vivit
Qui moritur, sivis vivere, Disce mori.
23 April 1684.


THE Burial Place of Thomas Airey, Hoastman.

THE Burial Place of Richard Hinkster, and Jane his Wife.

JOHN Green, Confectioner, 13 May, 1681.

ANN Colvil, Oct. 12, 1686.

West End of the CHURCH.
Hic jacet Corpus Esther Starkin quae obijt 22 Oct. 1681.

JOHN Addison, Fuller and Dyer.

GEORGE Graham, 28 December 1727, aged 82.

THERE is a Stone near the Font, which has many Years been supposed to be very
ancient. There was nothing to be seen upon it, but the 4 Evangelists, one at
each Corner; It is the blue Stone at the East Side of the Font. It has on it at
present the Name of Ridley.

In The MIDDLE-ISLE.
WILLIAM Stephenson Ropemaker's Burial Place.

THOMAS Allison's Burial Place.

GEORGE Mitford, Barber Surgeon, and Jane his Wife.

HENRY Towart, Master and Mariner, his Burial Place.

CHANCEL.
RALPH Fell, Merchant Adventurer, 11th Feb. 1680.

JOHN Simpson Hoastman, and Jane his Wife their Burial Place. In this Grave of
theirs was buried their eldest Son Anderson, so called as being a Descendant of
the worthy and loyal Family of the Anderson's of Braidley, who suffered so much
in the Time of the Civil Wars, in Defense of their King and Country. He dyed
May the 17th Anno 1730, in the 21st Year of his Age. He was a Youth of fine
Parts, and good Learning, a great deal of Sweetness of Temper, and strict
Religion.

THERE is in this Part of the Church a very large Stone, insculp'd with Brass,
of which several Years ago no more could be read than hic Tumulatus -- dono dei
datus mitis clero -- promotor Ecclesiarum. My Authority imagines this to be the
Burial Place of Robert Rhodes. He says, the Picture upon the Stone was very
like that of Roger Thornton; all the Difference is, that the Gown of this
Picture is not so deep as that of Thornton's. He conjectures it to be the
burial Place of Robert Rhodes; because of the Words Promotor Ecclesiarum, lib.
All-Hall'. The Words Promotor Ecclesiarum are not now to be found. However, had
they been there still, I think they are but a weak Argument to prove that
Robert Rhodes was buried here, when it is considered that he founded a Chantery
in St. Nicholas, that his own Soul, and his Wife's might be prayed for. For
People were generally buried in the same Church, and near the very Place, where
they erected a Chantery or an Altar.

BUT whoever it is, this I think may be safely concluded from the Grandeur of
the Grave Stone, that he was some wealthy Person; and from his being Promotor
Ecclesiarum, that he was also Religious.

THE Effigies is very Tall, and is surrounded with very curious Pictures of the
Saints, and some other Things; but the Brass is now tearing off, and going very
fast into Ruin. It is a pity it should not have more care taken of it, as it is
an Ornament to the Church, and the Monument of it is Benefactor. The Promoters
of Churches should be always remembered with the most grateful Respect, that
they may be shining Lights to the most distant Ages.

I shall close the Monuments of this Church with an Epitaph, said to have been
made upon Robert Wallas, formerly Clerk of this Church.

Here lies Robin Wallas,
The King of good Fellows;
Clark of All-Hallows,
And a Maker of Bellows:
He Bellows did make 'till the Day of his Death,
But he that made Bellows could never make Breath.
LEGACIES left to the POOR of ALL-HALLOWS Parish in Newcastle upon Tyne.
l. s. d. LEFT by Mr. Thomas Smith, Shipwright, yearly for Ever, to be paid at
Easter, out of several Houses, the Sum of 04 18 10 LEFT by Mr. Cuthbert
Woodman, Weaver, yearly for Ever, to be paid at Easter, out of a House in
Pilgrim-street, opposite to the Manor Chare-head, the Sum of 00 12 00 LEFT by
Mr. Robert Anderson, per Ann. which has not been paid since 1651, the Sum of 05
00 00 LEFT by Sir Alexander Davison, yearly for Ever, to be paid out of the
Town's Chamber, at two Payments, viz. Michaelmas and Ladyday, the Sum of 02 00
00 SIR Thomas Davison 01 00 00 MR. Mark Milbank 03 00 00 MR. William Carr 01 10
00 SIR Mark Milbank 06 00 00 MR. John Rumney 02 10 00 16 00 00 LEFT by Mr.
Andrew Aldworth, out of Houses in Akewell-gate, due on St. Andrews's -day, the
Sum of 01 00 00 LEFT by Mr. Leonard Carr, per Ann. out of several Houses in the
Butcher-Bank 05 00 00 LEFT by Henry Hilton, Esquire 6 l. per Ann. now reduced by
Act of Parliament to 04 00 00 LEFT by Mr. William Carr, yearly for Ever, to be
paid at Easter, out of several Houses 01 06 06 LEFT by Mr. William Gibson,
Merchant, per Ann. out of a House in Cowgate, now in the Possession of Mrs.
Carr, not been paid for several Years 01 00 00 LEFT by Mr. John Cosyns, Draper,
the Sum of two Shillings per Week, which is Weekly to be distributed in Bread
to such poor People of the said Parish as come to hear the public Ordinances
of God every Lord's Day, which he charged upon the Fleece Tavern by the Key,
and amounts per Ann. to 05 04 00 LEFT by Mr. David Sheavil, Surgeon, per Ann.
out of several Houses 04 00 00 LEFT by Mr. Tho. Davison, to be paid yearly in
the Month of December, out of the Merchants Company 01 10 00 LEFT by Sir
William Blacket, Bart. per Ann. out of a House at Tyne-Bridge-End, the Sum of
02 00 00 LEFT by Mr. John Collier, Shipwright, per Ann. to be paid at
Christmas; the Sum of 03 00 00 LEFT by Mr. Richard Hutchinson, Rope-maker, per
Ann. out of an House on Sandhill 05 00 00 LEFT by Mr. George Collingwood,
House-Carpenter, per Ann. to be given to two poor Widows, who are to have it
but once, so that all the poor Widows in the Parish may in turns enjoy the
same; due at Martinmas, and distributed by the Minister and Churchwardens 02
00 00 LEFT by Timothy Davison, Esquire paid out of the Merchants Company, to be
distributed amongst credible Freemen, or Freemen's Widows (not of the
Merchant's Company) yearly in December 01 05 00 LEFT by Henry Holmes, Esquire per
Ann. to be made at two several Payments, viz. three Pounds the Monday after
Christmas Day, and three Pounds the Monday after Easter Day, the Sum of 06 00
00 LEFT by Nicholas Ridley, Esquire per Ann. and charged upon his Lands in Heaton,
to be given eight Days before Easter 01 00 00 LEFT by Robert Fenwick, Esquire per
Ann. and charged upon the Angel Inn, to be paid at Christmas 04 00 00 LEFT by
Mr. John Be, Master and Mariner, per Ann. charged upon his two Messuages and
Shop, by the Key, to be distributed by the Minister, for the Time being, at
Christmas 06 00 00 LEFT by Matthew White, Esquire per Ann. and charged upon an
House in Pilgrim-street, to be distributed upon Christmas Day, or the Day
after, among ten poor Housekeepers 01 10 00 LEFT by Mrs. Isabel, Wife of
William Wrightson, Esquire per Ann. the Interest yearly to be distributed on
September 30th 50 00 00 LEFT by Mr. William Harrison, Hoastman, per Ann. the
Interest yearly to be distributed on St. Andrew's Day 150 00 00 LEFT by Mrs.
Margaret Ramsey, per Ann. the Interest yearly to be distributed 20 00 00 LEFT
by Mr. Edward Potts, Shipwright, per Ann. the Interest yearly to be distributed
20 00 00 LEFT by Mrs. Anne Handcock, per Ann. the Interest to be distributed by
the Churchwardens to such poor People as are constant frequenters of divine
Worship 50 00 00

All Saints CHARITY-SCHOOL in Newcastle upon Tyne, was set up by a Voluntary
SUBSCRIPTION, in the Year of our Lord, 1709, and has been continued ever since
on the same Footing; and further supported by several accidental Contributions.
The NAMES of the SUBSCRIBERS, and Sums subscribed when the SCHOOL was Founded.
l. s. d. ROBERT Fenwick, Esquire Mayor, per Annum 4 00 00 John Cuthbert, Esquire
Recorder 2 00 00 Mrs. Phaebe Blakiston 2 00 00 Matthew White, Esquire 2 00 00 Mr.
William Wrightson 2 00 00 Mr. Henry Milburn 2 00 00 Mr. Henry Reay 2 00 00 Mr.
John Baxter 1 00 00 Mr. Thomas Robinson 1 00 00 John Rogers, Esquire 5 00 00 Mr.
George Nixon 1 00 00 Mr. William Raper 1 00 00 Mr. Joseph Green 1 00 00 Mr.
William Harrison, Senior 1 00 00 Mr. Lionel Dixon 0 10 00 Mr. John Anderson 0
10 00 Mr. Lionel Forster 0 10 00 Mr. Edward Brumwell 1 00 00 Mrs. Jane Binks 0
10 00 Mr. Robert Vipont 0 10 00 Mr. John Maddison 1 00 00 Mr. Edward Gray 1 00
00 Mr. Henry Waters 1 00 00 Mr. John Johnson 1 00 00 Mr. Francis Armorer 1 00
00 Mr. Luke Conyers 0 10 00 Mr. John Story 1 00 00 M,. Jeremiah Cook 1 00 00
Mr. Thomas Turner 1 00 00 Mr. Thomas Campion 1 00 00 Mr. John Binks 0 10 00 Mr.
Jonathan Tyzack 0 10 00 Mr. Perigrine Henzell 0 10 00 Mr. Bartholomew Kent 0 10
00 The Reverend Mr. Leonard Shafto 2 00 00 The Reverend Mr. Charles Ward 2 00
00 Mr. Robert Webster 0 10 00 Mr. Lionel Colepits 1 00 00 Mr. Thomas Wallis 0
10 00 Mr. Matthew Bell 1 00 00 Mrs. Dorothy Dawson 1 00 00 Mrs. Julian
Hindmarsh 1 10 00 Brought over 51 10 00 Mr. Mark Browell 1 00 00 Mr. Edward
Colvill 1 00 00 Mr. Richard Burdus 0 10 00 Mr. George Hinckster 0 10 00 Mr.
Gerrard Robson 1 00 00 Mr. Matthew Dale 0 10 00 Mr. William Harrison, Junior 1
00 00 Mr. John Simpson 1 00 00 Mr. Thomas Allan, Senior 1 00 00 Mr. Thomas
Allan, Junior 1 00 00 Mr. Henry Atkinson 1 00 00 Mr. Timothy Rawling 1 00 00
Mr. William French 0 10 00 Mr. Ellis Inchball 0 10 00 Mr. Ralph Reed 1 00 00
Mr. Charles Atkinson 2 00 00 Mr. William Green 1 00 00 Mr. Tobias Blakiston 1
00 00 Mr. John Swaddell 1 00 00 Mr. James Tailor 1 00 00 Mr. Samuel Joblin 1 00
00 Mr. James Dawson, Yarmouth 1 00 00 Mr. Jonathan Rodam 1 00 00 Mr. Robert
Shafto 0 10 00 Mr. Thomas Elliot 0 10 00 Mr. George Hankin 0 10 00 Mrs. Frances
Reed 0 10 00 Mr. Henry Dent 0 10 00 Mrs. Mary Harrison 0 10 00 Mr. George Iley
1 00 00 Mrs. Barbary Nicholls 2 00 00 Mr. John Campbell 1 00 00 Mr. Lancelot
Cramlington 1 00 00 Robert Eden, Esquire 2 00 00 83 00 00

The Names of the SUBSCRIBERS, and Sums by each paid in the Year 1731.
l. s. d. WALTER Blacket, Esquire 5 00 00 Nicholas Fenwick, Esquire 7 00 00 Matthew
White, Esquire 2 00 00 Henry Reay, Esquire 2 00 00 John Rogers, Esquire 5 00 00 Mr. William
Dixon 0 10 00 Mr. John Maddison 1 10 00 Mr. Thomas Binks 0 05 00 Mr. Henry
Waters 3 00 00 Mrs. Mary Johnson 1 10 00 Mr. Francis Armorer, Senior 1 10 00
Mr. John Story 1 00 00 Mrs. -- Andrews 0 10 00 The Reverend Mr. Farrington 2 00
00 Brought over 32 15 00 The Reverend Mr. Shafto 2 00 00 Mr. George Colepitts 1
10 00 Mr. Ralph Sowerby 1 10 00 Mr. Matthew Bell 1 10 00 Mr. Thomas Wallis 1 10
00 Mrs. Julian Hindmarch 1 10 00 Mrs. Jane Rodam 1 10 00 Two Mrs. Browells 1 10
00 Mr. John Simpson 1 10 00 Thomas Allan, Esquire 2 00 00 Mr. Lionel Allan 1 10 00
Mr. Henry Atkinson 1 00 00 Mr. John Morris 1 10 00 Mr. Charles Atkinson 2 00 00
Mr. John Colvill 1 10 00 The Trinity House 6 00 00 Matthew Fetherston, Esquire 2 00
00 Mr. Henry Coulson 2 00 00 Mr. Thomas Dennet, London 1 00 00 The Butchers
Company 6 00 00 The Shipwrights Company 3 00 00 The Surgeons Company 1 10 00
The Rope-makers Company 1 10 00 Mr. Thomas Wass 1 10 00 Edward Collingwood, Esquire
1 10 00 Mr. Joseph Smith 1 10 00 Mr. John Anderson 1 10 00 Mr. George Simpson 1
10 00 Mrs. Anne Harrison 0 10 00 Mr. Cuthbert Nicholson 0 15 00 Mr. Thomas
Shafto 1 10 00 The Reverend Mr. Maddison 0 15 00 Mr. John Burfield 0 15 00 Mr.
Christopher Dawson 1 10 00 Mr. Joseph Liddell 1 10 00 Mr. Francis Armorer,
Junior 1 10 00 Joseph Ledgard, Esquire 1 10 00 97 00 00

Money collected at All Saints Church when the annual Sermons were preached for
the Benefit of the Charity-Children.
l. s. d. Anno 1709 THE Rev. Dr. Ellison 15 10 06 1710 Mr. Shafto 16 02 00 1711
Mr. Charles Ward 23 09 00 1712 Mr. Wilcox 24 07 02 1713 Mr. Cuthbert Ellison 22
16 04 1714 Mr. Shadforth 25 17 00 1715 Mr. Browell 26 19 2 1716 Mr. Farrington
20 12 00 1717 Mr. Chilton 23 01 09 Brought over 198 14 11 1718 Mr. John Ellison
21 06 06 1719 Mr. Cowling 20 02 05 1720 Mr. Dockwray 19 14 06 1721 Mr. R.
Cuthberts 17 11 08 1722 Mr. Sharp 27 03 00 1723 Dr. Mangey 22 04 06 1724 Mr.
Bourne 21 10 08 1725 Mr. Bradford 17 14 02 1726 Mr. William Hall 15 03 06 1727
Mr. Fetherston 17 19 09 1728 Mr. Thompson 16 04 10 1729 Mr. Turnor 17 08 05
1730 Mr. Sacker 23 04 09 1731 Dr. Banson 23 18 05 1732 Mr. Turnor 16 16 07 496
18 11

Accidental CONTRIBUTIONS.
l. s. d. Anno 1709 FROM unknown Hands, by the Rev. Mr. Char. Ward 03 03 09
1711 Mr. Alderman Whinfield's Legacy yearly 03 16 04 1712 The Town of Newcaste
toward Building a Gallery for the Charity Children in all Saints Church 15 00
00 From unknown Hands by the Rev. Mr. Char. Ward 02 09 00 1713 Mr. Thomas
Campion's Legacy 20 00 00 Mr. William Harrison's ditto 20 00 00 1714 Madam
Rogers 50 00 00 Mr. Thomas Wass 05 00 00 Mr. Michael Bland 02 07 00 The Coopers
Company 00 10 00 1715 Mrs. Mayor's Legacy 02 00 00 The Surgeons Company 01 00
00 Edward Collingwood, Esquire 00 15 00 The Rev. Mr. Farrington 00 15 00 1716 Madam
Nichols Legacy 10 00 00 Mr. Edward Slater 00 15 00 The Rope-makers Company 01
10 00 Mr. Alderman Ramsey's Legacy 50 00 00 Mr. Alderman Atkinson's Legacy
yearly 05 14 00 1717 From Stockholm and Yarmouth, by Mr. Ja. Dawson 11 00 00
From a Person who desired not to be Named 50 00 00 1718 Mr. Samuel Green's
Legacy 100 00 00 Some Company at the king's-head by Mat. White, Esquire 00 16 00
1719 Mr. Thomas Elliot's Legacy 100 00 00 1720 Mr. Thomas Burdus's ditto 10 00
00 Mrs. Ramsey's ditto 25 00 00 1721 Mr. James Clay's ditto 05 00 00 From a
Person which desired not to be Named 20 00 00 Mr. Tyzack's Legacy 05 00 00 1722
Capt. James Taylor's Legacy 50 00 00 Mrs. Mary Lane 05 00 00 1724 Mrs. Mary
Collingwood's Legacy 01 00 00 Brought over 577 11 01 1724 Mrs. Mary Jackson's
ditto 05 00 00 Mrs. Christian Bulman's ditto 20 00 00 Mrs. Spearman's ditto 10
00 00 1728 Mrs. Isabel Collingwood ditto 01 01 00 1729 Mr. Joseph Colpitts
ditto 20 00 00 Mrs. Reed's ditto 50 00 00 Mr. Thomas Bates ditto 50 00 00 Mr.
Alderman Coulson's ditto 50 00 00 783 12 01

THERE are 41 Boys taught to read, write, and cast Accounts, by John Davenport,
the present Master: And 17 Girls are taught to read, knit, sew, make, and mend
their own Clothes, by Hannah Johnson, the present Mistress.

THESE Children have Coats and Caps once a Year, and Shoes, Stockings, Shirts,
and Bands twice a Year: And at their leaving the School, they have Forty
Shillings each to put them out Apprentice, or equip them for Services, and each
of them a Bible, with the Common Prayer, a Whole Duty of Man, and Lewis's
Catechism.

THE Magistrates of Newcastle gave a Room, wherein the Girls are taught, and
contributed toward Building a Gallery in All Saints Church for the Children,
and likewise gave Ground, whereon to build a School for the Boys, and a House
for the Master: The Charge of which was defrayed out of several Legacies left
to the School.

TWO Hundred Thirty Four Boys and Girls have been in all put out since the
School was set up.

IN the Year 1728, some Gentlemen of this Parish founded a Lecture by
Subscription, for the Instruction of the People in the Rubric and Liturgy of
the Church. It was settled upon Henry Bourne, the Curate of this Church, and
was opened on Low-Sunday the said Year. It is held every other Sunday in the
Summer at 6-o'Clock in the Evening, and continues from Low-Sunday, 'till the
Sunday after Holy-Cross, or the 14th of September.

The FOUNDERS and BENEFACTORS Names at the opening of it.
CUTHBERT Fenwick, Esquire Mayor. SIR WILLIAM Blacket, Bart. RICHARD RIDLEY, Esquire
NICHOLAS Fenwick, Esquire HENRY Reay, Esquire STEPHEN Coulson, Esquire EDWARD Collingwood,
Esquire THE REV. Mr. Bradford, Vicar of Newcastle. MR. John Simpson MR. Charles
Atkinson MR. Joseph Liddell MR. Henry Waters MR. George Hinkster MR. Joseph
Colepitts MR. John Morris MR. Joseph Smith MR. James Hargrave THOMAS Hindmarsh,
Esquire MRS. Alice Colepitts MR. Ralph Sowerby MR. William Selby MR. John White MR.
Francis Armorer MR. Thomas Allison
SINCE then Mr. Henry Coulson, Mr. George Mitford, Mr. Richard Johnson, Mr.
Thomas Hall, Mr. William Trotter have increased the Number of Subscribers.

THE Curate of this Church is the Minister of it. The Vicar pays him 4 l. per
Annum, and the Crown 5 l. The rest of his Income arises from the Surplice Fees,
Register, etc. It was formerly the Custom to have two Clerks for this Church.
But in the Year 1708, it was thought more convenient for the Parish, and less
Burdensome to the Minister (who had one of the largest Cures in the Kingdom to
manage) to have an Assistant; accordingly Abraham Wilcox, M. A. was put into
the Clerk's Place, which was vacant by the Death of John Pinkney, and was
allowed the Fees of the Clerk for Weddings, Burials and Christnings; which
amounts to 50 l. per Annum: Mr. Wilcox was succeeded by Ambrose Fenwick, M. A.
afterward Vicar of Standfordham; He by William Hall, etc.

THERE are other two Clergymen belonging to this Church, which are Lecturers,
and paid by the Town; the one for Preaching in the Morning has 100 l. per
Annum, and the other for Preaching in the Afternoon 100 l. per Annum.

ALL the Ministers of this Church I have been able to collect are these
following.

The CURATES.
SAMUEL Barker, 1617. ROBERT Bonner, 1639. He was both sequestered and
imprisoned for his Loyalty in the Civil Wars. ROWLAND Salkeld, 1660. TIMOTHY
Fenwick, 1672. RALPH Gray JOSEPH Bonner, afterward Vicar of Bolam. PETER
Straughan, 1695. ANTHONY Procter, 1697. RICHARD Musgrave, A. B. 1703. CUTHBERT
Ellison, A. M. of Lincoln College, in Oxford, the present Vicar of Stannington.
HENRY Bourne, M. A. of Christ Col. Cambridge, 1722. The present Curate.
Morning LECTURERS.
Durant R. Predeux in the Time of the Civil Wars. LEONARD Shafto, A. M. WILLIAM
Mair. NATHANIEL Ellison, M. A. afterward Vicar of St. Nicholas. NATHANIEL
Chilton, A. M. LEONARD Shafto, A. M. He was also Rector of Gateshead, he was a
very useful Preacher, a Man of great Generosity and Hospitality, a hearty and
sincere Friend, and one of extensive Charity and Benevolence. He died August
27, 1731, and was buried in Gateshead Church. Sept. 27, 1731. Hugh Farington,
M. A. formerly Fellow of St. John's Col. in Camb. succeeded him, who is the
present Lecturer.
Afternoon LECTURERS.
THOMAS Knaggs, A. M. RALPH Emmerson, A. M. CHARLES Ward, A. M. an excellent
Preacher. HUGH Farrington, A. M. HENRY Fetherstonhaugh, B. D. late Fellow of
St. John's Col. Camb. the present Afternoon Lecture.
THERE are Prayers at this Church every Day at 10-o'Clock in the Morning, and 4
in the Afternoon. The Sacrament is administered at this Church every second
Sunday in the Month. It was formerly usual for the Town to present this Church,
at the High Festival of Easter, with twenty one Gallons of Wine.

OPPOSITE to the West Stairs of this Church is an Almshouse, which was in good
Repair, as we are informed by the Milbank Manuscript, about 100 Years ago, at
which Time the Churchwardens allowed them 20 s. per Annum, for Coals for four
Women. It is now in very bad Repair, and going fast into Ruins. At present the
People in it, are allowed eight Chaldron of Coals per Annum, and three
Shillings per Quarter by the Churchwardens.

ON the South Side of this Church are two Pair of Stairs; those opposite to the
Quire-Door lead into a narrow Street called the Dog-bank; but formerly, as
appears by some ancient Writings, Silver-street: The other Pair lead into the
Butcher-Bank, which is a narrow Street, and a great Descent. It is mostly
inhabited by Butchers, who have their Shops and Houses there. In this are many
narrow Lanes called Chares, which lead into the Key-side. This leads into the
Street called the Side, and into the Sand-hill. It was called formerly
All-Hallows Bank.

CHAP. IX. Of the CASTLE-YARD.
IN order now to go regularly down into the lower Parts of the Town, let us set
off from the South Side of the Steeple of St. Nicholas, which leads directly to
the Top of the Street called the Side. Whilst I am here I cannot help observing,
that were the Houses belonging to Mr. Partis, etc. which are situated from the
Porch Door of St. Nicholas, to the said Street, taken away, the Belfry and
Steeple would look much more grand and magnificent; and whereas this Great
Ornament of the Town is now almost hid as a Traveller comes up this Street, it
would then be wholly exposed, and strike the Beholders with Awe and Wonder.

AFTER you have crossed the upper Part of this Street, there is a Passage
leading to Bailiff-Gate, which has a Turn upon the Left Hand, that goes into
the Castle-yard, the Place where is situated the Castle of this Town.

BEFORE the Conquest the old Round Tower was probably in Being, and was the old
Castle, or Fort of Monkchester; and after the Conquest, when the other Castle
was built, it was called, (to distinguish it from the old Castle) the
New Castle, which in a small Time after gave Name to the whole Place. Something
to this Purpose are these two or three Words about it, in the Manuscript of
John Milbank, Esquire That this new Castle may be distinguished from the old one.
The Use of this Tower, as the same Authority informs us, was made to secure the
Pass to the Bridge in former Times.

THIS new Castle was built by Robert Curthois, the Son of William the Conqueror
in the Year 1080 as has been before observed. But notwithstanding this, and
that it gives a new Name to the Place, yet whatever Privileges belonged to
Monkchester (for so the Town was then called) continued with it, nor did the
Castle impair them in the least.

De reb. Novocast.
IT has been a Building of very great Strength, and very fit for what it was
designed, and yet in the Reign of King John we have an Account of it is being
repaired by that King, and that he was obliged in the making of a Ditch to
destroy diverse Houses, for which he satisfied the Owners, as may be seen in our
Account of that King's Charter to this Town.

THE first Account we meet with of it after it was built, is of it is being
besieged by William Rufus. For Robert Mowbray, Earl of Northumberland, having
opposed him, he came down and laid Siege to the Castle, and conquered
Newcastle; upon which Robert fled, and absconded in Bamburgh-Castle; but was
afterward taken by the King's Party, and carried Prisoner to Windsor.

AMONG several Rents and Revenues arising to this Castle, the following were
some.

THE Barony of the William Herron, Hen. I. eum Feost:
Herons, which contained One William regularly descended from this William died
in the 25th of Edward the 1st, and left no Male Issue; so that Emelin, his only
Daughter, was the Heir of the Barony. She married into the Family of John Lord
D' Arcy, and transferred this Manor of Haddeston and diverse others into that
Family. Lord D' Arcy abovementioned, died possessed of this Manor at Norton in
Lincolnshire, 30th Edward the 3d. In the 1st of Hen. IV. Thomas Lord Lumley
died possessed of it, and left it to Sir John Lumley his Brother. This Family
is so named from Lomley a Town situated on the Bank of the River Were, where
their Seat was. They are descended from Liulph, a Person of great Nobility in
the Time of King Edward the Confessor, who married Algitha the Daughter of
Aldred, Earl of Northumberland. Sir George Lumley, Knight, he that married the
Granddaughter of Roger Thornton of this Town, was in great repute in the
County of Durham, in the Reign of Edward the 4th, being High Sheriff in the 2d
of that Reign; in the 6th, Knight of the Shire; in the Year 8, High Sheriff
again, in which Office he continued three Years more.

But none of this great and ancient Family was ever higher in the Esteem of his
Prince, none in greater Repute in his Country, than is the present noble
Successor, Richard, Earl of Scarborough, who is also Viscount Lumley and
Waterford, Baron Lumley of Lumley, Master of the Horse to his Majesty, Lord
Lieutenant of the Counties of Durham and Northumberland, Knight of the most
Noble Order of the Garter, one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council,
etc.


Haddeston, Chirton, This Village is about two short Miles distant from the
Town of Newcastle. How it came out of the Hands of this Family of the Herons,
is not known. But in the 11th of Edward the 2d, it was the Lordship of Jeffrey
de Scrope, of Masham in Yorkshire. After him Ralph, Lord Graystake, was Lord of
it. In the Reign of K. Henry the 6th, this Manor was in the Possession of
William Fitz Hugh, who died and left it to his Son Henry. It is now in the
Possession of Mr. Tho. Bigg and Mrs. Jane Sanderson, who have there a House and
Garden, at which they reside in the Summer Season.


Little-Benton, Coldwell, This Place in latter Ages was the Seat of the
Wodrington's, who in the Reigns of Henry 6th, Edward 4th, and Henry 8th, were
High Sheriff's of Northumberland.
Swinburne, and Flatford paid for Castle-ward and Cornage; l. s. d. For
Castle-ward 00 13 00 For Cornage 00 05 10

THE Hen. I. Simonem de Devilstone, Feof:
Barony of Dilstone, containing Dilston, a small Village, standing on the
South Side of the Tyne, called in old Books and ancient Records, Devilstone,
from a small Brook running on the West Side of it whose Name Bid says was
Devilsburn, and emptying itself into Tyne. The Barony in which it stands takes
it is Name from it, and is at this Day called the Barony of Devilstone. We have
not yet met with the Original Barons of it. We observe a Family in our ancient
Histories, bearing the Surname of Deivill or Deiville, which might probably be
Owners of the Manor of Devilstone, i. e. the Town of Devils, for John Deiville
was Governor of Scarborough Castle in Yorkshire, and built a Castle of his own
at a certain Place called the Hode in that County; but having no ground for
this Conjecture in History, we shall leave it to the Reader to accept, or
reject it, though the Name being a little Unusual, and looking as if its Original
were derived from the Evil Spirit that bears that Name, we thought fit to give
some Account of it.

Bid in the same Place, viz. lib. 3. c. 1. tells us, that here it was that S.
Oswald, armed with the Christian Edith, slew in a fair Field Cedwell the
Briton, a wretched Tyrant, who had before slain Two Kings of Northumberland,
Osrick King of the Deirans and Eanfrid of the Bernicians, and miserably wasted
their Country: But the Author of the Additions of Cambden contradicts Mr.
Cambden, and tells us, that all the Latin Copies of Bid, that he had seen,
say, That Oswald's Victory was obtained in loco qui Lingua Anglorum Denisesburn
vocatur, i. e. in the Place called by the English Deniesburn, and the Saxon
Copies of King Alfred's Paraphrase have Denisses, Deni, ces and Denises burna,
And the Saxon Chronicle has not made any Mention of this Story.

Sir Francis Ratcliffe, or Radelive, Bart. descended of the ancient Family of
Ratcliff's Earls of Sussex, who was made a Baron of this Realm, March 7, 1687-8
did bear the Title of Baron of Dilston, Viscount Ratcliff and Langley, and Earl
of Derwentwater in Cumberland. He died anno 1696-7, and was buried in the
Church of this Place. The last Earl of this Family was James Ratcliffe. He was
beheaded on Tower Hill, Anno 1715. for being concerned in the Rebellion of that
Year.


Devil, or Dilstone, Corbidge, a Town situated upon the North Bank of the River
Tine; which takes it is Name from the Bridge laid there over that River for
Traffic into the Southern Parts of the County, and the rest of England, and
the ancient Roman Name found in Antonine's Itinerary, called Corstopitum or
rather Corstopilum (as it is read in the Edition of H. Surita) which, as Henry
of Huntington testifies was for Brevity Sake called Cure or Cor. Here,
according to the Description of Ptolomy was the Curia Ottodinorum, i. e. The
Court of the Ottodini or Northumbrians. The Manor of this Town, 8 Ed. 2. or
soon after, was purchased by Henry Percy, a wealthy Northumbrian, who was then
in great favor with that Prince. He, making a Settlement of his Great Estate
in the 7th of Edw, the 3d, gave two Parts of this Manor to his Son and Heir
Henry Percy, which he then was in Possession of, and the third Part after the
Death of Hawise, the Widow of John Clavering, who held it then in Dower; but
this Henry died seized of the whole Manor, Feb. 26, 26 Edw. 3. and left it
with other great Estates to his Son and Heir of the same Name, who accordingly
soon after the Livery of his Lands, saving to his Mother Idonea her reasonable
Dower, who had assigned her for it among other Lordships this of Corbridge,
which was not long come into his Possession; but it was settled upon his Death
upon his secured Wife Joan for her Dower, How this Manor was alienated in the
same Reign we cannot discover; but do find 10 Rich. 2d. that Alice the Widow of
Ralph Lord Nevil of Raby had for her Dowry among other Manours and Rents,
Twenty Pounds per ann. out of his Manor of Corbrigge.

At this Day there is nothing remarkable in this Town but the Church and a
little Tower-house, fitted up and inhabited by the Vicars of the Place; yet
there are so many Ruins of ancient Buildings, as prove it once to have been a
large and spacious Town. King John supposing that either an Earthquake or some
sudden Invasion might be the Cause of so great Desolations, and the Inhabitants
had no Time or Way to remove their Wealth, did not doubt but he might find a
great Deal of Treasure upon a diligent Search; but Fortune favored his Attempt
no more than it did Nero's in his Enquiries after the concealed Riches of Dido
at Carthage, for he found nothing but Stones marked with Brass, Iron and Lead.
The Vicarage of this Town being (...) all a Value, as not to be a suitable
Maintenance for the Minister, the Dean and Chapter of Carlisle, since the
Restoration of King Charles II. made an Augmentation to it of 20 lib. per annum.

But though King John discovered nothing considerable here, yet there was found
out accidentally about 40 Years ago, a Thing very remarkable. The Bank of a
small Torrent, which comes down from the Wall's Side by this Town, being worn
away by some impetuous Land floods, the Skeleton of a Man appeared of a very
extraordinary and prodigious Size, the Length of his Thigh bone was within a
very little of Two Yards, and the Skull, Teeth, and other Parts proportionably
monstrous; so that by a fair Computation, the true Length of the whole Body may
be will reckoned at Seven Yards. Some Parts of it were in the Possession of the
right Honorable the late Earl of Derwentwater at Dilston, in 1695, who was
much pleased with the Rarity; but his Lordship not having Notice of it, 'till
it was in a great Measure squandred away, and lost by the careless Discoverers,
he could not by all his Inquiries make it so complete, as any that have a
Regard to such Curiosities could heartily wish it were: But since there was not
found here an entire Skeleton, but Great Numbers or Strata of Teeth and Bones
of a very extraordinary Size, and withal a Sort of Pavement, or Foundation of
Stone running along with these Strata; and since here has an Altar inscribed
to Hercules been dug up, what if we should affirm that these are the Teeth
and Bones of Oxen, and other like Creatures, which were sa^rificed at the
Temple dedicated to Hercules, standing in this Place, Ex Mag. Brit.


Corbrigg, Togeston, etc. paid to the Castle;

l. s. d. For Castle-ward 00 13 04 For Cornage 00 10 00

THE Barony of Whalton, Hwanton or Qualton, a large Manor with many Fees
thereunto belonging, as the Manours of Lington, Linton, etc. It was the Estate
anciently of Robert de Cramavil, which he held for himself and his Heirs by the
Service of three Knight's Fees; but because he did not make Performance to King
John of what he expected, the King seized his Estate, and Reg. 7. bestowed this
Manor upon Robert Fitz Roger, in whose Posterity it continued 'till John Fitz
Robert, who (leaving the old Fashion of framing Sirnames out of the Christian
Names of their Fathers, as his Ancestors had done, and was hitherto used by
many Families) laid aside the Name of Fitz Robert, and at the Command of King
Edward the 1st took the Name De Clavering, dying without any Legitimate Issue,
he settled great Part of his Estate on King Edward the 1st, and his Heirs; and
the rest was either sold in his Lifetime, or left to his own Heirs. This
Manor, by what Title we know not, is found to be in the Family of the Scroops
of Masham, for 13 Ed. 3d, Sir Geffery Scroop, Banneret, died seized of this
Manor of Whalton, with many other Estates, which he left to his Son and Heir
Henry, in whose Posterity (who were summoned to Parliament from the 8th of
Henry IV to the 9th of Henry VIII.) It continued 'till Geffrey Lord Scroop
dying in that Year without Issue, his three Sisters became his Heirs. Ex Mag.
Brit.

Mr. John Shaw, Minister of St. John's in Newcastle, was Rector of this Place
in the Times of the late Rebellion. He was instituted and inducted into his
Living in 1645, but not permitted to enjoy it; however he was allowed to have
the Church of Bolton in Yorkshire, and held it 'till the Restoration of King
Charles, when he came into Possession of Whalton. He was a Person of Eminency
for his Conduct as well as Learning, and was several Times chosen to represent
the Clergy of those Parts in the Convocation. He died in a good old Age in
1689. His Writings should have been commemorated before, they are these
following.

The Pourtraiture of the primitive Saints in their Actings and Sufferings,
according to Saint Paul's Canon, Heb. xi. one Part whereof, to Verse 23. was
preached at Newcastle 1652. The other, from Verse 22 to the End, was preached
at the same Place in 1659. Both which were afterward published in Quarto.

Origo Protestantium, or an Answer to a Popish Manuscript of N. Ns. that would
fain make the Protestant Catholic Religion bear Date at the very Time when the
Roman Popish commenced in the World, wherein Protestancy is demonstrated to be
elder than Popery. Land. 1677 and 79. Quarto.

Answer to the Jesuit's Letter -- Printed with the former Book, and the
Jesuit's Letter with it.

No Reformation of the established Religion. Land. 1685. Octavo.


Walton given by King John to Robert Son of Roger, and confirmed by his
Charter, contained Walton, Ripplingdon, Newham, Denton, Newbiggin, Kenton is a
pleasant Village about two Miles West of Newcastle. It seems to have got its
Name from its Situation; for it stands upon a Hill, and so is a Town that one
may Ken from far, or see at a good Distance. In the Reign of Edward II. in the
Year 1313, when the Battle of Bannockburn was fought, one Sir John de Kenton
Knight* was High Sheriff of Northumberland. It has been in the Possession of
several good Families, and is now chiefly belonging to Walter Blacket, Esquire The
Road to this Village from the Town-moor, has on each Side of it Fields so well
cultivated, and Hedges so adorned with Plantations, that in the Summer-season
it is a most pleasing Walk.


Kenton, Gosford, the Barony of Richard sur Tees, or upon the Teas, because his
Seat was upon the Bank of that River, a Person of great Repute in the Reign of
King Henry I.
Gosford, and Fawden; and also Ogle, or as we find it in old Writings, Oggil or
Oggle, the Lordship and Seat of a Family that took their Name from it, being
called de Oggle. Of this Family our Histories mention John de Oggil in 49 Henry
III. who, for adhering to the rebellious Barons of that Reign had his Lands
extended; but his Descendants recovered their Estate, and Robert de Oggle in 15
Edward III. obtained a License to make a Castle of his Manour-house at Oggle,
and to have free Warren in all his Demesne Lands within his Lordship of Oggle,
etc. in this County. This Robert married Helena Bertram, the sole Daughter and
Heir of Sir Robert Bertram Knight, Baron of Bothail, by whom he had Issue
Robert, who died before his Father, but left a Son Robert, who after his
Grandmother's Death doing his Homage had Livery of her Lands and Castle at
Bothal. He in his Lifetime settled his Inheritance descended to him from his
Ancestors, upon his eldest Son Sir Robert Oggle, and his Heirs,; and for Want
of them, upon his younger Son John, whom he surnamed Bertram, to whom he gave
his Barony of Bothal-Castle. His Grandson Robert being a firm Adherent to the
York-Interest, was by King Edward IV. advanced to the Dignity and Degree of a
Baron of this Realm, by a Summons to his first Parliament, Reg. 1. His
Posterity being further enriched by the Marriages with the Heiresses of Alan,
Heton, and Alexander Kirby, for several Generations enjoyed his Honouur and
this Manor, with his other Estates; but Issue-male sailing in Cuthbert Lord
Ogle, Katharine, who at length became his sole Heir by the Death of her elder
Sister Joan, who was married to Edward Talbot, a younger Son of George Earl of
Shrewsbury, but died without Issue, and was married to Sir Charles Cavendish of
Welbeck Knight, is 4th Car. I. made by Letters Patent Baroness of Ogle of this
Place. Her Son William having been made knight of the Bath in 1610, at the
Creation of Henry Prince of Wales, was afterward advanced to the Degree of a
Baron, by the S^^le and Title of the Lord Ogle, in 1620. He in the great Breach
between King Charles I. and his Parliament, endeavored to support his Royal
Master in his Authority and Power, and did many signal Things for that End, as
raising Forces, fortifying the Town of Newcastle and Tinmouth, defending York,
etc. which Services, though not crowned with the desired Success, yet were of so
great Merit with King Charles II. at his Restoration, that he created him Earl
of Ogle and Duke of Newcastle in 1664. The Title of the eldest Son of this
Family in his Father's Lifetime, is Earl of Ogle, by the Courtesy of England.
Mag. Brit.

Nathaniel Ogle, Esquire whose beautiful Seat is at Kirklaw in Northumberland, is a
Descendant of this ancient Family of the Ogles.


Oggle, Burndon, Horton with Sticklaw and Hereford and Widdrington,
Widdrington-Castle, or Woddrington, the Seat and Manor of an ancient and
worthy Family of that Name, which had often signalized their Valor in the War
against the Scots, and long flourished in great Repute in these Northern Parts,
for Roger de Widdrington, was High Sheriff of this County, 36 Ed. 3d, as was
John de Witherington, 11 Hen. 4th, and the same, or another of his Name, 4 Hen.
6. Roger Wodrington the 10th and 28th of the same Reign; Gerhard Wodrington,
5th Edw. 4th, John de Wodrington nine Years together in the same Reign, and
John de Wodrington, 32 Hen. 8th, 6th Edw 4th, and 1st Eliz. But the Person
which has the most enobled this Family, was Sir William Wodrington, Knt. who
having been High Sheriff in this County, 12th Car. 1st, was created a Baronet,
July 9th, 1642; and having by the breaking out of the Civil War, or soon after,
raised a considerable Power for his Majesty's Service, which he put under the
Conduct of William Cavendish then Earl (but after Duke) of Newcastle, as
General, whereby he had his Share in the Honor of those many Victories that
General obtained at Tadcaster, Yarm, Seacroft, Tankersly, Leeds, Hallifax,
Rotheram, Sheffield, Chesterfield, Gaynsborough and Lincoln, but chiefly at
Bradford in Yorkshire, against the numerous Forces of the rebellions long
Parliament; he was in Consideration of his good Services thus done for the
Royal Cause, advanced to the Honor of a Baron of this Realm, by the Title of
Lord Witherington of Blankney, the Estate which came to him by Mary his Wife,
the sole Heir of Sir Anthony Thorold, Knt. of that Place in Lincolnshire. He
left several Sons, of whom William succeeded in his, P^ea^e and Honor, and his
Grandson William now enjoys them.

This Place was forfeited to the Crown Anno 1715, the Lord of it being
concerned in the Rebellion that was that Year raised against the King. He
suffered not along with the Earl of Derwentwater, Lord Kenmuir, etc. but was
graciously pardoned, and is alive at this Day.


Wodrington, paid for Castleward and Cornage; l. s. d. For Castle-ward 02 00 00
For Cornage 10 00 00

THE Barony of Henzerus. Primus Hugonem de Bolbeck, Feos.
Bolbeck, containing Stifford, Brumhall, Slavely, Shotton, Heddon on the Wall,
Part of the Manor of Hugh de Bolbeck, who descended by the Mother's Side from
the Noble Barons of Mont^chet. He had no Issue Male, but left four Daughters,
Coheirs of his large Barony and Estate, viz. Philippa married to Roger de
Lancaster, Margery to Nicholas de Corbet, and afterward to Ralph Lord
Graystock, (as Mr. Cambden says) But Sir William Dugdale, Baron, 452. tells us,
that it was Ralph, the Son of William Lord Grimthorp; Alice to Walter de
Huntercumbe, and Mand, some Years after to Hugh de la Val, or as Cambden, J.
Lovel. In an Original Charter, dated 1 Steph. whereby some Lands are conveyed
to, and settled on the Church of Winchester, subscribed by a great many Barons,
we have Signum Walteri de Bolbec, Bar. Seld. Tit. Hon. Par. 2. c 5. p. 571. one
Isabel de Bolebec, first Countys of Oxford, founded a Convent of Dominicans in
that City.


Heddon of the Wall, Hedwin East, Thornton, Whitchester, Haughton, Of BENWALL.

Mr. Cambden speaking of Chester on the Street, says, he supposes it to have
been the Condercum, where upon the Line of the Wall, the first Win^ of the
Astures kept Garrison in the Roman Times, as the Notitia tells us. And this he
conjestures, because in the Saxon, Chestre is called Concester, and because it
is but a few Miles from the Wall. But others are of Opinion, that Benwall, a
Village about two Miles West of Newcastle, was the ancient Condercum, because
of the Antiquity of the Place, and its Nearness to the Wall; the Notitia
described the Condercum, as upon the Line of the Wall.

This indeed seems rather probable. For if a Place is said to be situated ad
lineam valli, one would think it should not be far from the Wall, however not
in the wrong Side of Tine. The Places of the Roman Garrisons ad lineam Valli,
as far as I can judge, have always been in these Counties which the Roman Wall
past through; but no Body seen yet found out the least Footsteps of it in the
County of Durham.

In this Village were lately found several Men's with Coins in them, which were
most of them broken and squandered about by the ignorant Diggers; but one of
them being preserved, was given to the Library at Durham, where it remains very
entire.

The Prior of Tinmouth was went to spend some Part of the Summer at this
Village. It is now the Property of Robert Shafto Esquire and has been of his
Ancestors for many Years; the old Tower of Benwell-Hall was the Place where the
Prior resided, and the Chapel, which Mr. Shafto opens, and supplies, for the
Good of the People of his Village, was the Prior's domestic Chapel. This Place
is much frequented in the Summer-Season for its pleasing Situation and
agreeable Distance from the Town, and at all Seasons for the Hospitality of the
worthy Proprietor.


Benwell, Elswick is a Village distant a short Mile from Newcastle, it is
situated on the North-side of the Tyne, upon the Brow of an Hill, not far from
the River. It is exceedingly agreeable and pleasant in the Summer, having about
it some of the richest Grounds, whose Hedges are mostly beset with Trees. It is
a Place much frequented in the Summer-Season by the Town's People. Ralph
Jenison, Esquire Member of Parliament for the County of Northumberland, is the
present Possessor of it.


Elswick, Angerton, Hertbourne, Middleton, Morel, Burneton, Beril, Fenwick, the
Manor and Estate of the eminent and valiant Family of the Fenwicks, whose Seat
is here called Fenwick-Hall. Many of this Family have been Men of Note in the
Reigns of our first Norman Kings; for John de Fenwick was High Sheriff for this
County, 48 Edward III. and again (or it was another of the same Name) and
Richard II. Henry de Fenwick, 6 Henry VI. Roger de Fenwick, 9 Henry VII. Ralph
de Fenwick, Esquire 7th Henry VIII. William Fenwick, 20th 31st of Elisabeth, and
Sir John Fenwick, knight; the with Tear of King James I. Sir John Fenwick his
Grandson, was beheaded in the Reign of King William.


Fenwick Matifin-East-Hawkwell Shalow, Middleton-South, Cambhow,
Hert-Weigh-Hawick, Kirkherle, Rocheley, Newton-Grange, and the Moiety of
Bywell, paid l. s. d. For Castle-ward 03 06 08 For Cornage 01 12 00

THE Barony of Bolam, a small Village, of which Mr. George Forster was
Minister. He was turned out in 1646, and severely fined for not resigning
without Opposition; but was allowed for Fifths 4 l. 6 s. 8 d. which was ill
pail; but not being sufficient to maintain his Family, Joan Rex Feofalio.
he took a Farm, and he was plundered of his Hay and Corn, and had been
imprisoned, but he got Bail. He lived to 1660, when he was restored, and died
aged 81.

The Reverend Mr. George Fenwick, of Christ College Cambridge, is the present
Vicar.


Bolam, containing Bolam, Litedon, Burneton, Thornbury, Cupum, Parvam,
Wittington, Hayden, Belson, Bradeford, Denum, Trewick and Tunstal, paid l. s.
d. For Castle-ward 02 00 00 For Cornage 00 08 00

THE Barony of Henry I. Richardum de Gaugye Feof.
Gaugye, containing Ellingham, Cramlington, the Manor and Estate of Robert de
Gaugi, a great Man in the Reign of King John, and by him entrusted with the
Government of diverse Castles at Times, to defend them against the rebellious
Barons, which he did faithfully and to his own Advantage; for 3d Henry III. it
was certified, that the Barony of this Robert (now as we conceive, called the
Barony of Caugif, for Gaugi) in this County, consisted of this and diverse other
Manours, which he held of the King by the Service of three Knights Fees. This
Manor is now the Property of Robert Lawson, Esquire of Chirton.


Crawlington, Heaton is a small Village distant from Newcastle about a Mile and
a Half Eastward. It has been handed down by Tradition to the present Day, that
it was a Place of Retreat for King John when he came into this Country, and
there are still to be seen the Ruins of an ancient Building, now in the
possession of Richard Ridley, Esquire which carries the Name of King John 's
Palace. Whatever Truth there may be in this Tradition, this is certain, that
there is in the said Gentleman's Ground on the North-side of this old Building,
the Remains of a Fortification, which it is natural to conjecture, was built for
the Safety and Security of this House, and consequently this House must have
been of some great Distinction. And when it is further considered, that this
Village of Heaton is a Part of the Barony of Robert de Gaugy, it may not be
improbable to conclude, that this ancient Building has in some Measure been
what Tradition says it was. For Robert de Gaugy was a great Man in the Reign of
King John, and was entrusted by him (as has just now been observed) with the
Government of diverse Castles at Times, to defend them against the rebellious
Barons, which he did faithfully and to his own Advantage; for in the 3d of
Henry III. it was certified, that the Barony of this Robert in this County,
consisted of this and the other Manours, which he held of the King by the
Service of Three Knights Fees.

This Robert therefore might have had his own House here upon this Part of his
Barony; and as he was so faithful a servant to King John, and entrusted by him
with Matters of such great Concern, it is not improbable but when the King came
to these Parts, he lodged at this House; and this perhaps was the Reason of its
getting the Name it hears at this Day.

This is its ancient Grandeur; its present is, the House and Family of the
worthy Gentleman above mentioned; it was built in the Year 1713, it is a
beautiful House, and so situated, that on the West it overlooks the Town-Moor,
Fenham, and Part of the Lands of the Prior of Tinmouth; on the East it faces
the Sheilds Road; on the North it has a most agreeable Prospect to the Windings
of the Ouse-Burn, of its Woods and Banks, and of the Villages situated on it.
On the South it faces the River Tine. Its Conveniences and Beauties about it,
are on the West Side a Fish Pond, Groves, Wilderness, Gardens, Avenues, and
Numbers of Plantations. On the East a very large and beauteous Quadrangle,
whose Walls are shaded with the choicest Fruit Trees, and whose Area is adorned
with Variety of Knots and Flowers. In this Area, at a due Distance, are two
Images tall as the Life, which declare the Hand of a curious Statuary. On the
North are Gardens and Plantations, and on the South an Area Adorned with Images
and a pleasing Gravel-Walk, beset with Trees and bordered with Flowers.

This Gentleman the Possessor was eldest Son to Nicholas Ridley, Esquire who was
born at Hardriding, in the Parish of Haltwhistle, the ancient Mansion House of
the Family of the Ridleys; where is still to be seen above one of the old
Doors, the Date of the Year of its Building, which was earlier than the
Conquest, and the initial Letters of the Name of the Builder, N. R.

This Nicholas was of the younger Branch of the Ridleys of Wilmotes-Wike; the
Seat as Mr. Cambden says, of the worshipful Family of the Ridleys, which is a
pretty large Castle on the South Side of Tine, and very ancient, as appears
from several Things about it.

A little above this, upon the Banks of the Tine, is the Estate of Mr. Nicholas
Ridley, the younger Son of the said Gentleman.

This Nicholas, Senior, was twice Mayor of Newcastle, in the Year 1688, and in
the Year 1706, and was esteemed a Man of great Honor and Integrity, and an
excellent Magistrare. By his last Will and Testament, dated 7th December 1710,
he gave and bequeathed to the Poor of the Parish of Haltwhistle 40 s. per
annum, out of a little Farm or Tenement called Waggtail-Hall. He also gave a
Rentcharge of 4 l. and 10 s. per annum to the Poor of Newcastle upon Tine, and
50 l. to the Poor of the City of Carlisle. Which said Charities he ordered to
be distributed every Year to the more aged and infirm, eight Days before
Christmas. He left also 20 l. to the Poor of the Township of Hexham. He died
January 22d 1710, and hes buried in St. Nicholas in this Town, at the Entrance
into the Chancel from the Body of the Church.

Of this younger Branch was John Ridley of Hardriding, Esquire who was Major of a
Regiment in the Army of the right Honorable William Marquis of Newcastle, for
the Service of King Charles I.

Besides the Gentlemen of this Family already mentioned, we shall only take
Notice of the two Persons following.

Nicholas Ridley, first Bishop of Rochester, and then Bishop of London. He was
born here, and being educated in Grammar at Newcastle upon Tyne, and in
academical Learning in both Universities, where he took his Doctor's Degree,
was first made Master of Pembroke-Hall in Cambridge, then Chaplain to King
Edward VI. and at length Bishop. He was a Person small in Stature but great in
Learning, and a profound Divine, of whom Dr. Caius says, that quo viro nihil
integrius and egregiis Dotibus ornatius, being Good as well as excellently
endowed. He wrote many Things against the Popish Doctrines, and at length
confirmed his Writings with Sufferings, being burnt near Baliol-College in
Oxford, Anno 1555, 2d and 3d Phil, and Mar. He had a Hand in compiting the
Common Prayer Book, now in Use in the Church of England.

Thomas Ridley, Doctor of the Civil Law in Cambridge; he was the Son of
Lancelot Ridley, and Grandson of Nicholas Ridley, Esquire he was educated in
Grammar at Eaton, and in academical Learning at King's College, Cambridge,
where he was Fellow. Afterward he became a Schoolmaster at Eaton, one of the
Masters in Chancery, when he was Knighted, Chancellor to the Bishop of
Winechester, and Vicar General to Doctor George Abbot, Archbishop of
Canterbury. He was a general Scholar, and wrote a View of the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Law. He died Jan. 23, 1628, and was buried four Days after in
the Parish Church of St. Bennet, near St. Paul's Wharf, London, We meet with
one Mark Ridley, a Physician, a Person of that Note, as to be one of the eight
Pricipals of the College of Physicians, and a Writer; but we do not find that
he was of this Family at Wilmotes-wick. Mag. Britt.


Heaton, Hartelaw, Vide Chap. VIII. of Pilgrim-street.
Jesumuth and Whitby paid l. s. d. For Castle-ward 02 00 00 For Cornage 00 07 02

THE Barony of Marley, alias Morlaw, alias Roger de marly post Conquestum.
Morpeth, containing Morpeth, a Marlet-Town standing upon the Wentsbeck, which
runs through the Middle of it almost; for the Body of the Town is seated on the
Northern Bank of it, and the Church on the Southern; near to which stands on a
shady Hill the Castle, which, together with the Town come from Roger de Merlat,
or Merley, in whose Family it had been for some Successions, to the Lords of
Graystocke, by the Marriage of William Graystocke to Mary, one of the Daughters
and Coheirs of the said Roger. His Grandfather of the same Name 1 Johan. by
paying a Fine of 20 Marks, and two good Palsreys, obtained a License for
holding a Market and Fair at this his Manor of Morpeth. Roger Bertram, another
Baron of these Parts, finding that the Market at Morpeth proved a Detrement to
his Marlet at Mitford, impleaded this last Roger in the County Court of
NorthumBerland for Damages; but King Henry III. Reg. 34, being acquainted with
it, sent his Precept to the Sheriff, prohibiting him to go further in that
Suit, because it belonged not to his Jurisdiction.

This Manor continued some Time in the Family of Graystocke, but Issue-male
failing, it past by the Female-Heirs to the Barons Dacres of Gillesland in
Cumberland, by which their Estate was greatly enlarged; for the Barony of
Morpeth consesteth not only of the Castle and Lordship of the Town, but has
many Villages Members of it, as Grimwest, Ulweham, Hebscot, Schillington,
Twisel, Salwick, two Duddens, Clisten, Cladwell, Stanington, Shotton, Blakedon
North and South, Wideslad, Killingwith, Benton and Waver. This Estate continued
some Generations in that Family of the Dacres; but at length Issue-male
failing, it came by Elisabeth, Sister and Coheir of George last Lord Dacre, to
her Husband the Lord William Howard of Naworth, third Son of Thomas Du^e of
Norfolk, whose Grandson Charles was soon after the Restoration created Lord
Dacres of Gillesland, Viscount Morpeth, and ^ar^ of Carlisle, which Honors
were inherited by his Son Edward, and are new en^oyed by his Grandson Charles,
the third Earl of Carlisle of that Family, whose eldest Son Henry hears the
^^^terary Title of Henry Viscount Morpeth.

The present State of this Town is this: It is a Corporation, governed by two
Bailiffs, annually chosen by the Freemen, and send Burgesses to Parliament, but
not of many Years standing. It has a very good Market on Wednesday weekly, for
Corn, Cattle, and all necessary Provisions, and a Fair yearly on (...)

It is a Post Town, and a good Thorough-fare, lying about 4 Farlo^s on the
Road. The Castle is in Ruins, as most of all the other Castle's in the Nation
are. Here was anciently an Hospital for inform People, on which William de
Merley, a great Man in his Time, bestowed a Caru^ata of Island, but not finding
any Mention of it in the Monathcon, nor in Mr. Speed's Catalogue from Leland,
we suppose in was dissolved long before the general Supprem^^m by King Henry
VIII. Nothing more is recorded of this Place, so far as we can discover, but
that Elisabeth, the Wife of William Lord Grayflock, had for her Dowry an
assignation of this Manor of Morpeth, among other Estates; and that is the
Tear of our Lord 1215, the Townsmen themselves burnt is in part Spite to King
John.

This Place is famous for being the Birthplace of two eminent Physicians, viz.

William Turner, bred in the Universiry of Cambridge, where he became an
excellent Latinish, Grecian, Poet and Orator; be being a very zealous
Protestant, and writing several Books in Defense of the reformed Doctrine, was
very much molested for the same by Bishop Gardener, and others then in Power,
who kept him long in Prison: but having estated by a wonderful Providence, be
fled beyond Sea. At Ferrara in Italy he commenced Do^^r of Physic, gaining his
Degree there with general Applause. He went afterward into Germany, and there
lived in great Gredit and Practice, and died there (as is conjectured) in Queen
Mary's Reign. He wrote a great Herbal, a Book of Physic for the English
Gentry; as also several Treaties about Plants, Fishes, Stones. Metals, etc. He
was worthy (says Dr. Fuller) of our special Notice, because he was both a
Confessor and a Physician, Qualification which we observe not to meet every Day
in the same Person. And

Thomas Gibson, who flourished at the same Time, and was so eminent in his
Profession, that Bale gives him an higher Character than the former. viz. that
he did Aegritndinum fanasiones incredibiles, i. e. incredible Cures of
Diseases. He was a zealous Opposer of the Popish Doctrines, and wrote several
Books against them, and among others, one entitled. The Treasons of the
Prelates since the Conquest; yet not forgetting (...) Profession, for he wrote
upon the Nature of Herbs. He was alive in the last Year of Queen Mary, for Bale
sends forth a hearty Prayer to God for the Continuance of his Health and
Happiness, he being not only his Friend, but so useful in his Generation.


Morpeth, Grimnest Membrum suum, Newham, Hebscot, Shillington, Tuysell,
Saltwick, Dudden-East, Dudden-West, Clyfton, Caldwell, Stannington, Shotton,
Blakedon is a small Village seven Miles North of Newcastle. It stands upon the
great Road to Morpeth; what it was formerly I have little Knowledge. In the
Reign of King Henry III. and Edward I. we meet with one Adam de Blakedon, and
John de Blakedon, who were Bailiffs of Newcastle. At present it is the Seat of
Matthew White, Esquire Son of Matthew White, Esquire who was twice Mayor of Newcastle,
and Governor of the Merchants and Hoastmans Companies. Since the present
Gentleman was the Possessor of it, it vastly surpasses what it was formerly;
and whether we consider the Stateliness of the House, the Grandeur of the
Avenue, the Beauty of the Gardens, or the Art and Ornaments of the curious
Fish Pond, we shall find them exceeded by few in the whole Country.


Blakeden, Wetteslade North, Wetteslade South, Killingworth, Benton was
formerly the Manor and Estate of Sir Philip Somerville of Wickmore in
Staffordshire, 29 Edward III. and was found by an Inquisition taken of his
Estate at his Death, which happened in that Year. The Church with certain Lands
in this Parish he gave to Baliol-College in Oxford, for the perpetual
Maintenance of six Scholars there, to be elected out of it and the neighboring
Towns. He being desirous to have all the Fellows subject to one Form of
Government, made them new Statutes in some things, contradicting the old ones
given them by Devorgilla, the Relict of John Baliol their Founder.

About the Reign of Richard I. one Eustachius, Parson of Benton, was one of the
Witnesses to the Deed of Foundation to the Hospital of St. Mary the Virgin in
Westgate.


Roger Bertram de antiquo Feosamento.
Benton and Walker paid l. s. d. For Castle-ward 02 13 04 For Cornage 00 07 08

The Barony of Bothal, the Lordship of Richard Bertram, who being a devout Man
(as those Times went) gave two Shares, i. e. two third Parts of the Titles of
it to the Monks of Tinmouth. His Son Robert obtained of Richard I. that this
Manor and its Dependants should be made a Barony, by the Name of the Barony of
Bothal, as it is at this Day called. It lies upon the German Ocean on the
East-shore, between the Rivers Line and Wentsbeck. This Robert held this Barony
of the King in Capite, by the Service of three Knights Fees, as his Ancestors
had done formerly for the said Lands, being de veteri Feofamento, and paying
yearly for the Guard of the Castle at Newcastle upon Tine, for Coinage 5 l. 15
s. 4 d. To this Robert succeeded his Son Roger, who obtained a Charter for free
Warren for all his Demesne Lands here; and at Hepburn in this County his Heirs
enjoyed this Barony for some Successions, without making any Addition to its
Grandeur; but Robert Bertram, being in the Reign of King Edward III.
constituted Sheriff of Northumberland, and Governor of Newcastle upon Tine,
obtained License of that King to make a Castle of his Manour-House at Bothal,
which accordingly he did; and there are some considerable Remains of it to this
Day. This Robert left no Issue-male, and therefore his Daughter and Heir Helen
being married to Sir Robert Ogle, Knight, tranferred this Barony to his Family.
His Son Robert after the Death of his Mother obtained this Barony, and settled
it soon after upon his younger Son John, whom he Surnamed Bertram, from his
Mother, being desirous that his own Estate should go in his own Name, and so
gave it to his eldest Son Robert Ogle. He suffered his Brother John to enjoy
the Bertram-Estate quietly; but his Son Robert having obtained Livery of the
Lands of his Inheritance, by Color thereof, did forcibly, with two hundred
Men, possess himself of the Castle and Manor of Bothal; but upon Complaint
made to the Parliament by John Bertram, it was ordered that a Writ should be
sent to the sheriff of Northumberland, to require all those who were in the
Possession of the Castle to depart from it, that it might be restored to John
the Complainant, and commanded Robert to appear at Westminster on a certain
Day, to make Answer to the King for his Misdemeanour.

This John Bertram, who was afterward Knighted, was several Times Sheriff of
Northumberland, in the Reign of King Henry VI. and his Posterity flourished,
and had the Title of Lords Ogle, 'till the latter End of Queen Elisabeth's
Reign, when Male-Issue failing in Cuthbert Lord Ogle, Katharine, his Daughter
and Heir, married to Sir Charles Cavendish, Knight of Walbeck in
Nottinghamshire, and carried the Estate and Title of Ogle into that Family; but
the Name of Bertram is not forgotten, for it is a common Christian Name in
those Northern Parts. Some think the Name of Ferdinando is derived from it.


Bothal, containing Bothal cum membris suis, viz. Wheworth, Newmore, Oldmore,
Peggesworth, Hebborne, Fenrother, Tricklington, Eresden, Longhirst cum membris
suis, and Nishenden veteri morae, or the old Moor, and Eringdon paid l. s. d.
For Castle-ward 02 00 00 For Cornage 00 08 08

The Barony of Delaval containing Blackalladay, Seton, a principal Manor of
the Barony of Delaval, held of King Henry III. by Eustace Delaval, by the
Service of two Knights Fees, de veteri Feofamento; his Heir was Hugh Delaval.

I am told, the present Possessor Francis Blake Delaval, Esquire, it obliged to
finish, or expend so much yearly toward the finishing of the sumptuous
Building in that Place, which is so much the Wonder and Admiration of all the
Country. It was begun by the late Admiral Delaval, Anno (...) It seems for
Grandeur and Magnificence, for Strength and Continuance, to vie with the
ancient Northumbrian Castles, and to last the Days of the most distant Ages.


Secton cum membris suis, Newsum, and Dissington paid l. s. d. For Castle-ward
02 06 08 For Cornage 00 03 03

The Barony of Rosse, containing Work, the Castle and Manor of which was held
in the Reign of King Hen. II. Reg. 31, by Hugh de Nevil, by the Name of the
Honor de Werch, who accounted to that King for the Farm of it that Year, at 5
l. 10 s. 6 d. and in the 34th year of the King at 13 l. 1 s. 6 d. at which Time
by that King's Command it was given to Robert de Ross, of Helmesley in
Yorkshire; he gave it to his younger Son Robert de Ross, 2d Hen. III. to hold
it in Barony of the King by the Service of two Knights Fees, as his Father and
Predecessors had done. This Barony had many Towns and wordships belonging to it.

This Robert being constituted Chief Justice of the King's Forests in Derby,
Cumberland, this County, etc. had free Warren granted him in all his Demesne
Lands here, and diverse others of his Manours in this County. 36 Hen. III. But
39th Hen. III. he delivered up this Castle into the King's Hands, who being
advancing with an Army against the Scots, did not think it safe to suffer so
strong a Fort out of his own Power; but upon the King's Return it was yielded
up to him again the next year. Afterward the King began a Suit against him,
for the Title of his Castle of Work; but he in his Defense producing his elder
Brother William for Warranty, the King upon mature Advice, with such Noblemen
as were of his Council, discerning, that he had a good Right to it, quitted his
Claim to him. This Robert, not long after this, fell in Love with a Scotch
Woman, and having a Mind to get her for his Wife; not only joined himself with
the Scots, but endeavored to engage his Kinsman on their Side, viz. William de
Ros, of Hemlake, who detesting such Treachery, dissuaded him from it, but not
being able to prevail, advertised the King of it, and obtained a sufficient
Force to defend this Castle, that it should not be surrendered to the Scots.
Robert being thus disappointed, took a Body of Men out of the Garrison of
Rox-borough, and invading the Borders with Banners displayed, burnt Prestten,
and this Town, and then joining himself with William Wallis, the famous Scotch
General committed great Spoils upon the English in these Northern Parts. His
Estate was for these Rebellions Actions consiscated, but after his Death,
restored to his Daughter and Heir, Margaret de Ross, upon an Allegation, that
he had, before his Death, come to an Accord, with John Comin of Badenagh, for
himself and all his Arms with him, to be safe as to Life, Liberty, and Estate.
How she married we find not, but it appears that Sir John Montacute, afterward
Earl of Salisbury, was in the Possession of this Castle and Manor upon the
Death of Margaret his Mother, who had it, and diverse other Estates for her
Dowry. Mr. Cambden tells us, that in his Time they were the Estate of the
Greys, a Family of Note for their Valor, of whom William Gray was in the Reign
of King James I. advanced first to the Degree of a Baronet, and within a few
years after to the Honor of a Baron, by the Title of Lord Gray of Work, viz.
11 Feb. 21 Jac. I. and to the Heirs Male of his Body. He married Anne, the
Daughter, and one of the Coheirs, of Sir John Wentworth of Gosfield, in Essex;
and there fixed his Seat, in which his Posterity sometime resided, 'till Ford,
Lord Gray, sold it, etc. No Castle-ward or Cornage was paid for this Barony;
but yet it belonged to the Castle of Newcastle, as appears by an Inquisition
taken at Newcastle, 9th Edw. III. for that the Lord of Work was enjoined to
build an House within the Liberty of the said Castle for the more safe keeping
of it.


Werk, Mindram, Karham, Prestfen, Manilawe, Dunum, Palwister, Shotton, Killom,
Holthall, Newton, and the other Newton, Langeton, Lilleburn, Hilderton,
Weperden, Russenden, Tithington, Butlisden and the Moiety of Glattendon.

THE Barony of Bywell, a Barony and Castle, held of the King, viz. Richard I.
by Hugh de Baliol, the Son of Eustace de Baliol, by the Service of five Knights
Fees, and to find 30 Soldiers (Mr. Cambden says to pay 30 Knights Fees) for the
Guard of Newcastle upon Tyne, as his Ancestors had done from the Time of King
William Rusus, by whom they were enfeoff'd of the Barony as the Record
expresses it. In later Times, John Nevil, Lord Raby, who died at Newcastle
upon Tyne, Oct. 17th, 12th Rich. II. was found to be possessed among other
Estates of this. Here was a fair Castle in Mr. Cambden's Days, and below it a
most beautiful Wear for the catching of Salmon, and in the Middle of the River
stand two firm Pillars of Stone, which formerly supported the Bridge.

John Fenwick, Esquire descended from the ancient Family of the Fenwicks of Fenwick
Hall, who was High Sheriff of the County of Northumberland, Anno 1728, is the
present Possessor of this Place.


Bywell, containing Newbigging, Woodhorn, Lynmouthe, Hyrste, Hallywell, Lynton
Ellington, cum Cresswell and Ayden Membris suis, Bychefield, Iaglym,
Blackheddon, Samfordham, Newton-west, Newton-east, Scheellinge, Ovington,
Ovingham, Milkylleye, Whitlye, Falderlye, Bromley, Appleby, the Moiety of
Bywell, Slokefield, Swinburne-east, Swinburne-west, Ryhill.

l. s. d. THE Barony de Copun paid 00 13 04

THUS far the Baronies. But besides these Rents, there were Houses, Yards and
Gardens, etc. which paid to it.

IN the 9th of Edward III. an Inquisition was taken at this Town, whereby it
was found, That at the Time of the Battle of Vide Speed 1314.
Bannockburn, which was in the Year 1313, when John de Kenton Knight was High
Sheriff of Northumberland, the Castle and all Edifices about it were in good
Repair; That after that Time, Nicholas Scot, Adam de Swinburn, William Riddel,
Joannes de Fenwick, Cuthbert de Boroughdon, Joannes de Fenwick, Joannes de
Wodhorne, Joannes de Lilleburne, Willielmus de Tyndale, Roger Manduit, and
Robertus Darreius were High Sheriffs of Northumberland. During which Time it is
affirmed, the Great tower, and also the lesser ones of the said Castle, the
Great Hall, with the King's Chamber adjoining to it, together with diverse other
Chambers below in Queens Mantle, and the Buttry-Cellar and Pantry; The King's
Chapel within the Castle, a certain House beyond the Gate, which is called the
Checker-house, with the Bridges within and without the Gate, with three Gates
and one Postern, are 300 l. worse than they were. They say also, that there are
in the Custody of Roger Manduit, late High Sheriff, 420 Fother of Lead. They
say also, that it was thought highly necessary, that the Baron Heron of
Haddeston, the Baron of Walton, Lord Robert of Clifford of the new Place, chief
Lord of the Barony of Gaugie, the Lords of the Barony of (...) and Devilston,
that the Lord of Werk upon Tweed, the Lord of the Barony of Bolbeck, alias
Bywell, the Baron of Bothal; and Lastly, the Baron of Delaval should build each
of them a House within the Liberties of the Castle for the Defense of it. The
House of the Baron of Werk was built over the Postern.

THERE were two great strong Walls which surrounded the Castle. The interior
Wall was of no great Distance from the Castle itself, as may be still seen in
several Places. The exterior Wall surrounds the Verge of the Castle Bounders.
From this outer Wall were four Gates, the Great Gate and three Posterns. The
North-side of the Castle is the main Gate, called now the Black Gate. It has
had two Port-Cullicesses, one without the Gate, as may be still seen, and
another within it at a little Distance from it, the Ruins of which were to be
seen a few Years ago. There still remains a Piece of the old Wall, which shows
its Situation to have been where that House is, which was lately purchased by
Mr. Jasper Harrison; the Shop belonging to this House was dugg (as I was
informed) out of the Wall just now mentioned. On the East Side of the Castle
there was a Postern, which led down to the Street called the Side, which is
still to be seen; it was once called (but many Years after it was in Decay) the
Waist of Laurentius Acton. On the South Side of the Castle is another Gate,
which leads down the Castle-stairs to the Street called the Close: This was
called the South Postern. There is an old Building upon it, which was the
County-Goaler's House. On the Westside was the Postern facing Bailiff-Gate, now
the Dwelling House of James Lidster.

THERE is an House in the Yard, where they say was the Chapel of the Garrison,
which is called the Chapel-house to this Day; it stands North-east from the
Chapel; its common Name now is the three Bulls Heads.

21st September 1 mo Hen. VII. per Lit. Pat. then dated at Westminster, the
Office of Constable of the Castle of Newcastle was granted to William Case, Esquire
during Life, with the Wages and Fees then belonging, and of ancient Time
accustomed, de reb. 47.

15th February, 9th Hen. VH. per Lit. Patent. then dated at Westminster, this
Office being then void, by the Death of Sir Robert Multon Knight, the same was
granted to Roger Fenwick, Esquire for the King's Body for his Life, together with
the Wages and Fees of 20 l. per annum, to be yearly received out of the Issues,
Profits and Revenues of the said County of Northumberland, coming by the Hands
of the Sheriff of the said County, with all Manner of Profits, etc. de Reb. P.
47. Ibid.

NOT any Letters Patents of the Office of Constable since the last above
mentioned; for the Custody of the Castle (as supposed) was committed to the
Sheriffs of Northumberland for several Years.

IN the 31st Elizabeth, the same Power and Liberty was given to the Magistrates
of Newcastle, in the Castle-Garth; as in other Parts of the Town of Newcastle.

AN Inquisition in the Reign of James I. says, that the ancient Castle,
belonging to the King, situated within the Walls of Newcastle upon Tine,
belongs to the County of Northumberland, and is surrounded with a great
Stone-Wall. That below the Castle there is a great Hall, where the County of
Northumberland holds their Assizes. There is also a great Tower, full of
Chinks, under which are two Vaults, which are the Places where the Prisoners of
the County of Northumberland are kept, which are within the Circuit of the
Castle itself.

AND that there is in Being the exterior Wall of the Castle, which begins North
of the Castle, about six Yards from the Great Gate, which leads into the
Castle-yard; and so goes on eastward and southward by the Back of some Houses
in the Side. Then it goes westward by the Back of some Houses in the Sand-hill;
then it crosses the Castle-stairs, which lead to the Street called the Close,
and from thence behind the Houses, even to the upper Pinion-Gavel of the House
of James Clavering Alderman, which is about nine Yards distant from the long
Stairs, where the said ancient Wall, on account of its Decay, does no farther
appear; but yet the Bounds and Limits of the Castle go through the middle Part
of a House, extending itself even to the Channel in the long Stairs. Then it
goes along the Channel upwards on the Outside of the new Wall, which was built
to enclose the The high and great Heap, viz. the Dunghill on the Westside of
the Castle, was taken away by Sir John Marley Mayor, and his Adherents, to
rampart the Town-Walls against the Parliament and Commonwealth,
Dunghill. From thence it goes to the Corner of the House of (...) and thence
by the Back-part of the House of (...) where the ancient outward Wall begins.
This ancient outward Wall of the Castle contains by Measure three Acres of
Ground and one Rood.

IN the 18th of this King's Reign, another Inquisition was held at Newcastle
about the Castle, wherein Complaint was made of the Dunghill mentioned in the
Bounds of the Castle, that it had increased to such a Bigness, that it was in
Length 98 Yards, the Depth of it was 10 Yards, and the Breadth of it 32 Yards;
which being such a prodigious Weight upon the Wall on the West Side of the
Castle (which Wall was in Length 40 Yards, in Height 10 Yards, in Breadth 2
Yards) that a great Part of it is entirely thrown down and subverted to the
great Detriment of the Strength of the Castle. The Damage was computed at 120 l.

IT was also by this same Inquisition complained of, that the great square
Tower was full of Chinks and Crannies; and that one Third of it was almost
taken away: That all the Lead and Covering which it had of old was imbezled and
carried of, insomuch that the Prisoners of the County of Northumberland were
most miserably lodged, by reason of the Showers of Rain falling upon them. They
computed the Charge of repairing it would be 809 l. 15 s. 0 d.

IT has been a Building of great Strength, and no little Beauty; the vast
Thickness of the Walls speaks the one, and the Ruins of some curious
Workmanship speaks the other. The grand Entrance into the Castle was at the
Gate facing the South, which leads up a Pair of Stairs (which still show the
Magnificence of the Builder) to a very stately Door of curious Masonry. The
Room this leads into, has its Floor broken down close to the Castle-Wall, as
indeed all the other Floors are to the Top of the Castle; so that excepting the
Floor above the County-Goal, there is not one left, though there have been five
Divisions or Stories of the Castle besides this. This floored Room which I was
told was lately flagg'd by the Order of William Ellison, Esquire Alderman, when he
was last Mayor in the Year 1723, seems to me without any Doubt, to have been
the common Hall of the Castle, because on the North-side of the same Room there
is an Entrance by a Descent of some Steps into a Room, where is the largest
Fireplace I saw in the Castle, which plainly speaks it to have been the
Kitchen. At the End of this there are several Stairs, which lead into a Place
under the Kitchen, which I think goes down as low as the Bottom of the Castle.
This I take to have been a Cellar, as I do also that little dark Place on the
right Hand coming up again, to have been a Sort of a Pauntry.

THE Door I mentioned just now on the East of the Castle, which leads to the
first broken down Floor, is because of it is Grandeur and Beauty, an Argument
that this Room has been the most stately one in the whole Castle; another
Reason for it is being so, is because of the Windows which gave Light into it.
Those of them that face the East are the most beautiful of the whole Castle;
besides, on the South of this Room there is an Entrance into a Sort of a
Parlour or withdrawing-Room, which has a Fire Place in it; which has been a
Piece of curious Workmanship, as is visible to this Day; and this Place has no
Communication with any Part of the Castle but this Room. On the North-side of
this Room, is a Door leading into an Apartment, where stands a Well of a
considerable Depth, it was 18 Yards before we touched the Surface of the Water;
which seems to have been placed there on purpose for the more immediate Service
of this Room: There are some little Basins on the Top of the Well, with Pipes
leading from them, which conveyed Water to different Appartments of the Castle;
This is plain from what may be observed in the County Goal, at the Bottom of
the Castle; the round stone Pillar in it, having an Hollow in the Middle, of a
Foot wide, with a lead Spout in the Side of it.

IN the Inquisition made in the 9th of Edward 3d abovementioned, among other
Things that were complained of for being neglected, one was Capella Domini
Regis infra Castrum. This Chapel I have been told, stood on that Part of the
Castle Yard, where the Moot-hall is; but upon Searching, I found it in the
Castle itself according to the Account of it just now mentioned. The Door of it
is at the Bottom of the South Wall of the Castle, adjoining to the Stairs which
lead into the State Chamber. It has been a Work of great Beauty and Ornament,
and is still in the midst of Dust and Darkness, by far the most beautiful Place
in the whole Building; the Inside of it being curiously adorned with Arches and
Pillars. It is easy to observe the different Parts of it, the Entrance, the
Body of it, and the Chancel; on the left Side of the Entrance you go into a
dark little Room, which undoubtedly was the Vestry. The full Length of it is 15
Yards, the Breadth of it is 6 Yards and half. It had 3 or 4 Windows toward the
East, which are now all filled up, nor is there any Light but what comes in at
a little Cranny in the Wall.

Nicholas de Byker Tenet terras suas ut faciat districtiones ad Ward' Novi
Castelli super Tynam faciend' and pro deb' Domini Regis inter Tynam and Cocket,
etc. And then my Authority goes on to say, that the Manor of Byker was Sir
Ralph Lawson's Knight, deceased, after of Henry Lawson, Esquire his Son, and now of
his eldest Son, who without all Question is Bailiff by Inheritance of the said
Castle, and is to levy these Castle-ward Cornage, and other Rents, Issues,
Fines, and Amerciaments, belonging to the said Castle. And as he goes on, the
Constable of the Castle, when that Office is settled, may appoint the learned
Stewards to keep Courts, and then the Officers for the said Castle will be
complete. Besides the Rents abovementioned, a great Number of Houses, Yards,
and Gardens paid to it.

IN the 17th of James I. 1619, a Grant was made of the Site and Demesnes of
the Castle to Alexander Stephenson, Esquire who was succeeded by one Patrick Black,
who died, and left it in the Possession of his Wife. After that one James
Langton, Gent. claimed Patrick Black's Right, but by Virtue of what is not
known.

THE Liberties and Privileges of the Castle extends Northwards to the River of
Tweed, and Southward to the River of Tees.

IT is reported, that underneath that House which was anciently the County
Goal, is a Vault which leads to the Castle. There is indeed a large Door still
to be seen, which perhaps was the Entrance into it; and Mr. George Gray, the
present Possessor of the House, told me that it was certainly so, because he
had put down through his own Floor a Bailiff's Rod to the very End, and could
find no Bottom.

A Manuscript I have often had Occasion to mention gives us the following
Account of the Castle-Yard.

THE Way through the Yard begins at the Castle-Yate, and when I was young, there
was no Houses in it but the House of one Thomas Southern, and the House of one
Green; these Houses were near the Gate before you came into the Castle-yard;
and there was in the Garth a House, wherein the Jailer of the Castle dwelt, and
a House wherein William Robinson dwelt, who was Deputy Herrald under Norroy,
King at Arms. This Man wrote in a Book the Arms of all the Mayors of this Town,
from Laurentius Acton, until his Time. And when I was Chamberlain of the Town,
which was about the Time of Sir Nicholas Cole's being Mayor in the Year 1640,
it was then in the Town's Chamber; when Trollop built the Town-Court, he
borrowed it, but would never restore it.

THESE were all the Houses at that Time; but since then Mr. Bulmer, he took a
Garth behind his House in the Side, and built a Stable in it, and had a Garden
in it; and also George Hayroy took from thence to the Moat-hall, and built
Houses upon it: He was a Butcher, but not a Freeman, and these took their Lands
and Houses of Alexander Stephenson, a Scottish Man, who came in with King
James, for he begged the Castle of the King. He was one of his Close-Stool.
This Man began to build the Castle-Gate, but it was finished by one John
Pickle, who made it in the Fashion it is now, and kept a Tavern in it; and then
one Jordan a Scotsman and Sword-Kipper, built the House on the South Side of
the Gate, and lived in it; and Thomas Reed, a Scotch Pedlar, took a Shop in the
North-side of the Gate.

AT present there are a good many Shops and Houses belonging to it, in and
about it.

CHAP. X. Of the lower Parts of the TOWN.
HAVING now considered the Castle, and what belongs to it, we return back to
the Side, the Street from which we entered the Castle-yard.

Sect. I The SIDE.
THIS Street is from the Head of it, to the Stairs on the left Hand, a very
great descent, and lies narrow, until you come to the middle of it, from which
Place it opens in a spacious Breadth, and so continues to the Sandhill. It is
from the one end to the other filled with Shops of Merchants, Goldsmiths,
Milliners, Upholsters, etc. The East Side of this Street, from the Upper Part
of it to All-hallow Pant, was called Cordiner, or Cordwainer Raw.

ABOVE the middle of the Street are Stairs leading up to the Castle-yard, which
was the Eastern-Postern of the Castle, and after called the Waste of Laurentius
Acton, as appears from the Account of Gunner Tower; and our Towns-man, Gray,
says, that in the Middle of this Street is an ancient Stone-House, an Appendix
to the Castle, which in former Times belonged to the Lord Lumley, before the
Castle was built, or at least coetany with the Castle.

ON the other Side of this Street, opposite to the Waste now mentioned, is a
Corner Shop, which formerly belonged to a Chantery in St. John's Church. On the
same Side of this Street, almost opposite to this Eastern-Postern of the
Castle, is a short narrow Lane, (which formerly seems to have gone by the Name
of Vide Gunner-Tower.
Swinburn-place) which leads by Stairs into a dark narrow Lane which faces the
Painter Heugh that leads into Pilgrim-street. On the Northend of this Lane
there was a Place called Vide Gunner-Tower.
Pencher Place, perhaps the whole Lane was called so. It goes as far as the
Nether-dean-bridge, under which is now a Warehouse of Mr. James Moncaster,
Merchant. Under this I am told the Rings are still to be seen that the Boats
were fastened to, which brought up the Merchant Goods, when the Merchants had
their Shops in the Flesh-market. On the South it leads to the Side.

THE Pant standing near the Shop of Mr. Robert Makepeice, is undoubtedly that
which went by the Name of All-Hallow-Pant; The other Side of the Street from
All-Hallow-Pant to the Cale-Cross, was formerly divided by the coming up of the
River, which was called Lorkburn, and the East of it had the Name of
Flesher-Raw: because I suppose the Butchers had their Shops there, as well as
on the Butcher-Bank: The West bore the Name of the Side. After that, Lorkburn
was covered with Flags at the Top, and made one Street, which all goes by the
Name of the Side. In the Year 1696 Lorkburn was arched at the Top, and paved
over.

WE come now to the Cale-Cross, so called because of the Cale or Broth which
was sold there in former Times. This seems to have been it is original Name, for
I meet with it in the Reign of King Richard the Second, as may be seen in the
Account of St. Margaret's Chantery in St. Nicholas, and also in a Writing dated
Edward the Third. What Gray says of it is still just, that it is a fair Cross,
with Columns of Stone Hewn, covered with Lead: There is at the Top of it a
Cistern which holds the New-Water. Here is sold Milk, Eggs, Cheese, Butter, etc.

FROM the Cross the Street has the Name of Cale-Cross, 'till you come to the
Sandhill, which leaving the Butcher-Bank that leads to All-Hallow's Church on
the left Hand, you come immediately to

Sect. II. SANDHILL.
THE Sandhill is so called, because it was formerly a Hill of naked Sand, when
the Tide was out. For formerly the Tyne overflowed all this Place. After it was
taken in it became Part of the Town: That Part of it on the West Side of
Lorkburn, was a Place of Pleasure and Recreation for the Towns-People. For in
the Reign of Richard the 2d, a Proclamation was made, commanding to remove all
Merchandise from a certain Common Place, in Newcastle called Sandhill, where
the Inhabitants were wont to assemble for their Recreation.

IT is a spacious Place, and adorned with Buildings very high and stately,
whose Rooms speak the Ancient Grandeur, being very large and Magnificent. It is
now that Part of the Town where the chief Affairs of Trade and Business are
transacted. The Shops in this Street are almost altogether those of Merchants,
which have many of them great Conveniences of Lofts, Garners and Cellars.

HERE is the Market for Fish, Herbs, Bread, Cloth, Leather, etc. which for the
one Part of Things, viz. those to be wore, is kept every Tuesday and Saturday;
for Things to be eat, every Day.

ON the South Side of the Street, is the ancient Hospital called the Hospitale
Novicastri super Tynam in Comitatu Northumbriae vocatum Thornton's Hospital.

Licentia Henrici Regis Quarti Rogero de Thornton concessa pro fundatione
ejusdem.

Rex, etc. Sciatis quod de gratia nostra specialis and consideratione cujusdam
summae Pecuniae nobis in camera nostra, per dilectum nobis Rogerum nuper
solutae, concessimus and Licentia dedimus, etc. praesato Rogero, quod ipse
quoddam Hospipitale in Honor Sanctae Katharinae, in quodam Messuagio suo per
ipsum sum Rogerum in part nuper edificato in quodam loco vocato, Le Sandhill,
in villa nostro Novi Castri super Tynam, continente C. Pedes in Longitudine, XL
Pedes in Latitudine de uno Capellano divina infra Hospitale praedictum, pro
Salubri statu ipsius Rogen dum vixeret, and pro anima sua cum ab hac luce
migraverit, ac animabus patris and matris ipsius Rogeri, and Agnetis nuper
uxoris ejus; necnon antecestorum and liberorum suorum, ac omnium fidelium
desunctorum singulis diebus celebraturo; ac de novem viris and quaruor Faeminis
pauperibus in eodem Hospitale continue residentibus jaxta ordinationem ipsius
Rogeri vel executorum suorum in hac part faciendam, de novo facere, creare,
sundare, and stabilire possit in perpetuum: Et quod Hospitale illud, Hospitale
per se privatum and incorporatum existat in perpetuum, ac etiam quod capellanus
Hospitalis praedicti, qui pro tempore suerit, sit custos ejusdem Hospitalis; ac
quod idem Capellanus Custos and praedicti viri and Faeminae, Fratres and
Sorores Hospitalis Sanctae Katherinae, vocati Thornton's Hospital in Novo
Castro super Tinam, nuncupatur quodque custos Fratres and Soroves and little
Successores per nomen custodis Fratrum and Sororum Hospitalis Sanctae
Katherinae, vocati Thornton's Hospital, in Novo Castro super Tynam, sint
personae capaces and habiles ad omnimoda terras, tenementa, redditus and
servicia ac alias possessones quascumque de quibusdam personis adquirendas,
capiendas and recipiendas, tenendas sibi and successoribus suis, custodibus
Fratribus, and Sororibus, Hospitalis predicti in perpetuum, Licenna Regia inde
primitus optenta. Necnon quod idem custos, etc. fint personae habiles ad alios
implaciandos and ab aliis implacitari and ad desendendum in quibuscunque
placitis and querelis per nomen custodis Fratrum and Sororum Hospitalis Sanctae
Katherinae vocati Thornton's Hospital in Novo Castro super Tynam. Et quod licet
unum commune Sigillum pro negotiis and agendis ejusdem Hospitalis deserviturum
in perpetuum, Et ulterius, etc. Licentiam dedimus, etc. praefato Rogero quod
ipse quandam cantariam de uno Capellano divina ad altar Beati Petri in capella
Omnium Sanctorum in villa praedicta pro statu and animabus praedictis singulis
diebus celebratur juxta ordinationem ipsius Rogeri vel executorum suorum in hac
parie faciendam, scilicet sacere fundare and stabilire possit in perpetuum.
Concessimus etiam, etc. praefato Rogero quod ipse messuagium suum praedictum
cum pertinentiis, quod de nobis teneat in Burgagio, postquam Hospitale
praedictum, sic factum fundatum and stabilitum suerit dare possit and assignare
praefatis custodi Fratribus and Sororibus Hospitalis praedicti habendum and
tenendum sibi and successoribus suis, tam pro Inhabitatione fua, quam in
[auxilium] sustentationis suae in perpetuum concessimus insuper, etc. eldem
Rogero quod ipse Heredes assignati, vel executores sui terras Tenementa and
redditus cum pert' ad valorem x l. per Annum tam ea quae de nobis tenentur in
Burgagio quam ea quae de nobis non tenentur acquirere and praefatis Custodi
Fraeribus and sororibus Hospitalis praedicti ac capellano Cantariae predictae
cum sic facta fundata and stabilita fuerit, juxta diferetionem and limitationem
suam divisam, and proportionabiliter dare assignare and concedere possint
habend' etc. in perpetuum, etc. T. Rege apud Westin. x Junii.


Maison Dieu, or, the House of God. It was founded by that great Benefactor
Roger Thornton, in the Reign of King Henry the Fourth, upon the Death of his
Wife, for a Chaplain to pray for the Soul of the said Roger, as long as he
lived, and after he was dead, and for the Souls of his Father and Mother, and
Agnes his late Wife, etc. This Priest was called the Guardian or Keeper of the
said Hospital, because of the Care he had over nine poor Men and four poor
Women, who resided there. These poor People were called the Brethren and
Sisters of St. Katharine's, Hospital; for to this Saint was the Hospital
dedicated.

IN the 34th of Henry VI. Roger Thornton granted to the Mayor and Community of
Newcastle, the Use of the Hall and Kitchen belonging to the Hospital of the
blessed Katharine the Virgin on the Sandhill.

IN the Year 1629, Sir Richard Lumley, in Consideration of 100 l. conveyed to
the Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle, and their Successors for ever, all that
Building of Stone covered with Lead, standing near to the Water of Tine, and to
the East-part of the Town's Chamber, being about 16 Yards in Length, and
anciently Part of the Hospital of St. Katharine the Virgin.

Gray.
UPON this Building stands the stately Court of the Merchant-Adventurers of the
Old Staple, resident at that flourishing City of Antwerp in Brabant; since
removed to the more northern Provinces under the States. Their Charters are
ancient, their Privileges and Immunities great; they have no Dependence upon
London, having a Governor, twelve Assistants, two Wardens and a Secretary. The
present Governor is Richard Ridley, Esquire Alderman of this Town, who has been
Governor of this Company for many Years.

THIS Room in ancient Times, as we are informed by the Milbank Manuscript, was
given to the Town for a young Couple, when they were married, to make their
Wedding-dinner in, and receive the Offerings and Gifts of their Friends; for at
that Time Houses were not large. It Is true indeed, the Houses in the
Flesh-market, which were built many Years before this upon the Sandhill, had
most of them Rooms near as stately, if not altogether as stately as this Room
is; but then they were the Houses of the Great Merchants and Aldermen of the
Town. So that the Tradition of this Room may be true enough.

THIS Hall is adorned with the Arms of several generous Benefactors, and some
of the most curious carved Work in Wood. Here it is that for some Years by
past, the annual Feast of the Sons of the Clergy has been held.

ADJOINING to the West End of this ancient Building, was the Town-Court, which
was built by that worthy Man Roger Thornton. This was pulled down and the
present one erected Anno 1658. Alderman Weimoth by Will, dated the 11th of
April, gave 1200 l. toward it, and the Town was at the rest of the Charge,
which amounted to above 10000 l. Mr. Joshua Douglas the Town Clerk accounts for
it in this Manner.

l. s. d. IN the Year 1659, in October, the Town paid Robert Trollop for
building the Court 9771 00 00 IN the Year 1660, there is ordered more in Full
500 00 00 THE Purchase-Money paid Phineas Allen, for Part of the Ground where
the Court is built, which had Houses on it but were then pulled down.

TROLLOP had, as Mr. Douglas also acquaints us, 50 l. for setting up the King's
Arms in the Court and Bridge, and 50 more for finishing them, and making the
Conduit on the Sandhill.

THIS Building, as to its Form and Model, is of great Beauty, and withal very
sumptuous. That Part of it, which is the Court itself, is a very stately Hall,
whose lofty Cicling is adorned with various Painting, and its Floor laid with
checkered Marble. On the East end of it is a Dial, and the Entrance into the
Merchants Court. On the West are the Benches, where the Magistrates sit, raised
considerably above the Floor of the Court, above which are the Pictures of King
Charles II. and King James II. large as the Life. On the North a Gallery for
Spectators; and on the South the Windows, which are very pretty, particularly
that Window which is a Katharine-Wheel, in which is a large Sun-dial of painted
Glass, with this Motto, Eheu Fugaces! Under this is a large Balcony, which
overlooks the River. Here it is that the Mayor and Sheriff keep their Courts,
and the Judges at Lammas hold the Assize. Here is kept the Guilds, the Court of
Admiralty, etc.

ON the North-side of this Hall is a magnificent Entrance into a Passage, which
leads into a large Room called the Town's Chamber. Here it is that the Mayor
transacts the common Business of the Town. Here the Common Council is held,
where the Mayor sits on a Bench distinguishable from the others, the Aldermen
on each Side of him, the Common Council below upon Chairs placed on each Side
the Room, and separated from the Benches, as the Court itself is separated from
the Benches there. And here upon the Days of Rejoicing, the State Holidays, the
Mayor not long ago entertained the Magistrates and Burgesses with a Banquet of
Wine, etc. to which they were wont to come from the Mayor's House with great
Pomp and Solemnity. At the West End of the Room is a small Apartment, or
withdrawing Room, where the Magistrates upon Occasion retire, where the ancient
Records of the Town are kept, etc. Under this Court and Chambers are the
Weigh-house and Townhouse. The former is for weighing all Sorts of
Commodities; for in the Reign of King Henry VI. Brass Weights according to the
Standart were sent to this Town. The latter is the Place where the Clerk of the
Chamber and the Chamberlain are to receive the Revenues of the Town for Coal,
Salt, Ballast, Grind-Stone, etc. Gray.


BEFORE I leave this Street, I must by no Means omit the Effigies of King James
II. which stood here, as I have been told, on that Side of the Bull-ring next
the Court-stairs. By the Account I have had (for I never saw the Statue itself,
nor the Picture of it) it must have been a very curious Work. The King's
Picture on Horseback was cast in Copper large as the Life; the Horse stood upon
his Hind-Feet, raised upon a Pedestal of white Marble, which was surrounded
with Iron-Pales. It cost the Town 1700 l. and was confessed the most beautiful
and curious of its Kind that was in the whole Kingdom. Certainly it was a great
Ornament to the Town, and it is therefore great Pity it is not still in Being,
though it was the Statue of an unfortunate King. But there is no Bounds to the
heady Proceedings of a furious Mob; it drives all before it, without either
Reason or Reflection, and bears no Regard to Things either Civil or religious.
Such a one I am told was this, that pulled down the noble Statue; a few
Soldiers, as drunk with Loyalty as with Liquor, assisted by the busy hotheaded
Genius of Sandgate, having provided Ropes for that Purpose, pulled it down,
dragged it from thence to the Key, and threw it into the River. This was in the
Year 1688; it was afterward taken up again, and Part of it cast into a Set of
Bells, which now belong to All-Hallows in this Town.

Sect. III. The CLOSE.
ON the East of this Street is the Entrance to the Key-side, which shall be
spoken hereafter. On the West is the Close, to which as you go along, you pass
by the North-side of the Chapel of St. Thomas the Martyr; and on the other Side
opposite to this Chapel, an ancient House which is said to be built by Richard
de Emmeldon, Mayor of Newcastle, for three Priests to pray for his Soul. I take
it to be nigh those Stairs which lead up to the Half Moon, the ancient outward
Fortification.

FROM hence going on still Westward, you cross over the North-end of the
Tine-bridge, and so pass into the Street called the Closs. It answers its Name
exactly well, for it is but narrow and close too. It was formerly that Part of
the Town where the principal Inhabitants lived, Sir John Marly, Sir William
Blacket, Sir Mark Milbank; and the Houses of many other Gentlemen of Figure are
still remembered by the ancient Inhabitants. And indeed however the Street
itself may be, however mean the Fronts of the Houses are, within they speak
Magnificence and Grandeur, the Rooms being very large and stately, and for the
most Part adorned with curious Carving. The Earl of Northumberland's House was
in this Street; it was that House which has at its Entrance a great Gate,
besides which there is a large round Ball of Stone, the House on this Side Mr.
Thorp Stewart's. In the lower Part of this Building, toward the Water, are
very manifest Tokens of its Antiquity

OF late Years these Houses have been forsaken, and their wealthier Inhabitants
have chosen the higher Parts of the Town.

ON the right Hand as you enter the Street from the Tine-Bridge, are Stairs
which lead into the Castle-yard, which were the Southern Postern of the Castle,
and are called the Castle-stairs. On the same Side a little further along, are
other Stairs, which are called the Long Stairs, which lead up to the
Bailiff-Gate, Backraw, Castle-yard, Side, etc. almost opposite to which is a
small Key, called Javel-Gripp. Somewhat further along are other Stairs on the
same Side of the Street, leading to West-gate, which are called Tudhill-Stairs.
Perhaps it is not amiss to tell you what I have been somewhere informed of,
that the proper Name of it should be Tout-hill, from the touting or winding of
a Horn upon it, when an Enemy was at Hand. What makes me the more inclineable
to believe this Tradition to be true, is, that Cornage was paid to the Castle,
as may be seen in our Account of it. Now Cornage comes from the Word Cornagium,
(from Cornu a Horn) and was a Kind of grand Serjeanty: The Service of which
Tenure was to blow a Horn, when any Invasion of the Scots was perceived; and by
this many Men held their Land Northward, about the Picts Wall. Cambd. Britan.
609 Page and Littleton, Fol. 35.

ALMOST opposite to these Stairs is the House of the Mayors of Newcastle, where
they reside during the Year of their Mayoralty. It is a Building grand and
stately; and considering the Place it stands in, is very ornamental. As the
Mayors of Newcastle have such continual Business at Court, though the Situation
is not so pleasing as that of the upper Part of the Town, it is yet more
advantageous, as it is nigher the Court.

BEYOND this House a little Way, still going on Westward, is the Gate belonging
to this Street, called the Close-Gate. The Town-wall descends from the
West-Friar Tower, down a dangerous Pair of Stairs, upon a very steep Bank, to
this Gate, from which it goes Southward to the Waterside, where is an old
Tower, now the Hall of the Sail-makers.

WITHOUT this Close Gate is a Way to the Forth, a Place of Recreation.

IN the Close were many Houses, which pay an annual Rent to the Master and
Brethren of St. Mary the Virgin.

THIS Street is commemorated in many ancient Writings for a Mill, which (in
ancient Times, long before these were drawn) was wont to stand upon the Hoga,
that is, upon the Bank without the Close-Gate. In a Grant from the Master and
Brethren of St. Mary's in West-gate, it is permitted to the Parties concerned,
that they have quandam placeam terrae in Vico quoe vocatur le Closs, sicut se
extendit in longitudine de Hoga, ubi antiquum molidinum solebat stare, usque ad
aquam Tinae, and quantum de Tina acquirere poterit.

Sect. IV. TINE-Bridge.
IN coming into the Close, we crossed the End of the The Bridge is of great
Antiquity, undoubtedly as old as the Times of the Romans. There must have been
a Communication between this and the other Side of the River; and therefore
there was a Necessity for it. The ingenious Mr. Horsley, p. 104, says, I think
there are some certain and visible Remains of a military Way on Gateshead-Fell,
pointing directly toward the Part, where I suppose the Station has been at
Newcastle, and coming, as I apprehend, from Chester le Street. Dr. Hunter
assured me, he had also observed visible Remains of such a Way. And it is the
common Opinion, that there has been a military Way from Chester to Newcastle;
this Way tends toward the Place where the Bridge now is. There must then have
been a Bridge in the Roman Times over the River Tine, near the Place where the
present Bridge stands.


Tine-Bridge, let us now return and consider it a little. It has been a Query,
whether the Bridge was originally of Wood or Stone; but I think it is
altogether needless; all the Bridges in England were originally of Wood. In the
Reign of Richard I. Philip Bishop of Durham sent to the Burgesses of Gate-Side
a Grant of Forestage, in which are these Words: And it shall be lawful for
every Burgess to give Wood to whomsoever he will, to be spent about the River
of Tine, without any License. This I imagine has been for the building of Keys,
and especially for the repairing of the Bishop's Part of the Bridge, which is a
further Proof, that this Bridge, which was the original one, was Wood. But what
I think puts it beyond Dispute, is, that according to Matthew Paris, it was
burnt in the Year 1248, together with a great Part of the Town.

AFTER this Misfortune happened, the Town, who repairs two Thirds of the Bridge,
and the Thomas Ruthall, Bishop of Durham, in the Reign of Henry VII. built or
repaired the third Part of the Bridge over the River Tine, toward the South.
Goodwin.
Bishop the other, laid out their Endeavors to raise up another Bridge of
Stone. Accordingly the Bishop of Durham sent out Indulgences, and the Town
procured other Bishops to do the same, to all those that would assist either
with Money or Labor in the erecting of it. By which Means they got such a Sum
as was sufficient.

THE Archdeacon of Northumberland wrote to the Clergy of his Archdeaconry, and
desired them to assist the Work of the Bridge as much as they could, telling
them, their venerable Father the Lord Bishop of Durham by his Letters Patents,
had commanded them without any Let or Delay, to go about the Affair of
Indulgences, and that they were to prefer the Episcopal Indulgences to others.
And what arose from them was to be given to the Master of the Bridge, who was
then Laurentius, for the Use of the Bridge. Lib. Cart.

IN like Manner the Official of Carlisle promised an Indulgence of 10 Days to
any one, that would assist the repairing of Tine-Bridge.

WALTER Bishop of Rochester on the 8th of the Ides of September, in the Year of
our Lord 1277, granted an Indulgence of 20 Days to all that bestowed Part of
the Substance GOD had given them, to the repairing of the Tine-Bridge, or would
assist the repairing of it, by working at it with their own Hands.

IT is supposed by some, that William St. Barbara sent the following
Indulgence; but that cannot be, for he lived a great while before the Bridge was
built. It was therefore Walter Bishop of Durham, who in the 8th Year of his
Pontificate sent it, dated at Weremouth.

Walterus Dei gratia, Dunelm. Epis. dilectis in Christo Filiis, Archidiacon.
Officialibus, Decan. Parsonis, Vicariis, ceterisque Ecclesiarum Praelatis, per
Dioc. Dunelmens. constitutis, Salutent a^ter-nam.

Quoniam, ut ait Apostolus, omnes stabimus ante tribunal Domini nostri Jesu
Christi, receptare prout in corpore gessimus, sive bonum sive malum: oportet
nos diem messionis extremae, misericordiae operibus praevenire, ac aeternorum
intuitu seminare in terris, quod, reddente Domino, cum multiplicato fructu
recolligere debeamus in Coelis, firmam spem fiduciamque renentes. Quoniam qui
seminat in pace, pace and metat, and qui seminat in benedictionibus, de
benedictionibus and metat vitam aeternam. Cum igitur Pons de Tina nimia
indigeat reparatione, nec sine (...) Largitionibus valeat sustentari; vobis
mandamus, subditis vestris moneatis, and efficaciter inducatis, ut de bonis a
Deo collatis, pias Elcemosynas ac grata Caritatis subsidia ad hoc studeant
erogare, ut per subventionem suam opus hujusmodi valebat conseminari. Hos autem
de dei omnipotentis misericordia, ac beatorum Petri and Pauli Apostolorum ejus
meritis and intercessione consici, qui ad dicti Pontis reparationem and
sustentationem de bonis a Deo collatis pie contulerint, viginti dies diminuta
sibi penitentia miserecorditer Relaxamus. Dat' apud Wearem' xiiijo Kalend'
Octob' Pontis' nost' anno octavo.


WALTER, by the Grace of GOD, to his beloved Sons in Christ, to the
archdeacons, Officials, Dean, Parsons Vicars, and to the other Prelates of
Churches in the Diocese of Durham, eternal Health.

FORASMUCH as the Apostle says, that We must all stand before the Judgment Seat
of Christ, to receive as we have done in the Body, whether it be good or bad;
we ought to prevent the Day of the last Harvest, by doing Works of Mercy, and
looking toward heavenly Things, and to sow on Earth what we shall reap in
Heaven, with manifold Fruit, holding a firm Hope and Trust; Because he that
sowes in Peace shall reap in Peace, and he that sows in Blessings, shall of
Blessings also reap, and shall reap eternal Life. Seeing then that the
Tine-Bridge wants Abundance of Repairs, and cannot be sustained without large
Alms, we command to admonish those that are under you, and efficaciously bring
them to give Alms of the Things which GOD has bestowed on them; and that for
the Sake of Charity they would bestow on the Work what they can, that by their
own Aid and Assistance a Work of this Kind may be restored: And relying on the
Mercy of the Omnipotent God, and on the Merits and Intercession of the blessed
Apostles Peter and Paul, we release all those our Parishioners, truly repenting
and confessing, who shall piously contribute of the Things GOD has sent them,
to the repairing and sustaining the said Bridge, we mercifully release them
from the smallest Penance, for twenty Days to come.

SEWALDUS Archbishop of York, on the Ides of September, in the Year of our Lord
1257, granted an Indulgence of 30 Days to come to every one that bestowed any
Thing toward the Building and repairing of Tine-Bridge.

ANDREW, Bishop of Cathness in Scotland, gave Liberty by a Grant to collect
Alms throughout his whole Diocese, for the repairing of the Tyne-Bridge.

THE Bishop of Waterford in Ireland granted also to those that would assist the
repairing of the Tyne-Bridge in Newcastle upon Tine, a Promise of being prayed
for in the Cathedral Church of the Holy-Trinity in Waterford, and in the other
Churches of his Diocese, and also an Indulgence for 10 Days.

AMONGST the many Benefactors occasioned by these Means, are these following.

JOHN the Son of Decanus, and Bartholomew the Son of William, Son of Benedict,
Guardians of the Alms collected for the Support of the Tine-Bridge, with the
Council and Assent of the Mayor, Bailiffs and Burgesses, confirmed to Gervasius
the Son of Ralph, that whole Land with every Thing belonging to it, in the
Fields of Jesemuthia, which Henry de Bulmar, and Ralph gave, and by their Carts
confirmed to the said Tine-Bridge, etc. on Condition that he rendered to the
said Tine-Bridge, one Plank, or Six Shillings annually at the Feast of St.
Michael, Adam de Jesumuthia was the first Witness to this Grant.

ADAM of Jesumuthia granted to GOD, and to the Tine-Bridge, on Account of the
Soul of William de Greenville and the Souls of his Ancestors, part of the
Ground in the Land of Jesumuth.

SOME of the Witnesses to this Chart were Gilbert de Valle, Adam de Plessy,
Gilbert de Oggell, William de Byker, Elge de Gosford.

RICHARD de Northesold, and Hugh of London, gave nine Shillings and six Pence,
out of certain Lands lying in the vico fori to the repairing of the Bridge. One
Stephen of Benwell is mentioned in this Grant, as having Land adjoining to that
out of which this Money is granted.

SOME of the Witnesses to this Grant were Thomas Carliol, then Mayor of the
Town, etc. J. Lindisay, Bail' Robert de Mitford, Adam de Blakedon.

NICHOLAS de Saws gave to the Reparation of the Bridge, when Nicholas Scot was
Mayor, and Adam de Blakedon, Laurentius Custos pontis, and Sancti Thome, 1269.

SOME other Benefactors occasioned by the same Means, viz.

PETER de Graper, Adam Son of Henry de Carliol, Burgess of Newcastle, Nicholas
Son of Adam de Carliol, Burgess of Newcastle, Henry Lewyn, Joannes Aurisaber,
Robert de Valenceves, and Emma his Wife, Henricus, Gervasius, John de Burneto,
St. Thomas's Chapel.
John Brune, Joannes Page, Richard de Cromclif, Roger Amyas, Anno 1292, William
of Salisbury, 1315, Ralph Brydock of Gateside, 1323, Simon de Shotton, Robert
de Seaton, Henry Gategang Parson de Emildon, 1251. In the Year 1255, Henry de
Carliol, then Mayor, Robert Valesine gave an annual Rent to the Support of the
Tine-Bridge, and to a Chaplain to put up Prayers for the Souls of himself, his
Father, and Emma his late Wife, in the Chapel of St. Thomas the Martyr.

Laurentius de Moreton and Alice his Wife of this Town, granted a Message in
Pampeden to John de Brinklawe of Newcastle, and his Wife; on Condition that
they paid to the Guardian or Master of the Bridge 4 s. at the Terms agreed
upon, and gave to them and their Heirs one Et nobis and Heredibus nostris unam
Rosam ad Festum Nativitatis Sancti Joannis Baptistae. Lib. Cart. p. 55.
Rose at the Feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist.

FOR the Collection of these Alms, and receiving them, there was one
constituted the Custos or Guardian of the Bridge, which was sometimes also the
Master of St. Thomas the Martyr, as may be observed in the Account of those
Charities.

IN the 43d of Edward the 3d, an Inquisition was made, whereby it was found,
that the Bridge was so decayed, that 1000 l. would not repair it; and that 20
Marks belongs to the said Bridge, and to the Chapel of St. Thomas the Martyr,
built upon the same, 10 whereof was paid to the Master of the said Chapel, for
himself, and his Clerk, and the remaining ten Marks to the Bridge Master
Builder.

THIS Bridge, after it was repaired, stood upon 12 bold Arches, but now there
are only 9, the rest being turned into Cellaring, at the Building of the Keys.
It is a pretty Street, beset with Houses on each Side for a great Part of it.
In the Entrance from the North into it, stands the Chapel of St. Thomas the
Martyr, sometime Archbishop of Canterbury, so called, because it was dedicated
to him. Who the Founder of it was I have never been able to learn, nor the Time
of it is Building; but it must have been after the Year 1171, the Year when the
Martyr suffered, and it must have been built before the Year 1248, because then
it was in being.

IN this Chapel were Three Chanteries.

THE Chantery of St. Anne in the Chapel of St. Thomas upon Tine-Bridge, was
founded by William Herryng, valued at 4 l. 17 s. and arose out of certain
Tenements on the Sandhill.

THE Chantery of our Lady in the said Chapel: No Deed of Foundation to be
showed, but the Incumbent now being is Resident upon the same, and he and his
Predecessors, some say, always presented by the Mayor of Newcastle for the Time
being, and Christopher Threkeld Patron, valued at 4 l. 3 s. 6 d. which arose
out of certain Tenements in the Close and Side.

ANOTHER Chantery of our Lady founded by George Carr, Merchant, of Newcastle;
but never Licenced, valued at 5 l. 6 s. 8 d. out of the Sandhill and the Side.

SOME of the Masters of the Chapel are these following.

WILLIAM de Stanhope custos Capellae Sancti Thomae Martyris Anno 1297, and 1289.

NICHOLAS de Stockton Magister Capellae beati Thomae Martyris, 1341.

IN the Reign of Edward the third, anno 1347, William Spynn was Capellanus
Custos Capellae Sancti Thomae Martyris, and Guardian of the Alms for the
Support of the Tine-Bridge. In this Year by the Consent of the Mayor and
Bailiffs and Common Council of Newcastle upon Tine, he confirmed by his own
Charter to Gilbert de Mitford, Burgess of Newcastle, the middle Cellar of the
three which are under the Chapel, on Condition that he paid annually fourteen
Shillings at the Feast of St. Martyn in the Winter, etc. to the said Master,
etc. This Grant was sealed with the Town's Seal, and signed by Peter Grasser,
Mayor, William de Acton, Hugo de Angreton, Hugo de Carliol, and John de
Emeldon, Bailiffs.

WE meet him also 1352.

JOHN Croft, Custos, Edw. 4th's Reign, anno 1405; Master also in the Year 1411.

THOMAS Scot Custos Capellae, etc. in the Reign of Hen. 7, anno 1498.

32d Hen. 8th, John Brandlin, Clericus Master.

ST. Mary Magdalen's Hospital was annexed to the Chapel of St. Thomas the
Martyr, at the Bridge-end, and consists of a Master and three poor Brethren, to
be free Burgesses of this Town, each Brother to have 3 l. 6 s. 3 d. per annum;
and the Curate for reading Prayers, and one Sermon in the Year, has 4 l. 6 s. 8
d. and the Collecter of the Rents about 1 l. 17 s. 6 d. The whole Rental is 29
l. 7 s. 8 d.

THIS Grant or Charter was renewed in the Reign of King James the first,
whereby Robert Jennison is declared the first Master, perhaps Mr. Robert Bonner
was second, upon whose Death Mr. Thomas Davison was chosen 1675, qui obiit 1715.

THE present Master is the Rev. Dr. Thomlinson.

THIS Chapel was lately beautified and Pewed, and on Sunday the 10th of
September 1732, (the whole Body of the Magistrates coming to it with the usual
Solemnities and Formalities) was set apart by the Corporation for a Chapel of
Ease to the Church of St. Nicholas. The Sermon in the Morning was preached by
the Rev. Mr. Vicar; that in the Afternoon by the Rev. Mr. Clayton. The
officiating Ministers are the Rev. Mr. Cowling, who preaches on the Sunday
Morning, and the Rev. Mr. Cuthberts, and the Rev. Mr. Clayton, on the Sunday
Afternoon alternately.

A little beyond this is a large and strong Building, which Gray informs us,
was built a little before the Writing of his History, upon an Arch of the
Bridge, and used for a Magazine for the Town. Under this are the Shops of
Francis Rudston, Esquire Alderman, and Mr. William Sorsby. There is very visible
above this Gate-way, the Remains of a Port Cullice. After the Restoration, the
Picture of King Charles the 2d, was set up on the South side of this Building,
with this Motto under it, Adventus Regis, Solamen Gregis; The coming of the
King, is the Comfort of the People. It was wont to look exceedingly beautiful,
and in coming along the Bridge from the South, was a very worthy and
conspicuous Ornament to the Town; but of late it is pretty much obscured with
Dust, if not defaced with the Weather, through the Want of being put into a
little Order and Regularity.

ON the North-side of this Building is an Account of it is being repaired in the
Year 1713. Henry Reay, Esquire Mayor; Joseph Green, Esquire Sheriff.

AFTER you come from under the Gateway of the Magazine, there is an open on the
Bridge on either Side. Over the one of these it was that surprising Accident
happened to Mr. Anderson, a Merchant and Alderman this Town: As he was looking
over the Bridge talking with a Friend, he fingered a Ring he had on (as People
frequently do when they are thoughtful) which before he was aware, fell into
the River, and was given entirely over for lost. Sometime after one of his
Servants having bought a Salmon in the Market, found the very Ring in the Belly
of the Fish, and restored it to his Master. Herodotus gives the like Account in
the 3d Book of Polycrates King of Samos, who was at that Time esteemed one of
the Favorites of Fortune, which as my Authority observes, may satisfy us of
the Truth of Solomon's saying, There is no new Thing under the Sun.

THIS Gentleman was Mayor of Newcastle, and was Ancestor of the present Mr.
Abraham Anderson Merchant, on the Sandhill. The said Francis Anderson made his
Estate to his Son Henry Anderson, who was the Father of the said Abraham's
Grandfather. The Estate and Ring have been in the Family ever since, and are
now in the Possession of the said Abraham. I my self saw this Ring about 4
Months ago. The Impression the Seal gives is that of Soloman and the Queen of
Sheba. On the Inside of the Ring, just under the Signet, is the Picture of a
Salmon, in Commemoration of the Fish and the Transaction, on the one Side of
which is the Letter F, and on the other the Letter R, in Commemoration of the
Person. It is a Curiosity so great, that not only the whole Kingdom cannot show
the like of it; but the whole World beside, nay the World itself never, that we
know of, had the like Transaction but once before, viz. that beforementioned.
The Gentleman therefore who has this valuable Jewel in his Possession, ought to
have the utmost Care of it upon many Accounts, and as none of the least, that
it is a Credit to his Family, as well as to the Town.

A little further, about the middle of the Bridge is a large old Tower, which
they call the Tower of the Bridge, where lewd and disorderly Persons are kept
'till they are examined by the Mayor, and brought to due Punishment, except the
Crime be of a very gross Nature, and then are removed to Newgate and there
continue 'till the Assizes. Beyond this a little is the Blue-Stone, which gives
the Name of the Blue-Stone to that Part of the Bridge. Here is the Bounds of
Newcastle Southwards. Beyond this, the other Part of the Bridge belongs to the
County Palatine of Durham, and is repaired by the Bishop. At the End of the
Bridge, which leads into Gateside, is another Tower, where has been a
Drawbridge.

Sect. V. Of the KEYSIDE.
ABOVE when I mentioned the Sandhill, I took Notice, that on the East it leads
to the Key-side, which is a long Wharf or Key for Ships and other Vessels. It
is built upon the Sand, as indeed all the lower Parts of the Town have been.
Through this Street goes the remaining Part of the Town-wall, which is
continued from the East End of the Merchants Court to Sandgate Gate, which make
in some Manner two Streets, the Inside and Outside of the Key. On the Top of
this Wall is a Walk along it, as is along the other Walls of the Town; and at
the Bottom of it are a great many Gates, which are called Water-gates. These in
the Reign of King James I. Anno 1616, were ordered to be locked up every Night,
except one or two to stand open, for the Masters and Seamen to go to and fro to
their Ships. This was done, to prevent Servants casting Ashes and other Rubbish
into the River; and those two Gates were watched all Night long.

THIS Key extends in Length from East to West 103 Rods.

THIS Street is chiefly inhabited by such as have their Living by Shipping,
such as Merchants, Hostmen, Brewars, etc. As it is the great Place of Resort
for the Business of the Coal-trade (the grand Support of this Town and Country,
and many other Places also) and likewise for many other Things; it is not much
to be wondered at, if in going along it, you see almost, nothing but a whole
Street of Sign-posts of Taverns, Alehouses, Coffee-houses, etc.

AFTER you pass the Custom-house, where the King's Customs are received, which
is at the West End of this Street, as you go along eastward, you meet with a
great many narrow Chairs or Lanes. These have so many Times changed their
Names, and in all Probability will so often do it, that it is to little Purpose
at present to mention them. There is however Grundon-Chair, which I meet with
in a Writing of several hundred Years old; as also the Name of the Broad Chair,
of a very ancient Standing, and the Name of another in a Writing, drawn in the
Reign of Henry VI. which, had it been worth remembering, would in all
Probability have been forgot long before now. But which of the others went
formerly by the Names of Brown-Chair, the Chair of Nicholas de Salicibus, Tod's
Chair, Norham Chair, Philip's Chair, Shipman Chair, Oliver Chair, Galway Chair,
we are altogether in the dark. There is one more ancient Name of a Chair in
this Street, which is the Kirk-Chair, or the Way or Lane they generally went to
Church by from the Keyside. This I take to be that Chair, which now goes by the
Name of Fenwick's Entry, because its Situation answers so exactly to the
Churchyard, the Top of this Chair being almost upon a Line with the Stairs
that lead up to the Church. This Lane is much the neatest of the whole Street,
having in it several good Houses, which are kept in a different Order from the
Generality of the House in those narrow Lanes. In the upper Part of it is the
Dwelling House of Cuthbert Fenwick, Esquire Alderman of this Town, who is the
Proprietor of the whole Entry.

AT the Key itself is a very safe Station for Ships, where they lie free and
secure from the greatest Dangers of Wind and Water, where they unload their
Wares and Commodities, their Wood, Deal; and by a Crane, their Wines, Flax, and
all heavier Commodities.

CHAP. XI. Of Pandon or Pampedon.
HAVING done with what was anciently called Newcastle, we come now to describe
the ancient Town of Pampedon, which was a Town of itself distinct from
Newcastle; but was united to it in the Reign of Edward I. Vide anno 1299. There
is some Doubt about the Reason of the Name, some imagining it came from
Pandana, one of the Gates of Rome, which was so called, quia semper paterit,
because it stood always open. But I dare say, this could never give Name to the
Town of Pandon, which being in all Probability a Roman Place of Defense, was
rather obliged to be always shut. Others imagine it came from Pandara, a
Scottish Virgin Saint; but for what Reason they know best. For my Part I never
saw one yet; and perhaps for good Reason. For if I mistake not, this Town had
the Name of Pandon, before there ever was a Saint in that Kingdom. I am
therefore inclinable to believe, that it got its Name from the Romans who lived
in it, who, as Gray agrees, called it Pampedon or Pantheon, because perhaps
some Building was erected here in this Place, in Imitation of the Pantheon at
Rome (this Wall being the utmost Confines of the Roman Empire) which was built
in Honor of all the Gods. And as this Wall was the utmost Bounds of the Roman
Empire, therefore there might be such a Temple in this Place, to remind the
Romans of the necessary Assistance of all the Gods, to preserve the Bounds of
the Roman Empire. The late Romans Brit. p. 131.
Mr. Horsley will have the latter Syllable of this Word to come from the Word
Deen, which signifies a Hollow, or a Brook, because such is the Place. But with
this I cannot agree; the Deen could not have that Weight with it, as to give
Name to the whole Place; or should that be allowed, how is the former Part of
the Name accounted for? It retains therefore (as Gray justly observes) its
Name, without much Alteration, since the Romans resided in it. After the
Departure of the Romans, as the same Authority gives out, the Kings of
Northumberland kept their Residence in it, and had their House now called
Pandon-Hall. It was a safe Bulwark, having the Picls Wall on the North-side,
and the River Time on the South. This Place of Pandon is of such Antiquity,
that if a Man would express an ancient Thing, it is a common Proverb, As old as
Pandon- Gate. Thus far this Author.

Sect. I. Of the MANOUR-CHARE.
BUT to treat of some Particulars of this ancient Town, we shall begin then at
the Manour-Chare, which leads from Pilgrim-street to St. Austin Friars. This
Chare which leads from Pilgrim-street to Jesus Hospital, and from thence to the
Head of the Broad-Chare, was in ancient Times called Cowgate. This is plain
from an ancient Writing in the Possession of Mr. Thomas Waters, in
Pilgrim-street, dated Feb. 20, in the 5th Year of Edward the 4th, where are
these Words, describing the Situation of the House he possesses at present:
Prout jacet in vico Peregrinorum infra villam Novicastri super Tynam inter
Tenementum nuper Laurentii de Acton ex part Boreali, and Tenementum nuper
Thomae Clerk, ex part Australi, and extendit in Longitudine a via Regia ante,
usque vicum quondam vocatum Cowgate, modo vocatum Austyn-Chare, retro. In the
Reign of Edward the 4th it had the Name of Austyn-Chare, as appears also from
this Writing: Now it has the Name of Manour-Chare which some imagine to be
given from the Word Minor or Minorites, or Franciscans; but unless they can
prove that the Fryery of the Franciscans was situated here, they never can
prove that the Chare was so called from them; and this is scarce possible to be
done. For we have already shown that the Minorites or Franciscans had their
House in another Part of the Town, viz. in the High-Fryar-Chare; this is also
clearly proved from the several Writings of the Company of Tailors, that this
Place was formerly called Cowgate, and afterward called the Frear-Chare, or
St. Austin Frear-Chare. These Writings of theirs also mention an Almshouse,
which went by the Name of Ward's Almshouse, situated in this Chare, I supposed
it was situated at the Bottom of Mr. Water's Garden, for I have heard some old
People say, they remember thereabouts the Ruins of an Almshouse.

Cowgate the ancient Name of the Street, is still continued in one Part of it,
viz. from the Foot of Silver-street, to the Head of the Broad-Chare.

HAVING come down this Lane from Pilgrim-street, we come to three different
Ways; that on the Right leads down into Pandon; that on the Front leads into
the Town's Hospital; and that on the Left, into St. Austin-Fryers, and
Carliol-Croft.

Sect. II. Of St. AUSTIN-FRYERS.
THE left hand Passage has still the Remains of a large Gate, which has been
one of the Gates leading to St. Austin-Fryers, which, (having past this Gate)
is a little above upon the Right Hand. There is still a complete Quadrangle, to
be seen, the South Side of which has undoubtedly been the Chapel. This seems to
have been the ancient Building, for Gray seems to speak of some sumptuous
Additions that were made to it. In succeeding Ages, says he, it was enlarged
and beautified with stately Buildings, Cloisters, and a Fair Church. The Kings
of England since the Conquest, kept House in it, whence they came with an Army
Royal against Scotland; and since the Suppression of Monasteries, made a
Magazine and Storehouse for the North Parts. Now of late that Princely Fabric
is demolished, and laid level with the Ground. The Pride, Covetousness, Luxury
and Idolatry of these Houses brought a sudden Ruin upon themselves and Houses.

THE same Authority tells us also, that there was an ancient Religious House
founded by the Kings of Northumberland, and that several of them were buried
here; but it cannot be true that they built any Thing for the St. Austin
Friars, for they came not into England 'till long after the Conquest, in the
Year 1252. Then it was that Lanfrank of Milan, the first General of the
Eremites of St. Austin, sent some of them into England to seek a Dwelling for
themselves. The Augustine Friars held their first House given them in Wales, at
a Place called Wood-house which before had belonged to the Family of the noble
Family of the Turburvills. Afterward Humphry Bohun, Earl of Hereford and Essex,
in the Year of our Lord 1253, gave them a House and beautiful Church,
remarkable for a Spire of wonderful Workmanship, in London; which is now partly
a Meeting House for the German Protestants who have settled in London.

Anno 1377, the Augustine Friars obtained Leave to eat Flesh, upon Condition
that they should keep the Fast of the Friars Minors before Christmas. Stephen.
ad. Vol. 2d. 221.

WHAT Year this House was founded in, or this Order came to this House, I have
no where met with, but the Augustines are said to have been founded by the Lord
Ross, De rebus Novocast'.
the Baron of Werk, which I am inclinable to believe very true, for in the 11th
of Edward the Second, 1317. I find mention made of some Lands in Cowgate,
belonging to the Brethren of St. Austin, which were given them by William Ross
who was Baron of Werk. How much earlier than this King's Reign this Monastery
was founded, I have not been able to learn. But it is probable it was sometime
in the Reign of Edward the 1st, and this I think is out of Dispute now, for
since this Conjecture of my own, I received a Letter from the Rev. Mr. Wearing,
of Bampton in Westmoreland, with the following Account. King Edward the First,
in the 19th Year of his Reign, gave Leave to one John de Capella, to give and
assign a Message of his in Penrith, to the Prior and Friars of the Order of
St. Augustine, in the Town of Newcastle upon Tyne.

THEY surrendered on the 9th of Jan. 30 Hen. 8.

THE enclosed Ground all round it, where is now the Pasture of Nathaniel
Clayton, Esquire Alderman, the Surgeons-Hall, the Hospitals, etc. did undoubtedly
belong to them, and were their Gardens.

THIS House is now turned partly into a Workhouse, for the Employment of the
Poor; Part of it is turned into a House of Correction, a Dunghill, etc. Here is
the Charity-School of the Parish of All Hallows, which was built Anno 1723, and
an House for the Master to live in, which was built the same Year.

THE Bells of All Hallows were cast in this Place, which since the Decay of the
Monastery, was called the Artillery-yard, from the Townsmens performing there
the Exercise of the Pike and Gun.

BEFORE I have done with this Monastery, it may not be amiss to mention a
Passage in Milbank's Manuscript, which came to my Hands since the compiling of
this Antiquity. The Author of it says, "When I was young, (which was, as I take
it, about the First of King James I. Reign) there were Cloisters in this
Monastery, and a fair Church. A Scot did beg it of King James; after that took
the Lead off it and sold it; but it was cast away before it came to its Market.
He sold also some Stones to Sir Peter Riddel, who with them built the South-End
of his fine House; but now it belongs to Captain Dykes, and his Posterity has
no right.

Sect. III. Of JESUS HOSPITAL.
HAVING thus done with what relates to the Passage above mentioned on the left
Hand, let us enter that on the Front. And this is what the People call the
Town's Hospital, but its true Name is Jesus Hospital, for it was dedicated to
the Holy Jesus. You ascend to it by Stairs from the high Street, and then enter
into a pleasing Field, on the North-side of which is the said Hospital. It is
three Story high, and the Under-story is adorned with Piazza's, which are about
60 Yards in Length, and make a very agreeable Walk. About the Middle of the
Piazza's is the Entrance into the second and third Stories; and over against
this Entrance is a Fountain (very much beautified) for the Use of the Hospital.

THIS new Hospital, commonly called the Town's Hospital in the Manours,
dedicated to the Holy Jesus, was founded, erected, and endowed, at the Charge
of this Corporation Anno 1681, T. Robson Mayor.
, for a Master, and thirty nine poor Freemen, or Freemens Widows.

THE Town allows them quarterly 20 s. and the Master 30 s.

TOWARD the Bottom of this Field is another Hospital, erected for six poor
Widows of Clergymen and Merchants, which was endowed by the Charity of Mrs.
Anne Davison, Widow of Mr. Benjamin Davison, Merchant, and erected by the
Corporation of Newcastle, Nathaniel Clayton, Esquire Mayor, Thomas Wasse, Esquire
Sheriff, Anno 1725.

THEY have to subsist on 40 s. per Quarter each.

Sect. IV. Of the BARBER-SURGEONS Hall.
ON the East of this same Field is the Hall of the Barber-Surgeons, which was
rebuilt by them in the Year 1730.

IT is a very beautiful one, and not a little sumptuous; it stands upon tall
Piazza's, under which is a very spacious Walk. There is before it a fine
Square, divided into four Areas or Grass-Plats, surrounded with Gravel-Walks,
each of which is adorned with a Statue. The First of the two next the Hall is
the Figure of Aesculapius placed upon a tall Pedestal, upon one Side of which
is the Motto (...). In the Area, oppposite to this, is the Figure of
Hippocrates, who bears an open Book, with these Words in it (...), and on the
one Side of the Pedestal (...) (...), These were set up in the Year 1710, John
Shaw and Robert Golightly Stewards.

ON the other two Grass-Platts are the Figures of Medicus Pergameus or Galen,
and Medicus Spagyricus or Paracelsus, which were erected 1712, Robert Golightly
and William Handby Stewards. I am informed by one of this Company, that in a
little Time, the Wall at the Foot of the Garden will be taken away, and instead
thereof will be Iron-Rails. It will show the Hall and Gardens to some
Advantage, but be rather too great an Ornament for such a dirty Part of the
Town.

THERE are besides this Square two other Gardens for Herbs, which together with
the Hall and Garden we have been speaking of, are attended by a Gardner, who
lives there for that Purpose.

Sect. V. Of WARD's Almshouse, ALVEY's Island, PANDON Hall.
WE now turn to the right Hand, and descend the Chair toward Pandon, and pass
by Mr. Waters's Garden, at the End of which was Ward's Almshouse, above
mentioned, of which I have lately met with the following Account from the
Milbank Manuscript. The chief Almshouse in the Town is the Ward's, near the
Manor; the Mills at Pandon-gate should give them, as I remember, 20 s. per
annum, to buy them Coals; but old Mr. Brandling pulled off the Lead, on purpose
to expel the poor People, which he did. The Mills are now fallen into one
Homers's Hand, and so is lost for ever. I have seen the Writings, and know it.
Below this is a narrow Passage which leads into the Carliol Croft. Below this
again is a Place, which was formerly called the Island, as says Tradition. It
was so called, because in former Times, when the Tide flowed up to the
Stock-bridge, there was thereabout a Hill of Sand, which at the Tide's leaving
of it, appeared like an Island. They call it at present Alvey's Island, because
it belonged to one of that Name. It is the very Place, on which stands the
House, Cellars, and Malting of Mr. George Hinkster, which are bounded on the
West, North and South by the King's Street, and on the East by a waste Piece of
Ground, of the Lady Goldsburgh, which was formerly called the Stones.

OPPOSITE to the South Front of this House was the ancient Building, viz.
Pandon-hall, above mentioned, but now rebuilt in some Measure. There are still
remaining many ancient Walls and Parts of this Building; it was of considerable
Bigness, having been according to Tradition, on its North-front in Length from
the Stockbridge to Cowgate; and on its West-front in Length from its North-west
Corner, beyond that Lane that leads into Blyth's Nook.

IT is of great Antiquity, being built in the Times of the Heptarchy; for it
was the House of the Kings of Northumberland, who lived in it, for which Reason
it was called Pandon-hall.

Sect. VI. Of FISHERGATE and WALL-KNOWL.
FROM hence we go Eastward unto Pandon-Bridge, which is called the
Stock-Bridge. It was undoubtedly of Wood in ancient Times, though we meet with an
Account of its being Stone, when Thomas de Carliol was Mayor, which was in
Edward I. Time at latest. To this Place it was that the Fishermen brought up
their Fish, and sold them here, as Gray observes from Tradition. But to confirm
this beyond the Force of Tradition; it must certainly have been true, that the
Fish-market was here, because the Street you go into when you have past
Pandon-Bridge, was formerly called Fisher-gate. Now this is plain from an
ancient Writing, which was drawn when Henry le Scot was Mayor of this Town,
about the Year 1287. I shall give my Authority at large, because there depends
upon it some other Things besides this.

THE Writing is a Conveyance of some Land which is thus described.

QUAE extendit in longitudine a communi via super le Wall-Knoll, in australem.
Partem domus Fratrum de monte Carmel, usque ad communem viam quae solebat
ducere versus Fishergate, i. e.

WHICH Land extends itself from the Street of the Wall-Knoll, to the South Side
of the Monastery of the Carmelites, even to the Highway, which formerly led to
Fishergate.

NOW it is certain, this Monastery was at the Top of the Wall-Knoll; the
Remains of it are still in Being, and shall be by and by further considered. It
is also certain from this ancient Writing, that a Way led from the South Side
of the said Monastery to Fishergate; therefore this Street must be Fishergate,
because the common Way here spoken of could lead to no other Place. I take this
common Way to have been those Stairs beside Mr. Green's House at the
Stockbridge, which lead up to the Gardens there, and which, were it not a Wall,
would lead directly from this Street to the Remains of this Monastery.

AS we go along from the Stockbridge, we meet two Streets, one on the left
Hand, and the other on the right. That on the left Hand is called the
Wall-Knoll, which, as it is a very great Ascent and high Hill from Fishergate,
so it seems to me to have this Name from the Roman Wall going along it; for the
Word Knoll signifies an Hill or Eminence, as I gather from the Lord Bishop of
London's Note in Cambden upon Sevenoke in Kent, who says, On the East Side of
it stands Knowll, so called, because it is seated upon a Hill. And Gray says
also positively, that it was Part of the Picts Wall.

AT the upper End of the Street above mentioned, toward the Carpenters The
following Play coming too late to my Hands to be inserted in its proper Place,
I am obliged to mention it here. It is entitled,

NOAH 's ARK; or, The SHIPWRIGHTS ancient PLAY, or DIRGE.
Deus incipitur. ERE was this World that I have wrought.
No Marvel it is if I do show;
Their Folk in Earth I made of Naught,
Now are they fully my Foe.
Vengeance now will I do
Of them that have grieved me ill,
Great Floods shall over them go,
And run over Hoope and Hill.
All Mankind dead shall be,
With Storms both stiff and steer;
All but Noah my Darling free,
His Children and their Wives,
Ever more yet they trow'd in me,
Save therefore I will their Lives.
Henceforth my Angel free,
Into Earth look what thou would,
Greet well Noah in this Degree,
Sleeping thou shall him find:
Bid him go make a Ship
Of stiff Board and great,
Although he be not a Wright.
Therefore bid him not let,
He shall have Wit at Will,
Be that he come thereto;
All Things I him fulfill,
Pitch, Tar, Scam and Row.
Bid him in any Manner of Thing,
To Ship when he shall walk,
Of all kine Kind of Beast and Fowl,
The Male and Female with him he take.
Bid him go provey, say so,
In Ship that they not die,
Take with him Hay, Corn and Straw,
For his Fowl and his Fee.
Henceforth my Angel free
Tell him this for certain;
My Blessing with thee be,
While that thou come again.

Angelus dicat. Waken Noah, to me take tent.
Noah bid, if thou hear this Thing,
Ever whilst thou live thou shall repent.

Noah respondit. What art thou for Heaven's King,
That wakens Noah off his Sleeping,
Away I would thou went.

Angelus dicat. It is an Angel to thee sent,
Noah, to tell thee hard Tiding;
For every Ilk a Wight for Warks wild,
And many fowled in Sins fair,
And in Felony fowly filled;
Therefore a Ship thou dight to steer,
Of true Timber highly railed,
With thirty Cubits in Defense.
Look that she draw when she is dressed,
And in her Side a Door thou shear,
With Fenesters full fitly fest,
And make Chambers both more and less,
For a Flood that up shall burst;
Such a Flood in Earth shall be,
That every like Life that has Life-ward,
Beast and Body with Bone and Blood,
They shall be stormed through Stress of Storm;
Albeit thou Noah and thy Brood,
And their three Wives in your Hand,
For you are full righteous and good,
You shall be saved by Sea and Land,
In the Ship ere you enter out,
You take with you both Ox and Cow;
Of ilk a Thing that Life has lent,
The Male and Female you take with you.
You fetch in Fother for your Freight,
And make good Purveiance for you prove,
That they perish not in your Sight;
Do Noah as I have bidden thee now.

Noah respondit. Lord be then in this Stead,
That me and mine will save and shield;
I am a Man no worth at Need,
For I am six hundred Winters old,
Unlusty I am to do such a Deed,
Worklooms for to work and weeld
For I was never since I was born,
Of Kind of Craft to burden a Boat;
For I have neither Ryff nor Ruff,
Spyer, Sprund, Spront, no Sprot.
Christ be the Shaper of this Ship,
For a Ship need make I must.
Even woe worth thou fouled Sin,
For all too dear thou must be bought,
God for Thanks he made Mankind,
Or with his Hands that he them wrought;
Therefore or ever you blind,
You mind your Wife, and turn your Thought,
For of my Work I will begin,
So well were me were all forth brought.

Deabolus intrat. Put off Harro, and well away,
That ever I uprose this Day;
So may I smile and say,
I went, there has been none alive,
Man, Beast, Child nor Wife,
But my Servants were they;
All this I have heard say,
A Ship that made should be,
For to save with owten Nay,
Noah and his Meenye;
Yet trow I they shall be,
Thereto I make a Vow,
If they be never so slay,
To taynt them yet I trow.
To Noah's Wife will I wynd,
Gare her believe in me;
In Faith she is my Friend,
She is both whunt and slay,
Rest well, rest well, my own Dereday.

Uxor Noah dicat. Welcome, fewsthere, what is thy Name,
Tyte that thou tell me.

Deabolus dicat. To tell my Name I were full loath,
I come to warn thee of thy Skaith,
I tell thee secretly,
And thou do after thy Husband read,
Thou and thy Children will all be dead,
And that right hastily.

Uxor dicat. Go Devil, how say, for Shame.


Deabolus dicat. Yes, hold thee still le Dame,
And I shall tell how;
I swear thee by my crooked Snout,
All that thy Husband goes about
Is little for thy Profit;
Yet shall I tell thee how,
Thou shall weet all his Will;
Do as I shall bid thee now,
Thou shall weet every Deal.
Have here a Drink full good,
That is made of a mightful Main,
Be he has drunken a Drink of this,
No longer shall he learn.
Believe, believe, my own dear Dame,
I may no longer bide,
To Ship when thou shall sayre,
I shall be thy Side.

Noah dicat. This Labor is full great
For like an old Man as me,
Lo, lo, fast I sweat,
It trickles at our mine ee;
Now Home will I wend,
My weary Bones for to rest,
For such Good as God has sent,
There I get of the best.
Rest well Day, what Cheer with thee.

Uxor dicat. Welcome, Noah, as might I thee
Welcome to thine own Wayns.
Sit down here beside me,
Thou have full weary Baynes:
Have eaten, Noah, as might I thee,
And soon a Drink I shall give thee,
Such Drink thou never none before.

Noah dicat. What the Devil what Drink is it,
By my Father's Soul I have nere lost my Wit.

Uxor dicat. Noah, bode you tell me whereabout you wends,
I give God a Vow, we two shall nere be Friends.

Noah dicat. O Yes Dame could thou layne
I would thee tell my Wit.
How Good of Heaven an Angel sent,
And bad me make a Ship,
This World he will fore do
With Storms both stiff and steer sell,
All but thee and me, our Children and Wifes.

Uxor dicat. Who Devil made thee a Wright,
God give him Evil to fair
Of Hand to have such slight,
To make Ship less or more perfect,
Men should have heard wide where
When you began to smite.

Noah dicat. Yes Dame it is God's will,
Let be so thou not say,
Go make an End I will,
And come again full throng.

Uxor dicat. By my Faith I no rake
Whether thou be Friend or Foe,
The Devil of Hell thee speed,
To ship when thou shall go.

Noah dicat. God send me Help in high,
To clink you Nail too
God send me help in high,
Your Hand to hold again,
That all may well be done,
My Strokes be not in Vain.

Angelus dicat. God has thee Help hither send,
Thereof be thou right bold,
Thy Strokes shall fair be kend,
For thou thy Wife has cowld.

Noah dicat. Now is this Ship well made
within and without thinks me,
Now home then will I wend
To fetch in my Money,
Have good day both old and young,
My Blessing with you be.

Deabolus dicat. All that is gathered in this Stead,
That will not believe in me,
I pray to Dolphin Prince of dead,
Scald you all in his Lead
That never a one of you thrive, nor thee.

FINIS. Amen.

Tower, are still to be seen the Remains of the Hospital of the Carmelites or
White Friars. The East of their Church is still standing, to the repairing of
which Roger Thornton left in his Will two fother of Lead; this Hospital being
dedicated to St. Michael, gave the Name to it of St. Michael's on the Mount.

IT is said by Dugdale in his Baron. Lumley, that the Roger Thornton he is
there speaking of, was the Founder of the House of the White Friars in
Newcastle. But this Roger can scarce be the Founder of it, for I have proved
him to be the younger Roger; and it was taken Notice of above, that Roger the
Elder left Two Fother of Lead to it when he died, so that if either of them be
the Founder, it must be the Elder, rather than the Younger that Dugdale speaks
of.

BUT I believe it will be a difficult Matter, upon Examination, to prove either
the Father or the Son the Founder of it, for it boasts a greater Antiquity: For
this Domus Fratrum de Monte Carmel, is mentioned in an ancient Writing which
was drawn when Henry le Scot was Mayor, about the Year 1287, in the Reign of
Edward the 1st, as is said above, and therefore it must at that Time have been
in being; but the Elder of them was not Mayor of Newcastle, 'till 114 Years
after this; so that it is impossible he should be the Founder, and therefore
much less his Son. They might, and probably they both of them were great
Benefactors, or second Founders to it, and so have been esteemed each of them
Founders themselves.

THEY surrendered at the same Time with the Rest: Sometime after they
surrendered, King Henry the 8th made a present of this Priory and its Revenues,
together with some other Lands belonging to other religious Houses, lying in
Newcastle upon Tyne, to Sir John Gresham, Alderman of the City of London, and
Richard Billing ford, Gent. who 21st of February, 2d Edward the 6th, conveyed
them to William Dent, of this Town, Gentleman. What they conveyed was as
follows.

THE House or Priory of St. Michael de Wall Knoll, with the Things following
belonging to it, This Orchard and Garden were undoubtedly the Gardens of
Swaddle, Green, Gray, etc. all that Ground which descends into Fisher-gate.
a Garden and Orchard, about an Acre of Ground; a Close, about 4 Acres, near
the Walls of the Town, 34 Messuages, three Gardens, and one Close; also a Close
called Colerigges, and four Les Rigges in the Shield Field; also 17 more
Messuages in the Town and Suburbs, belonging to the Monastry of Tinmouth; also
four Tenements and a Garden, in this Town, belonging to the Monastry of
Alnwick; also three Houses belonging to the Nuns of Halystone or Holystone, a
Village in Northumberland where in the Infancy of the English Church, Paulinus
is said to have baptized many thousands
Halystone; also six Houses, in this Town, belonging to Newminster; also a
House, in this Town, belonging to the Monastry of Blanchland; together with
every Thing belonging to the said Monastries in this Town of Newcastle upon
Tyne.

IN the 24th of Queen Elizabeth, this William Dent, Alderman, and William his
Son, conveyed this Priory, together with an House and Orchard, and a Garden,
containing an Acre of Ground, to William Jenison, then Mayor of Newcastle, and
Richard Hodgshon, Alderman.

Sect. VIII. Of CROSSWELL-GATE, BYKER-CHARE.
ABOVE when we went from Fishergate-street, we met two Streets, that on the
Left Hand we have already treated of: The other, I imagine, is that which
formerly went by the Name of Crosswell-gate, which is often mentioned in
ancient Writings. It is reported that the Dwelling House of Roger Thornton was
in this Street. Whatever Truth is in this, it is certain, that many Houses in
this Street pay an Annual Rent to the Lord Scarborough to this Day, into whose
Family the Granddaughter of Roger Thornton was married. There are in this
Street several Lanes or Allies, the first we meet with in going along from
Fishergate, is a Place called, at present, Blyth's Nook: It is built over
Pandon Burn. The next is a narrow Lane leading to the Burn Bank, a Place by
which Pandon Burn runs into the Tyne. It lies very low, and before the
Heightning of the Ground with Ballast, and the Building of the Wall and Key,
was often of great Hazard to the Inhabitants; once in particular a most
melancholy accident happened in this Place, in the Year 1320, the 13th of
Edward the 3d, the River of Tyne over-flowed so much, that 120 Laymen, and
several Priests, besides Women, were drowned; and as Gray says, 140 Houses were
destroyed. Complete Hist. Eng. Vol. 1st. P. 235.

BEYOND this again is a Chare called Byker Chare, which seems by the aged Look
of several of the Buildings, those especially at the North-end of the Chare,
where is the House of Mr. Henry Atkinson, Hoastman, to be of great Antiquity:
Perhaps it got the Name of Byker-Chare, from one Robert de Byker and Laderine,
his Wife, who had Lands in Pandon, etc. See Anno 1299.

BEYOND this again is Cocks Chare, Love-lane, etc. where are some Houses which
deserve a better Situation.

Sect. IX. COWGATE, TRINITY-HOUSE, BROAD-CHARE.
WHEN we came to Pandon-Hall, we went Eastward into Pandon; it remains now,
that we go Southward from the same Place. Leaving then Silver-street on the
Right Hand, we come into Cowgate, which has been a Part of the Town where some
eminent Men have lived in; such as Gilbert de Cowgate, Walter de Cowgate, etc.
who were Men of Fortune and Estate. Going forward, we pass by Blythe Nook on
the Left Hand, and the Dog-Bank on the Right, and then we come to the Broad
Chare; a little below the Entrance of which, is the Trinity House; which
according to some was a Monastry, dedicated to the Holy Trinity. This Order of
the Trinity House was founded by St. John de Matha and St. John de Valois, in
the Year 1198, in the Popedom of Innocent III. The End of its Institution was
the Redemption of Captives. In the Year 1224, a Monastry was founded for this
Order in Kent. What Time this Monastry of the Trinity (if there was such a one)
was founded in this Town, we are entirely in the Dark: Only it was said by
some, that Laurentius of Newcastle, was its Founder. If this be true, it is not
improbable but it was Laurentius Acton, who was Mayor of this Town in 1435 and
1436, etc.

WE are also equally at a loss as to its Situation: For Bishop Burnet, in his
Collection of Records, P. 146, says, It was on the Wall-knoll, in Newcastle;
and that they surrendered January 10th, 30th of Henry the 8th. If it was here,
I know of no Place to fix it in, but where the Carmelites were, and this could
never be. I am therefore inclinable to believe, that this Monastry means that
of the Carmelites, and through a Mistake is called that of the Trinity.

BUT be that as it will, it is certain that this Place called the Trinity
House, was no Religious House: For it is said in our Account below, to have
been called of old Time Dalton's Place. And besides, had it been this Religious
House, the Mariners could not have got Possession of it 'till its Suppression,
which was on the 10th of January, 30th of Henry the 8th; whereas it was
conveyed to them the 20th of Henry the 7th, as the following Account testifies.

A Writing in the Custody of the Brethren of the Trinity-House, dated the 4th
Day of January, the 20th of the Reign of Henry the 7th, which gives an Account
of a Message and Garden, which was conveyed by one Ralph Hebborne, of
Hebborne, of Northumberland, Esquire to the Fraternity of the Mariners. It is the
Place where is now the Trinity House, which was in old Time called Dalton's
Place.

IN the same Writing it is ordered, that the aforesaid Message, etc. shall be
repaired for Ever by the common Purse of the Brotherhood; that in some
convenient Part of it should be an Hall for the Fellowship to meet in, at all
Times convenient, for the observing of their Rules, etc. and that in the
Residue of the same, there should be certain Lodgings ordered for such of the
said Fellowship, as afterward should fall into Poverty, or be not able to
sustain themselves: Those they held during the Term of their Lives, and then
were succeeded by others in the like necessitous Circumstances. It was also
ordered in this Writing, that within the said Message, there should be a
Chapel and a Priest, to sing and say Mass, and other Divine Service therein,
as should be appointed by the Aldermen, and Wardens of the said Fraternity, for
the Time being. That the Priest and the said poor Persons so admitted, should
pray for the good Estate of the said Ralph Hebborne, Master John Hebborne,
George Hebborne, and for the Masters Souls, and for the good Estate of the said
Fellowship, and for the Souls of such of the same Fellowship as be departed, or
hereafter should depart to the Mercy of God; and also for the Souls of John
Dalton, sometime Owner of the said Message, his Ancestors Souls, and all
Christian Souls.

ONE Part of this Writing was to be put in a Chest, belonging to the
Fellowship, and kept by them; the other was to be kept in a Chest for that
purpose, in the Vestry of All-Hallows in this Town, in the Custody of the
Churchwardens, for the Time being, for Ever.

THIS was further confirmed to the Fraternity of the Trinity House, by Thomas
Hebborne, Son of the said Ralph Hebborne, on the 9th of September, in the 16th
of the Reign of King Henry the 8th, upon the Conditions following, viz. That
the Fellowship should pay to the said Thomas Hebborne, his Heirs or Assigns,
within the Town of Newcastle, on the Vigil of the Apostles, Peter and Paul, in
the Month of June, a Pottle of Wine, if it be demanded yearly, for Evermore.
That the said Thomas Hebborne should be made a Brother of the Fraternity, and
Partaker of all Masses, good Prayers and Suffrage, which should afterward be
celebrated, said and done by the Chaplain and Priest of the Fraternity, within
the Trinity House, and at the Trinity Altar within the Church of All-Hallows,
for Evermore; with such Obsequies and Funeral Ceremonies, as usually were done
at the Burial of any Brother of the same Fraternity, if the said Thomas departs
within this Town of Newcastle. The Priest of the Trinity House at this Time,
was one Sir Robert Ellison.

TO this Writing was annexed the Seal of the Town of Newcastle, and the Names
of the Mayor, Sheriff, and Aldermen.

On Oct. the 5th, 28 Hen. 8. Light-houses were permitted to be built by the
Trinity-house, to found, edify, make and build two Towers; that is to say, one
on the North Part of Shields, in the Entrance of the Harbor, and another upon
the Hill.
KING James the 1st, in the third Year of his Reign, granted to the Master,
Pylots, and Seamen of Newcastle, a Charter.

SEVENTEENTH of October 1664, King Charles the 2d, granted them another Charter.

AND a Third was granted them 26th of July 1687, by King James the 2d.

IN a Manuscript I have frequently mentioned, it is said that the Trinity House
in the Broad Chare, was held by the Masters and Mariners of this Town of the
Andersons, by giving them a red Rose at Christmas, which Bartram Anderson
turned to Wine, and then sold it to Sir Ralph Jenison, and it adds, how they
agree I know not. It is at present a very pretty Building, consisting of a
handsome Square, very Monastic in it is Aspect, having it is Appartments or
Lodgings for the Inhabitants, a very neat Chapel, and a magnificent Hall. It
maintains 14 Persons, allowing every one a Chamber, eight Shillings per Month,
Coals and Clothing. There are also 15 extra Persons, which have allowed them,
some more, some less.

LEAVING this House of the Mariners, we go down the Broad Chare, without any
Thing remarkable, 'till you come to the Key-side; about the Middle of it is a
Square, which goes by the Name of Stony-hill, nigh it a Lane, called
Spicer-lane, which also leads on to the Key.

CHAP. XII. Of the Suburbs, and other out Places.
Sect. I. Of the FORTH.
WITHOUT the Close-Gate is a pretty long Street, with Houses on each Side;
which goes as far as a Dike called Skinner-Bourne, where are of late Years a
Factory belonging to Mr. Thomlinson, a Pot-House to Mr. Joseph Blenkinsop and
Ralph Harl, and a Glass-House to Mr. Dagney, and Company; from thence Northward
at the Top of the Hill is the Place called the Forth, anciently called the
Frith, which lies without the Walls of the Town, and abutts on the South on a
certain little Close called Goose-green-Close, then it extends itself to a
Close called Dove-cote-Close, and from thence Westward by the furthest Ditch of
the Close, which lies contiguous to the Corner of the Hedge, which is next to
the Common Way which leads into the Forth. Then by and over the Common Way to
the little Rivulet or Syke of Water in the Bottom of the Valley, and so passing
the Syke, you go upwards to the Close called Goose-green-Close. The Forth
contains 11 Acres of Ground. It was surveyed by Order of the Parliament, in the
Year 1649, and valued at 12 l. per Annum.

IT was valued Tythe-free. The Town paid 4 l. per Annum to the King for it.

HOW it comes to be called Forth or Frith, I can only conjecture. The Word
Blount Law Dictionary in verb. Frith.
Forth or Frith, as it is anciently called, comes from the Saxon Word Frith,
which signifies Peace. For the English Saxons held several Woods to be sacred,
and made them Sanctuaries. From this Definition of the Word, it may be no
improbable Conjecture that the ancient Saxons inhabiting about the Parts of the
Wall where the Town now is, gave the Name of Frith to this Place, as it was
perhaps endowed with gloomier Shades and darker Recesses, the awful Excitors of
Heathen Superstition, than other Places about the Town were.

IN the Reign of King Henry III. a License was granted to the Townsmen of
Newcastle, bearing Date Dec. 23d of his Reign to dig Coals and Stones, etc. in
this Place called the Forth. And here it was as some think, or rather as
others, in the Castle Leases that the first Newcastle Coals were wrought.

IT seems to have been all along a Place of Pleasure and Recreation. For it was
an ancient Custom for the Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriff of this Town,
accompanied with great Numbers of the Burgesses, to go every Year at the Feasts
of Easter and Whitsuntide to the Forth, with the Maces, Sword and Cap of
Maintenance carried before them. Undoubtedly the vast Concourse of both young
and old at this Place at these Seasons of the Year, rather than at any other
about this Town, is the remains of this ancient Custom.

AFTER the building of the Castle it is said (but without any just Authority)
that the Forth was anciently a Fort belonging to the Castle.

IN the Year (...), Part of it was turned into a pretty large Bowling-Green;
which was adorned with a broad Gravel Walk and a double Row of Trees around it.
It is at present a mighty pretty Place, exceeding by much any Common Place of
Pleasure about the Town. On the East Side of it, you have a Prospect of Part of
the Town's Wall, through which is the Common Passage to and from this Place
under a shady Walk of Trees; on the West you View the Grounds of the Village of
Elswick, which have a gentle ascent to the Village itself; a Place at the
proper Season of the Year much frequented by the Town's People, for its
pleasing Walk and rural Entertainment.

FROM this Quarter we view also as we do from the South, the Banks of the River
Tyne, together with their Villages. On the North is an House of Accommodation.

GRAY says that it was given to the Townsmen for their Services, by Edward III.
Whereas it seems to have been theirs in the Reign of Hen. III. However if the
other Conjecture be true, I verily believe it was given to the Town for that
memorable Victory obtained by the Townsmen, when the Earl of Murray was taken
Prisoner, which is commemorated in Anno Christi, 1342.

Sect. II. Of WARDEN-CLOSE.
FROM hence we proceed to the West-gate, which gives Name to a little Village
within the Bounds of the County of Northumberland, from whence still going on
by the Outside of the Town's Wall, we come to the Warden's-close. It seems to
be called the Warden's-close, because it belonged to the Wardens of the Priory
of Tinmouth. For Gray tells us he had his House, Garden, and Fish Pond, etc.
here. This indeed is not improbable, for the Monastery of the Blackfriars was
dependant upon the Priory of Tinmouth: And we are sure that this Close was Part
of the Garden belonging to the Blackfriars in former Times. And there are
still the seeming Remains of Fish Ponds, Gardens, etc.

AT the Top of this Field toward the North, is a Field called the Shoulder of
Mutton Close, because it is in the Shape of a Shoulder of Mutton, which must
formerly have been Part of the Warden's-close. In this is a Cistern of Water,
which a curious Friend of mine imagines, supplied the Blackfriars. This
perhaps may be true enough. The Well belonging to this Monastry may proceed
from it. But I take its grand Use to have been to supply with Water the
Fish Ponds and Gardens just now mentioned.

Sect. III. Of NEWGATE Suburbs.
THE Suburbs out of Newgate Gray informs us, were ruined in the late Civil
Wars. However the Street Gallowgate, (so called because of the Way that the
Malefactors of the Town of Newcastle go to the Gallows, which is situated in a
very low Place called the Gallows-hole) Is become again a very tolerable
Street, and a very pleasant Place, having in it some good Houses, which are
situated in Gardens and Fields. At the Top of this Street is a Lane which leads
to the West-gate, Quarry-house, etc. it borders upon a Field called the
Shoulder of Mutton Close.

Sect. IV. Of the CASTLE LEASES, TOWN MOOR, etc.
OPPOSITE to this Lane is the Castle Leases, called anciently the Castle Field,
a large Piece of Ground belonging to the Town, containing 141 Acres 12 Perches:
Gray informs us, that Tradition said it was the Gift of King John to the good
Men of Newcastle. However this be, it is certain that it had been the Town's
immemorially or Time out of Mind, in the Reign of King Edward III. For in the
31st of that Reign the Town of Newcastle took an Inquisition in the Castle
Field on a Palm Sunday Eve, the 31st Year of King Edward III. desiring the
Confirmation of the Castle Moor and Field, and the Privileges belonging to
them: And the King by his Letters Patents dated at Westminster, confirmed to
the Burgesses of Newcastle the other Charters they had obtained, and also
confirmed to them the Possession of the Castle Moor, Concessimus pro nobis and
heredibus nostris quod predicti Burgenses and eorum heredes habeant and teneant
moram and terras predictas

Lib. Cart. p. 11.


and Castle Field; they having belonged to this Town immemorially at this Time:
He also, as appears by the said Charters, confirmed to the Burgesses of this
Town, and their Heirs, the Liberty of digging Coals, Stone, and all other
Advantages arising from the said Castle Moor.

THIS Place was formerly the Inheritance of diverse Persons, Owners thereof, who
were accustomed from ancient Time, to take the fore Crop thereof yearly, at or
before Lammas-Day, and after that, by an ancient Custom, all the Burgesses of
this Town used to put in their Kine, and used the same in pasturing of them
'till Lady Day in Lent yearly, and then to lay the same for Meadow again 'till
Lammas.

IN the Year 1679, when George Morton was Mayor, the Town purchased the
Sweepage of the Castle Leases for the Benefit of the Burgesses.

IN the 33d of Charles II. a License was granted the Mayor and Burgesses to
purchase the Sweepage of the Castle Leases.

THE Grounds of it abut on the said Castle Moor on the East and North Parts,
upon the Highway leading to Kenton on the West, and on the other Way leading to
the said Castle Moor on the South.

WHEN the Parliament took an Inquisition of it, the Forth and Town Moor in the
Year 49, were valued at 27 l. per Annum.

THE Mill in the Castle Leases, commonly called Chimley Mill, upon the Syke or
Rivulet called Bailiff-Burn, and the other Mill called Little Mill, were at the
same Time valued at 10 l. per Annum each.

THIS Ground was always valued Tythe-free.

ON the West and North of the Castle Leases lies the Town-Moor. It is a very
spacious Piece of Ground, containing 1037 Acres, one Rood, two Perches. It was
originally a Wood, very famous for Oak Trees, out of which have been built many
hundred of Ships, and all the Houses of the old Town of Newcastle.

THIS Moor, together with the Castle Leases, or Castle Lizards, called
anciently the Castle Moor, and Castle Field, were the Right of the Town of
Newcastle, and had been so Time out of Mind, as has been just now observed in
the Reign of King Edward III. who in his Charter of the Town, dated the Tenth
of May, in the 31st Year of his Reign, confirmed the Holding and Possessing of
it, and the Working of Coals, Stones, etc. in it; together with all the Profits
arising from it (in the same Manner he had confirmed all the Immunities and
Privileges, which had been granted by the Kings, his Predecessors.) to the
Burgesses of Newcastle.

THE ancient Bounds of the Town-Moor, which are the same to this Day, and
answer still in every Particular, are thus described in the Charter
abovementioned.

ET quia ex part Dilectorum Nobis Burgensium ejusdem Villae Nobis est
Supplicatum, ut cum Mora and Terra Vocatae Castle-Field and Castle-Moor, ex
part Boreali Dictae Villae Novicastri de quadam Placea Vocata Inglesdick
Versus Orientem Per Metas Positas Usque ad Quandam Placeam Vocatam Le Thornbusk
Juxta Crucem [and Deinde per Certas [Divisas and Metas Positas Versus Dictam
Villam Novicastri Usque] Furcas] and sit inter Postos Furcarum; Ita quod Una
Postis Fiat in Marchia Inter Terram Prioris de Tynemouth and Terram Dictae
Villae Novicastri and sit Usque Le Quarldike and Deinde per Viam Usque ad
candem Villam Novicastri, sunt terra and solum Dictae Villae Novicastri
Pertinentia ad eandem Villam a tempore quo non extat Memoria.

THE Substance of which is, it Bounders on a certain Street or Causeway, called
Gingler-Dyke, and Bounders to a Street or Cause-way called Thornbusk, besides
the Cross; and from thence to the Bounders set toward the Town of Newcastle,
unto a Gallows set between the Trees or Posts of the Gall-house; so that one
Post is placed and set in the Marches, between the Fields and Lands of the
Prior of Tinmouth, and the Fields and Grounds of Newcastle; and so extends
unto the Quarrel-Dyke, and from thence unto the King's-Street, and so on unto
the said Village.

IT is the Opinion of Gray
some, that this large Piece of Ground was the Gift of Adam de Athol, of
Gesmond, to the Town: But if the Town of Newcastle had an Immemorial Right to
the Town-Moor, in the Days of Edward III. and this is proved from his Charter
abovementioned; then it is very improbable that Adamarus de Athol, of
Gesmunde, should be the Donor of it. For this De reb. Novicast. p. 9.
Adam was High Sheriff of the County of Northumberland, in the Fifth of Richard
II. and was living in the Year of our Lord 1392, as appears by an Indulgence of
40 Days granted to the Church of St. Andrew's, which was in the Proceedings
upon a Dispute, about 30 Years after, relating to the Town-Moor. It is
declared, that the Town-Moor had belonged to the Town of Newcastle
immemorially, or Time out of Mind: But how can it be said to be in the
Possession of the Town for so long a Time, when he himself, who gave it, lived
thirty Years after this Declaration? And if he did so; no doubt but several
others lived so long too. Either then the Town was not at the Time of this
Dispute immemorially in the Possession of this Ground, or this Adamarus de
Athol, was not the Donor of it. Again, had he been the Donor of it, he must
have been 120 Years old at his Death; that is to say, he lived thirty Years
after this Dispute, and Ninety before to make it immemorial; (which is the
least Time that can be allowed to make any Thing so) so that these two put
together will make that Number of Years at his Death. It is not indeed in this
Age of the World impossible for a Man to live so long, but yet it is highly
improbable. There are few come to this Age, and when they do, they are looked
upon as so many great Exceptions to the general Rule of the Ages of Men; and
then their Ages stand upon Record to succceeding Generations; and no doubt, had
this been true of Adam de Athol, it would at least have been mentioned upon his
Tombstone, but we find no such Thing. Nay, should we allow, for the Sake of
making him the Donor, that he really lived 120 Years; yet after all, this grand
Absurdity would follow, that if the Town, when this Dispute happened, had had
it immemorially; he must have made a Present of it on the very Day he was born.

FOR these Reasons therefore it is impossible he should be the Donor of it, but
some of his Ancestors of the same Name might: And this is the rather to be
imagined, because Tradition says, it was Adam de Athol, of Jesumund, handing
down the Name to this Day. As then he was of the same Name, and undoubtedly a
great Benefactor to this Town, so the good Deeds of some of his Ancestors might
have been ascribed to him through Mistake, and so be handed down to this
present Day. There was one Adam de Jesumuthia, or Gesmund, who ordered that one
Good-Plank, or Six-Shillings, should be given annually (as may be seen in the
Account of the Tyne-Bridge) for the Reparation of the Bridge. Perhaps it was
him, for the Bridge was burnt in the Reign of Henry III. in the Year 1248, and
immediately they set about the Repair of it, and this Adam was one of the
Benefactors to it. If then Tradition says true, that Adam de Jesmund was the
Donor of the Town-Moor to the Town, this is probably the very Man, and whether
he gave it before the Burning of the Bridge, or at the Time of his Benefaction
to the Bridge; yet in the Thirty first of Edward III. it would undoubtedly have
been the Town's immemorially, which is a good presumptive Proof of this
Conjuncture, that this was the very Man. Be this as it will, it is certain that
it had been the Town of Newcastle's Time out of Mind in the Thirty first Year
of Edward III. and was then confirmed to them, as has been observed above; in
our Account of the Castle Leases.

TWO Fairs are kept upon this Moor, on the First of August, and Eighteenth of
October, of which the Tolls, Booths, Stallage, Pickage, and Courts of
Pic-powder, to each of the Fairs, were reckoned worth communibus Annis 12 l. in
Oliver's Time.

IN the Survey made of the Town-Moor, in the troublesome Times, it was reported
that the Coal Mine, or Colliery, in the Town-Moor, extended it self under the
Superficies of the Town-Moor one hundred Acres, and that the Value of it was to
the Town 35 l. per Annum.

IT is the Pasture for the Cows belonging to the Freemen of Newcastle.

IT is much frequented by the Gentry of this Town, and others for Exercise and
Health; it being (that Part of it especially called the Cow-hill,) a Place of
the most wholesome Air about the Town.

Of the NUN-MOOR.
THE Nun-Moor is that large Piece of Ground that lies on the West of the
Town-Moor, between the Thorn-Bush and the Hedge that separates from it the
Grounds of Kenton.

RICHARD I. confirmed to St. Mary's and the Nuns of Newcastle, whatsoever had
been given them by Asalack, the Founder of that Hospital; (as is observable in
his Charter of the Founding of St. Mary's) whatever belonged to him, as well in
Land as in Money, or Houses; whatever he had acquired and obtained, both within
and without the Town of Newcastle, all these he confirmed; and he himself also
gave them two Carucates of Land of his own, that they might pray for his Soul.
This is supposed to be the Charter for the Confirmation of Nun-field, or as it
seems to have been otherwise called Nun-house, in the Town-Moor. And if this
Conjecture be true, it is clear that this Asalack gave the Nun-Moor to the Nuns
of St. Bartholomew, and not as is commonly reported Adam de Athol. These Nuns
were the Occasion of it is being entitled Nun-field, or Nun-house, or the
Nun-Moor, as it is called at this Day.

IN the Fourth of the Reign of Henry VII. Dame Joan, Prioress of the Monastry
of St. Bartholomew the Apostle, in Newcastle upon Tyne, and Convent of the
same, granted a Lease of the Nun-Moor for an hundred Years to the Mayor,
Sheriff, Aldermen, and Commonality of this Town, under the yearly Rent of one
Pound three Shillings and four Pence. Hence it is plain that this Moor belonged
to those Nuns, and took it is Name from them.

IN the Eleventh of Henry VIII. there was an award between the said Priory and
Convent, and William Bennet, Esquire Owner of Kenton, about the Bounders of it.

IN the Thirty sixth of the same Reign, it was granted to John Broxholm, in
Consideration of 1122 l. 15 s. 6 d. and was conveyed by those claiming under
him to the Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle upon Tyne.

THIRTY Seventh Hen. VIII. upon an Inquisition then taken and returned into the
Exchequer of Lands, belonging to Religious Houses, Nun-moor is certified to be
within the County of Northumberland.

THE other Parts of the Suburbs out of Newgate is a Street that reaches as far
as the Barras-bridge, called Sidgate, which consists of Houses very
indifferent, most of which are inhabited by poor People; but very sweetly
situated, having the Leases or Gardens behind them.

Sect. V. Of the Suburbs of PILGRIM-STREET.
WE come now to the Suburbs of Pilgrim-street gate; which were also ruinated in
the late Civil Wars. But at present it is a very well built Street, having in
it some very pretty Houses, such as are the Houses of Mr. John Stephenson,
Merchant, Mr. John Morris, Hoastman, and several belonging to Mr. William
Graham, etc.

THIS Street is the most Pleasant Situation of any within or without the Town.

IT stands as it were in the middle of Gardens and Shady Fields, which make it
a delicious Place in the Summer Season.

IN the upper Part of it, nigh the Barras-bridge, are to be seen the Remains of
the Hospital dedicated to St. Mary Magdalen, which was vulgarly called, the
Maidlein's. It was seated at the Summit of an Hill, beneath which is the Well
called St. Mary Magdalen's Well, so named from the Hospital, as are also
several Fields which to this Day are called the Maidlin Meadows.

IT was founded by King Henry I. for a Master, Brethren and Sisters to receive
Leprous Folks, and since that Sickness abated, for the poor of the Town in Time
of Pestilence. Fourteen within the House were allowed every one a Room, 8 s.
per Month, Coals, and Fifteen without, some 8 s. per Month, some 5 s. some 2 s.
6 d.

ONE Johannes de bland obiit die mensis proximo ante festum Sancti Michaelis
archangeli, hora nona illius diei, anno Domini millesimo Tricentesimo
septuagesimo quarto. Cujus corpus humatum est juxta summum altere ex part
Boreali cancellarii, in Capella Beatae Mariae Magdalenae. Lib. Cart.
John Bland was the Master of this Hospital in the Reign of Edward III. he was
a Man of a fair Character, and good Reputation. It is recorded of him, that he
died the Day before the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, or on the 28th of
September, in the ninth Hour of that Day, in the Year of our Lord 1374. His
Body was buried nigh the High-Altar, on the North side of the Chancel, in St.
Mary Magdalen's Chapel.

HE was a great Benefactor to this Hospital, as appears from his Charity and
Generosity in the first Year of his Mastership. For whereas Laurentius Acton
had the said Hospital in perpetuum, for himself, his Heirs and Assigns, this
worthy Man paid for his own Right 40 Marks to the said Laurentius, and the said
Laurentius had the first Fruits belonging to the said Hospital, which yearly
amounted to the Sum of 200 Marks.

ONE Richard Sperman had an annual Pension from the said Hospital of 8 Marks,
which Pension the abovementioned Gentleman in the 2d Year of his Mastership
bought out for the said Hospital.

HE also the same Year freed the said Hospital from an annual Pension, which
was payable to Hugo de Mitford.

THE same Master of this Hospital, in this same Year following, built in the
said Hospital a Consistory, a Stable, and a Bier, and made in the Quire two New
Windows facing the South of the said Chapel, besides a Number of other good and
generous Charities which he bestowed upon this Hospital.

THE same Gentleman proves judicially in the King's Court, that the Mayor and
Commonalty of Newcastle upon Tine, did assign, present, and induct the Master
of the said Hospital. He was Master of the said Hospital about five Years.

IN the Reign of our Lord 1564, in the 6th of Queen Elizabeth, one Edmund
Wiseman, Servant to the right Honorable Sir Nicholas Bacon, Knight, and Keeper
of the Great Seal of England, obtained by the Procurement of one Cuthbert
Bewick, a Burgess and Merchant of this Town of Newcastle, a Presentation from
the Queen, of the Hospital of St. Mary Magdalen, lying without the Wall of
Newcastle; of which Hospital the Mayor and Burgesses of this Town were the true
and very Patrons, and had till then presented Time out of The West-Spittle, the
Hospital called the Magdalens, and the Chapel of St. Thomas the Martyr, have
been given by the Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle, Time out of Mind.
Mind. By Virtue of this Presentation from the Queen, James Bishop of Durham
would have inducted the said Wiseman (in the Year aforesaid, betwixt Lammas and
Martinmas) into the Possession of the said Hospital; but the Mayor and Aldermen
of the Town having Respect to the Defense of their Patronage, would in no wise
permit the said Bishop to give Induction therein: For the Hospital of St. Mary
Magdalen was a Donative, and not a Benefice inductible by any Bishop.

IN the Year 1569, 15th February, the Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle granted
the next Presentation of St. Mary Magdalen, commonly called the Maid^enes, to
Henry Anderson, Robert Mitford, and Christopher Mitford.

IN the Account of Ficket-Tower, there is Mention made of a Great Cross,
standing within Maudlin-Barras; and in the Milbank Manuscript it is said, At
the End of the Barras -Bridge before the Chapel stood a stately Cross firm and
complete, and This Pigg was a Rebel, a very great Enthusiast, a Monument of his
whimsical Head is that Stone-Pillar, a little North of the three Mile Bridge,
which every deservedly to this Day, bears the Title of Pig's Folly.
John Pigg in the Time of the Rebellion took it down, and called it Idolatry,
and thought to make his own Use of it; but it was broke by some who hated it
should be profaned. This Hospital at the Suppression was valued at 9 l. 11 s.
4 d.

LEAVING St. Mary Magdalens, we go forward to the End of this Street, which
together with the End of the Street leading from Newgate, meets at the
Barras-Bridge.

HOW it comes by the Name of Barras-Bridge, Gray gives us no Account. Others
have imagined it to be so called, from a Person of that Name, who was its
Builder or Benefactor. This Conjecture in my Opinion is a grand Mistake; for we
have just now mentioned the Maudlin-Barras, and therefore the Word Barras must
imply something else. The Manuscript above mentioned speaking of the Antiquity
of St. Andrew's Church, gives this as a Reason of its being the oldest in Town,
because it is next the Barras, which has been the ancient Barracado of the
Town. So then according to this Account, it got its Name from the Word
Barracado. This also in my Opinion is a Mistake. For the Word Barrows (for so
it should be spelled) signifies the same as Tinnuli, Hillocks, and sometimes
Graves and Sepulchers: And when it is considered, that the Hospital of St. Mary
Magdalen was founded for the Reception of Leprous Folks, it is easy to see,
that the Maudlin-Borrows are the Tombs or Burial-Places of those that died of
the Leprosy in that Hospital; and since the Burial-place it self was nigh to
the Bridge, the Bridge got thence the Name of the Barrows-Bridge. The Barras
mentioned in the Account of Ficket-Tower are the same Thing; nothing else but
the Burial-place of the Franciscan Friars.

THE Place of the Maudlin Barrows I take to be the sick Man's Close; for as
after the abating of the Leprosy, this Hospital was obliged to take the Poor of
the Town in during the Time of the Pestilence; so I question not, but those
that died were buried in the ancient Burial-place or Barrows of the Hospital.
And since we are certain they were buried in the sick Man's Close, we may be
therefore almost certain, that the sick Man's Close was the Barrows of this
Hospital.

THE Barrows-Mill belonged to the black Friars; and in the Year 1558, paid a
Rent to the Town of Newcastle of 2 s. per annum. Lib. Cart. p. 43.

THE Chapel on the other Side the Barrows-Bridge was dedicated to St. James the
Apostle, and was anciently called St. See Andrew Tower.
James's Kirk. I suppose it was a Chapel of Ease to St. Andrew, for Jesmond and
Sandiford, and other Out-parts of that Parish.

Sect. VI. Of the Suburbs of PANDON.
THE Suburbs out of Pandon-Gate are but very few Houses; but there are Gardens
all the Way up the Causeway; two of them are those of Mr. John Simpson and Mr.
Charles Atkinson. This Way was within these four Years the pleasantest Entrance
into the Town of Newcastle, having Gardens on each Side, beset with Trees of so
large a Size and Shade, that they covered the Street itself in several Places.
These were cut down for a little unpossest Money, and the greatest Beauty of
the Street lost.

THERE are in this Street two or three Passages, leading to different Places,
which it may not be amiss to mention. After you are out of Pandon-gate, there
is one on the left Hand leading to Pandon-Dean, a very Romantic Place, full of
Hills and Vales, through which runs Pandon-Burn. It is a very entertaining Walk
in the Summer to Magdalen-Well. A little above this is another very narrow
Passage on the right Hand, bordering upon Mr. Harrison's Garden, which leads to
a Place called the Garth-Heads, which was a Place of Pleasure and Recreation;
but of late it was taken in, and made a common Garden of, by Richard Ridley,
Esquire the Proprietor of it.

HAVING past this Lane, we proceed till we come to the Top of this great Ascent
(for such indeed is this Street) and there we meet with two Ways; the one leads
to the Shield-Field, the Property of Mr. Charles Clark of Newcastle, which has
been already mentioned; and the other to Owse-Burn, which is at present a large
Village, occasioned by the Coal-works of Richard Ridley and Matthew White, Esqs
etc.

IT takes its Name from the Burn that runs through it. The Banks of this Burn
are in many Places terribly high, in all Places beautifully Romantic.

BEFORE we come to the Suburbs of Sandgate, we must not omit to mention the
Keelmens Hospital; it is situated some Distance East of the Town's Wall,
between the Carpenters Tower and Sandgate. It is a square Building, done in the
Form of Monasteries and Colleges, having its low Walk round it, in Imitation of
Cloisters. The Area in the Middle of it, is about 83 Foot broad, and about 97
Foot long. There are upwards of fifty Chambers in it. Who it was built by, may
be learned from the Inscription above the Entrance of it, which is as follows:
The Keelmens Hospital, built at their own Charge, Anno Domini 1701, Matthew
White, Esquire Governor, Mr. Edward Gray, Mr. Edward Carr, Stewards of the
Hoastmens Company for the Time being, and Trustees for this Hospital. I have
been told, that Dr. Moor, one of the late Bishops of Ely, upon going down the
River in the Town's Barge with the Magistrates, observed it, and made Enquiry
after it. And being told, that it was built by the Keelmen themselves (every
one allowing toward it a Penny a Tide) he said, that he had heard of, and seen
many Hospitals, the Works of rich Men; but that was the first he ever saw or
heard of, which had been built by the Poor. It Is a great Pity that the Design
of its Building is not thoroughly answered; but there are some Miscreants, who
would rather starve in Sickness or old Age, than not guzzle a Penny in their
Health and Youth.

Sect. VI. Of the Suburbs of SANDGATE.
THE Suburbs of Sandgate (excepting some Houses nigh the Walls of the Town) we
are informed escaped the Fury of the Civil Wars. This Street has it is Name from
it is Situation, which is upon the Sand. For this whole Street as well as the
Sandhill, and all the lower Parts of the Town in ancient Times was the Common
Sand or Shore of the River.

THIS Street has in it a vast Number of narrow Lanes on each Side of it, which
are crowded with Houses. It is chiefly inhabited by People that work upon the
Water, particularly the Keelmen. The Number of Souls in this Street and the
Lanes belonging to it, is computed to several Thousands.

ABOUT the middle of this Street is an open Place called the Squirrel, from a
little Brook of that Name, which runs through it into the River Tyne, which was
the ancient Bounds of the Town of Newcastle. From this, as far as the House of
Mr. Jeremiah Cook, Shipwright, is the Street of Sandgate, then we enter St.
Ann's Street, (so called from the neighboring Chapel) which leads us on to the
Ropery, which is a long and pleasant Walk, giving an agreeable Prospect of the
River, and a great Part of the Town and Neighboring Places. What this Ropery
was formerly, Gray gives us the best Account. Below East, says he, is the
Ballast-Hill, where Women upon their Heads carried Ballast, which was taken
forth of the small Ships which came empty for Coals; which Place was the first
Ballast Shore out of the Town; since which Time, the Trade increasing, there
are many Ballast Shores below the Water, on both Sides of the River; much the
same Account is given of this, in the Manuscript so frequently mentioned; the
Hoastmen got Leave at first to lead Coals above the Bourn, and that occasioned
their Delivery of Ballast upon the Lime-Kiln Road, and the Women bore the
Ballast upon their Heads, and made the Ballast-Hills; for the Town had procured
all that Shore of the Lords of Byker for that Use, and to build Lime-Kilns upon.

ON the North of this Ropery stands the Chapel of St. Ann, which is a a Chapel
of East to the Church of All-hallows, which though pretty large is yet much too
little for the Parish, it being perhaps one of the largest Parishes in the
whole Kingdom.

WHEN it was originally built I have met with nothing that gives any Account.
after the Reformation it was neglected and came into Decay; but the Town in the
Year 1682. repaired it, and settled a Lecturer there, to preach in the Morning,
and to expound the Catechism every Sunday Afternoon; which the Town allowed 30
l. per Annum for; at the Opening of it, after it was repaired, the Rev. Mr.
March, then Vicar of the Town, preached the first Sermon, in it, which was
Printed, and Entitled, The Encaenia of St. Ann 's Chapel in Sandgate.

IT has at present two Lecturers, which are paid by the Town, the Rev. Mr.
Clayton, and the Rev. Mr. Maddison; to the former the Town pays 40 l. per
Annum, and to the latter 50 l.

BELOW this to the Glass-house-bridge are the Houses of Ship-Wrights, and
Master Builders, such as Mr. Thomas Wallas, Mr. Roger Durham, Mr. John Lattany,
Mr. Cuthbert Preston, etc.

THE Glass-house-bridge, so called because of the Glass-houses which are almost
contiguous to it, was originally a Wood-Bridge, as the Bridge higher up the
Bourn was, 'till within these 6 or 7 Years; but in the Year 1669, when Ralph
Jenison, Esquire was Mayor, it was made of Stone by Thomas Wrangham, Ship-Wright,
on Account of Lands which the Town let him; The Passage however over it was
very difficult and uneven 'till the Year 1729, When Stephen Coulson, Esquire was
Mayor, it was made level and commodious both for Horse and Foot.

ON the other Side of the Bridge are the Glass-houses, which in Grey's Time
served most Part of the Kingdom with Window-Glass.

SOMETIME in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth came over to England from Lorrain,
the Henzels, Tyzacks and Tytorys. The Reason of their coming hither was the
Persecution of the Protestants in their own Country, of whose Persuasion they
were. They were by Occupation Glass-makers. At their first coming to this Town
they wrought in their Trade at the Close-gate, after that they removed into
Staffordshire, from whence they removed again and settled upon the River Side
at the Place called from their abiding in it the Glass-houses. Deservedly
therefore have so many of these Families been named Peregrines from the Latin
Word Peregrinus which signifies a Pilgrim or a Stranger.

HAVING at last settled here they became very numerous, and generally married
into each others Families to preserve the three Names of Henzel, Tyzack and
Tytory. But the latter of them within this Few Years became extinct. There are
of the Tyzacks several remaining; but the Henzels are most numerous.

AS you go from the Glass-house, you come now to the Glass-houses, a large
Village, and pass by the Western Glass-house, then to the Crown-Glass-house,
then to the middle Bottle-house, then to the middle Broad-house, then to the
castern Glass-house. Nigh this last is the House of the late Mr. Peregrine
Henzel, the principal Person then remaining of his Family, and one of the Chief
Owners of these Works.

FROM hence we pass over the Grounds of St. Laurence, to a Place consisting of
several Houses, which from a Chapel here situated, dedicated to St. Laurence,
is called St. Laurence's Glass-house, or Mushroom-Glass-house; there is also
here a Bottle Glass-house, now held under the Town by Mrs. Middleton, of which
Richard Ridley, Esquire is an Owner.

ST. Laurence's Chapel, or Chantery as it is called, is said to have been built
by one of the Earls of Northumberland. No Doubt that Prayers might be put up
for his Soul, and the Souls of his Family.

AT the Reformation it had Fate of many Chapels of the like Kind; to have its
Revenues disposed of, and itself left to fall into Ruins.

IT was dependant upon the Priory of St. John's of Jerusalem. It was granted to
the Town in the 3d of Edward VI. among other Things, in Consideration of 144 l.
13 s. 4 d.

Anno Dom' 1558, The Rents of St. Laurence, as follow.
l. s. d. ST. Laurente taken by Lease by John Laverock 7 10 00 THE Fishery of
St. Laurence, taken by (...) Mitford 1 13 04 A Close called St. Ann's Close 0
12 00 A Close called the Conny Close 1 13 04

A Cottage in Kittingworth, in the Tenure of John of Killingworth, and certain
Lands in Heaton belonging to St. Laurence. Lib. Cart. 44.

NIGH this Chapel of St. Laurence is one of the Wagon Ways, and Steaths of
Richard Ridley, Esquire for his Colliery at Byker.

ONE of the Andersons procured a Shore from the Chapel of St. Laurence, unto
the Gate that runs down the River, toward Lawson's Land, which was filled
by Women's Heads. Milbank.

Sect. VIII. Of the Town's BOUNDERS.
THE Town Bounders by Land from a small Brook, or Course of Water, called the
Swerle, in Time past in the County of Northumberland, and now in the Town of
Newcastle, on the West Side of the aforesaid Town, along by the Shore of the
Water of Tyne, unto the Fields of the Town of Elswick, in the aforesaid County
of Northumberland, by and along the Fields of the Town of Elswick, aforesaid,
unto the Fields of the Town of Fenham was heretofore a Village very pleasant
and beautiful on Account of it is much Wood; but now much more so because of the
very fine House and Gardens of Thomas Ord Esquire This Village, or the Royalty of
it, belonged to the Priory of St. John of Jerusalem, for we meet with a Receipt
from the Prior to the Town of Newcastle, for the Coal Mines of Fenham.
Fenham, in the aforesaid County of Northumberland, and so toward the North
unto the Fields of the Town of Kenton in the aforesaid County of
Northumberland, and along by those Fields unto the Town of The Estate of
William Carr, Esquire
Coxlodge, in the aforesaid County of Northumberland, and so toward the East
of the Fields of the Town of Jesmund in the aforesaid County, and by and along
the same Fields of Jesmund toward the South, unto a certain Bridge called
Barras-bridge, in the aforesaid County of Newcastle upon Tyne, and from the
same Bridge in and through a certain Lane in the aforesaid County of
Northumberland and Newcastle, leading toward the East to another Bridge called
Sandiver Bridge, in the aforesaid County of Northumberland; and from the same
Bridge toward the South, in and through a certain Field called Shield-Field,
in the aforesaid County of Northumberland and Newcastle, unto a certain Lane or
Street in the same County, leading to the aforesaid Water or River of Tyne.

THE additional Bounders are mentioned in the second and third Years of King
Edward VI.

THE Circumference of the Town's Bounders is 10 Miles and 50 Yards.

CHAP. XIII. Of the River TYNE.
IT remains now that we speak of the River The Tyne seems to have been
originally as to the Name of it, Vedra. For the River Vedra is the only River
taken Notice of by Ptolomy in these Parts; and we all know that in these Parts
the River Tyne is the most considerable.

There is indeed a Tyne mentioned by Ptolomy, but that is situated between the
Tay and Forth, in Scotland; but neither can that be it, it is too
inconsiderable: Nor lastly can it be the River Were, though there is a nigher
Affinity in Sound between Vedra and Were, than between Vedra and Tyne. For the
Vedra is mentioned by Ptolomy as the most considerable River, and it is
confessed that the Tyne is more so than the Were, or if the Were has any Claim
to the Name of Vedra it is only in Conjunction with the River Tyne. Perhaps,
says Mr. Horsley, p. 103. Vedra has been the Name of the Tyne and Were. The
Tract that now has between the two Rivers, and is bounded on each Side by them,
is now called Werewickshire.


Tyne, which is indeed a River to be outdone by few in the whole Kingdom,
whether you respect it is Haven, it is Commodities, it is Privileges, which have
been frequently mentioned, the Prospect of it is Fields, it is Woods and
Villages, etc. As to the Haven, it is so deep as to carry Vessels of a
considerable Burden, and of that Security, that they are not in Danger either
of Storms or Shallows, save that within a little of the Bar of Tinmouth (which
are called by the Sailors the Black-Middens, which are very dangerous;) but to
prevent any Mischiefs which may happen to Ships in the Night Time from them,
there are two Light-houses maintained by the Trinity-House, in Newcastle, and
near them in the Year 1672, was built a Fort, called Clifford's Fort, which
effectually commands all the Vessels that enter the River. Mag. Brit. Vol. 3.
p. 607.

MR. Cambden observes that this Town of Newcastle, for it is Situation and
plenty of Sea-Coal, so useful in itself, and to which so great a Part of
England and the low Countries are indebted for their good Fires, is thus
commended by Johnson in his Poems on the Cities of Britain;

Novum Castrum
Rupe sedens Celsa, rerum aut miracula spectat
Naturae, aut solers distrahit illa aliis.
Sedibus Aethereis quid frustra quaeritis ignem?
Hunc alit, hunc terra suscitat ista sinu.
Non illum torvo terras qui turbine terret;
Sed qui animam Terris, detque animos animis.
Eliquat hic ferrum, aes, hic aurum ductile fundit.
Quos non auri illex conciet umbra animas?
Quin (aiunt) auro permutat Bruta metalla;
Alchimus hunc igitur praedicat esse Deum.
Si Deus est, ceu tu dictas, Divine Magister,
Haec quot alit? Quot alit Scotia nostra Deos,
Newcastle
From her high Rock great Nature's Works Surveys,
And kindly spreads her Goods through Lands and Seas.
Why seek ye Fire in some exalted Sphere?
Earth's Fruitful Bosom will supply you here.
Not such whose horrid Flashes scare the Plain,
But gives enlivening Warmth to Earth and Men.
Ir'n, Brass and Gold it is melting Force obey;
(Ah! who is ever free from Gold's almighty Sway?)
Nay into Gold 'twill change a Baser Ore,
Hence the vain Chemist deifies its Power:
If It be a God, as is believed by you,
This Place and Scotland more than Heaven can show.
IT is observable in this Place when the Coal Trade is brisk, that all other
Business is so too; and when it is otherwise, through the Contracts of the Coal
Owners, or of the Masters, that there is a certain Deadness in all Trafick. It
is the Money arising from the Coal Trade, that almost entirely Circulates in
this great Town and adjacent Country.

IT has been observed by Fleetwood Preciosum Chronicon 118. p.
some, that Sea Coal has not been in Use above 150 Years, at least not in
London; and that when we meet with Coals in old Accounts, it is meant of
Charcoal. I can scarce be of this Opinion, if it was but for what the said
Authority himself acknowledges, viz. that Carbo Marinus, or Sea Coal, is
mentioned in Matthew Paris. And in the 1st of Edward III. there is mention made
de Carbonibus marithnis, of Sea Coals and the Measure of them.

HOWEVER this be, nigh this Town of Newcastle Coals were worked very early, in
a Charter of King Hen. III. dated Dec. 1, 23d of that King's Reign, License was
granted to the Town of Newcastle, to dig Coals in the Castle-Field and the
Frith.

IN the Year 1421, the 9th of Hen. V. Twopence per Chaldron being paid to the
King for all Coals sold at the Port of Newcastle, to People not enfranchised;
it was enacted that the Keels should be of the Burden of 20 Chaldrons, and no
more, according to Custom; some being of the Burden of 22, and some of 24
Chaldrons built, to defraud the King of his Customs, and that the Keels should
be sealed by the King's Officers. De. reb. 39.

QUEEN Elizabeth demanding of the Town the Arrear of 2 d. per Chaldron, which
had been neglected for many Years; the Town begged her Majesty that these
Arrears might be forgiven, and to grant them a Gardner Queen Eliz, Charter.
Charter to incorporate a new Fraternity or Brotherhood, to be called Free
Hoastmen, for the selling and vending of all Coals to Shipping. And in
Consideration thereof they would pay to her Majesty and her Successors, 12 d.
for every Chaldron exported from thenceforth to the free People of this Nation;
this was taken into Consideration and granted.

IN the Year 1644, in the Time of the Civil War, the City of London received a
great Advantage by this Town's being taken; for almost two Years bypast, the
poorer Sort of People had been almost starved, Coals having risen to the Price
of 4 l. per Chaldron, a Price never known before that Time.

THIS Place is generally computed to vend upwards of 300,000 Chaldrons A Year.
There are likewise vast Exportations of Lead, Salt, Salmon, and Grindstones,
which last Commodity, as Gray says, and is still true, are conveyed to most
Parts of the World; according to the Proverb, A Scott, a Rat, and a Newcastle
Grindstone you may find all the World over.

IT is not in my Power to describe the Number of Arts and curious Machineries
that are used in this Affair of the Coal Business; the sinking of Pits, Winning
of Coals, Fire-Engines, Waggon-Ways, the Wagons, their managing of them, the
Staiths, etc. deserve a more skilful Pen. Thus much however I may venture to
say, that those Waggon-Ways, a small Part of the whole Coal Works, may vie with
some of the great Works of the Roman Empire.

The Right and Title of the Mayor and Burgesses of the Town and County of the
Town of Newcastle upon Tyne, to the Soil, and also to the Conservation of the
River of Tyne.
1st, By Prescription.

THE said Mayor and Burgesses have time out of Mind enjoyed the Soil of the
said River or Tyne: And all Shores or Keys built upon the said River, are by
Virtue of Leases from the said Mayor and Burgesses.

AND they the said Mayor and Burgesses have also time out of Mind enjoyed the
Conservation of the said River of Tyne.

AND for Conservation and Preservation thereof, there has also time out of Mind
been holden before the Mayor and Aldermen of the said Town every Monday a
Court, in which Court Enquiry is made after the due Conservation and
Preservation of the said River of Tyne, by a Jury sworn to present all Nusances
done therein, who make Presentiments thereof in Writing; whereupon the Offenders
are summoned, and if Guilty are punished by Fine or Imprisonment.

BUT formerly there has been another Custom for punishing such Offenders as
appears by the following Testimonial.

A Testimonial of John Philips's and William Goodwin's cutting each a Purse in
the Town's Chamber, for casting Ballast in the River of Tyne.
Villa Novicastri super Tynam.
WHEREAS Information upon Oath was given, that John Philips Master of the Mary
of Hull, and William Goodwin, Master of the Elizabeth of Wisebidge, did the 5th
of this Instant cast Ballast within the 14 Fathom deep, between Sowter and
Hartley, to the Damage of the River. They the said Persons being called before
us, the Mayor, Aldermen and Chamberlains, with the Master of the Trinity-house,
who was then present in the Town Chamber, and did there acknowledge and confess
the said offense, and did lay down 5 l. a Piece, which was put into two Purses,
which they cut, according to the ancient Custom of this Corporation in such
Cases.

Henry Dawson, Mayor. Leonard Carr Robert Shafto Thomas Ledgard Thomas Bonner
William Dawson George Dawson Ralph Fell, Master of the Trinity-house. Phineas
Allin Chamberlains. Thomas Welsh Thomas Young Christopher Ellison Thomas Goftyn


THIS ancient Custom of cutting a Purse, etc. was confirmed Anno 1616, by an
Order of the King and Council.

THEY the said Mayor and Burgesses have also Time out of Mind had a Water
Bailiff, who is a sworn Officer, and other Officers whose offices are to search
out offenses done in and upon the said River of Tyne, and to execute the Orders
of the said Court.

AND they the said Mayor and Burgesses have also always cleansed the Port from
Rubbish, Ballast, and Sand, either brought in by Storms or otherwise, into the
said River of Tyne.

THE Trinity-house of this Town (which is a Fraternity of Mariners, Free of the
said Town) are also frequently employed in discovering Offenses done to the
said River of Tyne; and where there are dangerous Places in the said River,
Buoys and Lights are set, and Persons employed and paid by the said
Trinity-House, for looking to, and taking Care of them.

2dly, By Acts of Parliament.

IN an Act of Parliament made in the 21st Hen. VIII. Chap. 18. there is an
Express Clause, which gives the Mayor and Burgesses Authority to pull down all
Wears, Gores, and Engines, in the River of Tyne, between Sparrow-Hawk, and
Hedwin-Streams, and in the Preamble of the said Act, it is declared, that the
Soil of the River of Tyne, etc. has been Time out of Mind, enjoyed by the Town
of Newcastle in their Demesne as of Fee in Right of the Crown.

AND also in another Act of Parliament made the 2d of Edward VI. (not printed)
It is declared, that for the Maintenance of the said Town of Newcastle upon
Tyne, and for the Preservation of the Port and said River of Tyne, all the
Sands, called Shores are settled on the Town.

AND also by Letters Patents, 31 Eliz. which confirm to the Mayor and Burgesses
of the said Town of Newcastle upon Tyne, their Customs which they had by
Prescription or otherwise. It is in particular granted to them, to have
Jurisdiction of a great many Statutes mentioned in that Charter, and amongst
other Statutes, the Statute 34 Hen. VIII. chap. 9. which concerns the
Conservation and Preservation of Rivers.

3dly, By Judgments, Records, Inquisitions, Judgment in Quo Warranto, Verdicts
at Law, Decrees in the Court of Exchequer; and

UPON one Decree there is a perpetual Injunction, which was afterward
confirmed in the House of Lords on an Appeal.

JUDGMENT in Parliament 34 Ed. I. where the Prior of Tinmouth having Lands
adjoining to the said River of Tyne at North-Shields, and having built a Shore
there, within the Flood Mark; it was adjudged that it should be removed at the
Cost of the Prior. It may not be amiss to give some Account of this Trial.

The Contents mentioned In a Plea, at Westminster, in the 20th Year of Edward
I. Between the King, and the Burgesses of Newcastle, and The Prior of Tinmouth
Quod Dominus Rex habere debeat totum Portum in aqua de Tyne a mari usque ad
locum qui dicitur Hedwin-streams, etc.
1st, The whole Port in the Water of Tyne; 2d, His Ovens at Newcastle; The King
Dues.
3d, For every Quarter of Corn there baked; 4th, of Custom; 5th, the King,
loses at North-Shields for the Issues of Baking per Annum 10 l. and by the
Forestalling of the Market there 20 l. The said Prior also takes the Wreck of
the Sea, which specially belongs to the King.

THE King could also take two Tunn of Wine to be chosen behind and before, and
every Tunn of Wine for 20 s. of every Ship of Herrings 100 Herrings, etc. all
which the said Prior takes at Shields and else where, by which Means the King
lost his Prises and Customs due to him; because the same, Merchandises came not
entirely to his due Port of Newcastle.

THE Prior also built 4 Ovens at Tinmouth, which were rented at 5 l. 6 s. 8 d.
per Ann. and kept a Market on the Lord's Day at Tinmouth. It was also objected
to him, that the whole Country and the Mariners applied themselves, and sold
their Goods and Merchandises at Shields, to the King's great Detriment, he
receiving no Toll nor other Profits for the same.

THE King ought to have the Towage of Ships and Boats, greater and smaller, in
the River of Tyne, in going up to Newcastle, and down to the Sea, freely over
any Lord's Land, etc. The King ought to have in his Port 4 d. for every Boat
that has an Oar, and 1 d. for every lesser one that has none.

In Answer,

THE Prior said, the Premises did only touch his free Tenement, and he
answered, that as for the Wreck of the Sea, the Forestalling of Merchandises,
etc. He and his Predecessors had them by Charter of King John, Grandfather of
King Edward I. and so he proceeds to his new Town of Shields.

HE said also that he had no Market or Oven at Shields. But as to the Fishers
and buying of Fish, he says, that his Predecessors in their Times have always
had their own Fishers fishing in the same Water, for the Maintenance of their
House, Toll free, etc. because the Port of the Water of Tyne does especially
and entirely belong to the King, and that they (meaning the Prior and Convent
of Tinmouth) have had certain their Tenants of Shields with their Boats within
their Demesnes.

AND as for the Market at Tinmouth, he said he claimed none there; but he had a
Tumbrel, and had hired Fishers, Brewers and Bakers, and also Shambles there.

AS to the Charge of Towage he said, that he never hindered those that
exercised any such Office in the Water of Tyne adjacent to his Land, save only
at Elstwick or Astwick.

HE said moreover, that before and at the Time of making King Richard's
Charter, which was before any Liberties granted to Newcastle by King John, the
Priors of this House took and had all the Premises freely and quietly, etc. by
virtue of Custom of Liberties granted to them by their said Charter by Land and
Water, whereof he found his Church seized, etc.

WHEREUPON he demanded Judgment.

THOSE who prosecuted for the King said, that the Charter was worth nothing. As
to the Wreck of the Sea, they said, no sooner had the Ships applied themselves
out of the great Sea into the said Port, and there had the Misfortune to break,
then the said Prior takes the Goods of such broken Ships, both swimming and
therein abiding, and Converts them to his own Use; and that the then Prior was
seized of ten Tuns of Wine, out of a certain Ship of Peter of Appleby Burgess
of York, wrecked in the said Water.

AND as to the charging or discharging of Ships and of Merchandises, etc. they
said, that whereas the said Port of Tyne is only the King's, as often as the
Prior should do so, the King was manifestly injured, being then, and always
before in Seizin and Possession of the said Port.

AS to the Town of Shields, they said, that whatsoever small dwelling Houses
there had been there, etc. the said Prior (that then was) caused there to be
made 26 Houses upon the King's Soil; because they are comprehended within the
flowing and Inundation of the Sea, and they demanded the Record of Justice,
that the said then Prior alleged that the King therein has no soil, etc. but
that it merely belonged to him, even to the This is supposed to be the
Low Water Mark.
Fill of the Water.

THEY also said, that in those Houses at Shields, there were Fishers and
Brewers, and Victuallers, etc. so rich that they were able to give Loading and
Victuals for 100 or 200 Ships, which ought to apply themselves at Newcastle
upon Tyne, and there buy their Victuals for the bettering the said Town.
Whereupon they said, that the said Prior is the only Occupier of the King's
Soil, and the only Taker away of the said King's Town of Newcastle; and that he
the said Prior had 16 Fishers or more, with great Boats, fishing in the Sea
yearly for Traffick's Sake only, and not for Maintenance of his House; whereof
the King received neither Toll nor Custom.

THEY said also, that the said Prior and his Men come out with their Horses and
Carriages, and out of such Ships as came thither got Necessaries for
themselves, so that most Times Ships and Boats return empty and half laden to
other Ports than to Newcastle, aforesaid, whereby the King cannot receive his
due Prises and Customs.

AND after they said that John of the Vale, I suppose, De le Val, being Judge
Itinerant, 7 Edw. I. It was then reported by the Jury, that the Prior of
Tinmouth built a Town upon the Bank of the Water of Tyne on one side, and the
Prior of Durham levied or built another on the other Side, where no Towns ought
to be, unless Lodges only for Fishermen; and that the Fishermen have there sold
their Fishes, which ought to have been sold at Newcastle, to the great Hurt of
the said Town, and Loss of the King's Prises: And that both the said Priors of
Tinmouth and Durham, have caused to be made Brewers, and Fishers, having great
Ships, whereas they ought to have but Boats, and have caused Bread to be baked
there, which ought to have been baked at Newcastle.

IT is inhibited and forbidden the said Prior of Tinmouth, that from
thenceforth he should not hold, or cause to be held a Market or Fair in the
aforesaid Places, and was determined that the Port within the Water of Tyne,
from the Sea to Heddon Streams, is the free Port of the King and his Heirs with
it is Prises, Customs, Towages, Tonages, with all other Profits and Commodities
incident and belonging to the same, etc. and that neither at Tinmouth nor at
Shields Ships are to be laden or unladen.

IT was also ordered that 4 Ovens at Tinmouth should pay Damages 5 Marks, and
those that took Tonnage and make Forestal, etc. and as to the Wrecks of the
Sea, etc. that the King and his Heirs should have them for ever hereafter; as
to the Markets and Fairs, that there be not at Tinmouth or Shields any Market
or Fair, and that neither at Tinmouth or Shields there be any Sale of Things
saleable, as in Meats, Drinks, or any other Things whatsoever, whereby the
King, his Heirs and Successors may be made the Worse.

IT was also ordered, that the Keys and other Things levied and raised by the
said Prior within the Flood Mark on the King's Soil, should be removed at the
Costs of the said Prior.

Close Roll, 12 Ed. II. Membran. 26. It is recited that the King had given
Power and Authority to John Earl of Hamstead, to examine and remove Nusances
done to the River of Tyne, and was pleased to recall it, because it was a
Prejudice to what the Mayor of Newcastle claimed and enjoyed in the Time of his
Predecessors.

BY an Inquisition 4th Jan. 25 Hen. VI. the Jury upon their Oath found, that
beyond the Memory of Man, the Town of Newcastle upon Tyne, had, and held of our
Sovereign Lord the King, and all his Predecessors, as Burgesses of the said
Town (when there was no Mayor), and as Mayor and Burgesses of the said Town
(when there was a Mayor), the said Town and Water of Tyne, and the Soil of the
said Water of Tyne, wherever it was covered, from a Place called Sparrow Hawk
in the Sea, unto a Place called Hedwin Streams; and that the same, with the
Appurtenances were Parcel of the Liberties and free Customs of the said Town,
and were held under a Fee-Farm, saving the King's Rents, Prises, and
Assessments in the Port of the said Town.

THEN they find and set forth Kng John's Charter, and Confirmation.

AND diverse other Customs and Privileges belonging to the said Town, are there
mentioned, expessed and set forth.

IN a Quo Warranto, 5 Car. I. Michaelmas Term, in the King's Bench, the
Prescription for Conservation of the River Tyne is allowed.

BY the Pleadings in a Decree in the Exchequer, Michaelmas Term, 5 Car. I.
Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle upon Tyne, Plaintiffs, Robert Johnson
Defendant; and another 10 Car. I. Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle upon Tyne
Plaintiffs, and (...) Hilton, Defendant, the Conservancy of the said River of
Tyne is acknowledged to be in the said Mayor and Burgesses, between
Sparrow-Hawk and Hedwin Streams.

Michaelmas 12. Car. I. Decree in the Exchequer against one Anthony Errington,
for erecting certain Buildings on certain Waste Grounds on the South Side of
the Street called Sandgate, within the Flood Mark of the River of Tyne.

Trin. 1694, Bill in the Exchequer, Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle,
Plaintiffs, against Dean and Chapter of Durham, and Samuel Shepherd,
Defendants, a Trial at Law on the said Bill was directed by the said Court of
Exchequer, on these two Issues following; that the Defendants could not
lawfully erect and use a Ballast Key or Wharf, at Westoe or Jarrow-Slake,
without the License of the Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle.

THAT the erecting a Ballast Key at Westoe, or Jarrow-Slake by the Defendants
would be a Damage to the River.

18 Junii, 1697. Verdict on both Issues for the Plaintiffs.

26 Jan. 1697, after this Trial, the Court of Exchequer did order, adjudge and
decree, that a perpetual Injunction should be awarded under the Seal of the
Court, to quiet the Plaintiffs in the Possession of their Franchises,
Liberties, Powers and Privileges, and to stop the Defendants from erecting any
Ballast Shore or Wharfe in Westoe or Jarrow-Slake, unless cause should be shown
on Monday 15 (...) l697, which Cause being continued on the Paper of Causes
from Time to Time, after several Debates and Hearings, Feb. 10, 1697, the whole
Court delivered their Opinion at large, that the Bill was a proper Bill, and
the Issues apt and proper Issues in this Case, and declared they were fully
satisfied with the Trial at the Bar: Thereupon it was finally ordered, adjudged
and decreed by the Court, that the Defendants, and every of them, should be,
and were thereby constrained from making and erecting any Ballast Key or Wharf
at Westoe or Jarrow-Slake, and that a perpetual Injunction should be granted to
stop the Defendants, and every of them, their Successors, Executors and
Assigns, and all Persons claiming under them, from making, setting up, or
erecting any Ballast Key or Wharf there, at any Time or Times hereafter.

17 Martii, 1697, Dean and Chapter of Durham, and Samuel Shepherd, petitioned
and appealed to the House of Lords against this Decree.

7 Maij School, On hearing Council at the Lords Bar, on the Petition and Appeal,
it was ordered and adjudged by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament
assembled, that the said Petition and Appeal of the Dean and Chapter of Durham,
should be dismissed the said House, and that the Order and Appeal from which
they appealed should be confirmed.

IN the 22d James I. a Person was sued for Building some Houses in Sandgate,
within the Flood-Mark of the River Tyne, the Consequence of which was, the
Defendant was obliged to pull down the said Houses at his own Expense.

IN the Year 1631, the Sheriff of Durham was ordered by the King and Council to
apprehend Offenders damaging the River Tyne, and carry them before the Mayor
and Aldermen, Conservators of the said River.

September 9, 1665, Sir Francis Anderson had granted to him a Lease for 1000
Years, from the Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle upon Tyne, of all that Parcel
of Ground within the Territories of Winlington, between High and Low Water
Mark, in length from East to West 1254 Yards, and in Breadth from Low Water
Mark, in length from East to West One Thousand Two Hundred Fifty Four Yards,
and in Breadth from Low Water Mark One Hundred and Twenty Yards, with Liberty
to build Keys and cast Ballast, upon paying 2 d. per Ton for all Ballast cast
thereon.

THE Bounds of the River Tyne, belonging to the Town of Newcastle, have been
from the Day they had any Charter to this Day, from the Sparrow-Hawk to Hedwin
Streams, which is about 14 Miles.

TO begin at Hedwin Streams, and so go down the River, taking Notice of the
Villages, etc. 'till we come to the Bridge. Hedwin is a Village situated on the
North Side of the River seven Miles: It seems to have been originally a Roman
Station, for the Word in the Saxon signifies a Military Wing, and the Roman
Wall goes close by it.

RYTON, a Village situated on the South side of the Tyne, distant about 7 Miles
from Newcastle, is adorned with a fair Church, which had the Honor to have for
its Rector the very learned Dr. Cave, who was succeeded in it by Malin Sorsbie,
Master of Arts, a religious Man, and an excellent Scholar. He was Father to the
present Alderman Sorsbie, late Mayor of this Town. The next Incumbent of this
Church was Dr. Finny, who built the stately Parsonage House there; and the
present one the Rev. Mr. Secker.

NEWBURN is a Village distant fron Newcastle about 4 Miles, and situated on the
North side of the Tyne. It is of great Antiquity, as appears from the following
Relation.

COPSI, the first Earl of Northumberland, after the Conquest, was constituted
such by the Conqueror, for that Part of the Province that lies North of the
River: Whereupon he drove Osulph, whom Merker, the younger Son to Algar, Earl
of Chester, the last Earl of Northumberland had substituted there.

AT length Osulph, whom he had so driven, being necessitated to betake himself
to the Woods and Deserts for Refuge, gathered some Strength, and forcing Copsi,
for Safeguard, to fly to the Church of Newburne, set it on Fire, and when Copsi
(to save himself from the Flames) came out, did cut off his Head at the very
Door, on the 4th of the Ides of March, in the 5th Week after he had the
Administration of these Parts; but the very next Autumn this Osulph was himself
slain by the Hands of a Robber. Bar. Dugdale, p. 54. Vol. 1.

KING Henry I. granted the Church of this Place to St. Mary's of Carlisle, and
the Canons of the same.

WALDENUS Parsona de Newburne, was one of the Witnesses to the Foundation
Charter of St. Mary's in Westgate, about the Reign of Richard I.

THIS Manor belonged to the Crown, 'till Robert Fitz Roger, surnamed de
Clavering, from his Manor of Clavering in Essex, obtained a Grant of it from
King John, Reg. 5. To hold to him by the Service of one Knight's Fee, which
upon levying the Scutage of Wales, 13 John, he paid. His Posterity enjoyed this
Manor long after, for Robert de Clavering, who had Summons to Parliament from
the 23 of Edward I. to 3 Ed. II. died possessed of this Manor of Newburne, and
left it to his Son and Heir John de Clavering, who despairing of having any
Issue Male, settled this Manor, and some others, by Way of Feossinent, upon
one Stephen de Trafford, to the Intent that the said Stephen should reconvey
them to the said John, to hold for Life, with the Remainder to King Ed. I. and
his Heirs. The King soon after it came to him, gave it to Henry Percy, the
Ancestor of the Earls of Northumberland, in whose Family we find it 42 Edw.
III. for Henry Earl of Northumberland died about that Time seized of this
Manor, with diverse other Estates, and leaving his Wife Joan surviving, this
Lordship with its Members, was assigned to her for her Dowry among several
others. After her Decease it continued in the Percy's Family diverse
Successions, and was in the 5 Hen. V. settled upon Elizabeth, the Relict of
Henry Earl of Northumberland surnamed Hotspur for Life, and after her Decease
passed to her Son Henry, who died seized of it, and other great Estates, 33
Hen. VI. fighting for whom he lost his Life at the Battle of St. Albans in
Hertfordshire. King Edward IV. having by this Victory gained a sure Possession
of the Throne, Henry Earl of Northumberland, his Son and Successor, lost his
paternal Estate, by being attainted in Parliament, 1 Edward IV. and as the
major Part of his Estate was given by that King to his Brother George Duke of
Clarence, as is above specified, so this Manor of Newburn, and Newburn-Haven,
were granted to Sir Robert Ogle, in Consideration of his many faithful
Services, being soon after made a Baron of the Realm.

DR. Smith, late Bishop of Carlisle, finding the Vicarage of this Place to be
small, and not able to maintain a Minister, made an Augmentation of 25 l. a
Year to it since the Restoration of King Charles II. Magn. Britan. Vol. 3. p.
673.

THIS Manor is now Part of the Estate of his most noble Grace, Charles Duke of
Somerset.

THE next Village to it is Stella, a little below Newburn, on the other Side
the Water. Here is a magnificent House and Gardens, which belonged to the Lord
Widdrington, which became forfeited to the Crown in the Year 1715, for his
entering into the Northumberland Rebellion. This Place originally belonged to
the Nuns of Newcastle; it is now chiefly inhabited by Coal-Workers, and has
Staiths in it.

THERE are many other Villages on the Sides of this River, such as Blaiden,
Lemmington, Swalwel, Delaval, Redheugh, etc. Several of them have Staiths
belonging to them, such are the Staiths of the Lady Clavering, Sir Henry
Liddel, Baronet, Richard Ridley, Esquire George Liddel, Esquire Edward Wortley
Montague, Esquire George Bows, Esquire George Pit, Esquire George Malliber, Esquire Mr. John
Simpson and Mr. Joseph Ledger.

THERE is a little Island in the Midst of the River, called, The King's
Meadows, which is a delicious Place, and a great Ornament to the River.

LET us now come below Bridge, to take Notice of a few Things there. Gateshead
presents itself first, a Town in the Bishopric of Durham; it stands on the
South Side of the Tyne, opposite to Newcastle, and is a Place of great
Antiquity. Mr. Cambden thinks it a Place of equal Antiquity with Newcastle,
because of it is ancient Name Gabrosentum; but I have already proved it more
rational to believe it to have been only it is Suburbs.

THERE was an ancient Monastry here in the Time of Bid; which was the Monastry
of Utanus, it was where Mr. Riddle's House, or Gateshead House is as it now
stands.

ON the 14 of May, 1080, Walter Bishop of Durham was murdered at this Place.
The Occasion of it was, this Walter attending more wordly Affairs than the
Charge of his Flock, gave himself altogether to Temporal Business, wherein he
wholly occupied himself. He bought of the King the Earldom of Northumberland,
and then making himself a secular Judge, took upon him to sit in the Court, and
to determine all Causes at his Pleasure, dealing withal very corruptly, and
taking still the Course that might be most for his own Gain. Hereupon he
greatly enriched his own Coffers, but purchased unto himself extreme Hatred
amongst the Common People, which was his Destruction in the End. There was a
certain Gentleman, of great Account, named Leulfus, that married Algitha, the
Daughter of Aldred, sometime Earl of Northumberland, from whom the Lord Lumley
that now lives is lineally descended. This Leulfus, to the end he might live
near the Church in his latter Time, and for very Devotion, came to Durham to
dwell there, and kept Company very much with the Bishop, who loved him
entirely, for many good Parts he saw in him, as namely, his Wisdom in
discerning, his Equity in deciding, and his Discretion in ordering and handling
such Causes as he committed unto him; in which Respect also he used him very
familiarly, employed him often, and gave him what Countenance he could. Now,
you shall understand, that unto the same Bishop belonged two Men, unto whom for
the most Part he committed the ordering of all his Affairs; Leofwyn or Leobwyn
his Chaplain, whom he trusted with all Houshold-Matters, and Gilbert, a Kinsman
of his own, that dealt in his Causes of Temporal Government. In their Offices
they behaved themselves so, as the Bishop had Cause to commend their Diligence,
but to blame their Rashness and Wilfulness in many Things, which
notwithstanding he bore withal, either because their Industry and Care of his
Affairs, so blinded his Eyes, as he could not espy their Misbehaviour
otherwise, or else being loath to detest them whom he had once advanced. These
Men, and especially Leofwyn, did greatly envy the Credit that Leulfus had
gotten with the Bishop, and every where opposed themselves against him, not
only in Words, traducing his Actions, but in Deeds also, thwarting and crossing
his Endeavors, whereby it came to pass, that many Jars fell out between them.
One Day amongst the rest, a Court being held in the Presence of the Bishop,
Leofwyn or Leobwyn (for so also I find him called) according to his wonted
Manner, gave Leulfus ill Speeches, which he not enduring to bear, as heretofore
he had done (furor fit saepius laesa patientia) answered this saucy Chaplain
somewhat more roundly than he had been accustomed. Whereupon he rose straight
from the Court in great Indignation ( Leofwyn I mean) and calling Gilbert
aside, with little ado persuaded him to carry a certain Number of armed Men to
the House where Leulfus lay, and in a Night to kill him; which indeed he
performed with great Cruelty, murdering not only the innocent Gentleman
himself, but also his Servants and whole Household. The News of this horrible
and outrageous Cruelty coming unto the Ears of the Bishop, amazed him very
much, and suspecting it was done by the Advice of Leofwyn, turning about unto
him: O Leofwyn, says he, thou have already slain me by thy Tongue. So not
doubting it would breed much Danger unto him, he got into his Castle, and
presently dispatched Messengers unto the Friends and Kindred of Leulfus that
was slain, protesting, that the Fact was committed without his Knowledge; that
he was mavelous sorry for it; and if any Man suspected him, would be ready to
submit himself to any Order of Law, whereby he might clear himself. Herewith
they seemed to be satisfied; but for Conclusion of a firm Peace amongst them,
it was thought fit they should meet and consider of the Matter. They met at a
Place called Goats-Head; the Bishop for his better Safeguard betook himself
unto the Church with his Company; the People (whereof an infinite Number were
gathered together) abode without. Messages a while past between them; but the
more the Matter was debated (being very odious of itself) the more the People
were incensed. At last it was told them, how not only Leofwyn, but also Gilbert
had been harbored in the Bishop's House, and afforded Countenance by him since
the Murder; which being once heard (and it was true enough) they all cried out,
it was manifest that the Bishop was the Author of this Fact. It is furthermore
delivered by Matthew Paris, that the Bishop not only before this, amongst many
intolerable Exactions laid upon the Country by him, had commanded the Sum of
400 l. to be levied at this Time. That being also remembered, while as all the
People stood in a murmuring, doubting what Course to take, one of some special
Regard amongst them slept up, using these Words, Short read, Good read, slay ye
the Bishop. Hereupon, without more ado, they ran all unto the Church, killed so
many of the Bishop's Retinue as they found without Doors, and with horrible
Noise and Outcries, bid him and his Company to come out unto them. Too late
then he repented, that he had committed himself unto the Fury of a discontented
Multitude, with whom he knew himself before that Time nothing gracious. But to
make the best of a bad Match, and to try all Means of ridding himself from the
Danger imminent, he persuaded his Kinsman Gilbert, there present, to go forth
unto them, if happily his Death (which doubtless he had deserved) might satisfy
their Fury, and purchase Safety unto his Lord and Master. Gilbert was content,
and issuing out, with diverse of the Bishop's Company, were all slain, except
only two Englishmen, Servants unto the Bishop (all the rest were Normans). They
being not yet satisfied, he besought Leofwyn (whose Life he knew well was
principally sought) to go out also. But he utterly refused so to do. The Bishop
therefore going unto the Church-door, entreated them not to take his Life from
him, protesting himself to be utterly guiltless of the Blood of Leulfus; and
showed them at large, how dangerous it would be to them in particular, and what
Inconvenience would follow to the whole Country in general, if they should
defile their Hands in shedding his Blood, an unarmed Priest, a sacred and
consecrated Bishop, their Ruler, their Governor, their Magistrate. Hoping,
Lastly, That his very Countenance, his Gravity, his Age, and the Sight of his
Person might move them to Compassion (for he was indeed a very reverend Man to
see to, very tall of Stature, Head and Beard as white as Snow, his Face fresh
and well colored, and every Way very personable, he went out, carrying a green
Branch in his Hand, that so he might testify his Desire of Peace. When he saw
that all this availed not, and the People ran furiously upon him, he cast his
Gown over his own Head, in like Sort as we read Julius Caesar did in the like
Case, and permitting himself to their Fury, with innumerable Wounds was
pitifully massacred, together with all his People and Retinue, to the Number of
an hundred; only Leofwyn yet remained within the Church, and being often
called, would not come forth; so they set the Church on Fire. Not enduring the
Fire, he leaped out of a Window, and was immediately hewn into a thousand
Pieces. The Monks of Yarrow came and fetched away the Bishop's Body (which they
found stark naked) and could hardly know it for the Multitude of Wounds; they
carried it to their Monastery, from whence it was conveyed to Durham, and there
buried on the South Side of the Chapter House, but secretly, for Fear of the
Murderers, that roved up and down the Town, and once assaulted the Castle. When
they found that they could not prevail there, they dispersed themselves, and
for the most Part came to evil and unhappy Ends. The King in the mean Time
hearing of this Tumult, sent his Brother Odo Bishop of Bayan, with many of his
Nobles, and a great Army, to take Punishment of this Murder, which while they
sought to revenge, they brought the whole Country to Desolation. Those that
were guilty prevented the Danger toward them by Flight, so as few of them could
be taken; of the rest that stayed at Home, some were unjustly executed, and the
rest compelled to ransom themselves to their utter impoverishing and undoing.
The chiefest Doer in this Outrage, was one Eadulsus, surnamed Rus, descended of
the Earls of Northumberland, who (as some say) slew the Bishop with his own
Hands, and afterward by the just Judgment of God, was himself slain by a
Woman, and his Body, though once buried in the Church of Godworth, was taken up
by the Commandment of Turgost, Prior of Durham, and forbidden Christian Burial.
At this Time Odo took away from the Church of Durham certain Ornaments of great
Value, amongst which is especially remembered a certain Crosier of inestimable
Price. In this Bishop's Days, and by his Endeavor, secular Clerks were
displaced, and the Church of Durham replenished with Monks, the Pope, the King,
and the Archbishop allowing this Alteration, Goodwyn, Fol. 637.

AFTERWARD this Church was new built, and placed where it now stands: For,
according to Tradition, it stood before in the Field below where Brick-Kilns
now are.

THIS Church of St. Mary's, Gateshead, is in the Gift of the Bishop of Durham;
but once, during the Vacancy of the Sea, it was given to Robert de Plesuys; the
Value of it then was 26 Marks per Annum.

IT is at present a very neat pretty Church, being exceeding well pew'd, having
a small Organ, and a Ring of eight Bells, which were last Year founded by
Contribution, etc.

IT has had several worthy Men its Ministers, such were Dr. Laidler, John Cave,
M. A. Dr. Tully, Dr. Pickering, Leonard Shafto, M. A. The Reverend Mr. Stilling
fleet, who was inducted Anno 1731. removed to Ryton in 1733, and is succeeded
in this Church by Mr. Lamb the present Incumbent.

THERE belonged to this Church the Hospital of St. Edmund, which was founded by
Nicholas Bishop of Durham, as appears by the following Charter, and Order for
its Foundation and Government.

Fundatio Hospitalis S. Edmundi apud Gatesheved.
OMnibus praesens Scriptum visuris vel audituris, Bertramus Prior and Conventus
Dunelmensis Ecclesiae, aeternam in Domino Salutem: Noveritis Nos Cartam
venerabilis Patris nostri D. Nicholai, Dei gratia, Dunelmensis Episcopi, in
haec verba inspexisso: Omnibus Christi fidelibus, praesentem Cartam inspecturis
vel audituris, Nicholaus, Deigratia, Dunelmensis Episcopus, aeternam in Domino
salutem. Sciatis Nos de assensu Capituli nostri concessisse, dedisse, and hac
Carta nostra confirmasse, Deo, and beato Edmundo Confessori, and quatuor
Capellanis, in Capella quam construximus apud Gatesheved, in honorem ejusdem,
Deo ibidem in perpetuum servituris, totam villam de Ulkistan, tam in dominicis
quam in servitiis, Villanis and eorum sequelis, cum bosco and cum molendino,
cum secta and soca, and cum omnibus aliis pertinentiis suis, sine aliquo
retenimento. Dedimus autem and concessimus eisdem Capellanis, and successoribus
suis, in perpetuum, totum vetus Dominium de Gatesheved, cum omnibus
pertinentiis suis, and cum Boskello quod vocatur Benchelm, continente
quadraginta and tres Acras per istas divisas, viz. inter terram arabilem S.
Trinitatis and viam, quae ducit usque Farnacres tendente ad pratum. Dedimus and
concessimus eisdem Capellanis, and eorum successoribus, in perpetuum, viginti
and novem Acras terrae de Eschaeta nostra, cum pertinentiis suis in
Aluresacyres, habendas and tenendas Deo, and beato Edmundo Confessori, and
dictis Capellanis, and eorum successoribus, in perpetuum, de Nobis and
successoribus nostris, in liberam, puram, and perpetuam Elemosinam, sicut
aliqua Elemosina liberius vel quietius dari potest vel teneri. Sed ne ista
nostra Collatio, in tam pios usus facta, speciem alienationis continere
videatur, in compensationem tam modici damni subscripta Ecclesiae Dunelmensi
reversura, quae quidem propriis sacultatibus and industriis adquisivimus, eidem
Ecclesiae nostrae in perpetuum adsignavimus, viz. sexdecim acras terrae cum
pertinentiis, in Steindrop, una cum Advocatione Ecclesiae ejusdem, and sexdecim
acras terrae cum pertinentiis in Winston, una cum Advocatione Ecclesiae
ejusdem. Item quinque Bovatas terrae cum pertinentiis in Thymelby, cum Bosco,
and cum Homagio and servitio Will. de Kolevile and heredum suorum in cadem, in
perpetuum. Item triginta and quinque acras terrae, cum pertinentiis, in Creyk,
emptas de Roberto de Raskelf. Item totam villam de Herdwyck, juxta Stockton,
quam emeramus de Galrido de Herdwyck, excepto valor excambii, quod ei fecimus
in Dominio nostro de Bradewood. Item quadraginta Marcas annuas de Ecclesiis
venerabilis fratris Domini Sylvestri, Karlconensis Episcopi, and Prioris
ejusdem, in Northumbria, toto tempore ipsius Episcopi, and post ejus cessionem,
vel decessum, sexaginta Marcas. Item Advocationem Ecclesiae de Stamfordham in
Northumbria. Quare volumus and firmiter praecipimus, quod praedicti Capellani,
and eorum successores, qui pro tempore fuerint, totam praedictam villam de
Ulkistan, tam in dominicis quam in servitiis, villanis and little sequelis, cum
bosco and cum molendino, cum secta and soka, and cum omnibus aliis pertinentiis
suis, and totum vetus Dominium de Gatesheved, cum omnibus pertinentiis suis,
and cum praefato Boskello quod vocatur Benchelm, and etiam praedictis viginti
and novem acris terrae cum pertinentiis in Alursacress, habeant and retineant
in liberam, puram and perpetuam Elimosnam, in omnibus and per omnia, sicut
praedictum est in perpetuum. In cujus rei testimonium, praesenti scripto
sigillum nostrum fecimus apponi. Testibus Dominis and Magistris Johanne de
Rumesbye, Philippo de S. Helena, Willielmo de Blokelepo, Odone de Kyllenny,
Willielmo de Hurtheworth, Johanne Forti, Galfrido de Forseth, Marco de Sancta
Cruce, Ricardo de Farnham, Roberto de Sancto Albano, Johanne le Grass, Roberto
de Bokynham, Rogero de Ponte curvo, Johanne Cilet, Waltero Seilby, Rogero de
Winton Capellano, Henrico de Sumero, Willielmo de Sadberge, Ricardo Basseth,
Willielmo de Karlawc, Radulpho Fermin Clerico, and multis aliis.

NOS ergo dictam Cartam dicti venerabilis Patris nostri Domini Nicholai Dei
gratia, Dunelmensis Episcopi, ratam and gratam in omnibus habentes ipsam
Sigilli nostri munimine duximus confirmandam. (...) Test Capitulo nostro.

Ordinatio Hospitalis Sancti Edmundi in Gatesheved.
OMnibus hoc scriptum visuris vel audituris, Bertramus Prior and Conventus
Dunelmensis Ecclesiae salutem aeternam in Domino. Noveritis Nos Cartam
venerabilis Patris nostri Domini Nicholai, Dei gratia, Dunelmensis Episcopi, in
haec verba inspexisse. Omnibus sanctae Matris Ecclesiae filiis, ad quos
praesens scriptum pervenerit, Nicholaus, Divina Gratia, Dunelmensis Episcopus,
salutem in Domino sempiternam. Etsi ascripti obsequiis Creatoris ipsius
proferre lauds in pace deberent and quiet, inimicus tamen, qui huic
adversatur nomini, zizaniam non cessans seminare per ministros suos, and
excrescentem malitiam secularem ad hoc sedulo suas vires ponit ingenii, ut,
quod ad laudem Dei and Divini nominis cultum fidelium devotio ordinaverit, ad
nihilum redigat, and irremediabili confusione perfundat: Hujus Nos astutae
calliditati occurrere cupientes remedio salutari, ne incertus aut inordinatus
vivendi modus sempiternum inducat torporem, statuimus and ordinavimus, ut in
Capella, quam apud Gatesheved ad honorem Domini nostri Jesu Christi, in nomine
beati Edmundi Confessoris, and gloriosi pontificis Cuthberti, fundavimus,
dedicavimus, and dotavimus, pro salute animae nostrae, predecessorum and
successorum nostrorum, quatuor Sacerdotes bonae vitae and conversationis
honestae sint perpetuis temporibus ministrantes, viz. Presbyter, cui custodiam
contulimus Capellae antedictae, and omnium spectantium ad eandem, quamdiu
vixerit, cum tribus aliis Sacerdotibus eidem Presbytero associandis; tali vero
adjuncto tenore, ut diebus singulis, in perpetuum, matutinas and caeteras horas
canonicas simul cantent, ac per unum sacerdotem de die, per alium de beata
Virgin, per tertium, de beatis Confessoribus Edmundo and Cuthberto, quartum
vero, pro anima nostra, predecessorum and successorum nostrorum, and omnium
fidelium desunctorum, quatuor missae quotidie celebrentur, cum Commendatione,
Placebo and Dirige. Praedicti vero quatuor Sacerdotes in eadem mensa comedent,
and in eadem Camera quiescent, nisi alicujus infirmitas ad tempus inter illos
aegrotum manner non permittat. Praedicti vero tres Sacerdotes praedicto
Magistro domus and suis successoribus erunt obedientes, and ab co singillatim,
viginti solidos sterlingorum, una cum mensa honorabili percipient annuatim, ad
providendum sibi in Vestibus and aliis necessariis. Si quis illorum, diabolico
instinctu incontinens, vagabundus, aut alias vivens inordinate, and per
Magistrum, qui pro tempore fuerit, monitus, in malitia perduraverit, per eundem
Magistrum absque requisitione Superioris amoveatur; quo amoto, sine majore
dispendio alius Sacerdos substituatur. Ad haec quidem capellam Trinitatis, and
ad sustentationem ibidem neque seculariter neque religiose viventium assignata
fuerit sustentatio modica and exilis, ut intelligatur quam bonum actu and quam
jucundum habitare Fratres in unum, de Consensu Prioris and Conventus
Dunelmensis, and illorum, qui ibidem habitare consueverant, capellam praedictam
cum suis pertinentiis capellae praenominatae quam fundaverimus, praesata
auctoritate consolidavimus. Ordinavimus etiam and statuimus, ut Episcopi
Dunelmenses, qui pro tempore fuerint, sint Patroni, Advocati, and Defensores
praedicti loci, and omnium spectantium ad cundem, and quod per ipsos Magistri
perpetuis temporibus instituantur, Presbyteri tamen and suo prospectu in loco
praedicto residentes. Si tamen Magister aliquis sive Custos institutus in
regimine Domus negligeus fucrit, aut alias inutilis inveniatur, per Episcopum
Dunelmensem qui pro tempore fuerit amoveatur, and idoneus sine mora Regimini
Domus praeficiatur. Si vero custodum aliquis qui praedictae Domui laudabiliter
praefuerit intantam debilitatem morbo incidiat vel Aetate, quod propter ipsius
impotentiam Alius ibidem praeficiatur; Amotus a Regimine ex causa honesta de
bonis Domus in vitae necessariis sustentetur, dum tamen aliunde non habeat unde
possit sustentari, and hoc idem de Sacerdotibus observetur, qui casus
inciderint antedictos. Si autem bona ad sustentationem praelibatam a nobis
assignata eidem pia Fidelium consideratione praedicto loco assignanda, ad
uberiora bona facienda suffecerint in Elemosinis and operibus misericordiae.
Qui Regimini domus deputatus fuerit taliter studeat erogare, ut in diserati
judicii examinatione ut fidelis Dispensator a Judice supremo cum electis ex
fructu bonorum operum vitam capiat sempiternam. Nulli ergo homini liceat hanc
Ordinationem nostram infringere, vel ei ausu temerario contraire; Si quis autem
hoc attemptare praesumpserit indignationem Omnipotentis Dei and Sanctae
Genetricis ejusdem, and Sanctorum confessorum Edmundi and Cuthberti and omnium
Sanctorum noverit se incursurum. Et ad majorem Securitatem hujus tenoris, Nos
Ergo dictam Ordinationem dicti venerabilis Patris Dom'i Nicholai divina gratia
Dunelmensis Episcopi gratam and ratam in omnibus habentes ipsam sigilli nostri
munimine duximus confirmandam. Test Capitulo Nostro.

Creatio Jo. de Appilby in Magistrum Hospitalis S. Edmundi per Tho. Hatfield
Dunelm' Episc.
THomas Permissione Divina Dunelmensis Episcopus, dilecto nobis in Christo
filio Magistro Johanni de Apilby Jurisperito salutem, gratiam and
benedictionem. Tuis meritis exigentibus Nosque ad id moventibus Virtutum
gratiis quibus te novimus insigniri, Te in Magistrum, Rectorem, and Custodem
perpetuum Domus seu Hospitalis de Gatesheved nostrae Dioces. vacantis and ad
Collationem seu Provisionem nostram pleno jure spectantis praefecimus, Teque
per Annuli nostri traditionem praesentialiter investimus de eadem,
Administrationem tibi omnium bonorum dictae Domus plenam and liberam
committentes. In cujus. -- etc. Dat' in manerio nostro de Aukland die 20 mensis
August, A. D. 1353. and Consecrat. nostrae 9.

Compert' quod Isabella quae fuit Uxor Joh. de Birkley obiit seisata in Dominio
suo de uno messuagio and Sexaginta acras terrae in Kyoleche quae tenetur de
magistro Hospitalis S. Edmundi in Gatesheved.

PHILIP Bishop of Durham, in the Reign of Henry II. granted to the Burgesses of
Gateshead several Privileges, as appears by what follows.

PHILIP by the Grace of God Bishop of Durham, to all Men of the whole
Bishopric, and of his Brotherhood in all England, he saluteth.

Know ye, that we have granted, and by his present Deed have granted to our
Burgesses of Gatesheved, full Liberty of Forestage, yielding in every half
Year, from Pentecost to the Feast of St. Martin; for a Wheye or Ox, the which
goes to Grass, 2 d. and for a Horse 2 d. and for every Hog 1 d. in respect of
all Things that they have to proper and necessary Uses; saving these
prohibited. Neither shall it be lawful for any Forester within the Meats that
are appointed within our Forest and Borough to Tax Lands upon any Burgess, or
upon any Manner of Thing of the said Borough, or upon any Oxen, or any other
their Cattle, or by any Ways to hinder them, either of their Wood, Timber, or
any other Things. And if any Suit or Trouble shall be between the Foresters and
Burgesses, it shall be determined in the said Borough, if it may be; if not,
then in our Presence it shall be determined. And the Cattle of any Burgess
shall not be carried out of the said Borough, but there shall be replevied, if
the same may be replevied. To the same Burgesses it shall be lawful to have
Herbage, and lying Turfs and Bruery to their own proper Uses, wheresoever they
are accustomed to have the same, so that they sell us Part thereof. And if any
Burgess do dig Turfs for his Chimney, not having Oxen; if for the Leading of
Turfs they shall be forced to have Oxen, nevertheless in giving for all or
every Ox, which they shall need 2 d. of Forestage, they shall be freed. And it
shall be lawful for every Burgess to give Wood to whomsoever he will, to be
spent about the River of Tyne, without any License; but not to sell any without
License of the Foresters. And no Forester shall disturb any Merchandise that
comes within the said Meat. And every Burgess of Gatesheved shall have of his
Burgage the same Liberty, which the Burgesses of Newcastle have of their
Burgages. And whithersoever the Burgesses of Gatesheved, or their Cattle, shall
come within our Land, in the Peace of God and Blessed St. Cuthbert, they shall
pass, that no Man to them shall do any Injury, or any Demand or Exaction of
them shall require. We do grant also to the same Burgesses, that they shall
have Common of Pasture and like Parts of Feeding to all their Houses, and all
Commodities which they ought to have of Subtwell Meadows, as they were wont to
have; as in Deeds of good Memory of our Predecessors reasonably is contained.

IN the 7th of Edward VI. the Mayor and Burgesses of Newcastle petitioned the
King, that the Town of Gatesheved in the County of Durham, adjoining to their
Corporation, only the River of Tyne between, being populous, and without
Government, and often committing many Outrages in their Town, and then got over
the Water into the Town of Gatesheved unpunished; and that often they cast
Rubbish into the River; and also that the Bridge went to Decay very much, which
belonged to that Town; humbly beseeching, That his Majesty would be graciously
pleased, to incorporate that Town with them, under their Government, with all
its Members, and Salt-meadows, and Park; and that it might be quite taken from
the County of Durham, and all the People therein to become subordinate to their
Laws.

WHEREUPON it was enacted, the whole Town of Gatesheved, with the Salt-Meadows,
the whole Water and Bridge, with all the Liberties thereunto belonging (except
the Common which should remain to the Inhabitants) should be incorporated with
Newcastle, and disjoined from the County of Durham, as Newcastle was from
Northumberland by Charter, Gardener, p. 169.

FIRST Mary, so soon as Bishop Tunstal was created Bishop of Durham, he
petitioned her Majesty, to restore Gatesheved to the County of Durham again,
and that the said Act 7th Edward VI. might be repealed; and it was repealed
accordingly, and enacted, that the Town of Gatesheved should be free from the
Corporation of Newcastle, etc. Gardener, p. 175.

ON the same Side of the Tyne, a little below, are the Fields called the
Salt-Meadows.

IN going down the Water, we meet with several Staiths, such are the Staith of
Richard Ridley, Esquire and Matthew White, Esquire at the Glass-House Bridge; the
Staiths of Richard Ridley, Esquire at St. Lawrence and St. Peter's Keys, of Walter
Blacket, Esquire and Mr. John Wilkinson; of Francis Rudston, Esquire and of Edward
Wortley Montague, Esquire We meet also with several Keys, such are Winkemley,
Bill-Key, Willington-Key, Hebbourn-Key, etc.

WE meet also with several Villages, such are Dents-Hole, St. Anthon's,
Snowdon's Hole, Howdon Panns, Jarroiv, etc.

WHEN the Hoastmen renewed their Charter, they had License to send Coals above
the Bill, and Mr. Coal procured a Shore at Friar-Goose, Mr. Henry Chapman
procured a Shore upon Hewith-Grounds; and Mr. Robert Brandling with much ado
got Leave to build a Shore upon his own Ground at Fellin. In the mean time, the
Tenants of the Dean and Chapter at Durham, took Liberty to throw their Ashes
into the River, which did much Damage to the Bar. Upon this Mr. Leonard Carr,
and Mr. Cuthbert Bewick complained, and the Town caused them to lay them upon
the Land, of which they have made mighty Heaps.

WHEN King James I. came to the Crown, he was pleased to be bountiful to his
Countrymen; amongst the rest, Sir Henry Gibb being one of his Officers, he
bestowed upon him the Lordship of Jarrow and he would have procured a Shore
there to cast Ballast; but although he had the Favor of the King, yet the Town
used such Means, and gave such Reasons to his Majesty and the Council, that
they found it detrimental to the Town, and especially to the River, so that he
was utterly hindered and disappointed.

BUT after the Death of King Charles I. Thomas Bonner, and Robert Ellison got
in to be Magistrates; and these Men having gotten Wealth and Increase by the
Rebellion, did purchase Jarrow; and what could not be done before in a lawful
Time, they did bring to pass at this unlawful Juncture, building a Shore, and
casting Ballast, to the great Detriment of the River: And having the Town at
Command, Mr. Bonner bought St. Anthony's, and Robert Ellison bought Hebbourn,
and there they both built Shores, and got the Allowance of the Common Council,
when they were beyond Resisting: And since that, Mr. Carr, a Man that deserved
well of his present Majesty [ CHARLES II.] and the Town, has procured, that
his Brother Ellison (for old Ellison's Son married his Sister) should have
Liberty to erect his Shore to a great Length, which in Time will utterly
overthrow our Navigation; for they will damn out the In-draught, which makes
Rivers far off the Sea be walled out; it will go by, and not come in: And some
ancient and discreet Masters of Ships have said, They have not left a Birth to
save their Ships in, when any Land-stood or Storm happens in the River. Milbank.

THE next Place Jarrow, or Girwy, as it was anciently called, which is a small
Village on the South Side of Tyne, about 4 Miles distant from Newcastle, famous
for a Monastery of learned Men, but more so for the Birth, Life, and Death of
venerable BEDE; so named for his singular Sanctity, who was born of mean
Parents, and at seven Years of Age delivered to the holy Abbot St. Benedict to
be educated in his Rule, and being come to Age he professed a Monastic Life in
the Abbeys of Weremouth, and Girwy, where he became by his constant Application
to his Studies, so complete a Scholar, that few in that Age, (which bred many
very learned Men) were to compare to him, for he was perfectly knowing in the
Greek and Latin Tongues, and no less perfect in Poetry, Rhetoric, Logic,
Physics, Metaphysikcs, Astronomy, Arithmetic, all Ecclesiastical
Calculations, Music, Geometry, Cosmography, History, Philosophy, and Divinity.
In short, he had an exact Knowledge of all commendable Sciences, insomuch that
William of Malmsbury thus describes him. He was a Man that may more worthily be
admired than commended; for he was born in an extreme Corner of the World, yet
the Light of his Learning spread over all Parts of the Earth, he continued a
most diligent Learner 'till he was thirty Years of Age, after which being
ordained Priest, he betook himself to Teaching and Writing. All the Hours he
had to spare from the Monastical Excerises of Prayer, and Singing in the Choirs
by Day and Night (in which he was constant and very devout) he most diligently
spent in his Studies, so that his Life was a continual Intercourse between
Devotion and Study, he never repairing to his Study 'till he had been at
Prayers, nor ever went to Prayers but from his Studies, by which continual
Application he penetrated into all Sciences. In his continual Deportment he was
so grave and serious, that the Title of Venerable was bestowed on him while he
lived, and ever continued to him after his Death. It appears from History that
he had at one Time those great Lights of the Church, Alcuinus, Preceptor to the
Emperor Charlemaign, and Claudius and Clemens, the Founders of the Universities
of Paris and Pavia for his Scholars.

THIS Character is fully verified by the Books of all Sorts of Learning writ by
him. At the End of his Works he gives us a modest account of his own Life,
together with a Catalogue of his Principal Works. Henry of Huntington gives us
also a large Catalogue of his Writings, too long to be set down here: Yet we
cannot omit some of the Principal Works, viz.

AN incredible Number of Treatises upon all Parts of the Old and New Testament,
many of which are still to be found in the Bodleian Library at Oxford.

ABOVE an hundred Homilies, and many Pieces of Divinity and Devotion.

A Small Book of the Holy Land.

A Chronicle from the Creation.

A Book of the Writers of the Church.

A Martyrology.

AN Epitome of the English History.

OF the Situation and wonderful Things of Great Britain.

THE Lives of many holy Men and Abbots, with many others of all Sorts of
Learning.

THIS most excellent Person, being grown old in the Study of Learning, and all
Christian Virtues, grew weak and decripit for a Time, and at length on the
Tuesday before Ascension, his Distemper grew so heavy upon him, that Nature
yielded to it, and he died on Ascension Day, in the seventy second Year of his
Age; But others say the Ninetieth, Anno 734, and was buried in his Monastery,
but afterward his Body was translated to Durham. Magn' Brit' vol 3d, p. 750.

NOR is it to be admired that he should become so learned in his Monastery, for
in former Ages the greater Monasteries were like Universities, wherein not only
Humanity, but all the Liberal Sciences, Philosophy, and Divinity were taught;
in the Year 697, he received Deacons Orders from the Hands of John Bishop of
Hexham afterward called St. John of Beverley, and in the Year 706 he was
ordained Priest by the same Bishop.

AMONG the several Ways of accounting for his Epithet of Venerable, it has
always been esteemed the most pleasing, though perhaps not the most true
Account, of what is said to have happened after his Death, viz. that one of his
Scholars designing to make his Epitaph in Hexameter Verse, which began thus,
Hac sunt in Fossa, and was willing to make it end Presbiteri ossa; But it would
not do, at last being tired out he fell asleep, and in the Morning to his great
Surprise he found it stand thus, Hac sunt in Fossa, Bedae venerabilis Ossa.
Here lies entombed within these Stones,
Of Venerable Bede the Bones.


Portus Ecfridi sinus qui a Tina ad Girwi penetrat. Penetrabat and interius
usque ad Bilton, pene tres Pass. millibus Super Girwi, quo Antiquitus and
Naviculae pervenerunt. Fluviolus hunc sinum intrat.
ANNO Higbaldi 7. ( viz. 788.) Dum Pagani portum Ecfridi Regis, hoe est Girwi,
vastantes, monasterium ad ostium Tini amnis depraedentur, dux little ibidem
crudeli nece interiit. Leland 's Collection, Vol. II. p. 328.

In English thus.

Ecfrid's Haven is a Gulf which penetrates from the Tyne to Girwi. It
penetrated also more inward as far as Bilton, almost 3000 Paces above Girwi,
where also little Sloops or Ships formerly came. A Rivulet enters Gulf.
IN the Seventh Year of Higbald, (viz. 788.) whilst the Pagans laying waste the
Haven of King Ecfrid, that is Girvi [Jarrow] Pillage the Monastery at the Mouth
of the River Tyne [Tinemouth], their General there suffered a cruel Death.

DUGDALE in his Monasticon, speaking of Jarrow Monastery, and of the Abbot St.
Benedict allows venerable Bede to be educated by him, but completed his holy
Works und Ceolfrid: He says too, that this Monastery was so ruined by the Danes
entering the Tyne, that scarce the Footsteps of it remained.

THIS Monastry was valued at the Suppression at 38 l. 14 s. 4 d.

THERE are still some Ruins of the Monastery to be seen, and upon the Church
Wall, when and by whom founded, may be learnt from this Inscription, which is
legible to this Day in the Church Wall.

Dedicatio Basilicae S. Pauli VIII. K. L. Maii Ann. XUI. Ecfridi Reg. Ceofridi
A BB. Ejusdemque Eccles. Deo Auctore Conditoris Anno IIII.
NOW the great Churches when the saving Light of the Gospel began to Shine
abroad in the World (for it is not impertinent to note thus much) were called
Basilicae, because the Basilicae of the Gentiles, namely those stately
Buildings where the Magistrates held the Courts of Justice, were converted to
Churches by the Christians; whence Ausonius, Basilica olim negotiis plena, nunc
votis, i. e. the Basilica full of Business heretofore, but now of Devotion or
else, because they were built in an oblong Form as the Basilicae were.

IN the Inscription the XUI should be XU. for King Elfrid reigned no more than
15 Years; and so (indeed) Sir James Ware has given it in his Notes upon Bede's
History of the Abbots of Weremouth. But it ought not from this Inscription to
be inferred that Ceolfrid was the Founder of this Monastry, since it appears
from Bede's Account, that he was only constituted first Abbot of the Place by
Benedictus Biscopus who sent him hither (with a Colony of Seventeen Monks) from
Weremouth. Cambden's Britan' p. 780 and 784.

IN this Church is to be seen a very ancient Chair which (Tradition says) was
the Chair of venerable Bede.

THE present Vicar of Jarrow is the Rev. Mr. Robert Wilson.

SOME Years ago, upon the Banks of the Tyne was discovered a Roman Altar, the
Figure and Description whereof take here as it was delivered to the Royal
Society, by the ingenious and learned Dr. Lister.

Fig. 1.
Fig. 5.
Fig. 2.
Fig. 3.
Fig. 4.


I have, says he, in his Letter to the Royal Society, with much Trouble, got
into my Hands a Piece of Roman Antiquity, which was but a very few Years ago
discovered upon the South-bank of the River Tyne, near Sheilds, in the
Bishopric; it is a very large and fair Roman Altar, of one entire Stone; but
after all my Cost and Pains, I am very sorry to find the Inscription very ill
defaced, and much of it is not legible, and I believe it has been also much
mishandled by those who have endeavored to read it; whereas if the Remainder
of the Letters had been exactly measured, and the Face blacked, and lightly
washed off again, as in Prints, some Things more might have been spelled.

As to the Nature of the Stone itself, it is of a coarse Rag, the same with
that of the Pyramids at Burrow-Briggs; it is four Foot high, and was ascended
to by Steps, which appears in all the Sides; but the Front has two
Square-holes near the Bottom, which let in the Irons that joined it to the
Steps.

I have carefully designed it on all its Sides, and given the Plan of the Top
also, which if you please, we will survey in Order.

1. THE Backside, opposite to the Inscription, on which is engraven in
Bass-Relief, a Flower-Pot, furnished I suppose, with what best pleased the
Stone-Cutter; for these Men needed not be more curious than the Priests
themselves, who were wont to make Use of Herbs next Hand, to adorn the Altars,
and therefore Verbenae is put for any Kind of Herb; yet if we will have it
resemble any Thing with us, I think it is most like, if not truly Nymphaea, a
known and common River Plant.

2. ONE of the Sides; which is somewhat narrower than the Front or Back, On
this are engraved in Bass-Relief, the cutting Knife (Cecespita) and the Ax
(securis); the Knife is exactly the same with that on the other Altar, formerly
by me mentioned in the Philosophical Collections of Mr. Hook; but the Ax is
different, for here it is headed with a long and crooked Point, and there the
Head of the Ax is divided into three Points.

3. The other Side, on which are engraved after the same Manner, an Eure
(Urceolus) and a Ladle which serves for a Sympullum. This I call rather a
Laddle than a Mallet, it being perfectly Dish-wife, and hollow in the Middle,
although Cambden is of another Opinion in that elegant Sculpt of the Cumberland
Altar; and the very same Utensil I have seen and noted on the Ickley Altar,
which is yet extant at Middleton-Grange, near that Town; but the Stone which
Cambden says supports a Pair of Stairs there (as at this Day it does in the
very Road) is but an ill Copy of it, and not the Original.

4. THE Plan of the Top, which is cut in the Figure of a Basin ( Disons or
Lana) with Ansae on each Side, consisting of a Pair of Links of a Chain, which
rest upon, and fall over two Rowles; and this was the Hearth.

5. THE Front, which has an Inscription in nine Lines in Roman Letters, each
Letter a little more than two Inches deep of our Measure, now remaining as in
the prefixed Sculpture, Fig. 5. which I would read thus: Dis, Deabusque
Matribus, pro Salute M. Aurelii Antonii Augusti Imperatoris votum solvit lubens
merito ob reditum.

The Deae Matres are well interpreted by Seldon. It is much his Safety and
Return both vowed, should be so separated in the Inscription; but I have not
Gruter by me, to compare this with the like. Caracalla say the Historians,
Ziphilinus, Herodianus, etc.
after his Father's Death at York, took upon him the Command of the Army alone,
and the whole Empire; he went alone against the Enemy, who were the Caledonii,
inhabiting beyond the Wall which his Father had built, he made Peace with them,
received their Hostages, slighted their fortified Places, and returned. And
this seems to be confirmed by the Inscription; for undoubtedly, upon this last
Expedition alone, without his Brother Gera and Mother, was this Altar erected
to him alone, at a Place about two Stations on this Side the Wall; so that the
Vow might be as well understood of his Return from this Expedition, as for his
Sasety and Return to Rome, which methinks should be true, or his Mother and
Brother Geta would scarce have been left out, at least so early, for yet the
Army declared for them both, according to their Father's Will.

FURTHER, it seems also to have been erected by those who flattered him, and
who were afterward killed by him; and for this Reason, the Persons who
dedicated it, seem to me to be Purposely defaced, the sixth and seventh Lines
of the Inscription being designedly cut away by the Hollowness of them, and
there not being the least Sign of any Letter remaining. And this I suppose
might be Part of their Disgrace, as it was usual to deface and break the
Statues and Monuments of Persons executed, of which this Monster made strange
Havoc; and since worn Inscriptions admit of various Readings, because some
Letters are worn out, and some more legible, whereby unprejudiced People may
conceive them diversely; I will therefore tell you another reading, Part of
these two first Lines, which I do not disallow, but that it will agree well
enough with the History of Severus, though his Apotheosis, or solemn Dedication
was not performed till he came to Rome, in the Manner of which funeral Pomp
Herodian is very large; it was of that excellent Antiquary Dr. Johnson of
Pomfret.

CONSERVATO RI. B. PRO SAL. etc. Which shows the Height of Flattery of those
Times; so that they paid their Vows to the lately dead Father the Conservator
of Britain, for the Safety of the Son: And the Story tells us, how gladly he
would have had him made a God long before, even with his own Hands. Cambden
Britan. in the Additions to Durham, p. 784.

BELOW this are the Towns of Shields, one on the North Side of the River, and
the other on the South. That on the North Side in the Reign of Edward the 1st,
(when the Contest was between the Town of Newcastle, and the Prior of Tinmouth)
was a Place where only 5 or 6 Fisherman had their Cottages, and it is but of
late Years that it became a large Town and so populous. The Church-belonging to
this Place was begun to be built in 1659.

SOUTH Shields is more famous for making Salt than North Shields, there being
much the greater Number of Salt Pans; it is also a pretty large Town, and has a
Church which going to decay, is about to be rebuilt. It is a Chapelry to
Jarrow, and dedicated to St. Hilda.

WE come now to the Mouth of the River Tyne, which is a Haven so deep as to
carry Vessels of a considerable Burden, and of that Security, that they are
not in Danger either of Storms or Shallows, save that within less than half a
Mile of the Bar of Tinmouth, (which is a Sand that lies cross the River's
Mouth, not above 7 Foot deep at Low Water) you meet with many Rocks which are
called by the Sailors the Black Middens, which are very dangerous, but to
prevent any Mischiefs which may happen to them in the Night Time, there are two
Light-houses, maintained by the Trinity-house in Newcastle, and near them in
the Year 1672, was built a Fort, called Clifford's -Fort, which effectually
commands all the Vessels that enter the River.

LELAND in the 4th Volume of his Collections, gives us the following most
valuable Remark of a Roman Station on the South Side of the Tyne, the Place of
the Birth of King Oswyn, for says he.

E Regione Tinemuthae suit Urbs vastata a Danis Ursa nomine, Ubi natus erat
Oswinus Rex.

TINMOUTH called by the Britains, Pen Ball Cragg. i. e. the Head of the Rampire
upon the Rock, from whence some maintain, that the Ditch reached as far as this
Place, if the Wall did not; Mr. Cambden says, that he will not gainsay this
Opinion, but adds, that he dares confidently Affirm, that this Place in the
Time of the Romans was called Tunacellum, which signifies as much as the
Promontory of Tuna or Tina, where the first Cohort (called Aelia Classica,
because it was first raised by Aelius Hadrianus, as the Name seems to import)
was in pay for Sea Service; for the Romans had their Naves Lusoriae, or light
Frigates in their border Rivers both for the suppressing the Excursions of the
neighboring Enemy, and making Incursions upon him, as may be seen in the Codex
Theodosii, under the Title De Lusoriis Danubii, i. e. Light Vessels on the
Danube.

UNDER the Saxon Heptarchy this Place was called Tunaceltep, not as Bede
affirms, from the Abbot Tunna, a mere romantic Story, which, if we recommend
to the Reader, it must be only for his Diversion, and not for any Truth in it,
but from it is Situation on the River Tyne. Here was anciently a little
Monastery, which was frequently plundered by the Danes, while the Saxons ruled.
Magn. Britan. p. 693.

AFTER the Decease of Oswyn, those that had killed him brought his Body to the
Mouth of the River Tyne, and there buried it in the Oratory of St. Mary's, in
the Year 631.

IN this Place a Number of illustrious Persons had gathered together, who in a
regular Order attended divine Worship; who thereby acquired such Honor and
Esteem, that when any one died of more than ordinary Reputation, whose Funeral
was to be solemnized with more than common Honor, he was usually buried here.

THIS Monastery was destroyed by Hinguar and Hubba. The Monks through Fear of
Persecution, fled to a certain little Church of their own, which St. Cuthbert
had dedicated; but the Danes finding them out, burnt it and all that were in it.

AFTER that William the Conqueror had given to Robert Mowbray the County of
Northumberland, the Earl showed a deal of Respect to St. Oswyn, and the Church
he was buried in (for the Church was founded within the Precincts of his
Castle). He gifted it with a Number of Lands, and placed in it Monks which came
from St. Albans, and yet it is said by some that Tosti Earl of Northumberland
laid the Foundation of this Monastery; but it is much more probable it was the
former, because he brought the Monks from St. Albans; but it will appear a
great deal more likely when we come to the following Grant or Charter of
William Rufus, for making of it a Cell to Willielmus Rex Anglorum T.
Archiepiscopo and W. Dunelmensi Episcopo, and omnibus Baronibus suis Francis
and Anglis salutem. Sciatis me dedisse and concessisse Deo and Sancto Albano
Ecclesiam de Tynmotha and omnia quae ad eam pertinent in terris and Decimis and
consuetudinibus in Nort de Tyne and in Suth de Tyne, and in Anglia, cum omnibus
quae Robertus Comes Northumberland, and sui homines dederant sancto Oswino
antiquam mihi soris factus esset. Et volo and precipio ut Sanctus Albanus
habeat praedictam Ecclesiam cum omnibus ad eam pertinentibus cum pace and
honor and omni consuetudine jure perpetuo Testibus Eudone Dapifew, and P. de
Valonis, apud Novum Castrum.


St. Albans, because that he says, cum omnibus quae Robertus Comes
Northumberland and Homines sui dederant sancto Oswino, etc.

KING Henry I. confirmed all that had been given to this Monastery, that is,
what had been given by Robert Mowbray, namely, the Tithes of Colebridge,
Ovington, Wylam, Newburn, Dissington, Calverdon, Elstwye, Bothall, Werkworth,
Anebell, Roubyr, and Wullour.

DAVID King of Scots in a Charter dated in the Year 1138, granted to the Church
of St. Mary and St. Oswyn, the Martyr of Tynemouth, and all belonging thereto
his Peace for ever, the Peace of his Son, and that of all his Servants,
threatening all those who should act otherwise with the Loss of his Favor for
ever; on Condition the Religious of this Monastery prayed for the Souls of his
Father and Mother, and of King Alexander his Brother, who to this Church had
granted a firm Peace, and for the Soul of Matilda Queen of England, his Sister,
and for the Souls of all his Ancestors and Successors.

KING Henry II. gave to it Egleringham, Bewick and Lilleburn.

KING John confirmed to this Church all their Possessions, being the Town of
Tinmouth, Seaton, Preston, Chirton, and another Chirton, Millington, Whitley,
Erdeston, Backwell, and another Backwell, Seghal, Morton, Bebesete,
Disslington, and another Disslington, Wulsington, Bewick, Egelingham,
Lilleburn, Anibel, Hovekslaw, Estwick, Wylum, Weltedane, and Half the Town of
Copun, Carleberry, and Morton in Haliwerkstock, and the Land of Royely, and
Demuni; also the Churches of Tinmouth, Wodeburn, Whalton, Bolum, Bewick,
Egelingham, Kertburn, and Cunesline; likewise Hereford upon Blyth, and the
Tithe of Hyrenes, Middleton upon Theyse, Corbigg, Rouber, Werkewuril, Wollour,
and Newburn, with all the Mills.

THE Grant of Richard Bertram confirms the Grant of the Tithe of Bothal. The
Charter of King Edward III. restores and confirms to this Monastery all its
Privileges, Immunities, and Possessions. Dugdale p. 42.

THIS Monastery being afterward fortified, and turned into a strong Hold, was
called Tinmouth-Castle; which Name it still bears, and as such, glories both of
its Stateliness and Strength; (for as an ancient Author speaks) it is
inaccessibly seated upon a very high Rock toward the Ocean on the East and
North, and elsewhere, so well mounted, that a slender Garrison may make it
good. For this Reason, Robert Mowbray, Earl of Northumberland, when he
practiced with certain Noblemen to dethrone William Rufus (because he had not
rewarded him according to his Expectation, for slaying Malcom King of Scots,
and his Son) but was set upon by the King before Things were ripe for
Rebellion, chose this Castle for his chief Hold, and maintained it for some
Time against the King and his Forces; but being at length brought into great
Straits by the Besiegers (as Rebels seldom meet with Success) he fled, and
betook himself to the adjoining Monastery, which was accordingly commonly
reputed an holy and inviolable Sanctuary; nevertheless he was carried off
thence, and afterward, in a long and noisome Imprisonment, justly suffered
Death for his Treason. Magn. Britan. Vol. 3. p. 694.

JOHN of Whethamstede, thirty third Abbot of St. Albans, was so called from the
Place of his Birth, a Village near St. Albans; but the Name of his Family was
Bostock; he was a Monk of the Priory of Tinmouth, and gave, after he came to be
Abbot, a Chalice of pure Gold, and of great Weight, to that Priory; his
Character cannot be better drawn up, than in Stephen's Monasticon, from whence
we have this Account: Contegit iste lapis venerabilis ossa Joannis
Wethamstede, Abbas hic qui fuit ejus in annis,
Ter doctus, doctos and amans, etc.
That is: This Stone covers the Bones of the Venerable John Wethamstede, who
was Abbot here in his Time, most learned, a Lover of learned Men, and kind to
them. He did not connive at any Faults in the Clergy; he was as zealous as
Phineas against lewd Persons, and as John against Adulterers, and even as Peter
against Simoniacks. He was so great a Repairer of old tattered Houses and
Marks, that none past exceeded him in that Particular, or is there any equal to
him. He is recorded to have left behind him Ten thousand Marks clear. Do you
the Convent of St. Albans hourly pray for the Soul of him that loved you.

THIS famous Monastery, which was of the Benedictines Order, and consisted of a
Prior and fifteen Monks, was suppressed Jan. 12th, in the 30th Henry VIII. It
was valued at 397 l. 10 s. 5 d. per annum.

KING Henry VIII. converted the Castle into a Defense and Fortification against
foreign Invasions.

THE Ruins of the Monastery are still to be seen in the Castle, near which also
was the Parish Church; but that being gone much to Decay, and the Parishioners
in the late Civil Wars being often debarred of the Liberty of a free Resort to
it, another was begun to be rebuilt in the Year 1659; and being afterward
finished, was consecrated by Bishop Cosins in the Year 1668. In the former
Church we may suppose it was, where Malcom King of Scots, slain with his Son
Edward Prince of Scotland, by Robert Mowbray Earl of Northumberland, was
buried. This King Malcom had barbarously plundered and ravaged these Northern
Parts five Times, once in Edward the Confessor's Days, twice in the
Conqueror's, and twice in William Rufus's; in the last of which Invasions he
met with his Fate, by that just Providence, who often retaliates Wrongs in the
Place they are done, as he found; for he was killed in this Country, where he
had slain and destroyed many: But King William did not prosecute his Revenge
further, as he might have done with Success, but established his Son on his
Throne, notwithstanding the Endeavors and Design of his Uncle Donald to
deprive him of it, which he had done, had not King William aided him to obtain
it.

JOHN of Tinmouth was born in this Town, and is said to have been the Vicar of
it, but afterward became a Benedictine Monk in the Abbey of St. Albans; he was
a most virtuous Person, and excellently learned, entirely addicted to the Study
of the Holy Scriptures, and of sacred History. He gathered the Lives and
Actions of the Saints of England, Wales, Scotland and Ireland, with great
Judgment and indefatigable Labor, which Work he entitled, Sanctilogium
servorum Dei, i. e. The sacred History of the Servants of GOD. Nor did he
deserve less Commendation for his Expositions of the Holy Scripture, in which
he not only explains the literal Sense, but the moral, allegorical, and
tropological; his Commentaries were upon all the Books from Genesis to the
Kings inclusive. He wrote also other Books, as Church-Lessons, The Golden
History, and a Supplement to the same, an Appendix to his Martyrology, etc. He
flourished about the Year 1366.

THE Church has perhaps been a Building of as much Art and Curiosity, as any
one in the whole Kingdom; nay, when we behold it at present, in the Midst of
Ruins, we are struck with Aw, and the utmost Veneration; whether it is a
Reflection on the extensive Charity of ancient Days, the surprising Fineness of
the Masonry, or whether there is something naturally moving in those ancient
Remains; but so it is, that it never fails to command a solemn Aw, and a silent
Commiseration.

TINMOUTH at present is a pretty large Village, and is much resorted to in the
Summer-Season, it having the Prior's Haven in it, which is a most convenient
retired Place for Bathing.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Government of the Town.
WHATEVER Government was in this Town in the Times of the Saxons and Danes; it
is certain, after the Conquest it was governed by Bailiffs; for though the Castle
had Privileges of its own, yet it left those of the Town as they were, and
without any Damage, as shall by and by be shown. In the mean Time let us
consider a few Things relating to this Place.

1066.
TOSTON, Earl of Northumberland, Son of the great Earl Godwin, and Brother of
Harold, having by his great Cruelties and many Acts of Injustice highly
exasperated the Northumbrians, they took up Arms against him, and expelled him
Northumberland, in 1063, in the Reign of Edward the Confessor. Harold being
ordered to go and chastize them, and restore his Brother, and understanding
that they had no design of withdrawing their Obedience from the King, but only
from an unjust and cruel Governor, who exercised over them a Tyrannical Power,
he not only interceeded for their Pardon, but procured them Morkard, Son of
Alfgar, Duke of Mercia, for their Governor. Toston, highly incensed at his
Brother's Proceedings, and not having it in his Power to vent his Fury on him,
he turned it on some of his Domestics, whom he caused to be cut in Pieces,
then to be barrel'd up, and sent to his Brother for a Present. After so
barbarous an Action, not daring to stay any longer in England, he retired into
Flanders to Earl Baldwin his Father-in-law. Upon Harold's being made King,
after the Death of Edward, Toston, in 1066, with some Ships, probably given him
by the Earl of Flanders, infested the English Coasts, and plundered the Isle of
Wight. From whence he went and landed some Troops at Sandwich; but being
informed the King was marching toward him, he set sail for the North, and
entering the Humber with his little Fleet, he made a descent on Yorkshire, and
committed vast Ravages. But Morkard coming upon him unawares, being then got
into Lincolnshire, put his little Army to Flight, and compelled him to betake
himself to his Ships: Being drove by contrary Winds on the Coasts of Norway, he
applied himself to Harold Harfager King of that Country, and by many Arguments
represented to him how easy it was to conquer England, and add that Crown to
his own. The King of Norway, whose Ambition was easily persuaded by the other's
Arguments, accompanied with Earl Toston, put to Sea with a Fleet of 500 Sail,
and entered the Tyne. After having sacked the Countries on both Sides the Tyne,
they put to Sea, and entering the Humber, landed their Forces on the North Side,
and ravaged the Country with iriexpressible Cruelties. Harold marched against
them with all the Expedition possible, and came up with them at
Stanford-bridge, on the River Derwent, a little below York. Here a most bloody
Battle was sought, which lasted from seven in the Morning 'till three in the
Afternoon, wherein Harfager and Toston were both slain, and Harold obtained a
complete Victory. This Battle was fought October 5th, 1066, but nine Days
before the Battle at Hastings. Vide Malmsbury and M. Paris.

WILLIAM the Conqueror laid waste the whole Province of Northumberland. Sax.
Chron. p. 174. 1069


MALCOLME, King of Scots, came into England with a great Army, 1079
and laid waste the Land of the Northumbrians, as far as the River Tyne, and
slew many Hundreds of Men; and carried of them to their Own Country a great
deal of Riches and Treasure, beside Captives. Gib. Sax. Chron. p. 180.

THE Castle was founded as has been before observed by Robert the Son of the
Conqueror. 1080


ROBERT Mowbray Earl of Northumberland, revolting against King William Rufus,
the King went and besieged him in Banborrough Castle. 1095
Sometime after, Mowbray going out upon a false Information, had the Misfortune
to fall into the Hands of the Besiegers. Odericus Vitalis says, Some Soldiers
belonging to Newcastle upon Tyne promised to give him Entrance into that Town,
if he would come thither privately with a few Followers. Upon which he went out
one Night with 30 Soldiers, but being betrayed by his own Men, was pursued and
taken by the Garrison of Malvoisin, i. e. bad Neighbor, being a Fortress built
by the King near Banborrough, and so called by him, because it took away all
Possibility of throwing any Succors into the Castle.

IN this King's Reign, Malcolme III. King of Scotland, came to Gloucester to
the King, to commune with him about sundry Matters, that related to the Peace
of both Realms; but not being received and entertained in the pompous Manner he
expected; he returned into his own Nation in Displeasure, and immediately
getting his Army together, entered England, and destroyed the Country as far as
Alnwick Castle, which he besieged and so straightned, that it was upon the very
Point of Surrendering; a Soldier having promised to deliver up the Keys upon
the Top of his Spear, which while he pretended to do, he stabbed the King with
it. At the same Time Robert Mowbray, Earl of Northumberland, lay in Ambush for
the Return of the Scots, who upon the Loss of their King, lest the Siege, and
being going homeward fell into the Ambush, and were many of them slain, and
amongst them Edward Prince of Scotland. Thus did Providence revenge upon King
Malcolme, the many Ravages and Cruelties he had exercised upon the English, in
this King's, his Father's, and the Confessor's Reign. He was buried at
Tinmouth, and his Son by the Aid of William Rufus obtained his Throne. Magn'
Britan. Vol. III. p. 623.

AGAS, Mother to Margaret, Queen of Scotland, and Christian, her Sister, became
Nuns at Newcastle upon Tyne, after that King Malcolme was killed at Alnwick.

WILLIAM King of Scots entered into England, having many Flemings with him, and
won the Castles of Appelby and Burgh, and after he won Prudehow Castle, Robert
de Stoteville, Randolph de Mandeville, Bernard Baliol, (of whom Bernard's
Castle took it is Name) and William de Vesy, came to Newcastle, and took King
William Prisoner, and sent him to London; and King Henry took William with him
into Normandy, and imprisoned him in Roan.

KING William was afterward delivered at York for the Ransom of 4000 l. --
Soldiers of the King's going with him again toward Scotland, fought with the
Commons of the Town of Newcastle at the Very Bridge for certain Displeasures;
and there was Sir John Perith, Knt. slain, and other Esquires belonging to the
Constable and Marshal. Leland's Coll. Vol. II. p. 531, 532, 533, 550.

1136
IN the Second Year of King Stephen, many of the English out of hatred to him
secretly invited David King of Scotland, to revenge the Injuries done to the
Empress Matilda, who was his Neice, and to whose Succession both Stephen
himself, and he, had sworn in the Reign of her Father, Henry the first, upon
which David suddenly invaded the Frontiers, and as the Chronicle of Mailross
acquaints us, miserably waisted all Northumberland, and took both Carlisle and
Newcastle, which he filled with Garrisons. Against those King Stephen marched
with a powerful Army; and concerning this War, there are diverse Reports, yet
all agree, that in no long Time, a Peace was concluded, by which David still
enjoyed Carlisle, and his Son Henry the Earldom of Huntington, for which he did
Homage to King Stephen; but his Father refused to do the same, alleging, that
he had already given his Faith to the Empress Matilda. Eachard.

Oct. 25th, 1154, the King died, and was succeeded by Hen. II.

1156
THIS King made at Chester a very Advantageous Treaty with Malcolm, King of
Scotland, who yielded up to him Carlisle, Newcastle upon Tyne, and
Bamborough-Castle, resting satisfied with the Earldom of Huntington, which
Prince Henry his Father had held. Paris. Hovden. The Restitution of these
Places, says Rapin, was doubtless no more than what was just; since David,
Grandfather to Malcolme, had caused them to be adjudg'd to him by Treaties, at
a Time when Stephen minded more his own private Interest, than the public Good
of the Kingdom; but in all Appearance, Henry's great Power contributed more
than any Thing else to the bringing the King of Scotland, to this Temper.

AFTER these Things, we meet with some Accounts of this Place; for we are told,
that King Henry II. confirmed their Estates to them, and exempted them from
Tolls and Duties: It is therefore a Mistake in some, who say, the Town had no
Privileges till the Reign of King John. And besides, in the third of King
John's Reign, which was above ten Years before the Town had a Charter from that
King, the Town had great Privileges; for the Men of Newcastle upon Tyne (as is
mentioned in that Year in the great Roll of Northumberland) paid 100 Marks and
2 Palfreys: So having the Town in their Hands by the old Farm, to wit (as is
there said) 50 l. and 10 s. of Increase, for Confirmation of their Liberties,
which they had by the Charter of Henry the King's Father. De reb. Novocast.

1173
IN the Controversy between King Henry II. and his ungrateful Son Henry, Roger
Mowbray and Hugh Bigot procured William King of Scots to invade England; upon
which the Scots King laid Siege to Carlisle; but not taking it in so short a
Time as he expected, he past into Northumberland, which (as the Mailross
Chronicle inform us) he destroyed in a great Measure, and butchered Numbers of
its Inhabitants. After this he sat down before Alnwick, with a Design to take
it; in the mean Time, Robert de Stateville, Ralph Glanvel, William Vesy,
Bernard Baliol, and Ordinet Umfreville, who lay then at Newcastle with a Force
of 400 Men, heard that the Scots King besieged this Town; whereupon they
resolved to try the Chance of War, and raise the Siege; but before they could
arrive there, the Scots King despairing to take it, broke up the Siege, and
suffered his Men to plunder the open Country. Whilst they were doing this, the
English came suddenly upon them, and after a short Resistance, took the King of
Scots himself, and some others, and returned to Newcastle with a triumphant
Joy. Mag. Brit. Vol. 3. p. 624.

THE King died July 6th, and was succeeded by his Son Richard. 1189


HUGH de Pudsey Bishop of Durham, 1192
created Earl of Northumberland, the 8th of that Honor.

THIS Bishop died March the 3d. 1195


PHILIP de Pictavia, or of Poitiers, a Favorite of King Richard, 1195
was elected in his Stead, December 30th, 1195, and was this Year, May the
12th, consecrated by the Pope.

ON April the 6th, the King died, and was succeeded by his Brother John. 1199


PHILIP Bishop of Durham died; 1207
he was a great Heartner of the King against the Pope, for which the Pope
excommunicated him, together with the King. He died before he was absolved,
April 22d. This Bishop by the License of King Richard, set up a Mint at Durham
1196, and began to coin Money.

KING John commanded William King of Scots, 1209
to meet him at Newcastle, and they met each other at Boyelton. Then the King
of Scots went on, and the King of England came as far as Norham; and in going
and returning, bore his own Expenses at Alnwick. A little after they both came
to Newcastle, where they had a Conference; but they parted, without doing the
Business they came about.

THIS King in the 14th Year of his Reign, 1212
granted and confirmed to the Burgesses of Newcastle upon Tyne, and to their
Heirs, the Town and all Things belonging to it, to Fee-farm (on Condition that
they paid him and his Heirs an hundred Pounds per annum, viz. at Easter 50 l.
and the other 50 at the Feast of St. Michael) except the Rents, Prizes, and
Leases, in the Part of the said Town, which he reserved for himself. He
Praetere concessimus eis, and charta nostra confirmamus pro nobis and
haeredibus nostris centum and december solid. etc. ad dividendum and assignandum
illis qui reditus suos amiserunt occasion Fossati and novae Operationis factae
subter Castrum versus aquam, etc. Lib. Cart. p. 1.
also granted to them an hundred and ten Shillings and Sixpence of Rent of
Escheat, to be divided amongst those People who lost their Rents, on account of
the Ditch and the new Work, which was carried on under the Castle toward the
River. This was ordered to be so divided, that they were to receive of it in
Proportion to their Loss; those who had received the greater Loss, were to
receive more; and those less, who had less Damage.

THE same Charter also exempts the good Men of the Town of Newcastle from the
Power of the Sheriff or Constable, in Matters relating to themselves. He gave
them also many other Immunities and Privileges for their faithful Services to
him (as his Charter to them expresses) among which this was one, that no
Burgess of the Town of Newcastle should be seized without the said Burgh for
the Non-payment of any Dobt, unless he was the capital Debtor.

ALEXANDER King of Scots with his whole Army, on the 17th Calends of November,
began to besiege Norham-Castle; 1215
they continued the Siege 40 Days, and then returned Home re insecta.

15 KALENDS this same King took Homage of the Barons of Northumberland at
Felton, which was so resented by the King, 1216
that he came with an Army, and wasted Northumberland with Fire and Sword, and
some of the Southern Parts of Scotland. On the 3d of the Ides of January, he
burnt the Village of Werk, on the 5th he burnt Alnwick; on the 7th he burnt
Mitford and Morpeth; on the 17th Kalends of February, he burnt Roxburgh, etc.
Chron. de Mailross.

THIS Year the King died, after a very troublesome Reign, and was succeeded in
the Throne by Henry his eldest Son, who was only nine Years old when he was
crowned at Gloucester, which was on October the 3d.

Henry III.
THE Sea of Durham was long void after the Death of Philip; but Richard de
Marisco, 1217
Lord Chancellor of England, Dean of Salisbury, and Archdeacon of
Northumberland, an old Courtier, was this Year thrust into the Sea by Gualo the
Pope's Legate, and consecrated by the Archbishop of York, June 22.

1226
He died at Peterborrow-Abbey May the 1st, as he was traveling to London.

1228
RICHARD Poor, Bishop of Salisbury, was translated to Durham; he was a Man of
rare Learning in those Times, and of notable Integrity for his Life and
Conversation. Being apprehensive of his Death, he preached to his People, and
acquainted them with it for 2 Days together, and then setting his House in
order he went to his Prayers; and as Mat. Paris tells us, when he came unto
these Words, in pace in id ipsum Dormiam and Requiescam, he gave up the Ghost.
He died April 15, 1237.

1234
THE King confirmed to the Burgesses of this Town, whatsoever had been granted
to them by his Father King John. His Charter to them is dated at Westminster,
July the 2d.

1236
THE King of England and Alexander King of Scots had a Conference at Newcastle.
Chron. de Mailros.

1239
THE King by his Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, dated at
Westminster, Dec. 1, upon the Good Men of the Town of Newcastle's Supplication,
gave them License to dig Coals and Stones in the Common Soil of that Town, in
the Place called Castlefield and the Frith.

THIS King was petitioned again by the Burgesses of this Place, to grant them
all the Stones and Coals belonging to the Frith, which was granted them.

1241
NICHOLAS de Farnham made Bishop of Durham.

1244
AT this Time there were in the Court of England many seditious Persons, who
endeavored to break the Peace of the 2 Sister Kingdoms, particularly one
Walter Bisset, who infused the Poison of Dissension into the Breast of King
Henry, and the Lord Ingelram, whose Daughter Alexander King of Scots, had
married. The Chron. de Mailros.
King of England had got as far as this Town with his Army and the King of
Scots as far as Pontisland with his Army. But they came to no Battle: For at
the Instance chiefly of the Archbishop of York, and some of the Nobility, a
Peace was agreed upon at Newcastle upon Tyne, on the Eve of the Assumption.
Before we leave this, it must not be forgot what Rapin takes Notice of, that
Alexander submitted to the same Homage, that he himself and his Ancestors had
paid, and a good Understanding between the two Kings was perfectly restored.
Before they parted, a Marriage was agreed upon between Alexander's eldest Son
of the same Name with himself, and Margaret, Henry's eldest Daughter.

The King's Letter upon it.
REX omnibus, etc. Salutem. -- Noverit Universitas vestra quod Sacramentum,
quod dilectus Frater and Fidelis noster Richardus Comes Pictaviae and Cornubiae
fecit apud Novum Castrum super Tinam, pro pactionibus, inter nos and Regem
Scotiae; factis, ibidem confirmandis, idem Comes praedictum Sacramentum fecit
per praeceptum nostrum. Et ei firmiter praecipimus quod dictum sacramentum suum
inviolabiliter observet. Test Rege apud Novum Castrum super Tinam, 13 die
Augusti. Rymer Foeder. Tom. 1. p. 429.


THE Tyne Bridge and a great Part of the Town was burnt. Mat. Paris. 1248.


NICHOLAS Farnham obtained License of the Pope to resign his Bishopric. 1249.


WALTER de Kirkham made Bishop in his Room. 1250.


MAYORS and BAILIFFS.
Anno Christi. Mayors. Bailiffs. Henry III. 1251. Petrus Scott Hen. de Karle
Tho. de Merchingle Steph. de Lindesey Robt. de Galesmith This Year the Town of
Newcastle had it is first Mayor, viz. Peter Scott. The Word Mayor signifies the
chief Magistrate of a City. It was anciently called Meyr, from the British Word
Miret, i. e. Custodire to keep or protect. Richard I. Anno 1189, changed the
Bailiffs of London into a Mayor. The Bailiffs of this Town were not changed
'till this Year. The 1st Mayor, Sir Peter Scott, was a very wealthy Person. He
was the Founder, together with his Son, Sir Nicholas Scott, of the Monastery of
the Blackfriars, in this Town.



1252. The same. The same. 1253. The same. Henry de Karle Tho. de Karle Roger
de Finctor Adam Clircus
1254. Hen. Carleiol. Robert de Waletus Tho. de Carleol Nich' de Wainford
Nicholas Scott
1255. The same. Richard de Layhaye Barthol' Clircus Tho. de Karle, Jun' Walter
de Ponte
1256. The same. The same. 1257. The same. Nich. Scot Adam Clircus Tho. de
Murchingle Johan. Sant
1258. The same. The same. 1259. The same. Tho. de Karle Joan. Withowle Ada. de
Blagedene John Sant
1260. The same. The same. Walter de Kirkham Bishop of Durham died in the Month
of August. He was Bishop 11 Years, and was succeeded by Robert Stichell.
1261. The same. The same. 1262. The same. Ada. Clircus Ada. de Blagedene Nich.
Scott William Tunock
1263. The same. The same. This Year a Blazing Star appeared, and continued for
the Space of three Months. In a Charter dated the 49th of Henry III. we have an
Account that the Town's Seal was impressed upon Green-Wax, and that the
Inscription was, SVP TINAM COMMVNE SIGILLVM NOVI CASTRI. * Smith, M. S.
1264. Tho. Carleol Rob. Mitford Joannes de Flemming Hen. de Scott Hen. de
Burneton.
1265. The same. The same. 1266. The same. The same. 1267. The same. Joan.
Filius Rogeri John Flemming Hen. Scot Hen. de Burton
1268. The same The same. 1269. Nich. Scott Hen. de Karle Ada. de Blagedene
Tho. de Karle Tho. de Karle Jun.
1270. The same The same. 1271. Tho. de Karle Hug. de Merchingle Robert de
Lindsay Tho. de Karle Jun.
The King died this Year, and Prince Edw. who was just returned from the Holy
Land was crowned in August following.
1272. The same The same. Edward I. 1273. The same. Hugo de Merchingle Hen. de
Burneton Tho. de Jun' Rob. de Lindisay
Robert Stichell, Bishop of Durham died August the 4th, and was succeeded the
same Year byRobert de Insula.
1274 The same. John de Flemming Jo. Santmarays Ad. de Blagedene Rich. de
Lay-hay
Great Earthquakes, Lightnings and Thunderings with a Blazing Star, and a Comet
in the Appearance of a great Dragon, which made many Men afraid. Town's List.
1275 Joan. filius Rogeri Rob. de Mitford Joan. de Darnton
On St. Nicholas Even were great Earthquakes, Lightnings, and Thunder, with a
great Dragon and a blazing Star. No doubt, this was the same mentioned in the
year before.
1276 Tho. de Carliolo Joan. fill. Rog. Henricus Scot
1277. Tho. Karle William Tho de Karle Jun. Hen. Scot.
1278. Joan. filius Rog. Hug. de Merchingle To. de Lindesey Joannes le Flemmyng
1279. Tho. de Karle Rich. de Hay Hen. de Burneton Hugo de Merchingle Rich.
fill. Rogeri
This year, Sep. the 18th the King gave Leave to the Blackfriars (...) this
Town, to make the LittLe-gate, called the Gate of the Warden's-Close, in the
Town-Wall. Vide Chap. Town-Wall.
1280 Joan. fill. Rogeri Rich. de Lay-hay Hen. de Burneton Joan. Flemmyng Joan.
Gadrick
1281. Joan. fill. Rog. miles Robt. de Mitforde Rich. fill. Rogeri Robt. de
Lindsey Johan. le Scot.
1282. Robert' Mitford Jo. de Blamarge Joan. de Lindsaye Adam de Pampdon Joan.
le Scot
Robert de Insula, Bishop of Durham, died June the 13th, and was succeeded by
Anthony Beak, whom the Pope made Patriarch of Jerusalem.
1283 W. de Hawkwell Tho. de Witham William de Ogle Joan. de Heyton
1284. The same. Joan. Flands Joan. le Eschot Ad. de Pampeden To. de Lindesay
1285. The same. The same. The same 1286. Hen. le Scot Joan. Flemmyng Hugh de
Carliol Joan. le Scot Hen. de Le
1287. Hen. Scot. Joan de Blagedene Peter. Draper Tho. de Tindale Joan. Surreys
1288. The same. Joan. Flemming Rich. fill. Rogeri Jo. le Scot Hug. de Carle So
hot a Summer that many died with the Extremity of the Heat.

1289. The same. Tho. de Tindale Petr. Draper Hen. de Karle William de Ogle
Great hail fell in England which raised the Price of Wheat in particular from 5
d. a Bushel to 16 d. and so it increased yearly, 'till at last it was sold for
xx s. a Quarter.

1290. The same. The same. 1291. Hugo de Carliol Roger Tunnock Pet. Sampson The
King banished the Jews and gave them wherewith to bear their Charges, 'till
they were out of the Kingdom. The Number was 15009 Persons.
Hen. le Hay Alex. le --
1292. Hugo de Carliol Joan. de Surreys Wm. de Ogle. After King Edward I. had
determined the Right to the Crown of Scotland to be in John Baliol, Baliol was
crowned at Scone with the usual Formalities, and all the Scotch Lords took
their Oath to him, except Robert Bruice, who was absent. Which done, he came to
Newcastle upon Tyne, and did there, on the 26th of December, Homage to King
Edward: My Lord Edward King of England, superior Lord of the Kingdom of
Scotland; I John King of Scotland, become your Liege Man for the whole Kingdom
of Scotland, with it is Appurtenances; which Kingdom I claim, hold, and ought of
Right to hold, for me and my Heirs, Kings of Scotland, Hereditarily of you and
your Heirs, Kings of England, and shall bear Faith to you, and your Heirs,
Kings of England, of Life and Limb, and terrene Honor against all Men. Rapin.
and complete Hist. of Eng. V. 1. p. 195.

Upon this Occasion the King wrote the following Letters at this Town.

REX and superior Dominus Regni Scotiae, venerabilibus in Christo patribus, Wet
R. Sancti Andrea and Glasguen, Episcopis, and Dilectis and fidelibus suis
Johanni Common, Jacobo Senescallo Scotiae, and Briano filio Alani, nuper
Custodibus praedicti Regni Scotiae, Salutem.

Mandamus vobis quos omnes Rotulos de placitis and querelis quibuscunque coram
vobis habitis and placitatis de Tempore quo nos ad hoc deputarimus in eodem
Regno dilecto and fideli nostro J. Regi Scotiae sine dilatione Liberatis, and
hoc nullatenus omittatis. In cujus, etc.

Test Rege apud Novum Castrum super Tynam, quarto die Januarii. Rym. Foed.
Tom. 2. p. 602.

REX and superior Dominus Regni Scotiae, dilecto and Fideli suo Waltero de
Huntercumbe Custodi Terrae de Man, Salutem.

Quia de gratia nostra speciali, Reddidimus dilecto and fideli nostro Johanni
Baliolo, Regi Scotiae, talem seisinam Terrae de Man, cum pertinentiis qualem
Alexander ultimus Rex Scotiae antecessor suus, cujus Haeres ipse est, habuit de
eadem terra, die quo obiit.

Salvo jure nostro, and alterius cujuscunque and salvis nobis and Haeredibus
nostris, exitibus, Wardis Maritagiis, Releviis, Eschaetis Finibus,
Amerciamentis, arreragiis firmarum and Reddituum, quae tempore feisinae nostrae
ejusdem terrae acciderunt.

Et Salvis nobis and Haeredibus nostris cognitionibus placitorum and
Articulorum Quorumcunque de Ballivis and ministris ibidem de tempore praedicto,
una cum cognitione Transgressionis, impositae Duncano de Malesly, and
Judiciorum super iisden reddendorum executionibus.

Et similiter quod omnia judicia Seifinae nostro tempore, per Ballivos and
ministros nostros, in eadem terra reddita, teneantur, and executioni
demandentur.

Vobis Mandamus, quatenus praesato Regi seisinam terrae praedictae; cum suis
pertinentiis, in forma praedicta, liberari faciatis; salvo jure nostro and
alterius cujuscunque Test Rege apud Novum Castrum super Tynam, quinto die
Januarii.


Samp. le Cuttellns Walter de Cowgate
1293. The same. The same. 1294. Hugo de -- Robertus de Mitford Tho. de
Whickham William de Ogle Joannes de Heaton
1295. Hugo de Carleolo Joan de Surties Samps. de Carleolo William de Ogle
Walter de Cowgate
After King Edward had declared War against Scotland, he advanced to Newcastle,
and made it the chief Rendezvous of his Forces. Rapin. The Story at large is
this. King John of Scotland having in Contempt of King Edward disseised
Magdulph Earl of Fife, and imprisoned him; Magdulph complained to King Edward,
who ordered King John to appear before him; but upon this Summons he appeared
not. Upon this the King sent out a second Writ, ordering him to appear before
him 15 Days after Michaelmas, which was obeyed. Being come before him, he
seemed not so sensible of the King's Superiority, as he had been before; which
was judged a Contempt and Disobedience, and that three of his principal Castles
in Scotland should be seized. But before the Pronunciation of the Sentence, He
came before the King and his Council, and made Supplication to the King with
his own Mouth; the King receiving this, with the Advice of his Council, and the
Consent of Magdulph, granted his Prayer, and gave him Day until his Parliament
after Easter. But that Parliament was not holden that Day; however the Suit
between the King of Scots and, Magdulph was continued, and prorogued to the
next Parliament, which was summoned to be holden at St. Edmund 's-Bury, on the
Feast of St. Martin in the Winter, in the year 1295.

The Day being come, the King was present, and Magdulph strenuously prosecuted
his Plea. But the King of Scotland instead of appearing in Person, sent the
Abbot of Abirbrothock, and other Noblemen of that Kingdom, with not only
frivolous excuses, but to demand Satisfaction of King Edward for many and great
Injuries, Oppressions, and Grievances, sustained by the Scots from his
Subjects. King Edward 's Answer was, That for certain Causes he was coming
toward the North Parts, and that the King of Scots should then have sufficient
Recompense to his own Content. And then appointed him a Day to meet him at
Newcastle upon Tyne, viz. The 1st day of March next following, and ordered the
Abbot and those with him, to give Notice to their King that he should then
personally appear. In the mean Time the King had certain Intelligence that the
King of Scots with his Prelates, Earls, Barons, etc. had entered into a
Confederacy with France; so that the King of England upon this Account also,
toward the Time appointed prepared for his Journey to Newcastle, and sent
before him the Abbot of Newminster and Wellebeck to the King of Scots, to give
him Notice of the Adjournment and Time of his coming.

On the 1st of March, 1296, the King was at Newcastle, and staid there many
Days, expecting the King of Scots; he came not; the King of England removed
nearer to Scotland, and came to Bamburgh, where he also summoned him and
expected him: He neither came, nor sent to excuse himself, but returned the
Homage and Fealty for Himself and all his Kingdom to King Edward, by an
Instrument or Writing, and defied him. After this he summoned him again, but he
would not appear; nay instead of that they proceed to Arms, enter England,
plunder, burn, waste, kill and destroy wherever they come.

To obviate these Insolences, and chastise them according to their Deserts,
King Edward entered Scotland on Wednesday in Easter Week, besieged and took
Berwick Castle with a great Slaughter of the Scots; from thence he sent Part of
his Army to reduce the Castle of Dunbarr, lately revolted, which was done, by
the Death and Destruction of a great many Scots. Ten thousands, says my Author,
seven Barons, an hundred Knights, and thirty one Esquires were taken in the
Castle; the Army coming to relieve it, Twenty two thousand of them were slain.
From thence King Edward marched to Edinburgh, which Castle he took in eight
Days. From thence he marched to Sterlin, where the King of Scots, and many of
his great Men, sent to beg his Mercy. He ordered them to meet him some few Days
after at Brechin, where they submitted to his Mercy and Favor, without making
any Terms or Conditions whatever.

This done, King Edward caused the Stone used by the Kings of Scotland as a
Throne, to be brought to Westminster, appointed John Warren Earl of Surrey and
Sussex, Governor of Scotland, Hugh de Cressingham, Treasurer, and William
Ormsby, Justiciary, sent King John Baliol to the Tower of London, where he was
decently attended; and the Noblemen of Scotland, which he brought into England,
were forbidden to pass the River Trent, under forfeiture of their Heads. Brady.
Contin. Hist. Eng. p. 38.


1296 The Scots despising their Oaths of Homage and Fealty entered England,
Burning and wasting the Country, staying the People, and destroying all before
them, upon which the King sent his Summons to 200 Earls, Barons, Knights,
Abbots and others, to be ready at Newcastle upon Tyne on St. Nicholas Day, or
the 6th of December, with their Service of Horse and Arms to go with his Son
against the Scots, to suppress their Rebellion, and desend his own Kingdom.
Brad. Contin. p. 61.

This year died at Newcastle upon Tyne, William Heron, Son of John Heron, who
in the 32d Hen. III. was constituted Governor of Bamburgh Castle; and soon
after of the Castles of Pickering, and Scarborough in Yorkshire. He held a
Barony in the County of Northumberland by the Service of one Knight's Fee, as
his Ancestors had done since the Conquest.


1297 Joan. Scot Tho. de Tindale William de Ogle J. fill. Ad. de Blagdene Pet.
Draper.
1298. The same. The same. The same. The Scots under the command of William
Wallas, and Robert Bruice, laid Waste all Northumberland; then went to
Carlisle; but the Inhabitants knowing their Design before, had so fortified
themselves, that they could not Master them; then they went to Newcastle, where
they pulled down and burnt the Town. Which Compliment was returned much about
the same Time, by Robert Clifford, who at the Head of some People of the
Diocesses of Durham and Carlisle went another Way into Scotland, as far as
Roxburgh, and laid all Waste before him. Polyd. Virg. page 340.


1299. The same. The same. The same. King Edwardus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, etc.
Sciatis quod dedimus, etc. dilectis Burgensibus and probis hominibus Villae
Novi Castri super Tynam omnes terras and Tenementa cum pertinentibus in
Pampeden in Byker juxta praedictam villam Novicastri, etc. and quod praedicta
Villa Novicastri and terra and tenementa praedicta in Pampeden de caetero sint
unus Burgus, etc.
Edward the 1st in a Charter dated at York on the 20th Day of December, in the
27th Year of his Reign, granted to the Burgesses and good Men of Newcastle upon
Tyne, the Town of Pampeden, that it and Newcastle might ever after become one
Town.

There is in this Charter mention made of one Robert de Byker and Laderane his
Wife, they seem to have been People of great Figure at this Time of Day,
probably they were Lord and Lady of the Manor of Byker, and had their Town's
House in or near that Part of Pandon, called Byker Chare. They had Lands in
Pandon in Byker, which they gave to the Crown, which Lands at the Incorporation
of the two Towns just now mentioned, were annexed by the King as Part and
Parcel of Newcastle.


1300. The same. The same. The same. 1301. The same. The same. The same. 1302.
The same. The same. The same. 1303. The same. The same. The same. 1304. Peter
Graper. Nich. de Carliol Richard de Emeldon Tho. de Frismarisco Joan. Corane
1305. Peter Graper. Nich. Scott Tho. de Frismarisco Nich. de Carleol William
de Oggle
1306. Rich. de Emeldon Nich. Scott William de Oggle Adam. de Gallowaie Tho. de
Frismarisco The King died July the 7th, and in the Feb. following his Son
Edward was crowned.

Edward II. 1307. The same. -- de Acton William de -- Adam -- Tho. Frismarisco
1308. Nich. de Carliol Tho. de Frismarisco Tho. de Tindale Ad. de Dunelm This
was probably Adam of Durham, who founded the Chantry of St. Thomas the Martyr,
in St. John 's Church, in the year 1319.

1309. The same. Tho. de Frismarisco Tho. de Tindale. Gilbert de Flemming Ad.
de Dunelm Duns-Scotus died a miserable Death, being taken with an Apoplectic
Fit, and too hastily buried. He was a Northumbrian born, and took upon him at
Newcastle the Habit of St. Francis. Vile Franciscan Friars.

1310. The same. Tho. de Carliol Tho. de Tindale Gilbert Flemming Adam de
Dunelm
1311. Rich. Emeldon Th. fill. Hu. de Carliol Ad. de Dunelm Anthony Beak Bishop
of Durham dyed March the 28th and was succeeded by Richard Kellow.
Th. de Frismarisco
The Lords and other great Men of the Realm being highly provoked at the Pride
and Insolence of Pierce Gaveston, the King's great Favorite, whom he had
raised to the highest Honors and Preferments, entered into a Confederacy to
remove him from the King's Person, and banish him the Kingdom. The great Earl
of Lancaster, ( Son of Prince Edmund, and Grandson of Henry III.) was chosen
their General; who by common Consent sent to the King then atYork, petitioning
him either to deliver Earl Gaveston to them, or oblige him to quit the Kingdom,
according to the Late Ordinances. The King took small Notice of their
Supplications, left York, and repaired to Newcastle, where he continued for a
considerable Space. Upon which the Lords, with what Forces they could raise,
marched with all Speed toward Newcastle, not that they would offer Injury, or
create Trouble to their Sovereign, but only Earl Gaveston, and judge him
according to the Laws they made by common Agreement. Upon their Approach, the
King and Gaveston immediately fled to Tinmouth; and though tne Queen, then great
with Child, with Flood of Tears, begged of him not to leave her in that Place,
he without any Pity took Shipping, and salt'd with his Favorite toScarborough,
commanding the Garrison of the Castle to protect him, while he repaired into
Warwickshire. The Earl of Lancaster having possessed himself of Newcastle, sent
Messengers to the Queen atTinmouth to comfort her, faithfully promising That he
would not give over his Pursuit, 'till he had removed Gaveston from the King;
excusing himself from not coming to her in Person, left for her Sake he should
incut the King's Indignation. The Barons who had entered Newcastle the same Day
the King went from thence, had seized all that he and his Favorite had left
there, the Hurry wherein they went off not having given them leave to take any
Thing with them. In Gaveston's Baggage were sound a great many Jewels, which
for the most part belonged to the Crown, and of which an exact Inventory was
taken, that an Account might be given of them hereafter: They were accordingly
restored to the King afterGaveston was beheaded. Rapin.

It appears by several Records, that there has been an ancient Custom within
the said Town of Newcastle upon Tyne, of acknowledging Fines in the Guildhall
of the said Town, between the four Benches therein; and that the same has been
continued and usually practiced, and is now frequently done.

A Fine so acknowledged for Lands or Tenements within the said Town, being by
that Custom of the same Force and Validity as a Fine acknowledge in any other
Manner; and it is done so publicly, and before so many Persons, that the
Cognizors must be known to some of them, which allows no Opportunity for a
Fraud.

And when a Fine is to be acknowledged by a Wife, she is not only particularly
examined in open Court, but also make's Oath, that what she does is freely and
voluntarily, without any Force or Compulsion of her Husband.


1312 The same. Tho. Carliol Joan. Pampden Gilbert Fleming Hen. le Newton
1313. Rich. Emeldon Jo. fill. Hen. Scot William Burneton Tho. Frismarisco
Joannes Ellickar
The King published his Writs for Victuals to be sold at a certain Price.
1314. Tho fill. Hugo de Carliol Gilbert Flemming Hen. de Newton Joan. de
Pampeden Ad. de Dunelm
Another Quatuor Banco, in the Manner aforesaid.
1315. Rich. Emeldon Tho. Frismarisco Ad. Dunelm Rich. Acton Johan. de Pampeden
Richard Kellow, Bishop of Durham died, and was succeeded by Lewis Beamont.
1316. Rich. Emeldon Tho. de Frismarisco William de Burneton Rich. de Acton Ad.
de Dunelm
A grievous Famine and Mortality, insomuch that the Quick could hardly bury the
Dead; and a great Corruption of Cattle and Grass. Some eat the Flesh of their
own Children, and Thieves in Prison devoured those that were newly brought in,
and greedily eat them half alive.
1317. Rich. de Emeldon The same. 1318. Rich. de Emeldon Tho. Dunelm Adam de
Dunelm Gilbert Hankin Robert de Angerton
Vid. an. 1347
1319. Nich. de Carliol Tho. de Carliol Tho. de Frismarisco Roger Heckam Hen. de
Newton
About this Time flourished Hugh of Newcastle. Vid. Franciscan Friars.
1320. Nich. de Carliol John de Thorald Tho. de Tindale Rich. de Emeldon Tho. de
Frismarisco
1321. Rich. Emeldon Tho. de Frismarisco Rich. Acton Gilbert Hankin Robert
Angreton
1322. Rich. Emeldon Tho. de Frismarisco Gilbert Hankin Wm. de Burton Hugo de
Hecham Rex igitur elatus de tanta victoria, qui potius gemuisse debueret [leg.
debuerat] de tanta nobilium turba male perempta, quia tune fuit vere victus,
quando tot vicit prudentes milites, collegit exercitum fortem nimis and magnum
contra Scotos, quantus a longo tempore non est visus. Qui absque victualibus in
gravi pomposaque multitudine in borealibus adunatus partibus, pervenit ad
Regem, ad villam de Novo Castro super Tynam. Inde Rex hostiliter profectus est
in Scotiam lento gressu, permetiens quasdam parts illius provinciae, cujus
adventu praecognito, Scoti bona sua cum necessariis ad loca tutiora
comportaverunt, fugientes ad montes, nemora, vel paludes: sicque contigit, ut
cum Rex suis nullam resistentiam inveniret, nullaque victualia reperiret, sed
omnia deserta, vacuata, and vastata, perpendit, consumptis igitur victualibus,
tam per terram, quam per mare pro exercitu comportatis magna pars exercitus
fame and inaedia tabesacta protinus est extincta. Tho. Walsingham, p. 116.


The King [Edward II] being elated with so great a Victory [which he had
obtained over the Barons at Boroughbridge] who ought rather to have mourned for
the Loss of so great a Number of Nobility cruelly slain, because he himself was
then truly conquered, when he conquered so many prudent Warriors, raised a
verly large and powerful Army against the Scots, such as had not been seen for
a long Time. Which great and numerous Multitude meeting together in the
Northern Parts without Provisions, came to the King at Newcastle upon Tyne.
From thence the King proceeded with a slow March into Scotland, passing over
some Parts of that Province; whose coming theScots foreknowing, carried their
Goods and other Necessaries to the more safe Places, themselves flying to the
Mountains, Woods, or Marshes: and thus it happened, that though the King met with
no Resistance, yet finding no Provisions, but on the other Hand every Place
deserted, rifled and wasted, and having consumed the Provisions which were
brought both by Sea and Land, a great Part of his Army was utterly destroyed
through Famine and Want.



1323. Rich. de Emeldon Tho. de Frismarisco Wm. Hankin Wm. de Burneton Hugo de
Heckham
1324. Rich. de Emeldon Tho. de Frismarisco Wm. de Burneton Gilbert de Hankin
Rob. de Halliwell
1325. Rich. de Emeldon Tho. de Frismarisco Wm. de Burneton Gilbert de Hankin
Robert de Halliwell
1326. Rich. de Emeldon Tho. de Frismarisco Gilbert Hankin Wm. de Burneton Hugo
de Heckham This Year the King was deposed, and January 25 his Son Edward
crowned King; being of 14 Years of Age.

1327. Edward III. Nich. Scott, Miles. Tho. Hankin Wm. de Burneton Gilbert
Hankin Rog. de Angreton King Ed. II. was cruelly murdered in the Castle of
Berkley, by the Practices of the Queen his Wife, and the Lord Mortimer. This
first Year of the Reign of Edward the 3d, notwithstanding the Care of the Earl
Marshall at Newcastle, and the Lord Mowbray at Carlisle, the Scots passed the
River Tyne with an Army consisting of 4000 Men at Arms, Knights and Esquires,
well mounted, and 1000 others, armed after their Country Fashion, upon small
inconsiderable Horses, besides their Forces on Foot. They encamped in Stanhope
Park, in the Bishopric of Durham, against whom the King came himself in
Person; but not being able to come at them, by Reason of their Advantageous
Situation, they, after having been watched 15 or 20 Days took the Advantage of
a dark Night, and retired with Haste into their own Country. Eachard.



1328. Nich. de Carliol Th. fill. Hu. de Carliol Tho. de Frismarisco Roger
Heckham Hen de Newton King Ed. III. Pardoned and remitted to the Burgesses of
Newcastle upon Tyne, all the Debts and Arrears of Debts which they owed to him
or his Progenitors. Madox. Firm. Burg. p. 98.

1329. Rich. Emeldon Wm. de Burneton Jo. de Denton Hugo de Heckham Rob. de
Halliwell
1330. Wm. de Burneton Hugo de Hankyn To. de Halliwell Jo. Denton Waleranus
Lumley
1331. Rich. Emeldon Hugo de Hecham Rob. de Halliwell Jo. de Denton Waleranus
Lumley Carta Priorissae S. Bartholomei in Villa Novi Castri super Tinam de uno
Both in vico Fori in eadem Villa.
OMnibus hanc Cartam cyrographatam visuris vel audituris Sibilla Gategang
Priorissa Monialium S. Bartholomei de Novo Castro super Tinam and ejusdem Loci
Conventus, Salutem in Domino sempiternam. Noveritis nos unanimi consilio and
Assensu Capituli nostri dedisse, concessisse, and hac praesenti Carta nostra
cyrographata confirmasse Johanni de Wedirball Sutori de Novo Castro super Tynam
totam illam Botham nostram in Vico Fori, sicut jacet in longitudine and
latitudine inter Botham Thomaes de Carliolo ex una part and retro, and Botham
Richardi Fond ex altera, habendam and tonendam praedicto Johanni de
Wetherhall, Haeredibus and Assignatis suis de Capitalibus Dominis Feodi illius
per fervicia inde debita and de jure consuota libere, quiet, been, and in pace
in perpetuum, Reddendo inde annuatim nobis and successoribus nostris sex
solidos argenti per annum ad duos anni terminos, viz. Medietatem ad Festum
Pentecost. and aliam medietatem ad Festum S. Martini in hyeme pro omni alio
Servicio, re, and demand. Et si contingat dictam Firmam ad aliquem terminam a
retro fore non solutam per quadraginta dies, and sufficiens Districtio infra
illam Botham non inveniatur, tunc liceat Nobis and Successoribus nostris
praedictam Botham intrare and pacifice in perpetuum tenere, praesenti Scripto
extunc in nullo obstante. Et Nos vero Priorissa and Coventus praenominat. and
Successores nostri totam praedictam Botham cum omnibus suis pertinentiis and
Edificiis praedicto Johanni de Wedirhall Haeredibus sujs and Assignatis pro
Firma memorata contra omnes gentes warantizabimus and defendemus in perpetuum.
In cujus rei Testimonium parti praesetis Cartae residentis penes dictum
Johannem sigillum nostrum commune est appensum, and parti praesentis Cartae
residentis penes Nos dictus Johannes sigillum suum apposuit. His testibus
Ricardo de Emildon tunc capitali Ballivo Villae Novi Castri, Johanne de Denton,
Gilberto Hawkyn, Hugone de Hecham, and Richardo Scot Subballivis ejus.
Laurentio de Duresme, Adam Pagis, Gilberto de Duxfield, Johanne Sapakape and
aliis.

A Charter of the Prioress of St. Bartholomew's in the Town of Newcastle upon
Tyne, concerning one Booth in the Market Place in the said Town.
TO all who shall see or hear of this Charter, written with our own Hand, Sibil
Gategang Prioress of the Nuns of St. Bartholomew's in Newcastle upon Tyne, and
of the Convent of the same Place, Greeting in the Lord eternal. Know ye, that
We with the unanimous Counsel and Assent of our Chapter have given, granted,
and by this our present Charter, written with our own Hand, have confirmed to
John de Wedithall, Shoemaker of Newcastle upon Tyne, all that our Booth in the
Market Place, as it lies in length and breadth between the Booth of Thomas de
Carleol on the one Side, and the Booth of Richard Fond on the other: To have
and to hold to the said John de Wetherhall, his Heirs and Assigns, from the
Capital Lords of that Farm, by the Services then due and by Law used to be
paid, freely, quitely, well peaceably for ever. By paying to us and our
Successors every year six Shillings of Silver at two Terms of the year, namely,
an half at the Feast of Whitsuntide, and the other half at the Feast of St.
Martin in the Winter, in lieu of all other Service, Rent and Demand. And if it
shall happen that the said Fee shall at any Term be not paid in forty Days, and
a sufficient Distrain be not sound within that Booth, then it may be lawful for
us and our Successors to enter into the said Booth and for ever peaceably to
hold it, this our present Writing notwithstanding. And we the Prioress and
Convent aforesaid, and our Successors, the whole foresaid Booth with all its
Appurtenances and Buildings to the aforesaid John de Wedirhall his Heirs and
Assigns for the foresaid Fee will warrantize, and for ever defend, against all
Persons whatsoever. In Witness whereof to the Part of the present Charter
remaining with the said John, our common Seal is placed, and to the Part of the
present Charter remaining with us the said John has placed his Seal. Witnesses,
Richard de Emildon then chief Bailiff of the Town of Newcastle, John de Denton,
Gilbert Hawkyn, Hugh de Hecham, and Richard Scot, his Sub-Bailiffs. Laurence de
Duresme, Adam Pagis, Gilbert de Duxfield, John Sapakape, and others.



This Mayor was this year made Eschaetor.
1332. Rich. Emeldon Hug. de Heckham Rob. de Halliwell Jo. de Denton Waleranus
Lumley
Lewis Beaumont Bishop of Durham, died and was succeeded by Richard de Bury,
who was consecrated unto the Sea of Durham, December 19, this same Year, in the
Presence of the King, the Queen, Edward King of Scotland, 2 Archbishops, 5
Bishops, 7 Earls, and a Numbers of other noble Personages, both Men and Women.
The Year following he became Chancellor, and within two Years after that,
Treasurer of England. Godwin.

On the 23d of April, the King being at Newcastle, sent a Letter to the
Archbishop of Canterbury. Rim. Foed. Vol. 4. p. 553. The same Day he sent
another, p. ibid. On the 27th he sent from this Town a Letter to the King of
Castile p. 555. On the same Day he sent another. On the 27th he sent another to
the Earl of Flanders, about not assisting the Scots. p. 557. On the 29th he
sent another about the Conduct of the Ambassadors of the King of France. Ibid.


1333. Rich. Acton Hug. Hecham Waleranus Lumley Gilbert Hankyn Robert Halliwell
1334. Hugo Hecham Gilbert Hankyn Jo. Galloway Rich. Scott Jo. Frysma June the
12th the King sent a Letter from this Town about calling the Convocation of the
Province of York, and getting of Assistance. p. 614. On the same Day he sent
another to the Archbishop of Canterbury about carrying of the Cross, and the
same Day he also wrote another upon the same Subject to the Earl of Nottingham.
He sent several other Letters from this Town particularly one on June the 18th.

After Edward Baliol, Son of John, had by the Assistance of the English, and
Many great Successes, caused himself to be crowned King of Scotland; to
strengthen his Alliance, he first at Edinburgh, and afterward at Newcastle, in
the Year 1334, in the Presence of Many great Lords and Commons of both Nations,
did Homage to King Edward III. as to his superior Lord, and took his Oath of
Fealty, binding himself and his Heirs to hold the Kingdom of Scotland of him
and his Successors for ever; and further he granted to him the Possession of
five Counties next adjoining to the Borders. Eachard.

Ad page 92. ^ Chantery. Patronatus Cantarie B. Mariae in Ecclesia omnium
Sanctorum Villae Novi Castri super Tinam.
OMnibus hoc scriptum Visuris vel Audituris Thomas de Karliolo de Novo Castro
super Tynam, Salutem in Domino. Noveritis Me concestisse and praesenti scripto
confirmasse Petro filio Petri Draper de praedicta villa Novi Castri and
Ceciliae uxori ejus, and Haeredibus de eorundem corporibus legitime procreatis
totum jus meum Patronaturs Cantariae pertinentis ad Altar Beatae Mariae
Virginis in Ecclesia omnium Sanctorum in praedicta villa Novi Castri volens pro
me and Haeredibus meis: Concedens quod quandocunque vacaverit, tunc praedicti
Petrus and Cecilia and Haeredes de Corporibus fuis ligitime procreati dare
possint, confer, and assignare praedictam Cantariam cuidam Capellano idoneo
ad praedictum Altar Divina celebraturo in perpetuum faciendo and inveniendo ad
praedictum Altar omnia onera ad idem Altar pertinentia, sicut caetevi
Predecessores sacere consueverunt. Salvo tamen Mihi in tota vita mea jure
Praesentandi ad praedictam Cantariam, si contigerit illam vacare aliquo tempore
vitae meae. Et est sciendum quod si praedicti Petrus and Ceailia. absque
Haeredibus de corporibus suis legitime procreatis obierint, volo quod jus
Patronatus Cantariae praedictae post little decessum, exitu de ipsis, ut
praedictum est, deficiente, rectis Haeredibus meis revertatur in perpetuum. In
cujus Rei Testimonium praesenti scripto Sigillum meum apposui and Sigillum
commune Villae Novi Castri praedictae apponi procuravi his Testibus Johanne de
Denton tunc Majore Villae Novi Castri praedictae, Hugone de Halliwel, Richardo
de Acton, Roberto de Castro, Johanne de Karliolo, Johanne de Galeway, Johanne
de Frismaro, Ricardo de Galeway, and aliis. Datum apud Villam Novi Castri
praedicti 25 die Mensis Septembris, Anno Gratiae 1334. and regni Regis Edwardi
III. a conquestu octavo.

A Patronage of the Chantry of St. Mary's in the Church of All Saints in the
Town of Newcastle upon Tyne.
TO all who shall see or hear of this Writing Thomas de Karliol of Newcastle
upon Tyne, Greeting in the Lord. Know ye, that I have granted, and by the
present Writing have confirmed to Peter Son of Peter Draper, of the aforesaid
Town of Newcastle, and Cecily his Wife, and to the Heirs from their Bodies
lawfully begotten, all my Right of the Patronage of the Chantry belonging to
the Altar of the blessed Virgin Mary in the Church of All Saints in the
foresaid Town of Newcastle, for me and my Heirs: Granting that whenever it
shall be vacant, then the foresaid Peter and Cecily, and the Heir's from their
Bodies lawfully begotten, may give, conser and assign the foresaid Chantry to
some fit Chaplain, to celebrate for ever the divine Offices at the foresaid
Altar, by doing and finding at the aforesaid Altar all Burdens belonging to
the said Altar, as the other Predecessors have used to do. Saving nevertheless
to me for my whole Life, the Right of presenting to the foresaid Chantry, if it
shall happen to be vacant any Time of my Life. And be it known, that if the
aforesaid Peter and Cecily shall die without Heirs from their Bodies lawfully
begotten, I Will that the Right of Patronage of the Chantry aforesaid shall
after their Decease, their Issue failing, as is aforesaid, for ever return to
my right Heirs. In Witness whereof I have put my Seal to the present Writing,
and have caused the Common Seal of the foresaid Town of Newcastle to be put.
Witness John de Denton then Mayor of the Town of Newcastle, aforesaid, Hugh de
Haliwell, Richard de Acton, Robert de Castro, John de Karliol, John de Galeway,
John de Frismaro, Richard de Galeway, and others. Green at the Town of
Newcastle aforesaid the 25th Day of the Month of September, in the year of
Grace 1334, and the eight year of the Reign of King Edward III. from the
Conquest.



1335. Hugo de Heckam Gilbert Hankyn John de Galloway Rich. Scot Jo. de
Frismarisco June the 28th a Letter was dated at Newcastle, per ipsum Regem and
Concilium. Rim. Foeder. Vol. 4. p. 651. Another, de Orando pro Rege. Another
July the 1st. Another from this Town, Nov, 16. Two more the same Day. 20th Day
another. Another the 23d, etc. p. 677 and 678.



1336. John Denton Gilbert Hankyn Jo. Woodman Robert Shilvington William Acton
Martin Alnwick a Franciscan Friar of the Monastry of Newcastle flourished about
this Time. Vide Franciscan Friars of this Town.

1337. Nich. Scot. Robert de Shampton Barthol. Clerus Adam de Blakedon Tho. de
Karle, Jun.
1338. Hugh Hecham Richard Scot Peter Graper Robert Halliwell Rob. de Castello
A Sudden Inundation of Water at Newcastle bore down Part of the Town's New
Wall where 120 Persons were drowned: This is also said to have happened in the
year 1320. Vide Pandon Burn.
1339. Waleranus de Lumley Tho. Burneton Rich. Scott Gilbert Hankyn Rich.
Gallaway
Whilst the King was warring against Tournay, the Scots in several Bodies
entered England, where they destroyed the Country as far as Durham, returning
all safe again; saving that the Earls of March and Southerland being encountered
by the Lord Thomas Gray of Werk, Sir Robert Manners, and John Copeland, a
valliant Esquire of Northumberland, were utterly discomfited. Barns. Hist. Ed. III.
Lib. 1. chap. 17.
1340. William Felton Miles. Robert Musgrave Hug. Carliol Jo. Woodman Joan.
Emeldon
It is granted that no Goods be sold 'till a Plank be laid to the Ship, on
Forfeiture of the Goods.

King Edward III. resolving to invade Scotland both by Sea and Land, repaired
to the Frontiers, where he waited for his Fleet, which was to join him at
Newcastle. But a violent Storm, which lasted several Days, rendered his Ships
unfit for Service during the rest of that year. This unlucky Accident hindered
him from entering Scotland, being destitute of Provisions and Ammunition, which
his Fleet was bringing to him. Rapin.

Indentura inter Priorem Dunelm' and Majorem Villae Novi Castri super Tynam, de
redditu de Farne Eland.
CEst Endenture faite enter Johan Prior and le Convent de Duresme d'une part
and Johan de Denton Mair de Neof Chastell sur Tyne d'autre part tesmoigne que
nous le ditz Prior and Convent avouns resceu parmy les maines le dit John trees
Marcs and diz Soutz d'Argent du Term de la Seint Michell I'an de Grace Mill,
Treiscentz, quarant primer de une annuel recut que nostre Seigneur le Roy Nous
a grante a prendre de la Ferme de Neof Chastel sur Tyne sicome plus pleinement
est contenuz en la Chartir nostre dit Seignour le Roy de ceo fait a Nous des
queux treese Marcs and diz soutz Nous Johan. Prior and le Convent avaunt ditz
acquitouns pour nous and noz Successors l'avant dit Johan de Denton Meir and
la commune de la Ville de Noef Chastel susdit. En Tesmoignante de quelle chose
au Party de cette Endenture demorant devers le dit Meir and la commune de Noef
Chastel nous Johan Prior and le Convent de Duresme avons mis nostre commune
Seal. Et a l'autre party de meisme l'Endenture demorant devers le ditz Prior
and Convent. leo Johan de Denton Meir ai mis mon Seal. Done a Duresme
lendemayn de la dit Fest de Seint Michell l'an de Grace avaunt dit.

An Indenture between the Prior of Durham and the Mayor of Newcastle upon Tyne,
relating to the Rent due to Farne Island.
THIS Indenture made between John the Prior and the Convent of Durham on the
one Part, and John de Denton, Mayor of Newcastle upon Tyne on the other Part
witnesses, that We the said Prior and Convent, have received from the Hands of
the said John, thirteen Marcs and ten Pence of Silver for the Term of St.
Michael, of the year of Grace one Thousand, three Hundred, forty and one, for
an annual Receipt which our Sovereign the King has granted us to receive out
of the Rents of Newcastle upon Tyne, as more amply is contained in the Charter
by our said Lord the King hereupon to us granted; of which thirteen Marcs and
ten Pence We John the Prior, and the Convent aforesaid, do release for us and
our Successors, the said John de Denton the Mayor, and the Commons of the Town
of Newcastle, before named. In Witness whereof, We John the Prior and the
Convent of Durham, have affixed our common Seal to that Part of this Indenture
for the Use of the Mayor and Commons of Newcastle; and to the other Part of the
same Indenture remaining in the Hands of the said Prior and Covent, I John de
Denton Mayor, have affixed my Seal. Dated at Durham the Day succeeding the
Feast of St. Michael, the Year of Grace aforesaid.

These Charters at large shall be inserted Anno 1492, being recited in King
Henry the 7th's Inspoximus.


1341. Joan. Denton Gilbert Hankyn Jo. Galleway Thomas Burneton Petrus Graper
1342. Rob. de Halliwell William Acton Jo. de Durham Robt. Musgrave Tho.
Fleaminge David King of Scots entered Northumberland, exercising all Manner of
Hostility, and wasting and Ravaging all before him, for about 40 Miles in
length, 'till he came to Newcastle upon Tyne, which he resolved to Besiege, and
so sat down with all his Forces before it: The Captain of the Castle was the
Lord John Nevil of Hornby, a Person of great Conduct and Bravery who resolving
to give the young King of Scotland a Taste of the English Valor, as soon as
might be, commanded 200 Lances to make a Sally very early next Morning. These
dashing suddenly with great Fury into the Scottish Host, on that Part where
the Earl of Murray was (who, as they say, was chief General for the Time, the
King himself keeping private) took the Earl himself naked in Bed, dragged him
away naked out of his Tent; and so having slain several of his Men, and won
much Booty, they returned all safe into the Town with great Joy, and delivered
the Earl of Murray Prisoner to their Captain. The Earl was a chief Prince of
the Blood in Scotland, next of Quality to Prince Robert Stuart and the Earl of
Southerland; but for Valor and Conduct he yielded to None. This daring
Enterprise having alarmed the whole Camp, the Scots ran like Madmen to the
Barriers of the Town, and began a fierce Assault, which they continued a great
while with much Pertinency. But they gained little and lost much. For there
were many good Men of War within, who defended themselves with much Resolution
and Discretion, so that the Scots were at last fain to leave off their attac,
and the Hopes of suddenly revenging their Dishonor in that Place. Wherefore
that bold and lucky Attempt of the Besieged being thus well backed by a
vigorous Defense, was sufficient to persuade King David and his Council, that
to dally about Newcastle was dangerous, whereupon about Noon they decamped and
went for Durham.

As Soon as the Lord Nevil had seen for certain the Departure of the Scots, he
guessed their Design. Upon which he mounted a very swift Gelding, and coasting
wide of the Scots, rode Post Day and Night; 'till on the 5th Night he rode more
than 200 Miles to Chertsey in Surry, where at that Time King Edward lay, to
whom he exactly related all he knew of the Scots, whereupon the King made all
the Haste he could Northward.

In the mean Time the Scots assaulted Durham with all the Fury imaginable; for
they were even stark mad for the former Affront they had received at Newcastle,
when they lost the Earl of Murray so dishonourably. They reared their Engines
to cast Stones, and other Devices they had, whereby to approach the Walls under
the Shelter of certain Machines, resembling the ancient Testudo of the Romans,
or the Synospismus of the Greeks; and withal they had other Engines running
upon Wheels, wherein on Lofts as high as the Walls at least, there were
Cross-Bows and others, who kept the Besieged from the Defenses. So that after
the Assault had been continually renewed with all the Vigor imaginable, and on
the other Hand maintained with incredible Obstinacy for 6 or 7 Days, the Scots
entered the City by Force; at which Time King David in revenge of all his Losses
for so many years preceding, especially being urged beyond his Nature by the
importunate Instigations of his French Auxiliaries then with him, commanded his
Captains to put all to Fire and Sword. There were Men, Women, and Children, old
and young, Men of the Church, as Monks, Priests, Canons, and others, holy and
profane, all without Pity or Distinction put to Death, neither Churches,
Monasteries, nor Shrines, no not that of St. Cuthbert himself (after it had
reposed there for more than 300 years) could reconcile the incensed Mind of the
Soldiers to Pity; not so much as one Soul was left alive within the Place. So
implacable and unmerciful is the Sword of War when sharpened with unchristian
Cruelty.

Before the Scottish Army got back to its own Country, the King of England was
upon their Heels; but there were certain Noblemen on both Parts, who earnestly
labored to compose the Matters between the two Kings, which at last took such
Effect, that a Truce was concluded for two years. Barns. Hist, Ed. III. p. 254.



1343. Rich. Galleway William Acton Tho. Fleaminge Jo -- Robt. Musgrave
1344. Rob. Shilvington Robt. Musgrave Jo. Woodman Robt. Halliwell William de
Acton
1345. Robt. de Foghale William de Acton Jo. de Frismarisco Hugo de Carliol
Robt. de Pentrith Richard de Bury, Bishop of Durham died at Auckland, April the
24th, and was succeeded by Thomas Hatfield, Secretary to the King, who was
consecrated July the 10th, this same Year.

1346. Robt. de Foghill William de Acton Jo. de Frismariso Hug. de Carliol
Robt. de Pentrith
1347. Peter Graper William Acton, sen' Jo. Emeldon Hugo de Angreton Hugo de
Carliol When King Edward III. was abroad in France, warring against that
Kingdom, David King of Scotland took that Opportunity to ravage the Borders of
England, and penetrated as far as Durham, which he took, sacked and burnt; but
the English coming shortly after to an Engagement with him, he had the
Mortification not only to lose the Day, but also to be taken a Prisoner. Rapin.
The Scotch King, though he had two Spears hanging in his Body, his Leg almost
incurably wounded, and his Sword beat out of his Hand, disdaining Captivity,
provoked the English by opprobrious Language to kill him; and when John
Copeland, Governor of Roxborough Castle, advised him to yield, he struck him
on the Fate with his Gauntlet so fiercely that he knocked out two of his Teeth.
But however Copeland Conveyed him away out of the Field a Prisoner. Upon his
refusing to deliver him up to the Queen, (who stayed at Newcastle during the
Battle) the King sent for him to Calais, where he excused his Refusal so
handsomely, that the King sent him back with a Reward of 500 l. A Year in Land,
where he himself should choose it near his own Dwelling, and made him a Knight
Banneret. Act. Publ. V. p. 542. as quoted by Tyndal, Rapin 's Translator.

This Battle is said by Hollingshead in his History of Scotland, p. 241, to
have been sought October the 17th, the year before.

The following Letter I am obliged to Mr. Alderman REAY of this Town for.
SIR,
PUrsuant to your Request and my Promise I Have been with Mr. Harle, and have met
with the Passage you mentioned relating to Newcastle, in the 119th Page of the
first Vol. of Ha^luyt's English Voyages, etc. printed at London, 1599, Fol. by
which it appears that the Town of Newcastle assisted K. Edw. III. with 17 Ships
and 314 Men against the French; a most authentic and convincing Proof of the
great Naval Strength of that Town in those Days.

Another earlier Instance of its being a Town famous for Trade in Edward II 's
Time, is to be found in p. 142. and 143 of the said Vol. where we meet with an
Order of the King and Council for the Staple to be holden at a certain Place.
This Order (relating to the Exportation of Wool) is directed to the Collectors
of Custom for Wool and Woolen Fells in the Port of London. The Title of it runs
thus, De Stapula tenenda in certo loco ordinatio, Anno 13, Edwardi secundi; and
the Order itself thus, Rex collectoribus custumae canarum and pellium canutarum
in portu London salutem, ending with these Words; Test Rege apud Doveram
decimo octavo die Junii per ipsum Regem and consilium; and immediately after is
subjoined as follows; Et postmodum per breve de privato sigillo eodem modo
mandatum est collectoribus Custumae praedictae in Portubus subscriptis,
videlicet. In Portu Villae Southampton. In Portu Villae Weymouth In Portu
Villae Sancti Botolphi In Portu Villae Kingstone super Hull In Portu Villae de
Novo Castro In Portu Villae de magna Iernemutha In Portu Villae de Lenne In
Portu Villae de Gypwico
where you see Newcastle is numbered among the greatest PORTS of the Nation at
that Time.

It would be as fatiguing as it is unnecessary to transcribe at length the said
Order, which must therefore be omitted as well as the long Roll of the English
Fleet contained in the 118, 119 and 120 Pages of the said Book; I shall only
tell you that the Account of the Fleet is thus inscribed.

The Roll of the huge Fleet of Edward III. before Calice, extant in the King's
great Wardrobe in London, whereby the wonderful Strength of England by Sea in
those Days may appear.

This List is divided into the South and North Fleet, the Beginning and End of
both which I Will give you in the Author's own Words. The South Fleet
The King's Ships 25 The King's Mariners 419 London Ships 25 London Mariners
662 etc. Sum of the South Fleet Ships 493 Sum of the South Fleet Mariners 9630
The North Fleet.
Bamburgh Ships 1 Bamburgh Mariners 9 Newcastle Ships 17 Newcastle Mariners 314
etc. Sum of the North Fleet Ships 217 Sum of the North Fleet Mariners 4521


I cannot leave this List, without observing to the great Honor of that loyal
and brave Town, that Newcastle is not exceeded in its Number of Ships by any
one of all the 33 Ports named in the said Enrolment of the North Fleet.
Yarmouth alone excepted. And how can it possibly detract from the Glory of
Newcastle, to be then outdone by Yarmouth, when (which is very surprising)
that same great Yarmouth, in Norfolk, fitted out a vastly greater Number both
of Men and Ships, than London itself, the great Metropolis of the Kingdom,
furnished his Grace with for the memorable Siege of Calais, where he (I mean
King Edward III.) and his Son the Black Prince acquired such Renown to the
English, as will render themselves and the English Nation famous to succeeding
Ages.

There is one Thing more I must take Notice of before I conclude, which is,
that the aforementioned Fleet Roll has no Date. I think it was about the Year
1347, when the English laid Siege to Calais, though I cannot certainly tell, not
having an English History by me at present. This is all I can find upon a
cursory View of the Book that has any Relation to Newcastle, begging Leave, in
the mean Time, to subscribe myself,

SIR, Your very much obliged Humble Servant, JOHN WILSON.
Alnwick, Dec. 15, 1731.



An' Christi. Mayors. Bailiffs. 1348. Peter Graper William de Acton Hugo de
Carliol Hug. de Angreton Jo. de Emeldon
1349. The same. The same. The same. Extracta e Testamento Johannis Cragg de
Novo Castro die Martis proximo post Festum Nativitat. B. Johannis Baptistae.
Do and Lego, 1. CORPUS meum ad sepeliendum in Ecclesia omnium Sanctorum infra
novam Cancellam. 2. In cera circa Corpus meum comburenda, sex Solidos. Do and
Lego, 3. Summo Altari Ecclesiae B. Nicholai, pro Decimis and Oblationibus meis
non been solutis. Sex Solidos. 4. Fabricae Ecclesiae praedictae Omnium
Sanctorum, viginti Solidos. 5. Capellanis ad exequias meas venientibus, quatuor
Solidos. 6. Ad omnes ordines Fratrum de praedicta Villa Novi Castri, tresdecim
Solidos and quatuor Denarios per aequales portiones. 7. Cuidam Capellano idoneo
pro Anima mea apud praedictam Ecclesiam omnium Sanctorum celebraturo duos
Annos, december Marcas. 8. Cuidam hujusmodi eunti apud S. Jacobum, quinque Marcas.
9. Capellano Parochiali ejusdem Ecclesiae Omnium Sanctorum tres Solidos and
quatuor Denarios. 10. Clerico ejusdem Ecclesiae, unum Solidum.
An Extract from the Will of John Cragg of Newcastle on Tuesday next after the
Feast of the Nativity of St. John the Baptist.
I Give and Bequeath, 1. My Body to be buried in the Church of All Saints,
beneath the new Chancel. 2. In Wax to be burnt about my Body, six Shillings. 3.
To the High Altar of the Church of St. Nicholas, for my Tithes and Oblations
not duly paid, six Shillings. 4. To the Fabric of the aforesaid Church of
All Saints, twenty Shillings. 5. To the Chaplains going to my Funeral, four
Shillings. 6. To all Orders of the Brethren of the foresaid Town of Newcastle,
thirteen Shillings and four Pence, by equal Portions. 7. To a sit Chaplain to
celebrate for my Soul in the aforesaid Church of All Saints two years, ten
Marks. 8. To another going before St. James, five Marks. 9. To the Parochial
Chaplain of the said Church of All Saints, three Shillings and four Pence. 10.
To the Clerk of the said Church, one Shilling.

An' Christi. Mayors. Bailiffs. 1350. Peter Graper William de Acton Hugo de
Carleol Hug. de Angreton Jo. de Emeldon Assisa per Priorem Dunelm' contra
majorem and Ballivos Novi Castri pro redditu annuo Domus de Farneland.
ASSISA capta apud Novum Castrum super Tynam coram Thoma de Fencotes, Thoma de
Seton, and Rogero de Blaykeston, Justiciariis Domini Regis ad Assisas in
Comitatu Northumbriae capiendas Assignatis die Mercurii in tertia Septimana
Quandragesimae Anno Regni Regis Edwardi Angliae tertii, a Conquestu vicesimo
quinto, and Regni sui Franciae, duodecimo, virtute cujusdam Commissionis Eis
and Willielmo Basset directae, praesentia ipsius Wilielmi non expectata,
Virtute cujusdam brevis Domini Regis, Quod si non omnes, etc.

Assisa venerunt recognoscere si Petrus Graper Major Villae Novi Castri super
Tynam, Johannes de Emeldon, Hugo de Angerton, Hugo de Carlel, and Willielmus de
Acton Bailivi ejusdem Villae Novi Castri injuste disseisierint Johannem Priorem
Dunelm. de libero Tenemento suo in Villa Novi Castri super Tynam post
possessionem, etc. Et unde quaeritur quod disseisierunt Eum de tresdecim Marcis
and december solidatis redditus cum pertinentiis, etc.

Et Petrus and alii non venerunt: Et Vicecomes modo mandavit quod praedicti
Hugo de Angerton, and Hugo de Carlel mortui sunt: Et praedictus Petrus
attachiatus est per Henricum Glassen Wright, and Thomam de Newbigging; and
praedictus Johannes de Emeldon per Thomam de Newbigging and Thomam Stele, and
praedictus Willielmus per Thomam de Newbegging and Henricum Glassen Wright:
Ideo ipsi in misericordia, and praedicta Assisa capiatur versus Eos per
Desaltam, etc.

Et super hoc praedictus Prior per Attornatum suum dicit, quod Dominus Rex nunc
Regnans, per Cartam suam, quod ex Testimonio Illorum quibus siduciam adhibuit,
accepit quod Dominus Edwardus nuper Rex Angliae Pater suus, in vita sua verbo
tenus concessit Monachis in Insula de Farneland juxta Bamburgh, quae quidem
Insula Cella est Prioratus Dunelm. commorantibus december quarteria Frumenti and
duo dolia vini percipienda singulis annis per manus Majoris and Ballivorum de
Novo Castro super Tynam de Elemosina ipsius Patris sui in perpetuum. Et quod
concessio illa in Vita ipsius Patris sui non suit Executioni debite demandata,
nee Literis suis aliquibus roborata. Idem Dominus Rex nunc pro salute Animae
ipsius Patris, volens Voluntatem suam in hac part adimiplere and continuare,
conceslit Monachis praedictis in Recompensationem Frumenti and vini
praedictorum tresdecim Marcas and december solidos percipiendos singulis annis ad
Festum S. Michaelis per manus Majoris and Ballivorum dictae Villae de Novo
Castro super Tynam, qui pro tempore suerint de Firma ejusdem Villae, viz,
quinque Mar^^s pro quolibet Dolio Vini, and quinque Solidos pro quolibet
quarterio Frumenti, habendos eisdem Monachis and Successoribus suis Monachis in
Insula praedicta commorantibus de Elemosina sua in perpetuum; Et prosert hic in
Curia praedictam Cartam Domini Regis nunc quae hoc testatur, etc. and perit
Assisam: Inde capiatur Assisa, etc.

Recognitione Assisae praedictae dicunt super Sacramentum suum quod praedictus
Prior suit seisitus de praedicto redditu cum pertinentiis, quousque praedicti
Petrus and alii ipsum inde disseifierunt ad damnum ipsius Prioris quadraginta
and unius Librarum, tresdecim Solidorum, and quatuor Denariorum. Ideo
Consequens est quod praedictus Prior recuperet inde seisinam suam versus Eos
per Visum Recognitionis Assisae praedictae; and damna sua praedicta; and iidem
Petrus and alii in injuria. Et Vicecomes non omittetur propter Libertatem
Villae praedictae eo quod alias, etc.

An Assise by the Prior of Durham against the Mayor and Bailiffs of Newcastle,
for the yearly Rent of the House of Farneland.
AN Assise taken at Newcastle upon Tyne before Thomas de Fencotes, Thomas de
Seton, and Roger de Blaykeston, Justices of our Lord the King, at the Assizes
to be held in the County of Northumberland, assigned on Wednesday in the third
Week of Lent, in the twenty fifth year of the Reign of King Edward in England,
the Third from the Conquest, and the twelfth of his Reign in France, by virtue
of a certain Commission directed to them and William Bassep; the Presence of
the said William not being expected, by virtue of a certain Brief of our Lord
the King, But of not all, etc.

The Assizes came to consider and know, if Peter Graper, Mayor, of the Town of
Newcastle upon Tyne, John de Emeldon, Hugh de Angerton, Hugh de Carlel, and
William de Acton Bailiffs of the said Town of Newcastle had unjustly disseised
John Prior of Durham from his free Tenement in the said Town of Newcastle upon
Tyne after Possession, etc. And it is enquired why they disseised him from
thirteen Marks and ten Shillings, the Rent with the Appurtenances, etc.

And Peter and the others did not come; And the Sheriff declared, that the
foresaid Hugh de Angerton, and Hugh de Carlel are dead: And the foresaid Peter
is attached by Henry Glassen Wright, and Thomas de Newbigging; and the foresaid
John de Emeldon by Thomas de Newbigging and Thomas Stele; and the foresaid
Wiliam by Thomas de Newbigging and Henry Glassen Wright: Therefore they are in
Mercy, and let the aforesaid Assise be taken against them by Default, etc.

And upon this the aforesaid Prior by his Attorney says, That our Lord the King
now reigning, by his Charter, because he heard from the Testimony of those whom
he credits; That our Lord Edward, lately King of England, his Father, had in
his Life, by Word of Mouth, granted to the Monks dwelling in the Island of
Farneland near Bamburgh, which Island is a Cell of the Priory of Durham, ten
Quarters of Corn and two Tuns of Wine, to be received every Year by the Hands
of the Mayor and Bailiffs of Newcastle upon Tyne, as an Alms of his said Father
for ever. And that this Grant was not duly put in Execution in the Lifetime of
his said Father, nor confirmed by any of his Letters. Our present Lord the King
for the Health of the Soul of his Father, being willing to fulfill and continue
his Will in this Part, has granted to the aforesaid Monks as a Compensation of
the aforesaid Corn and Wine, thirteen Marks and ten Shillings, to be received
every year at the Feast of St. Michael by the Hands of the Mayor and Bailiffs
of the said Town of Newcastle upon Tyne then being, from the Fee of the said
Town, namely, Five Marks for every Tun of Wine, and five Shillings for every
Quarter of Corn, to be paid to the said Monks and their Successors dwelling in
the foresaid Island as his Alms for ever; and he produces in Court the foresaid
Charter of our present Lord the King, which testifies this, etc. And he prays
Assise: Let an Assise therefore be taken, etc.

By a Recognition of the aforesaid Assise, they say upon their Oath, that the
aforesaid Prior was seized of the foresaid Rent with the Appurtenances, 'till
the foresaid Peter and others disseised him, to the Loss of the said Prior
forty one Pounds, thirteen Shillings and four Pence. It follows therefore that
the aforesaid Prior may thence recover his Seisine against those by a Sight of
the Recognition of the Assise aforesaid; and his Losses aforesaid; and the said
Peter and others are in the Injury. And let not the Sheriff be omitted because
of the Liberty of the aforesaid Town because that otherwise, etc.



An' Christi. Mayors. Bailiffs. 1351. Gilbert Duxfield William Acton, sen Jo.
del Chambers Jo. Emeldon
This John de Camera here mentioned, and so often below, together with Gilbert
Duxfield the Mayor of the year before, are undoubtedly the very people
mentioned in that famous Foreign Indulgence whose Original is in St. Nicholas
Vestry, the Substance of which I have given in our Account of St. Nicholas
Churh.
1352. William Strother Richard Scot Jo. de Camera Jo. Emeldon William Acton,
jun.
King Edward being displeased* with the Flemings, who had withdrawn from his
Alliance and married their Earl (who was contracted to one of his Daugthers) to
a Daughter of the Duke of Brabant, removed the Staple of English Wool, which
had been set up in their Country, into England, to their great Damage, but to
as great Benefit of the English. Newcastle was then made a Staple Town; the
rest being Westminster, Chichester, Canterbury, Lincoln, Warwick, York, Exeter,
Caermarthen, Bristol, and Hull. Echard, Rapin. N. B. Staple signifies this or
that Town, whither the Merchants of England were by Act of Parliament to carry
their Wool, Cloth, Lead and Tin, for the Selling of them by the Great. What
were the Staple Commodities of this Realm may be seen in the Statue of of 14
Rich. II. c. 1. as Wool, Leather, Wood, Fells, Lead, Tin, etc.

Joan Queen of Scots, having got Leave of King Edward her Brother to visit her
Husband, David Bruce King of Scots, then King Edward's Prisoner, came into
England with a moderate Attendance; and upon the Mediation of Joan the Queen,
the Prayer of David the Prisoner, the Prelates, great Men, and Commons of
Scotland, the King granted to treat with them about his Deliverance. And
thereupon sent to Newcastle upon Tyne the Bishop of Duresme, William de Bohun
Earl of Northampton and Constable of England, Gilbert d' Umfreyvill Earl of
Anegos, the Lords de Porcy and de Nevill, William Baron of Greystock and Henry
le Scoop, his Commissioners, with full Power to treat with the Bishop of St.
Andrews and Brechin, Patrick of Dunbar, Earl of the March of Scotland, the
Abbot of Dumsermelin, and Master Walter de Moffet Archdeacon of Leonosse,
Commissioners for Scotland. Brady's Contin. p. 253.


1353. Peter Graper John de Emeldon Jo. de Chamber William de Strother Wm. de
Acton, jun.
1354. The same. The same. The same. King Edward appointed Commissioners to
treat with the Scots concerning David's Liberty. This Negotiation, which went
on slowly, ended at length in a Treaty which was concluded at Newcastle, July
the 13th, whereby Edward obliged himself to set David free for a Ransom of
Fourscore thousand Marks of Silver. This Treaty was not executed 'till 3 years
after, viz. 1357. Rapin, Act. Publ. V. p. 793, 799.


1355. Wm. del Strother William Acton John Emeldon Richard Scott. Jo. Chamber
The King having received news that the Scots had surprised the Town of Berwick,
marched in the latter End of November with a great Army toward Scotland, and
kept his Christmas at Newcastle upon Tyne. Brad. Contin. 256.

1356. The same. Nich. Barrot 1357. The same. Jo. Emeldon Nich. Barrot Jo. de
Camera Nich. Acton. Castle-Field and Castle-moor confirmed to the Town of
Newcastle. Vide our Account of these Places.

1358. The same. Jo. de Emeldon Jo. del Chambers Nich. Barrot Will de Acton
1359. The same. Jo. de Camera Will. de Acton Jo. de Emeldon Nich.
1360. Wm. de Strother. Jo. de Camera Wm. de Acton Jo. de Emeldon Nich. --
1361. Jo. Chambers. Jo. Emeldon Jo. de Ruffen Jo. Stanhope Elias de Frawhitt A
great Dearth and Pestilence in England.

1362. The same. Jo. de Emeldon Elias de Frawhitt Jo. de Stanhope Robert de
Duxfield This Year the King gave to this Town a Grant for 10 years of certain
Duties upon Goods and Merchandises for Repiaring of Bridges.

1363. Rob. Angerton Jo. Emeldon Jo. Stanhope Wm. Acton Jo. Byker A Frost in
England from the midst of September to the Month of April.

1364. The same Wm. de Acton, Jo. Ruffan Jo. de Stanhope
1365. Rich. de Stanhope Wm. de Acton Jo. de Emeldon Jo. Stanhope Jo. de Ruffan
1366. Wm. de Acton Jo. de Stanhope Tho. Graper Jo. de Ruffan Jo. de Byker
1367. The same. Jo. de Emeldon Jo. de Preston Jo. de Byker Jo. Houghell
1368. The same. The same. The same. 1369. Rob. Angreton Tho. Graper Jo.
Bulkham Jo. Ruffan Steph. Whitgrave E Testamento Nicholai Coke Villae Novi
Castri super Tynam dato tertio die September.
Do and Lego, 1. FRatribus Carmelitanis Novi Castri sexaginta Petras Ferri. 2.
Fratribus Praedicatoribus ejusdem Villae, viginti sex solidos, and octo
denarios. 3. Fratribus minoribus viginti solidos. 4. Fratribus Augustininis
viginti solidos. 5. Summo Altari B. Nicholai viginti solidos. 6. Altari B.
Mariae Ecclesiae praedictae sex solidos, and octo denarios. 7. Fabricae
Capellae S. Johannis tresdecim solidos and quatuor denarios. 8. Fabricae
Fenestrae in Choro S. Nicholai viginti solidos. 9. Capellanis ad celebrandum
pro anima mea in Ecclesia S. Nicholai triginta Libras.
From the Will of Nicholas Coke of the Town of Newcastle upon Tyne, dated the
third Day of September.
I give and bequeath, 1. TO the Carmelite Brethren of Newcastle Sixty Stone of
Iron. 2. To the preaching Brethren of the said Town, twenty six Shillings and
eight Pence. 3. To the Minor Brethren twenty Shillings. 4. To the Augustine
Brethren twenty Shillings. 5. To the High Altar of St. Nicholas twenty
Shillings. 6. To the Alar of St. Mary 's in the foresaid Church six Shillings
and four Pence. 7. To the Fabric of the Chapel of St. John thirteen Shillings
and four Pence. 8. To the Fabric of the Window in the Choir of St. Nicholas
Twenty Shillings. 9. To the Chaplains to celebrate for my Soul in the Church of
St. Nicholas thirty Pounds.


About this year flourished Nicholas Durham, born in the Northern Parts,
Carmelite-Fryer at Newcastle, and Doctor of Divinity, a learned and constant
Opposer of the Errors of John Wickleif. He writ on the Master of the
Sentences; Originals of Doctors; Resolutions of Questions; and against Wicklief
's Articles. Steph. Addit. 2 Vol. in Carm.


1360. The same. The same. The same. 1371. The same. The same. The same. Carta
Hugonis Makson de Novo Castro and Christianae Uxoris ejus de uno Messuagio in
Ballio boreali Dunelmi facta Ricardo de Castro Bernardi Clerico.
OMnibus ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint Hugo Makson de Novo Castro
super Tynam and Christiana Uxor ejus Salutem in Domino sempiternam. Noveritis
Nos dedisse, Concessisse, and hac praesenti Carra nostra confirmasse Ricardo de
Castro Bernardi Clerico unum Messuagium cum Pertinentiis in Ballio boreali
Dunelm. sicut jacet inter Tenementum Magistri Hospitalis de Kepyer ex una part
and Tenementum quondam Gilberti Clerici ex altera, Habendum and tenendum
praedictum Messuagium cum pertinentiis praedicto Ricardo, Haeredibus, and
Assignatis suis de Capitalibus Dominis Feodi illius, per servitia debita and
consueta in perpetuum. Et nos vero praedicti Hugo and Cristina Haeredes and
Assignati nostri praedictum Messuagium cum pertinentiis praedicto Ricardo,
Haeredibus and Assignatis suis contra omnes gentes warantizabimus and in
perpetuum defendemus. In cujus Rei Testimonium huic praesenti Cartae sigilla
nostra apposuimus his Testibus Adamo Tabeler Capellano, Willielmo del Orchard
Clerico, etc. Datum Dunelmi die Mercurii proximo post Festum S. Luciae Virginis
Anno Domini 1371.

A Charter of Hugh Makson of Newcastle and Christian his Wife, concerning one
Message in the North Baily of Durham, made to Richard of Bernard's Castle,
Clerk.
TO all to whom these present Letters shall come, Hugh Makson of Newcastle upon
Tyne, and Christian his Wife, Greeting in the Lord eternal. Know ye that We
have given, granted, and by this our present Charter have confirmed to Richard
of Bernard's Castle, Clerk, one Message with its Appurtenances in the North
Baily of Durham, as it lies between the Tenement of the Master of the Hospital
of Kepyer on the one Part, and the Tenement formerly of Gilbert Clerk on the
other; To have and to hold the aforesaid Message with it is Appurtenances to
the aforesaid Richard his Heirs and Assigns from the Capital Lords of that Fee,
by the due and usual Services for ever. And We the aforesaid Hugh and
Christian, our Heirs and Assigns, the foresaid Message with its Appurtenances,
to the foresaid Richard, his Heirs and Assigns, will warrant and for ever
defend against all Mankind. In Witness whereof we have placed our Seals to this
present Charter. Witnesses Adam Tabeler Chaplain, William del Orchard Clerk,
etc. Given at Durham on Wednesday next after the Feast of St. Lucy the Virgin,
in the year of our Lord 1371.


1372. The same. The same. 1373. The same. The same. 1374. The same. The same.
1375. William Scott Jo. Stanhope Tho. Graper Jo. de Ruffan Jo. de Byker
1376. Jo. Bulgham Laurence Acton Tho. de Horton Robt. Plumber William Durham
The King dyed June 21 and Richard II. was crowned in July following, when he
was 9 years old.

1377. The same. The same. Richard II. King Rich. in the 1st year of his Reign
1378, confirmed to this Town all the Grants and Charters of the Kings his
Predecessors.


1378. The same The same. 1379. Rich. Stanhope. Adam de York Thomas de Morden
Will. Bishopsdale Robert Oliver One John Coke of this Town died at Norham, and
was buried at St. Nicholas, who left beside Legacies to his Relations, a
Quantity of Iron to the Carmelites of this Town; to the Blackfriars 1 l. 6 s.
8 d. to the Franciscan Friars 20 Shillings, to the Augustines 20 Shillings; to
the High Altar of St. Nicholas 20 Shillings; to the Altar of St. Mary in the
same Church, 6 Shillings and 8 Pence; to the Building of the Window in the
Quire of St. Nicholas 20 Shillings. He left also to the Chaplains to celebrate
for his Soul in this same Church: He left also to the Building of the Bridge at
Warkwith, in Case it was built within two years after the Making of his Will,
20 Marks; and in Case it was not, he left them to the Bridge of Bolbec. Over
and above what he left his Daughter, Agnes, he bequeathed to her his
Silver-Cup; to William of Durham his Girdle and 20 Shillings; and to a Number
of poor Men 27 Dozen of Russet, etc.



1380. The same. The same Relaxatio Katherinae Fossour de Terris and Tenementis
Will. Sire in Qwicham, Gatesheved, and Heberne.
OMnibus ad quos praesens scriptum pervenerit Katherina quae sui uxor Johannis
de Bischopdale Salutem in Domino. Noveritis Me remisisse, relaxasse, and omnino
de Me and Haeredibus meis in perperuum quietum clumasse Dominis Wilhelmo de
Lanchester Vicario S. Oswaldi in Dunelmo and Welhelmo de Graystanes Capellano,
Haeredibus and Assignatis suis totum Jus and Clameum quod habui, habeo seu
aliquo modo habere potero in omnibus terris and tenementis, Redditibus, and
Servitiis, cum suis pertinentiis, ac in Reversionibus quibuscunque quae quondam
fuerunt Wilhelmi Sire in Gatesheved Whycham and Heberne, ita videlicet quod nec
ego praedicta Katherina, nec Haeredes mei, nec aliquis alius nomine meo in
praedictis terris and Tenementis Redditibus and Servitiis, ac Reversionibus cum
suis Pertinentiis aliquod Jus vel Clameum de caetero exigere vel vendicare
poterimus, sed ab omni Juris Action simus exclusi in perpetuum per praesentes.
Et Ego vero Katherina and Haeredes mei omnia praedicta, terras and Tenementa,
Redditus and Servitia, cum Reversionibus and suis Pertinentiis universis
praesatis Wilhelmo and Wilhelmo, Haeredibus and Assignatis suis contra omnes
gentes warantizabimus, acquietabimus, and in perpetuum defendemus. In cujus rei
Testimonium huie scripto Sigillum meum apposui his testibus Roberto Oliver, de
Novo Castro, Johanne de Elvet de Dunelm. Gilberto silio ejus, Hugone de
Corbrigg, and aliis. Datum apud Novum Castrum vicesimo octavo die Augusti, anno
Domini 1380.

A Release of Katharine Fossour from the Lands and Tenements of William Sire in
Qwicham, Gatesheved, and Heberne.
TO all to whom this present Waiting shall come, I Katherine, who was the Wife
of John de Bischopdale, Greeting in the Lord. Know ye, that I have remitted,
released, and altogether from me and my Heirs have for ever quitted Claim to
the Masters William de Lanchester Vicar of St. Oswald's in Durham, and William
de Graystanes Chaplain, to their Heirs and Assigns, all the Right and Claim,
which I had, have, or any way may have in all the Lands and Tenements, Rents
and Services, with their Appurtenances, and in whatever Reversions which
formerly were of William Sire, in Gatesheved Whycham and Heberne. namely so,
that neither I the foresaid Katherine, nor my Heirs, nor any other in my Name,
may for the Future demand or challenge any Right or Claim in the foresaid Lands
and Tenements, Rents and Services, and Reversions with their Appurtenances, but
may for ever be excluded from all Action of Law by these Presents. And I
Katherine and my Heirs all the foresaid Lands and Tenements, Rents and
Services, with the Reversions and all their Appurtenances to the aforesaid
William and William,t heir Heirs and Assigns will warrant, acquit, and for ever
defend against all Mankind. In Witness whereof I have placed my Seal to this
Writing. Witnesses, Robert Oliver of Newcastle, John de Elvet of Durham,
Gilbert his Son, Hugh de Corbrigg, and others. Given at Newcastle the Twenty
Fighth Day of August, in the Year of our Lord 1380.


An' Christi. Mayors. Bailiffs. Thomas Hatfield, Bishop of Durham died in the
beginning of May, and was suceeded by John Fordham, who was consecrated to this
See, May the 29th, this same year, and was enthroned Sept. 1382.
1381. The same. The same. There was a general Earthquake, of the Effects of
which the Waters did partake, insomuch that it made the Ships in the Havens to
totter.
1382. Will. Bishopsdale Lurentius Acton Jo. Heworth Wm. Johnson Jo. Thornton
1383. The same. The same. The same. The Bishop of Durham was hindered from
meddling with any Thing to the River Tyne.
1384. The same. The same. 1385. The same. The same. The same. 1386. Adam
Bulkham Laurentuis Acton Sampson Harding Rob. de Raynton Jo. de Horton
1387. The same. The same. There happened this year at Otterbourne in
Northumberland, a slout Engagement between the Scots and English, Victory 3 or
4 Times changing Sides, and at last fixing with the Scots, (for Henry Percy for
his youthful forwardness By-named Hotspur) who Commanded the English, was
himself taken Prisoner, and lost fifteen hundred of his Men; and William
Douglas the Scotch General fell with the greatest Part of his Army, so that
never was there a greater Instance of the Martial Prowess of both Nations.
Camb. Brit. p. 850.

The Annotator upon this has the following Words, We may be allowed to remark
here what a Person of great Honor and Skill in our English, Antiquities has
held before, that the old Ballad of Chevy Chase, (Sir Philip Sidney's Delight)
has no other Foundation for its Story, save only the Battle of Otterburne.
There was never any other Percy engaged against a Douglas, but this Henry, who
was indeed Heir to the Earl of Northumberland, but never lived to enjoy the
Honor himself. Sir John Froysart (who lived at that Time) gives the fullest
Account of the Darcl^, but says ^rova^ Bard James Douglas who was the Scottish
General. See Eachard, Rapin.

John Nevil, Lord Raby, died at Newcastle, possessed of the Barony and Castle
of Bywell; Walter Skirlaw, Bishop of Wells was removed from thence to Durham,
in the room of John Fordham, in the Month of September.


1388. The same. The same. 1389. The same. The same. This Year was granted to
this Mayor, that he and his Successors should have a Sword born before them.
1390. Wm. Bishopdale The same. 1391. The same. Laurentius Acton William
Johnson John de Aukland Hen. de Carliol
1392. The same. The same. 1393. The same. The same. 1394. The same. The same.
1395. The same. The same. 1396. Sampson Harding The same. 1397. The same. The
same. 1398. The same. The same. The King was sent to the Tower and deposed. He
resigned his Crown on Friday September 29th, and Henry Duke of Lancaster was
proclaimed King by the Name of Henry 4th.
1399. The same. The same. 1400. Roger Thorton The same Henry IV. This King,
May 23. in the the 1st Year of his Reign, was humbly petitioned by the
Burgesses of Newcastle, that his Majesty would be graciously pleased to divide
the Town and Corporation from the County of Northumberland, and grant them a
Sheriff with more Liberties and Immunities; which was granted, and that the
Corporation of Newcastle should be a distinct County of itself disjoined from
the County of Northumberland, which was not to meddle in the said new County,
as by the Charter appears more at large, upon Record in the Tower of London.
Gardener.

He granted by the same Charter, that a Sheriff was to be annually chosen
instead of Bailiffs, that he should keep a Court on Wednesday from Month to
Month, in the same Manner as the other Sheriffs of the Kingdom held theirs. The
Sheriff was to account before the Barons by an Attorney deputed, which should
be authentic, and to have Return of all Writs, etc.

Afterward William Redmershall was elected the first Sheriff.

The same King also, of his more abundant Kindness to the Burgesses of this
Town; as appears by the same Charter; gave them a Power of choosing from among
themselves Et ulterius uberiori Gratia nostra concessimus, etc. quod ipsi
singulis annis de sepsis eligere possint sex Aldermannos toties quoties necesse
fuerit. Lib. Cart.
six Aldermen, each of which had given him the full Power of a Justice of Peace.

After Kings confirmed to the Mayor and Commonalty all the Royalties of the
River Tyne from Sparrow-hawk to Heddin Streams, and that no Ship load or unload
any manner of Goods, Wares, and Merchandises in any Place of the River but only
the Key of Newcastle. Gray.

This is mentioned in the Charter where the Contest is mentioned between the
Town and the Prior of Tinmouth. Lib. Cart. p. 87, 88.


An' Christi. Mayors. Sheriffs. 1401. The same. William Redmarshaes This Year
our eminent Roger Thornton transacted the following Lease with Walter Skirlaw,
then Bishop of Durham; a Piece to be valued for some not impertinent
Expressions.

CET Endenture faite par enter Wauter par la Grace de Dieu Evesque du Duresme
d'une party, and Roger de Thorneton de Noes-chastell sur Tyne d'autre part,
tesmoigne, que le dit Evesque a grant and a ferme less a l'avaunt dit Roger
un myngrove de plumbe appelle Blakden Ester and Wester, and un autre myngrove
de plumbe appelle Aldwode-clogh, and un autre place appelle Harderake, a avoir
and tenir a l'avaunt dit Roger and ses Assignez a term de dusze ans procheyn
ensuants apres les Fest de Saint Mychell darrein pass, rendant ent par an a
l'avant dit Evesque and a ses Successors le neur lade de c^m de plumbe tantost
come is est gain and demand par ascun ministre de l'avaunt dit Evesque a ce
assigns de recevir. Et le dit Roger avera une convenable Shele en le Forest de
Werdale pour la sustinaunce de ses chivalx cariants le eour provenant de les
dits groves, paiant ent annuelment a le meistre Forester la aunciene ferme. Et
le dit Roger overa and maynuvra bien and suffisauntement par vieu de Surveiour
de nos mines illoques tous les groves and place avantdits, and chescun de eux
par tour le temps avaunt dit solone la Ley and Custom de mine de plumbe in
Werdale: Et si ascun de les groves ou place avaunt dits gist nient maynures par
demi an devis le Ferme susdit, adonqs ben life a le dit Evesque and ses
Successors maynuvrer ou lesser a Ferme a sa volontee ceste grove ou place qui
giest ensyment maynuvres. Et le dit Evesque voet and grant que le dit Roger
est suffisamentes de maereme a son meliour ease pour la sustinaunce and
mayntenaunce de les myngroves and place avandites par vieu de meistre Forestier
durant le term avantdir. Et le dit Roger avera Wayleve pour son carriage pour
les avantdits eour de plumbe and maereme and autres necessairs a ce
appourtenaunts durant le term susdit. En Tesmoignaunce de quelx chose si bien
le dit Evesque come l'avant dit Roger a cestes Evidences entrechaungeablement
ont mys lour Sealx. Done le premier jour de December, l'an du reign le Roy
Henry quart puis le conquest tierce.

THIS Indenture made between Walter by the Grace of God Bishop of Durham on the
one Part, and Roger Thornton of Newcastle upon Tyne of the other Part,
witnesses, That the said Bishop has granted and to Farm demised to the
foresaid Roger one Mine of Lead called Blakden the Easter and Wester, and
another Lead Mine called Aldwode-clough, and an other Place called Harderake,
to have and to hold to the aforesaid Roger and his Assigns for the Term of
twelve Years next ensuing after the Feast of St. Michael last past, paying for
the same yearly to the above named Bishop and to his Successors the ninth Load
of Lead Ore, as soon as it shall be wrought and be demanded by any Officer of
the above named Bishop assigned to receive the same. And the said Roger shall
have a convenient Sheeld in the Forest de Weredale for the seeding of his
Horses used in the Carriage of such Ore as the said Groves produce, paying
yearly to the capital Forester the usual Rent therefore. And the said Roger
shall keep open and well and sufficiently work all these Groves and Place
during the Term aforesaid, under the Inspection of our Surveyor of all our
Mines, according to the Laws and the Custom of the Weredale Lead Mines: And if
any of the said Groves or the Place aforesaid shall remain unwrought half a
Year after granting the said Farm, it shall be lawful for the said Bishop and
his Successors to work or convey by a new Lease at their Pleasure such Groove
or Place as lies so unwrought. And the said Bishop yields and consents that the
said Roger shall have Timber in sufficient Quantities at his Pleasure,
necessary for the Support and good Preservation of the said Mines and Place, by
the Inspection of the chief Forester during the aforesaid Term. And the said
Roger shall enjoy free Wayleave to his Carriages as well of Lead Ore as Timber
and other Necessaries thereunto appertaining, during the Term named. In Witness
whereof, as well the said Bishop as the before named Roger have interchangeably
to this Evidence affixed their Seals. Dated the first Day of December, in the
third Year of the Reign of King Henry the Fourth.


1402. Robert Chirdon. John Bywellgne. 1403. The same. The same. Confirmatio
Willielmi de Norham Capellani super custodia Cantariae B. Mariae in Ecclesia de
Gatesheved ante septuaginta annos fundatae, cum ejusdem Confirmatione
Episcopali and Capitulari.
UNIVERSIS Christi fidelibus praesentes Literas inspecturis Johannes Prior and
Capitulum Ecclesiae Cathedralis Dunelm. Salutem in Auctore Salutis. Noverit
Universitas vestra nos Literas venerabilis Patris and Domini, Dom. Walteri Dei
gratia Dunelm. Episcopi inspexisse Tenorem, qui sequitur, continentes. Walterus
Dei gratia Episcopus Dunelm. Omnibus ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint
Salutem. Inspeximus quandam Cartam fundationis and creationis cujusdam
Cantariae in Ecclesia parochiali de Gatesheved in haec verba. Sciant praesentes
and futuri quod nos Alanus filius Rogeri Prester and Alanus dictus Prester de
Gatesheved Dunolm. Dioces. ad cultus divini augmentationem, pro Animabus
nostris, patrum and matrum nostrorum, and omnium parentum, omniumque fidelium
defunctorum dedimus, concessimus, and hac praesenti carta nostra cirographata
confirmavimus Dom. Rogero de Thorington Capellano suo perpetuo singulis diebus
ad altar B. Mariae Virginis in porticu boriali in Ecclesia parochiali de
Gatesheved divina celebraturo totum illud tenementum cum fuis pertinent. prout
se extendit inter tenementum illud quod Adam Broun quondam tenuit ex part
boriali and cursum fontis vocati Saint Marywell ex part australi, and totum
illud tenementum cum pertin. suis sicut jacet infra villam de Gatesheved inter
messuagium Gilberti Maitoun ex part una, and messuagium Alani Seler ex altera;
and unum messuagium cum pertin. in Pipewellgate prout jacet inter terram
Gilberti Gategang and terram Roberti Tryppe and extendit se in longitudine de
Hengledyk usque ad Ground Ebb de Tyne; and unum messuagium cum pertin in
Helgate sicut jacet in latitudine inter terram quondam Clementis de Boveria ex
part una and communem Runilum ex part altera, and extendit se in longitudine
a venello de Helgate usque le Ground Ebb de Tyne; and totum illud tenementum
cum suis pertin. prout jacet in latitudine inter terram Petri de Lewe ex part
una and terram Thomae de Vaux ex part altera, and extendit se in longitudine a
via Regia usque ad terras Dominicas ex part orientali; and illud messuagium
cum suis pertin. sicut jacet in latitudine inter venellum quod dicitur S.
Mariae infra villam de Gatesheved ex part boriali and terram Walteri de Crayk
ex part australi, and extendit se in longitudine a via Regia usque ad terram
praedicti Walteri ex part orientali, and quondam terram in villa de Gatesheved
jacentem in longitudine a via juxta murum cimaeterii, usque ad terram quondam
Stephani Praepositi in Aykewelgate, and in latitudine a via Regia in
Aykewelgate usque ad terram Ricardi Schell; and totum illud tenementum cum suis
pertin. sicut jacet in longitudine and latitudine inter messuagium quondam
Radulphi Tinctoris ex part una, and messuag. Hugonis Tinctoris ex part
altera; and totum illud messuagium cum edificiis and pertin. sicut jacet in
latitudine inter messuag. quondam Hugonis Piscarii ex part una, and messuag.
Johannis Gategang ex part altera, and extendit se in longitudine ab alta via
usque Runilum qui ducit de font B. Helenae. Item totum illud messuag. cum
edificiis and pertin. suis in villa de Gatesheved sicut jacet in longitudine a
via Regia usque Aykewelburn, and in latitudine inter terram Willielmi Lardener
ex part una, and terram Alani Seler ex part altera: Item totum illud messuag
cum adifi^^ and per^iu^ suis sicut jacet in Aykewelgate in longitudine a via
Regia usque ad Dominicas terras Dom. Episcopi Dunelm. and in latitudine inter
terram Petri Fullonis ex part una, and terram quondam Thomae Mylis ex altera
part: Item unum annuum redditum sex solidorum and octo denariorium exeuntem de
toto illo tenemento cum pertin* sicut jacet in latitudine inter tenementum in
quo Robertus Littester inhabitavit ex part una, and terram quam Petrus
Littester tenet in feodo de Gilberto Gategang, and in longitudine a via Regia
usque ad currilegium Johannis Roughed, una cum omnibus aliis and singulis
terris, redditibus, and tenementis, quae and quas die confectionis praesentium
habuimus, seu nobis ex dono, feoffamento, sive jure haereditario proveniebant
aut descendebant infra villam de Gatesheved five in territorio ejusdem, habenda
and tenenda dicto Dom. Rogero de Thorington and successoribus suis Capellanis
ad dictum altar divina, ut supradictum est, celebraturis de Capitalibus
Dominis Feodi illius per servitia inde debita and consueta libere, quiere,
integre, been and in pace in perpetuum. Et volumus quod post decessum nostrum
communitas villae de Gatesheved habeat jus patronatus dictae Cantariae, ita
quod duodecim, december, vel octo, de probioribus and discretioribus hominibus
dictae communitatis ad hoc eligendi possint ad dictam Cantariam, quotiescunque
ipsam vacare contigerit post decessum Rogeri de Thorington Capellani, unum
Capellanum idoneum and honestum eligere, and in dicta Cantaria cum omnibus suis
juribus and pertin. in corporalem possessionem inducere. Et quod sic fiat
electio and institutio in perpetuum, volumus etiam quod praesatus Rogerus de
Thorington Capellanus per nos sic electus, and omnes sui successores statim a
tempore suae admissionis and electionis ad candem Cantatiam, continuam and
personalem saciant residentiam, divina, ut supra dictum est, singulis diebus
per annum a Canone licite provisis, celebrando: Quam quidem residentiam, si
canonico ipsi Capellani impedimento facere nequiveriut, cessante illo
impedimento, ad eam redeant faciendom, unusquisque successive post alium.
Volumus etiam, quod singuli Capellani ad dictam Cantariam, ut praemittitur, sic
electi Rectori Ecclesiae parochialis de Gatesheved, qui pro tempore fuerit, de
observando Ecclesiam suam de suis juribus universis and singulis indemnem
corporale facient juramentum. Et nos Alanus filins Rogeri Proster, and Alanus
dictus Prester, and haeredes nostri omnia praedicta terras, redditus, and
tenementa, cum omnibus edisiciis and pertin. suis praedicto Rogero de
Thorington and successoribus suis Capellanis, ut praedictum est contra omnes
gentes warantizabimus and desendemus in perpetuum. In cujus rei Testimonium tam
nos Alanus and Alanus, quam dictus Ds. Rogerus huic Cartae cirographatae
Sigilla nostra apposuimus, and ad majorem sidem Sigillum Communitatis villae de
Gatesheved apponi procuravimus: His Testibus Petro de Lewe tunc Ballivo de
Gatesheved, Joh. Gategang, Jacobo Gategang, Willielmo sillo Hutredi, Rogero
Read, Roberto Horn. Thoma Vaux, Steph. Nedoler, Thoma de Bows, Waltero
Potter, Radulpho Brydok, Johanne Lardener, Ricardo de Tesedall, Willielmo
Horner, and aliis. Dat. apud Gatesheved die Deminica in Festo Matthiae
Apostoli, Anno Doin. 1330. Quae omnia and singula in praedicta Caria contenta,
data, concessa, and sacta suerunt, Licentia nostra seu predecessorum nostrorum
super hoc non obtenta. Nos enim ad Honorem Dei, S. Mariae Virginis, and in
augmentationem divini servitii, ad supplicationem tam Willielmi de Norham nunc
Custodis Cantariae praedictae, quam Communitatis villae praedictae, creationem
and fundationem praedictas, necnon donationem and concessionem de praedictis
terris, tenementis, and redditibus, cum suis pertin. praedicto Rogero and
successoribus suis in forma praedicta sactas, and omnia alia in dicta Carta
contenta, rata, habentes and grata, eaque pro nobis and successoribus nostris,
quantum in nobis est, approbamus, ratificamus, and tenore praesentium
concedimus and confirmamus, statuto de terris and tenementis ad manum mortuam
non ponendis edito non obstante. Concedimus etiam per praesentes tam ad
supplicationem praedicti Willielmi de Norham, nunc Custodis, quam praedictae
Communitatis, quod praedictus Willielmus de Norham, Capellanus nunc Custos
praedictae Cantariae and successores sui Capellani habeant omnia praedicta
terras, tenementa, and redditus cum pertin. habenda and tenenda praedicto
Willielmo de Norham and successoribus suis Capellanis Custodibus Cantariae
praedictae, Divina ad altar praedictum pro anima nostra, and pro animabus
patris and matris nostrorum, and pro animabus dictorum Alani and Alani, and pro
animabus patrum and matrum eorum, and pro animabus omnium fidelium defunctorum
in perpetuum celebraturis ut praedictum est. Concedimus etiam praedictae
Communitati ad supplicationem ipsius Communitatis, quod ipsi and successores
sui habeant and possideant jus patronatus Cantariae praedictae, and quod
duodecim, december, vel octo de probioritus and discretioribus hominibus
Communitatis praedictae ad hoc per Communitatem praedictam eligendi, possunt ad
dictam Cantatiam post decessum praefati Willielmi de Norham, quandocunque ipsam
vacare contigerit, unum Capellanum idoneum and honestum nobis and successoribus
nostris praesentare, qui cum per nos aut successores admissus and institutus
fuerit per Rectorem Ecclesiae parochialis de Gatesheved, qui pro tempore
fuerit, and seu eo absente, aut ipsa Ecclesia vacant, per Capellanum
parochialem ejusdem, in corporalem possessionem dictae Cantariae cum omnibus
suis juribus and pertin. auctoritate nostra inducatur, and continuam
residentiam faciat, ad altar praedictum Divina celebrando secundum formam,
vim, and effectum Cartae praedictae. Ita tamen quod dictus Willielmus de Norham
nunc Custos dictae Cantariae, and successores sui Capellani dictae Cantariae,
in eorum admissione corporale praestent juramentum de orando pro anima nostra,
and animabus patris and matris nostrorum, and pro animabus praedictorum Alani
and Alani, ac pro animabus patrum and matrum eorum, and animabus omnium
fidelium defunctorum in forma supradicta statuto de terris and tenementis ad
manum mortuam non ponendis edito non obstante. In cujus rei Testimonium has
Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Dat. Dunelm. per manus Roberti de
Wycliff Cancellarii nostri, fecundo die November. anno Pontif. nostri quinto
decimo.

Quas quidem Literas nos Prior and Capitulum memorati ratas habentes and gratas
eas pro nobis and successoribus nostris ratificamus, approbamus, and tenore
praesentium confirmamus. In cujus rei Testimonium Sigillum nostrum commune
praesentibus est appensum. Dat. in domo nostra Capitulari octavo die Augusti,
An. Dom. 1403.


1404. The same. The same. Reginaldus Porter Vicarius Ecclesiae Paroch. de
Pittington, constitutus Custos Hospitalis B. Edmundi in Gatesheved.
WALTERUS Permissione DivinaDunelm. Episcopus, dilecto filio Reginaldo Porter
perpetuo Vicario parochialis Ecclesiae de Pitington nostrae Dioces. salutem,
gratiam and benedictionem. De tuis igitur fidelitate, prudentia, and
conscientia puritate before confidentes, Custodiam Hospitalis B. Edmundi Regis
in Gatesheved nostrorum Patronatus and Dioces. ad totam vitam tuam committimus
and concedimus per praesentes, tuam express onerantes conscientiam, ut bona
ipsius Hospitalis diligenter congreges and conserves, ac in usus deputatos
fideliter facias erogari. Per hoc autem nolumus nec intendimus naturam seu
fundationem dicti Hospitalis in aliquo immutare. quin te decente, seu dictum
Hospitale quovis modo dimittente Hospitale praedictum alteri personi idoneae,
in natura Hospitalis, and forma Clementinae quia contingit liber, committi
valeat, hac nostra commissione seu concessione penitus non obstante. In cujus
rei Testimonium, Sigillum nostrum fecimus his apponi. Dat. apud manerium
nostrum de Aukland, tertio die mensisDecemb. nostrae translationis anno
undecimo.


1405. The same. The same. 1406. The same. The same. This Year died Walter
Skirlaw Bishop of Durham: Thomas Langley succeeded, and was consecrated May the
7th.

Confirmatio super quibusdam Redditibus amortuatis ad Cantariam in Ecclesia
Omnium Sanctorum in Novo Castro.
UNIVERSIS Christi fidelibus praesentes Literas inspecturis, Johannes Prior and
Conventus Ecclesiae cathedral. Dunelm salutem in Dom. sempiternam. Noveritis
nos Literas venerabilis in Christo Patris and Domini, Dom. Walteri Dei gratla
Episcopi Dunelm. sub tenore qui sequitur, inspexisse.Walterus Dei gratia
EpiscopusDunelm. omnibus ad quos praesentes literas pervenerim, salutem. Quia
accepimus per inquisitionem quam per Robertum Conyers Escaetorum nostrum in
Comitat.Dunelm. fieri fecimus, quod non est ad damnum vel prejudicium nostrum
aut aliorum, si concedamus Ricardo Fysschlake Capellano, quod ipse unum
messuag. cum pertin. in Gatesheved, quod jacet inter tenementum Agnetis Lutter
ex part boreali, quondam in tenura Thomae de Moderby, and tenementum Nelae de
Chatton, quod quondam fuit in tenura Thomae Stirteys Militis, ex part
australi; and quendam annuum redditum novem solidorum and sex denariorum
excuntem de tenemenio nuper Johannis Cuke desuncti, modo in tenura Margaretae,
uxoris ejus in eadem villa, quae de nobis tenentur in capite, dare possit and
assignare dilecto nobis in Christo Ricardo Willesby Capellano Custodi Cantariae
S. Johannis Evangelistae in Ecclesia Omnium Sanctorum in villa Novi Castri
super Tynam, habenda and tenenda sibi and successoribus suis Capellanis and
Custodibus Cantariae praedictae, in subventionem sustentationis suae de nobis
and successoribus nostris per servitia inde debita and consueta in perpetuum:
and eidem Ricardo Willesby quod ipse praedicta messuagium and rodditum cum
pertin. a praefato Ricardo Fyssblake recipete possit and tenere sibi and
successoribus suis praedictis Capellanio Custodibus Cantariae praudictae in
perpetuum, sicut praedictum est, tenore praesentium familiter licentiam dedimus
specialem, statuto de terris and tenementis ad manum mortuam non ponendis edito
non obstante. Nolentes quod praedictus Ricardus Fyssblake vel haeredes sui, aut
praefatus Ricardus Willesby vel successores sui ratione praemissorum per nos
vel successores nostros, Justiciarios, Escaetores, Vicecomites, aut alios
Ballivos, seu Ministros nostros quoscunque occasionentur, molestentur in
aliquo, seu graventur: Salvis semper nobis and successoribus nostris, and aliis
Capitalibus Dominis feodi illius, redditibus and servitiis inde debitis and
consuetis. In cujus rei Testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.
Dat. Dunelm. per manus Rob. de Wycliff Cancellarii nostri, vicesimo die October.
anno Pontif. nostri septimo decimo.

Quas quidem Literas nos Prior and Conventus memorati ratas habentes pariter
and acceptas, eas pro nobis and successoribus nostris ratificamus, approbamus,
and tenore praesentium confirmamus, juribus and libertatibus Ecclesiae Dunelm.
in omnibus semper salvis. In cujus rei Testimonium Sigillum commune Capituli
nostri praesentibus est appensum. Dat. Dunelm. in domo nostra Capitulari,
decimo die mensis November. Anno Dom. 1406.


1407. The same. The same. 1408. The same. The same. 1409. William Aughton
William Middleton 1410. The same. The same. 1411. The same. The same. The King
died March the 20th, and the next Day his Son King Henry V. was proclaimed
King, and Crowned April the 9th.
1412. The same. The same. Henry V.
1413. The same. The same 1414. Robert Hebborn William Middleton In this Year
when King Henry was preparing to lead his Forces into France, a Conspiracy at
home against his Life was discovered, the Conspirators being Richard Earl of
Cambridge, Brother of the Duke of York, the Lord Scroope, Lord Treasurer, and
Sir Thomas Gray of Werk in Northumberland, Privy Counselors, at the
Instigation of the French, who particularly corrupted Scroope during his
Embassy in France the Year before: Who being executed, Scroope's Head was sent
to York, and Sir Thomas Grey's to Newcastle, to be Spectacles of Terror to all
Beholders. Complete History of England, Vol. I. p. 316.


1415. The same. The same. 1416. Roger Thornton John del Strother 1417. The
same. The same. Mandatum ad vocand. certas mulieres de Novo Castro ad paenas
eis injunctas, pro eo quod attemptaverint transire ad feretrum S. Cuthberti.
DOmini Dunelm. Episcopi Officialis Capellanis parochialibus Ecclesiarum S.
Nicholai and Omnium Sanctorum villae Novi Castri super Tynam falutem in Auctore
Salutis. Cum nuper Matildis Burgh and Margareta Usshar servientes ut asserunt
Petri Baxter dictae villae, ex instigatione diabolica inductae, and ausu
temerario ad Ecclesiam cathedralem Dunelmen. accessissent vestibus virilibus
indutae, eo animo and intensione, ut ad feretrum Sanctiss. Confessoris
Cuthberti personaliter accederent, scientes hoc esse prohibitum mulieribus
quibuscunque sub poena excommunicationis majoris, and violationis Ecclesiae
libertatis. Cumque de hoc gravi facitiore coram nobis pro tribunali sedentibus
convictae fuissent and confessatae, and cum talibus delictis voluntas
progrediens ad ulteriora reputatur praesto de consensu Magistri Johannis
Houteman Dom. nostri Episcopi Dunelm. Vicarii Generalis, ac aliorum
Jurisperitorum nobis adrunc assidentium, dictis mulieribus in forma juris
juratis poenitentias injunximus pro commisso, viz. quod utraque earum incedat
coram processione tribus diebus sestivis circa Ecclesiam S. Nicholai, and aliis
tribus diebus festivis circa Ecclesiam Omnium Sanctorum praedictas in eisdem
vestibus virilibus, eisdem modo and forma quibus ad dictam Ecclesiam
cathedralem Dunelm. tam temerarie accedebant. Vobis igitur injungimus and
mandamus, quatenus dictas mulieres ad agend. dictas poenitentias, ut
praemittitur alternis diebus in vestris Ecclesiis convocetis, and causam quare
talem peragunt poenitentiam populo public and solemniter nuncietis, ne aliae
mulieres de caetero in tantam prorumpere audaciam delinquendi valiant: Citantes
nihilominus dictum Petrum Baxter and uxorem ejus, quod compareant coram nobis
vel Commissario in galilea Dunelm. die Lunae proximo post festum S. Michaelis
proxime futuro causam rationabilem, si quam habeant, quare non debeant, tanquam
fautores, auctores, and consilium dantes in hac part, puniri in forma juris,
allegaturi and proponituri, ulteriusque facturi and recepturi quod justitia
suadebit: and quid feceritis in praemissis nos ad dictum diem and locum
certificetis aperte cum istis literis sigillo vestro sigillatis. Dat. Dunelm.
18. die mensis September. Anno Dom. 1417.

Certificatorium de poenitentia duarum mulierum quae nitebantur accedere ad
feretrum S. Cuthberti.
HUJUS auctoritate mandati Matildam and Margaretam infrascriptas vocavi ad
poenitentiam a vobis judicialiter illis injunctam, quae humiliter obtem
perantes comparuerunt, and dictam poenitentiam devote impleverunt, circumeundo
Ecclesiam Omnium Sanctorum coram processionem, secundum modum and formam ois
injunctam in ultima Dominica, and de caeteris Dominicis pariter sunt ad dictas
poenitentias, si meliorem gratiam non valiant invenire tamen bonum est ut illis
gratiose parceatur, si vobis placuerit, and sic mandatum vestrum venerabile
penes me in omnibus sum executurus, and praedictum Petrum citavi secundum
formam mandati, and uxor praedicti Petri sic est fatigata cum duobus gemellis
quod honest non potest comparere.

Per Robertum Croft Capellanum Ecclesiae Omnium Sanctorum.


1418. The same. The same. 1419. The same. The same. 1420. The same. John de
Bywell Requietantia facta Majori and Communitati villae Novi Castri super Tynam.
NOVERINT Universi per praesentes Nos Johannem Priorem Ecclesiae Cathedralis
Dunelm. recepisse and habuisse die confectionis praesentium de Majore and
Communitate villae Novi Castri super Tynam, per manus Monachi nostri de
Farneland novem libras, tres solidos, and quatuor denarios monetae Anglicanae
de termino S. Michaelis Archangeli proxime praeterito ante datam praesentium,
in plenam solutionem cujusdam annuae pensionis nobis and monasterio nostro
Dunelm. per progenitores Dom. Regis de elemosina sua concessae, percipendae
annuatim ad Festum S. Michaelis Archangeli de feodi firma villae praedictae per
manus hominum ejusdem villae. De quibus quidem novem libris, tribus solidis,
and quatuor denariis praedictis fatemur nos fore solutos, dictosque Dom. Regem,
Majorem, Communitatem, ac Homines dictae villae, haeredes and successores suos,
inde acquietamus per praesentes. Datas tertio die Octobr. anno regni Regis
Henrici quinti post conquestum Angliae octavo.


1421. William Essington Laurence Acton Dotatio Cantariae Johannis Dolfamby in
Ecclesia de Gatesheved.
SCIANT Praesentes and Futuri quod ego Johannes Dolphamby de Gatesheved dedi,
concessi, and hac praesenti Carta mea confirmavi Johanni Vesci Capellano
Cantariae Sanctor. Johannis Apostoli and Evangelistae, and S. Johannis
Baptistae, nuper per me fundatae in Ecclesia B. Mariae de Gatesheved, and
successoribus suis Capellanis ejusdem Cantariae, quatuordecem tenementa cum
omnibus suis pertin. in dicta villa de Gatesheved: De quibus quidem tenementis
unum jacet in Akewelgate inter tenementum Johannis Wermouth ex part boriali,
and tenement. pertinens Cantariae B. Mariae in Ecclesia praedicta ex part
australi, and extendit se a via Regia ante usque ad terras Dominicales Episcopi
Dunelm. retro. 2. Item aliud tenementum cum omnibus suis pertin. super le
Westrawe, sicut jacet inter tenementum Euphaniae Copper ex part australi and
tenementum Roberti Heworth ex part boriali, and extendit a via Regia ante
usque ad le Holchare retro. 3. Item alia duo tenementa pariter jacentia cum
omnibus suis pertin. sicut jacent super le Westrawe inter tenementum Thomae
Fleskewer ex part australi and tenementum Agnetis Surres ex part boriali, and
extendunt se a via Regia ante usque ad gardinum cujusdam tenementi quod
Christophorus Charles tenet de me in feodo retro, cum uno gardino sicut jacet
inter tenementum praedicti Christophori and tenementum meum ex part orientali
and croftum quod Willielmus Bulmer tenet de me in feodo ex part occidentali,
and extendit so a gardi^^ Beh^^^ (...) parta australi usque ad gardinum meum ex
part boriali. 5. Item aliud tenementum cum omnibus suis pertin. super le
Westrawe sicut jacet super corneram de Pipewelgate inter tenementum Agnetis
Surres ex part australi and venellam de Pipewelgate ex part boreali, and
extendit se a via Regia ante usque ad tenementum Rogeri de Thorneton retro. 6.
Item aliud tenementum cum omnibus suis pertin. super le Estrawe sicut jacet
inter tenementum nuper Johannis Bank ex part boriali and tenementum quod
Willielmus Codlyng tenet de me in feodo ex part australi, and extendit se a
via Regia ante usque ad le Ground Ebb de Tyne retro. 7. Item aliud tenementum
cum omnibus suis pertin. sicut jacet super le Estrawe inter venellum vocatum
Helgate ex part boriali and tenementum Willielmi Screwane ex part australi,
and extendit se a via Regia ante usque ad tenementum nuper Johannis Stokdale
retro. 8. Item aliud tenementum cum omnibus suis pertin. sicut jacet super le
Estrawe inter tenementum nuper Willielmi Langeton ex part boriali and le
Overkirke Chare ex part australi, and extendit se a via Regia ante usque ad
dictum Kirk Chare retro. 9. Item aliud tenementum cum omnibus suis pertin.
sicut jacet super le Estrawe inter tenementum nuper Hugonis Harbor ex part
boriali and tenementum Roberti Whelpyngton ex part australi, and extendit se a
via Regia ante usque ad le Common Gutter retro; cum duobus selionibus terrae
sicut jacent inter terram Dom. Thomae Surtays Militis, ex part australi and
terram Willielmi Hilton ex part boriali, and extendit se ab alta via Regia
ante usque ad viam quae ducit versus Dunelm. retro 10. Item quatuor tenementa
pariter jacentia super le Estrawe inter tenementum Adae del Graunge ex part
boriali and tenementum Johannis Gilford ex part australi, cum omnibus suis
pertin. 11. Item aliud tenementum cum omnibus suis pertin. sicut jacet super le
Estrawe inter tenementum nuper Roberti Galefore ex part boriali and tenementum
Johannis Sutton ex part australi, and extendit se a via Regia ante usque ad
Akewelgate retro: Habenda and tenenda omnia praedicta and singula quatuordecim
Tenementa, cum omnibus suis pertin. praefato Johanni Vescy and successoribus
suis, Capellanis ejusdem Cantariae, de Capitalibus Dominis feodorum illorum per
fervitia inde debita and de jure consueta in perpetuum. Et ego praedictus
Johannes Dolphamby and haeredes mei omnia praedicta and singula quatuordecim
tenementa, cum omnibus suis pertin. praefato Johanni Vescy and successoribus
suis, Capellanis ejusdem Cantariae, contra omnes gentes warantizabimus and in
perpetuum desendemus. In cujus rei Testimonium praesenti Cartae meae Sigillum
meum apposui, his Testibus Henrico Eton Rectore Ecclesiae dictae de Gatesheved,
Roberto Helton, Willielmo Gategang, Johanne Gilford, Willielmo Boltby, Roberto
Cok, Thomae Hedlam, and aliis. Datum apud Gatesheved in Festo Apostolorum Petri
and Pauli, Ao Dom. 1421. and Ao Regis Henrici quinti post Conquest. Angliae
nono.


1422. The same. Thomas Chirdon Henry VI. The King died Aug. 31. His Son King
Henry the VIth, in the ninth Month of his Age, was proclaimed.


1423. William Ellerby The same. 1424. The same. The same. Confirmatio
Cantariae Johannis Dolphamby in Ecclesia de Gatesheved.
OMNIBUS Christi fidelibus praesentes Literas inspecturis Johannes Prior
Ecclesiae Cathedralis Dunelm. and ejusdem loci Capitulum, salutem in omnium
Salvatore. Noveritis nos Literas Reverendi in Christo Patris and Domini, Dom.
Thomae Deigratia, Dunelm. Episcopi, sub tenore qui sequitur, inspexisse. Thomas
Dei gratia Episcopus Dunelm. Omnibus ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint,
salutem. Sciatis quod de gratia nostra speciali concessimus and licentiam
dedimus pro nobis and successoribus nostris, quantum in nobis est, Johanni
Dolphamby de Gatesheved, quod ipse quandam Cantariam de uno Capellano divina
singulis diebus in Ecclesia parochiali B. Mariae de Gatesheved, pro
salubristatu nostro and ipsius Johannis dum vixerimus, and pro animabus
nostris, cum ab hac luce migraverimus, ac animabus Willielmi Johanson nuper
burgensis villae Novi Castri super Tynam, ac patrum, matrum, uxorum, liberorum,
fratrum, sororum, parentum, benefactorum nostrorum, and omnium fidelium
defunctorum, juxta ordinationem ipsius Johannis in hac part faciendam,
celebraturo in perpetuum, facere, fundare, and stabilire possit; and quod idem
Johannes, postquam dicta Cantaria sic facta, fundata, and stabilita fuerit,
dare possit and assignare praefato Capellano quatuordecim messuagia cum pertin.
in Gatesheved, quae de nobis tenentur in burgagio, habenda, tenenda, and
percipienda eidem Capellano and successoribus suis, Capellanis Cantariae
praedictae, in auxilium, sustentationis suae in perpetuum: Et eidem Capellano
quod messuagia praedicta cum pertin. a praefato Johanne recipere possit and
tenere sibi and successoribus suis praedictis, sicut praedictum est, in
perpetuum, tenore praesentium similiter iicentiam dedimus specialem, statuto de
terris and tenementis ad manum mortuam non ponendis edito non obstante:
Nolentes quod praefatus Johannes vel haeredes sui, aut praefatus Capellanus seu
successores sui, ratione statuti praedicti seu aliorum praemissorum per nos vel
successores nostros, Justiciarios, Escaetores, Vicecomites, aut alios Ballivos
seu Ministros nostros, vel successorum nostrorum quoscunque inde occasionentur,
molestentur in aliquo, seu graventur. In cujus rei Testimonium has Literas
nostras fieri fecimus Patentes: Dat. Dunelm. per manus Willielmi Chauncellor,
Cancellarii nostri, primo die Junii, anno Pontif. nostri quinto decimo.

Quas quidem Literas nos Prior and Capitulum memorati ratas habentes pariter
and acceptas, eas, quantum in nobis est, pro nobis and successoribus nostris
ratificamus, approbamus, and tenore praesentium confirmamus, jure Capituli and
Ecclesiae nostrae praedictorum, si quod habuerimus in messuagiis antedictis aut
eorum aliquo, five in libero redditu exeunte de eis, seu aliquo eorundem, Nobis
and successoribus nostris in perpetuum in omnibus semper salvis. In cujus rei
Testimonium, Sigillum commune Capituli nostri Praesentibus est appensum. Dat.
Dunelm. in Domo nostra Capitulari, septimo die mensis October. Ao Dom. 1424.


1425. The same. John Tray. 1426. Roger Thornton The same. 1427. The same. John
Jay. 1428. John Rhodes The same. This Year died that noble Benefactor Roger
Thornton, whose last Will and Testament is a good Proof of the shining Worth of
this eminent Magistrate, and well deserves a Place here; for which the World is
indebted to John Thornton of Nether Witton in Northumberland, Esquire a worthy
Descendant of this Person.

E Registr. Thomae Langley Episcopi Dunelm. fol. 163. a.

UNIVERSIS S. Matris Ecclesiae Filiis praesentes Literas inspecturis Thomas
Permissione Divina Dunelm. Episcopus, salutem in Domino, and fidem indubiam
praesentibus adhib. Noveritis quod nuper inspecto Registro nostro, inter
caetera Testamentum Rogeri Thornton senioris, nuper de villa Novi Castri super
Tynam, nostrae Dioces. Mercatoris, and per nos probatum in forma juris in eodem
invenimus contineri: Quod quidem Testamentum ad humilem and instantem
supplicationem dilecti nobis in Christo filii Rogeri Thornton, filii praedicti
Rogeri Thornton Testatoris, and Executoris unici dicto Testamento nominati,
exemplificari tenorem and veram copiam ejusdem Testamenti de Registro nostro
extracti fecimus transcribi, cujus tenor de verbo in verbum sequitur sub hac
forma.

In Nomine Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti, Amen. The Thursday next
before Yole-day in the Year of our Lord 1429. I Roger Thornton the Elder makes
and ordains my Testament and my last Will in this Form following: That is to
say, I commend my Soul to the Mercy of GOD, and my Body to be buried beside my
Wife in Alhallowes Kyrk of Newcastle. Also I will, that every Priest Secular
being at mine Interrment have to pray for my Soul and to be at my Dirgies and
forth bringing one Noble. Also I will, that one hundred Pounds be spended and
dealt at mine Interrment, the Ams of Roger my Son. Also I give to the Vicar of
S. Nicholas Kirk for forgotten Tends five Pounds. Item, To the Kirk of S.
Nicholas Reparation and Enorments thereof forty Marks; also to Alhallow in
like Form twenty Pounds. Item, To S. John's Kirk four Fothers of Lead. Item, To
S. Andrew's Kirk two Fothers of Lead. Item, To the Lepermen of Newcastle two
Pounds. Item, To the Chapel of S. Thomas upon Tyne-Bridge six Fothers of Lead.
Item, To Reparation of West Spittel two Fothers of Lead. Item, To the Walknowl
Reparation of their Kirk two Fothers of Lead. Item, To the Reparation of the
Nuns of Newcastle two Fothers of Lead. Item, To the Lepremen of Newcastle two
Pounds. Item, To the Reparation of Tyne-Bridge of Newcastle one hundred Marks,
if so that the Mayor and Commons will release me all Actions, as I that never
hindered them, nor naught awe them at my witting, but this I desire for
eschewing of Clamor. Item, To the Mesondieu of S. Katherine of my Foundation,
for their Enorments, twenty Pounds. Item, To my Chantry of S. Peter in Alhallow
Kirk, for the Enorments thereof, ten Pounds. Item, To the Chapel of Witton by
the Water six Marks. Item, To every House of Alms ordained for Bedrydens in
Newcastle one Mark, which shall be Parcel of the said Sum that shall be spent
upon mine Interrment. Item, To the Reparation of those Tenements that I have
given to the aforesaid Mesondieu and to the said Chantry forty Pounds. Item, I
will that thirty Priests sing for me two Years next after my Decease, ilk
Priest having for his Soulds by Year eight Marks. Item, I will that four
hundred Marks whilk that the Priour and Covent Hexham awe me be dispensed,
bygging of their Kirk, if they will make agreeable Seurtes that it shall be
duly done. Item, I give to the House of Blanchland two Fothers of Lead. Item,
To Brinkbourn two Fothers of Lead. Item, To Cocket Eland one Fother of Lead.
Item, To Reparation of Farn Eland one Fother of Lead. Item, To the Nuns of
Hallystartes one Fother of Lead. Item, To every ilk of the four Orders
Mendicants of Newcastle to pray for my Saul ten Marks, to be departed to every
Friar Conventual by the Ams of my Son. Item, I will that the Recluse of
Newcastle, and Sir Henry Fenwick and Sir Henry Lincoln, Priests, be Parcel of
the thirty Priests for two Years; and also after the said two Years I will they
three sing for me, taking every Priest of them two Seculars, eight Marks, and
the Recluse yearly six Marks, to an hundred Marks be dispendit if they live so
long, and else to be dispendit for my Soul by the Ams of my Son. Item, I
forgive to the House of Gisburn thirty Pounds which they awe me, beside the
hundred Pound which I have given them before this Time, so that they find me a
Priest perpetually singing for me in their House, like as their Covenant is
made. Item, I will that a hundred Marks be forgiven amongst my poor Tenants by
the Ams of my Son to them that may not well pay. Item, I give to the Covent of
Yarum and to the Covent of Hartlepool to pray for my Saul ten Marks to aither
House, to be departed among them by the Ams of my Son. Item, I give to the
Reparation of the Steeple of the Minster of Duresme one Fother Lead. Item, To
every Monk of Charter House at Mount Grace to pray for my Saul, a Noble. Item,
To every Monk of Newmynster a Noble. Item, To every Monk of Tinmouth a Noble.
Item, To every Monk of Whitby a Noble. Item, To Sir Thomas Pittington Vicar of
Hartburne five Pounds. Item, To Sir John Fenwick ten Pounds. Item, To Sir
William Harewood one Pound. Item, To Margaret my Servant in Penny and Penny
worth six Pounds (...) and ten Marks; and also for Term of her Life that House
in Bradchair that Nicholas Baxter dwells in. Item, To Roger Corbett four
Pounds, and also that he have Term of Life the Alms of the Mesondieu, so that
he dwell not therein. Item, To John Gofton twenty Shillings. Item, To Robert
Halls my Servant ten Pound of the Debt whilk he owes me. Item, To John
Desburgh four Pound of the Debt whilk he owes me. Item, To Thomas that was my
Servant a Noble. Item, To Agnes Hume twenty Shillings. Item, To Agnes Ward
twenty Shillings. Item, To Elen Ward twenty Shillings. Item To Maryon Wann
twenty Shillings. Item, To Old Gillott twenty Shillings. Item, To Jonet Pridow
twenty Shillings. Item, To Sir Henry Lincoln one Mark. Item, To William Mawe,
if he make true Reconing, twenty Shilling. Item, To Thomas Gentleman one Pound.
Item, To John Tinmouth twenty Shillings. Item, To Emery Herring five Pound.
Item, To William Desbrough five Pound. Item, To Henry Thornton five Pound.
Item, To John Whatnow forty Shillings of his Debt. Item, To Thomas Skinner the
Skinner four Shillings. Item, To John Sharp fifteen Shillings. Item, To John
Moreton one Pound. Item, To William Walker twenty Shillings. Item, To Chirnside
a Noble. Item, To John Felton his House free Term of his Life, he to reparrell
it, and a Corrody in S. Catherine Term of his Life. Item, I forgive to John
Wheelwright one Pound of his Debt. Item I give to Thomas Croxton a Mark. Also I
will that forty Pounds be in my Son's Disposition, to this Intent, that if any
poor Labourer, or other Person, claim any Parcel of Debt by me owing, he is to
dispoyne, and them pay off that Sum by his Discretion, in discharging my
Saul, as he will answer to GOD. Item, I give to Gerrard Mitford five Pounds.
Item, To John Robinson of Thornton, if he make true Reckoning, five Pounds.
Item, To young John Robinson his Son five Pounds. Item, To John Brumpton forty
Shillings. Item, To Cock my Servant twenty Shillings. Item, To George my (...)
Co^bott for^y Shillings Item, To Margaret Dalton twenty Shillings. Item, To
Alison my Servant a Noble. Item, To Robert Killingworth a Mark. All those Goods
and Parcells aforesaid I will my Son do and dispoyne, as he will answer before
GOD; and aw Remainaunt and Residue of my Goods, Mobles and Unmoveables, with
all my Lands that I, or any other in my Name, or to my Life, are enfeossed in,
except the Lands given to my Mesondieu and to my Chantry, I give freely,
clearly, and fully to my said Son Roger and his Heirs and Assigns for evermore.
And to fulfill this my Testament and last Will, I make and ordain the same Roger
my Son to be mine Executor, in Presence of Sir John Fenwick, Emery Hering, and
Margett my Servant, this present Day and Year aforesaid, Sealed with mine own
Hands.

Et in Exemplificationis Testimonium Sigillum nostrum praesentibus duximus
apponendum. Datum in Manerio nostro de Aukland quarto die mensis Januarii, Anno
Dom. 1431. and nostrae Consecrat. vicesimo sexto.


1429. The same. John Clark. 1430. The same. The same. 1431. The same. Edward
Bartram 1432. Laurence Acton Thomas Chirdon 1433. The same. Thomas Parpdie This
Year was held by Royal Authority a warm Inquisition against Bishop Langley and
his Royal Prerogatives in the County Palatin of Durham, first at Hartlepool,
and afterward at Newcastle, the Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland, the
present Mayor of Newcastle, John Horsley, and seven others being appointed to
be Commissioners, the said Laurence Acton and John Horsley appointed to be of
the Quorum: The Proceedings, though violent, yet proved a remarkable Evidence of
the Immunities and Freedom of the County Palatin, and of the Bishop's Royal
Authority.
1434. Richard Hall Richard Brown 1435. Rob. Whelpington Thomas Wardell
Custodia Capellae S. Edmundi and Cuthberti in Gatesheved concessa Johanni
Heyworth Vicario S. Nicholai in Novo Castro.
THOMAS Permissione Divina Dunelm. Episcopus dilecto nobis in Christo Magistro
Johanni Heyworth in Decretis Bacallario Presbytero, salutem, gratiam, and
benedictionem. Custodiam Capellae Sanctor. Edmundi and Cuthberti Confessorum in
villa de Gateshede nostrae Dioces. per liberam resignationem Magistri Georgii
Radclyfe ultimi Custodis ejusdem, in manibus nostris sponte sactam, and per nos
admissam, vacantem, and ad nostram collationem pleno jure spectantem, tibi
conserimus intuitu caritatis, teque Custodem ipsius Capellae praeficimus and
instituimus canonice in eadem, cum suis juribus, pertinentiisque universis:
Decernentes te vel procuratorem tuum pro te and nomine tuo in corporalem
possessionem dictae Capellae, juriumque and pertin. suorum, quorumcunque fore
realiter inducendum, juribus nostris Episcopalibus and Ecclesiae nostrae
cathedralis Dunelm. dignitate in omnibus semper salvis; tuam insuper
conscientiam express onerantes, ut bona ipsius Capellae diligenter congreges
and conserves, ac in usus deputatos fideliter facias erogari, ad quod faciendum
corporale in manibus nostris, tactis sacrosanctis Evangeliis, praestitisti
juramentum. In cujus rei Testimonium Sigillum nostrum praesentibus duximus
apponendum. Dat. in Manerio nostro de Aukland duodecimo die mensis Martii, Ao
Dom. 1435. and nostrae Consecrat. tricesimo.


1436. Richard Hall John Chambers Thomas Langley Bishop of Durham died Nov. 20.
and was succeeded by Robert Nevil Bishop of Sarum, Jan. 27.
1437. Laurence Acton Thomas Parpdie 1438. Rob. Whelpington John Castle
Officium Parcarii ac Custodis Turris de Gatesheved concessum Roberto Preston.
ROBERTUS Permissione Divina Dunelm. Episcopus omnibus ad quos praesentes
Literae pervenerint salutem. Sciatis quod de gratia nostra speciali, ac pro
laudabili servitio quod dilectus nobis Robertus Preston nobis and Ecclesiae
nostrae Dunelm. impendit, and in futurum, annuente Domino, impendet, dedimus
and concessimus eidem Roberto Preston officium Parcarii nostri de Gatesheved,
cum herbagio infra eundem parcum, una cum custodia turris nostrae ibidem,
Habend. tenend. ac occupand. officium praedictum cum herbagio and custodia
praedictis per se, seu per sufficientem deputatum suum, pro quo respondere
voluerit, ad terminum vitae suae, percipiendo de nobis and successoribus
nostris per manus Magistri Forestarii nostri ibidem, qui pro tempore fuerit in
officio praedicto, pro custodia dicti parci unum denarium and obolum per diem
ad duos anni terminos, viz. ad Festa Paschae and S. Michaelis Archangeli
annuatim durante vita praedicti Roberti Preston aequaliter solvendos; ac pro
custodia turris nostrae unum denarium per diem per manus Ballivorum,
Ministrorum, seu quorum cunque aliorum occupatorum infra dominium nostrum de
Gatesheved praedict. pro tempore existentium, praedicto Roberto Preston
singulis annis durante vita sua ad terminos dictos aequaliter solvendum; una
cum omnibus aliis proficuis, custubus, feodis, and commoditatibus eisdem
officio and custodiae qualitercunque spectantibus. Dedimus insuper and
concessimus pro nobis and successoribus nostris eidem Roberto Preston durante
vita sua unam robam de secta valecta vel octo solidos nomine ejusdem robae
quolibet anno ad Festum Natalis Domini sibi solvendos. In cujus rei Testimonium
Sigillum magnum Cancellariae nostrae Dunelm. fecimus his apponi. Dat. octavo
die mensis Aprilis, Anno Domini 1438. (...)


1439. John Clark William Harding Concessio Nominationis ad Ecclesiam
Parochialem de Gatesheved Cancellario Oxon. caetuique Regentium and non
Regentium in cadem.
ROBERTUS Permissione Divina Dunelm. Episcopus Venerabilibus and praedilectis
viris, Cancellario Universitatis Oxon. caetuique Regentium and non Regentium in
eadem, salutem, and per augmentum profectus scholastici de virtute crescere in
virtutem. Lactati in uberibus Almae Matris nostrae Universitatis antedictae
refectione scientiae salutaris ipsius studium in prole faecunda per salutiferos
palmites cupimus ampliare, ut dilatato sui tentorii loco funiculos faciat
longiores. Hinc est quod de vestris circumspectione and prudentia confidentes
nominationem Ecclesiae parochialis de Gateshede nostrorum Patronatus,
Collationis, and Dioces. cum ipsam proxime simpliciter vacare contigerit, vobis
illa unica vice duntaxat, concedimus specialem: sic quod personam per vos
nominandam infra tres menses post vacationem Beneficii hujusmodi nobis aut
successori nostro nominare curetis ad effectum, ut eidem nominato nominationis
vestrae praetextu ea vice Ecclesiam hujusmodi conferamus, successorve noster
confer valeat in eventu, caeterum facturi vel facturus quae nostro aut suo in
hae part incumbunt officio pastorali. Data nono die mensis October. Ao Dom.
1439. and nostrae Translat. secundo.


1440. John Chambers John Musgrave Commissio Domini Regis facta Roberto Rodes
super Officio Contrarotulatoris villae Novi Castri super Tynam.
HENRICUS Dei Gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae, omnibus ad
quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, salutem. Sciatis quod constituimus
Robertum Rodes Contrarotulatorem nostrum tam magnae and parvae Custumae, quam
subsidii lanarum, coriorum, and pellium lanatarum, nec non subsidii trium
solidorum de dolio, and duodecim denariorum de libra in portu villae Novi
Castri super Tynam, and in singulis portubus and locis eidem portui
adjacentibus, Habondum and tenendum illud officium quamdiu nobis placuerit;
percipiendo in illo officio feoda and vadia consueta, ita tamen quod idem
Robertus rotulos suos manu sua propria scribat, and continuo moretur ibidem, ac
omnia alia officium illud tangentia in propria persona sua, and non per
substitutum suum, juxta formam statutorum in hac part editorum, faciat and
exequatur; Volentes quod altera pars Sigilli nostri, quod dicitur Coket, in
portu praedicto in custodia ipsius Roberti remaneat, quamdiu officium habuerit
supradictum. In cujus rei Testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus
Patentes. Test Meipso apud Westmonast. decimo sexto die Julii, Anno Regni
nostri decimo nono, viz. 1440.

Commissio facta Priori Dunelm. ad recipiendum Sacramentum Roberti Rodes
Contratotulatoris Villae Novi Castri.
HENRICUS Dei Gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae, and Dominus Hiberniae, dilecto
sibi in Christo Priori Dunelm. salutem. Sciaris quod dedimus vobis potestatem
recipiendi Sacramentum dilecti nobis Roberti Rodes, Contratotulatoris nostri
tam magnae and parvae Custumae, quam subsidii lanarum, coriorum, and pellium
lanatarum, nec non subsidii trium solidorum de dolio, and duodecim denariorum
de libra in portu villae Novi Castri super Tynam, and in singulis portubus and
locis eidem portui adjacentibus, de officio illo been and fideliter faciendo
juxta formam cujusdam scedulae praesentibus interclusae. Et ideo vobis in fide
and dilectione, quibus nobis tenemini, injungimus and mandamus, quod
Sacramentum praedictum recipiatis, and cum illud reciperitis, eidem Roberto
Literas nostras Patentes sibi de officio illo factas, quas vobis mittimus per
latorem praesentium, liberetis: Et nobis de Sacramento illo, cum sic captum
fuerit, in Cancellariam nostram sub sigillo vestro distinct and aperte sine
dilatione constare faciatis, remittentes nobis hoc breve. Test Meipso apud
Westmonast. decimo sexto die Julii, Anno Regni nostri 19o.

Juramentum Roberti Rodes Contrarotulatoris Villae Novi Castri.
VOUS jurres que bien and loialment servies au Roi en l'office de Countroullour
des Custumes and Subsidies le Roi en le port de Novell Castle sur Tyne, and
loialment entreres les chooses que vendront au dit port ou passeront d'icel, and
que null down ne prendres pur vostre office fair, ne pour rien que purra cheire
en desavantage du Roi, ne null marchandises ne autres chooses custumables ne
seoffres passer horse du dit port sans Custume due paier, and que vous fres
mesme l'office and sur ceo demure en vostre propre person sans substituts
mettre, and les Roules escriveres par vostre main demesne, and le profett le
Roi agateres and ferres quant come vous purres selon vostre sens and vostre
poiair; si Dieu vous eide and ses seintes.

The Oath of Robert Rodes, Controller of the Town of Newcastle.
YOU Swear, that you shall well and lawfully serve his Majesty the King in the
Office of Controller of the Custums and Subsidies granted to his Majesty in the
Port of Newcastle upon Tyne, and justly enter such Things as shall be imported
into the said Port or exported from thence: and that you shall receive no
Presents for Performance of your Office, or upon any Account that may be
prejudicial to the King, neither shall permit any Merchandises or other
Custumable Goods to pass out of Port without Payment of Custum; and that you
perform the Office yourself, and enjoy the same in your own Person, without
presuming to nominate a Substitute, and shall write the Roulls with your own
Hand, and shall gather and collect the King's Profits according to your best
Knowledge and Ability: So GOD help you and his Saints.

Certificatorium de receptione Juramenti Contrarotulatoris Villae Novi Castri
super Tynam.
Coram ipso Rege in Cancellaria per Priorem Dunelm.
VIrtute istius Brevis ego Johannes Wessy^^g^^ (...) Martis decimo nono die
September. anno infrascripto apud Dunelmum recepi Sacramentum Roberti
suprascripti de officio suo bone and fideliter faciendo, secundum formam
cujusdam Scedulae adtunc huic Brevi inclusae. 1440.


1441. William Harding Simon Weldon 1442. Thomas Wardell William Jay 1443. John
Musgrave Thomas Hedlam 1444. William Harding Thomas Be 1445. William Jay John
Ward 1446. William Harding John Winton 1447. The same. Robert Baxter Marmaduke
Lumley Lord Bishop of Carlisle made Lord Treasurer, December. 18.
1448. John Ward John Richardson Appropriato Capellae S. Edmundi Episcopi in
Gatesheved facta Monialibus S. Bartholomaei in Novo Castro per Robertum Episc.
Dunelm.
UNIVERSIS Christi Fidelibus praesentes Literae inspecturis Robertus
Permissione Divina Dunelm. Episcopan, salutem in Auctore Salutis. Matris
Ecclesiae circumspecta benignitas illorum gravaminibus libentius compatitur and
miseriis promptius provider, quos prae caeteris vitae and morum excellentia
praefulgentes virtuosis morum praemiis dignos reddunt potloribus attolli
favoribus and majoribus beneficiis honotari. Sane exhibitae nobis nuper pro
part Religlosarum Mulierum Priotissae and Conventus Monasterii sive Prioratus
S. Bartholomai in Novo Castro super Tynam nostrae Dunelm. Dioces. petitio
continebat, Quod licet ipsum Monasterium suum ex sua primaeva fundatione in
fructibus, redditibus, and proventibus ad sustentationem Priorissae and
Conventus ibidem, ac aliorum servitorum degentium in eodem, receptionem
hospitum, ac alia incumbentia onera debite fupportanda sufficienter dotatum
suerat: at postea decrescentibus proventibus ejusdem Monasterii cum annua
pensione december marcarum de Ecclesia de Wessyngton excunte per felicis
recordationis Ricardum quondam Dunelm. Episcopum relevatum extiterat, jamque
temporis cursu in deterius dilabentur fructus, redditus, and proventus ipsius
Monasterii per ignis incendia ac alia mundi infortunia, and praesertim non
solutionem dictae annuae pensionis, quae propter notoriam exilitatem dictae
Ecclesiae de Wessyngton solvi non potuit de eadem, ita tenues and exiles
existunt in praesenti, quod pro honesta sua sustentatione and servitorum
suorum, ac hospitum receptione, cum idem Monasteritum suum in dicta villa Novi
Castri multum famosa sit constitutum, nec non domorum and aedificiorum eidem
pertinentium reparatione, and aliis oneribus ipsi Monasterio suo necessario
incumbentibus debite supportandis non sufficient nec sufficere poterunt
verisimiliter in futurum, nisi de alicujus subventionis remedio eidem
succurratur; quodque praemissorum praetextu dicta Ecclesia de Wessyngton a
solutione dictae pensionis exonerata fuit, and in recompensam dictae annuae
pensionis de post iisdem Priorissae and Conventui de fructibus, redditibus, and
proventibus Ecclesiae de Ryton dictae nostrae Dioces. valorem Ecclesiae de
Wessyngton antedictae notorie excedentis, juxta ordinationem nostram in ea
part factam persolvendi provisio facta fuit. Et confiderato insuper quod lites
and litigia ex verisimili inter Curatum Ecclesiae de Ryton memoratae quae
curata existit and dictas Religiosas Mulieres occasion pensionis hujusmodi
oriri poterunt in futurum, sicut inter Rectorem Ecclesiae de Wessyngton and
ipsas Religiosas Mulieres hujusmodi litigia saepius evenerunt temporibus
retroactis, unio, annexio, incorporatio, and appropriatio Capellae S. Edmundi
Episcopi in Gatesheved nostrarum Collationis and Dioces. eis and earum
Monasterio supradicto faciendae pietati consonae merito censeantur, cum ex his
sic unitis status utriusque liberius poterit supportari, unde pro part
earundem Religio sarum Mulierum Priorissae and Conventus nobis humiliter
extitit supplicatum and instanter petitum per easdem, quod, praemissis
diligenter attentis, in earum and sui Monasterii succursum and relevamen,
futuramque exonerationem dictae Ecclesiae de Ryton and ejusdem Rectoris a
solutione dictae pensionis december marcarum qua plurimum praegravatur, dictam
Capellam S. Edmundi Episcopi in Gatesheved nostrarum Collationis and Dioces.
cum suis juribus and pertin. universis eis and earum Monasterio supradicto, ac
sibi in eodem successuris quibuseunque unire, annectere, incorporare, and
appropriate in usus suos proprios perpetuo possidendam, ulteriusque
pronunciate, declarare, ordinare, statuere, and decernere in hac part quod est
justum and consonum pietati dignaremur. Nos igitur Regularis vitae honestatem,
divinique cultus fomentum, hospitum receptionem, and alia caritatis opera, and
vigentia gratiarum munera, quae in dicto suo Monasterio hactenus abundarunt,
nec non verisimilia litigia inter ipsas Religiosas Mulieres and Rectorem de
Ryton in exactione dictae annuae pensionis december marcarum futuris temporibus
eventura, caeteraque alia per easdem deducta diligentius attendentes, ac
ipsarum Religiosarum Mulierum voto circa appropriationem, unionem and
incorporationem praedictas quantum de jure possumus satisfacere cupientes,
super praemissis omnibus and singulis pro part ipsarum Religiosarum Mulierum
Priorissae and Conventus nobis suggestis, ac caeteris in ea part necessariis
and de jure requisitis inquiri fecimus diligentius veritatem: Et quia tam per
hujusmodi inquisitionem in ea part factam quam etiam per alia documenta coram
nobis exhibita, allegata, and probata invenimus dicta suggesta and petita
fuisse and esse vera, and quod evidens utilitas, urgensque necessitas unionem,
annexionem, incorporationem, and appropriationem dictae Capellae S. Edmundi
Episcopi in Gatesheved ipsi Monasterio S. Bartholomaei and ejusdem Priorissae
and Conventui ac sibi successuris faciendam exposcunt; nos ipsarum Religiosarum
Mulierum Priorissae and Conventus virtutum merita quibus invenimus eas
insigniri, earumque and sui Monasterii supradicti exilitatem and penuriam, ac
lites and litigia quae ex verisimili inter Curatum Ecclesiae de Ryton
memoratae, dictasque Religiosas Mulieres occasion pensionis antedictae oriri
poterunt in futurum, sicut alias in and pro pensione Ecclesiae de Wessyngton
inter Rectorem and dictas Mulieres orta and mota novimus ab experto, ac etiam
suggesta and petira prou^ (...) conven^ romct^e^ poud^^ (...) earumque
necessitati and indigentiae pio compatientes affectu, habito in hac part cum
Priore and Capitulo Ecclesiae nostrae Cathedralis Dunelm. diligenti tractatu,
eorumque consensu ad praemissa concesso pariter and obtento, omnibusque aliis,
quae in hujusmodi appropriationis, unionis, and incorporationis negotio, de
jure requiruntur, concurrentibus and observatis, invocata Spiritus Sancti
gratia hujusmodi causas unionis, annexionis, incorporationis sive
appropriationis in dicta petitione contentas, and alias pro part earundem
Religiosarum Mulierum nobis expositas and expressatas, veras, legitimas, and
sufficientes, ac rite and Legitime probatas fuisse and esse pronunciamus,
decernimus, and declaramus: Ac dictam Capellam S. Edmundi Episcopi in
Gatesheved cum suis juribus and pertinentiis universis, ex causis praedictis
and propter eas, dicto Monasterio S. Bartholomaei and ejusdem Priorissae and
Conventui sibique in codem successuris quibuscunque de expresso consensu and
voluntate dictorum Prioris and Capituli Dunelm. jure tamen alterius cujuscunque
in omnibus semper salvo, annexuimus, univimus, incorporavimus, and
appropriavimus in usus suos proprios perpetuo possidendam; sicque annectimus,
unimus, incorporamus, and appropriamus per praesentes. Ita viz. quod cedente,
decedente, resignante, dimittente, vel amoto Magistro sive Custode ejusdem
Capellae, qui nune est, seu ipsa Capella quomodolibet vacant, liceat
Priorissae and Conventui, qui pro tempore fuerint; ipsius Capellae sic vacantis
realem possessionem auctoritate propria apprehendere and came licite retinere,
nostris aut successorum nostrorum quorumcunque Dunelm. Episcoporum licentia,
auctoritate, consensu, aut voluntate in ea part minime expectatis. Post cujus
quidem Capellae S. Edmundi Episcopi in Gatesheved adeptam possessionem dictam
pensionem december marcarum de fructibus, redditibus, and proventibus dictae
Ecclesiae de Ryton excuntem and eisdem Priorissae and Conventui juxta vim,
formam, and effectum ordinationis nostrae in ea part facta, annuatim
persolvendam, statim and incontinenti cessare volumus and cassamus, ac ipsam
Ecclesiam and ejusdem Rectorem quemcunque pro tempore existentem ab ulteriori
solutione hujusmodi pensionis in ipso eventu exoneramus and exoneratos este
decernimus and declaramus per praesentes, praefataque Priorissa and Conventus
extunc in perpetuum in recompensam ejusdem pensionis december marcarum, cum
hujusmodi possessionem dictae Capellae nactae fuerint, ut praefertur, and mon
aliter, reputabunt se contentas, and ab omni exactione, petitione,
prosecutione, and reclamatione dictae pensionis in ea part omnino sint
exclusae in perpetuum. Et ne, quod absit, praesentis unionis, annexionis,
incorporationis, and appropriationis negotium ultra debitum prorogetur, aut
nostra intensio in ea part quovismodo frustretur, Magistro sive Custodi dictae
Capellae S. Edmundi Episcopi moderno facultatem permutandi eandem interdicimus,
and ipsam Capellam ad eundem effectum reservandam fore decernimus, and
afficimus per decretum. Volumus insuper, statuimus, ordinamus, and decernimus
quod praefara Priorissa and Conventus, and eis in dicto Monasterio succossitroe
sumptibus suis propriis and expensis invenient duos Capellanos bonae vitae and
conversationis honostae Missns and alin divina officia in eadem Capella S.
Edmundi Episcopi perpetuis futuris temporibus pro animabus fundatorum ejusdem
quotidie cum dispositi fuerint celebratros, ipsamque Capellam and caetere
aedificia tam infra quam extra eidem pertinentia reparabunt and manutenebunt
sumptibus suis and expensis ut praefertur. Nec non alia onera ordinaria and
extraordinaria cidem Capellae qualitercunque incumbentia subient and
suportabunt debite ut deberent. Praeterea pro indemnitate nostra and
successorum nostrorum Dunelmen. Episcoporum quorumcunque ac Eclosiae nostrae
Cathedralis Dunelm. Prioris and Capituli in praemissis salvanda, in
recompensationem emolumentorum quae nos and successores nostri praefatique
Prior and Capitulum poterimus seu poterint de dicta Capella S. Edmundi
Episcopi, si hujusmodi unio, annexio, incorporatio, and appropriatio de eadem
factae non essent, percipere and habere, ipsam Capellam sic unitam, annexam,
incorporatam, etc appropriatam cum annua pensione sex solidorum and octo
denariorum nobis and successoribus nostris cum alia etiam pensione trium
solidorum and quatuor denariorum praefatis Priori and Capitulo post nactam
possessionem ejusdem Capellae perpraesatam Priorissum and Conventum, and sibi
in eodem Monasterio perpetuis futuris temporibus successuras in Festo
Nativitatis S. Johannis Baptistae annis singulis persolvendis oneramus and
oneratam este decernmus penpraesentes. Juribus nostris Episcopalibus and
Ecclesiae nostrae Cathedralis Dunelm. libertatibus, privilegiis, and dignitate,
jureque alterius cujuscunque in omnibus semper salvis. In quorum omnium and
singulorum Testimonium arque Fidem Sigillum nostrum ad causas praesentibus
duximus apponendum. Data septimo die mensis Octobr. Ao Dom. 1448. etc nostrae
Translationis undecimo.

Ad p. 49. Obligatio Monalium de Novo Castro de annua Pensione.
PATEAT Universis per praesentes Nos Margaretam Priorissam domus S. Monasterii
S. Bartholomei in Novo Castro super Tynam, Dunelm. Dioces. and ejusdem loci
Conventum concessisse and hac praesenti carta nostra confirmasse venerabilibus
and religiosis viris Priori and Capitulo Ecclesiae Cathedralis Dunelm. eorumque
successoribus in perpetuum unam annuam Pensionem trium solidorum and quatuor
denariorum exeuntem de omnibus terris and tenementis nostris pertinentibus ad
Capellam S. Edmundi Episcopi in Gatesheved, ratione indemphitatis eorundem
Prioris and Capituli ac suae Ecclesiae Cathedralis Dunelm. praedictae,
confirmandam in annexione, unione, incorporatione, and appropriatione praefatae
Capellae S. Edmundi Episcopi in Gatesheved domui nostrae, five dicto Monasterio
nostro auctoritate ordinaria nuper de dictorum Prioris and Capituli consensu
factis: Habendam and percipiendam praedictam annuam Pensionem trium solidorum
and quatuor denariorum praefatis Priori and Capitulo and successoribus suis de
nobis and successoribus nostris, ac de omnibus terris and tenementis dictae
Capellae S. Edmundi in Gateshede qualitercunque provenientibus annuatim, ad
Festum Nativitatis S. Johannis Baptistae tantum, juxta vim, formam, and
effectum ordinationis super dicta unione, annexione, incorporatione, etc
appropriatione per Reverendum in Christo Patrem and Dominum, Dom. Robertum Dei
gratia Dunelm. Episcopum habitae and statutae. Proviso quod si contingat dictam
annuam Pensionem trium solidorum and quatuor denariorum vel aliquam ejus partem
a retro fore non solutam permensis spatium post Festum praedictum, quo solvi
debeat, quod tunc been licebit dictis Priori and Capitulo and eorum
successoribus in omnibus and singulis tertis and tenementis ad dictam Capellam
S. Edmundi Episcopi in Gatesheved quomodolibet spectantibus distringere and
districtiones inde captas abducere, asportare, and perres se retinere quousque
eis de dicta annua Pensione, una cum arreragiis and expensis in ea part factis
plenarie suerit satisfacti. In cujus rei Testimonium Sigillum nostrum commune
praesentibus duximus apponendum. Datum in domo nostra Capitulari 20. die mensis
October. Anno Dom. 1448.

An Obligation or Bond of the Nuns of Newcastle, concerning an annual Pension.
BE it known to all by these Presents, That we Margaret Prioress of the Nunnery
of S. Bartholomew's in Newcastle upon Tyne in the Diocese of Durham, and the
Convent of the same Place, have granted and by this our present Writing have
confirmed to the Venerable and Religious Men, the Prior and Chapter of the
Cathedral Church of Durham, and their Successors for ever, one annual Pension
of three Shillings and four Pence issuing from all our Lands and Tenements
belonging to the Chapel of St. Edmund the Bishop in Gateshead, by reason of the
Indemnity of the said Prior and Chapter and their Cathedral Church of Durham
aforesaid, to be confirmed in the Annexion, Union, Incorporation and
Appropriation of the aforesaid Chapel of St. Edmund the Bishop in Gateshead to
our House or our said Monastery lately made by the ordinary Authority and
Consent of the said Prior and Chapter: To be had and to be paid the aforesaid
annual Pension of three Shillings and four Pence to the aforesaid Prior and
Chapter and their Successors by us and our Successors from all the Lands and
Tenements of the said Chapel of St. Edmund in Gateshead however arising yearly,
at the Feast of the Nativity of St. John the Baptist only, according to the
Force, Form and Effect of the Ordination had and established upon the said
Union, Annexion, Incorporation and Appropriation by the Reverend Father in
Christ and our Lord Robert by the Grace of God Bishop of Durham. Provided that
if the said annual Pension of three Shillings and four Pence or any Part of it
be not paid in a Month's time after the Feast aforesaid, wherein it ought to be
paid, that then it shall be lawful to the said Prior and Chapter and their
Successors to distrain in all and every the Lands and Tenements belonging to
the said Chapel of St. Edmund the Bishop in Gateshead, and the Distraints
thence taken to carry away and keep in their Custody, till full Satisfaction be
made for the said annual Pension, together with the Arrears and Expenses made
in that Part. In Testimony whereof we have thought fit to affix our common Seal
to these Presents. Dated in our Chapter House October. 20. An. 1448.


An' Christi. Mayors. Sheriffs. 1449. William Harding Allan Bird 1450. John
Ward George Carr 1451. Robert Baxter John Baxter 1452. William Harding John
Penreth 1453. John Carliell Nich. Wetwang 1454. John Richardson William Roddam
1455. The same. Thomas Cuthbert 1456. The same. John Nixon 1457. The same.
Richard Stevenson In the 37th of King Henry VI. John Viscount Beaumont was
constituted one of the Commissioners to meet with those from Scotland at
Newcastle upon Tyne, touching Satisfaction for such Injuries as had been
committed by the Subjects of either Realm against the other, contrary to the
Articles of Truce formerly concluded between them. Dugdale's Baronage, vol. ii.
p. 54.
1458. John Penrith Henry Fowler 1459. John Richardson Richard Stevenson Edward
IV. King Henry VI. deposed.
1460. John Baxter Nicholas Hayning This Year the distressed Queen of King
Henry with 500 French Soldiers came to the Coast of Scotland, and thence sailed
to Tinmouth, where she landed, but was soon compelled to embark again, and in a
Tempest driven back to Berwick: Whence with the Addition of some Scots, and
accompanied by the King her Husband, she advanced into the Bishopric of
Durham, (the Prince remaining at Berwick) and in their Passage through
Northumberland gained some few Volunteers. To them resort Henry Duke of
Somerset and Sir Ralph Piercy, who a few Weeks before had voluntarily submitted
to King Edward, together with many of King Henry's firm Devotees, so that
together they made Show of a competent Army. However their disorderly burning
and spoiling wheresoever they went, whatsoever they could come at, lost them
the Affection of many, and purchased the Ill Will of many more.
1461. John Richardson Nich. Wetwang K. Edward in the Spring this Year
dispatched John Nevil Vicount Montacute into Northumberland, with Commission to
raise Forces, himself following with his whole Army, but in haste sends some
Companies after the Vicount, to prevent any Attempt of the Bishopric Men, in
case they should prove treacherous: With these the Vicount marched toward King
Henry, and by the Way at Hedley Moor encountered the Lord Hungerford, who with
the Lord Rosse upon the first Attack ran away, leaving Sir Ralph Piercy alone
with his own Regiment, who there with them died valiantly fighting.

Animated with this Success, Montacute, having certain Intelligence that King
Henry was encamped in the Levels near the River Dowell in Hexhamshire, marched
thither by Night, and assaulted his Camp: The Northern Men, used to such
Attempts upon the Borders, resist with an undaunted Resolution, but were soon
deseated, and sustained a great Slaughter, and the Lose of the whole Camp: King
Henry and his Queen escaping narrowly, leaving their best Friends to
Montacute's Mercy; the Duke of Somerset, the Lord Rosse, Mollins, Hungerford,
Wentworth, Hussy, and Sir John Findern, Knight. with many others, were taken
Prisoners: The Duke of Somerset at Hexham was soon beheaded, as afterward the
other Prisoners were served at Newcastle. Afterward King Edward came to
Durham, thence detaching the Earl of Warwick and others into Northumberland, to
reduce such Castles and Forts as yet held out for King Henry.


1462. Allan Bird Henry Foster 1463. Allan Bird William Blaxton 1464. John
Nixon Nich. Hayning This Year after a tedious Negotiation between King Edward
IV. and the King of Scotland, a Treaty of Pacification was concluded at
Newcastle, whereby the Truce for 15 Years, agreed on the preceding Year, was
prolonged for 45 years, viz. to 1510.
1465. Allan Bird William Thompson 1466. John Nixon Robert Chambers 1467.
William Blaxston John Esington 1468. John Nixon John Cook 1469. Rich.
Stephenson John Fisher 1470. William Blaxston Thomas Lockwood King Edward fled
into Holland.
1471. Jonn Nixon Jonn Carr 1472. William Blaxston Thomas Snaw 1473. The same.
Robert Harding 1474. Nich. Hayning William Hodgson Litera Fraternitatis
concessa Johanni Robynson villae Novi Castri, Mercatori, and Johannae uxori
suae, per Priorem and Capitulum Ecclesiae Dunelm. cum Annuitate sex marcarum
pro termino vitae eorundem.
RICARDUS Permissione Divina Prior Ecclesiae Cathedralis Dunelm. and ejusdem
loci Capitulum praedilectis nobis in Christo Johanni Robynson villae Novi
Castri super Tynam, Mercatori, and Johannae uxori suae, salutem in Domino
sempiternam. Mentis devotio and sincerae dilectionis integritas, quas erga
gloriosissimum Confessorem S. Cuthbertum Patronum nostrum, nosque and
Monasterium nostrum Dunelm. hactenus habuistis, and habetis in praesenti, sicut
ex factis vestris notoriis, and praesertim ex donatione unius tenementi cum
suis pertinentiis in vico vulgariter vocato Pilgrym-street infra dictam villam
Novi Castri situati and jacentis, ac ad vos jure haereditario ejusdem Johannae
notorie spectantis, unanimi vestrum assensu and voluntate, ac in puram and
perpetuam elemosinam nobis and dicto nostro Monasterio jam nuper facta, prout
per Cartam vestrae donationis and feoffamenti nobis desuper factam satis sumus
experti, animos nostros excitant and inducunt ut tam vobis quam parentibus
vestris mortuis, quorum nomina and cognomina in libris nostris inter caeteros
Benefactores nostros vivos and mortuos ad aeternam rei memoriam matriculantur,
juxta vestra and eorum merita gratitudinis vicissitudinem spiritualiter
rependamus: unde vos and vestrum utrumque ac Parents vestros praedictos in
Fratres and Sorores spirituales Capituli nostri praedicti praemissorum
occasion and praetextu admittimus per praesentes, and quantum in nobis est,
and Altissimo placuerit, omnium Mistarum, Vigiliatum, Jejuniorum, Orationum,
Praedicationum, Divinorum Officiorum, caeterorumque operum pietatis, and
suffragiorum quorumcunque quae per nos and successores nostros, tam in dicto
nostro Monasterio, quam Cellis ab eodem dependentibus fiunt and fient in
perpetuum, participationem concedimus specialem: and cum ab hac luce per mortem
Deus vos vel alterum vestrum evocaverit, and hoc nobis certitudinaliter
intimatum fuerit, pro vobis and vestrum altero primo decedente, vestris etiam
Parentibus antedictis, sicut pro aliis Confratribus and Consororibus nostris
spiritualibus de medio sublatis consueta orationum suffragia perpetuis futuris
temporibus Altissimo persolvemus. Praeterea propter praemissa, and alia vestra
merita nobis and dicto nostro Monasterio caritative impensa, quandam Annuitatem
sex marcarum monetae Angliae a nobis and successoribus nostris singulis annis
futuris temporibus sub modo and forma subsequentibus percipiendam and habendam,
quamdiu vixeritis aut alter vestrum vixerit, vobis and utrique vestrum diutius
viventi ex gratia nostra uberiori damus and concedimus per praesentes, ita viz.
quod in partem solutionis dictae Annuitatis sex marcarum vos and uterque
vestrum pro tempore vitae vestrae and alterius vestrum diutius viventis
percipietis and habebitis, sicque percipiet and habebit alter vestrum omnimodas
decimas garbarum in villa and campis de Symondsyde annuatim crescentes ad
vestros usus proprios pro quatuor marcis, tribus solidis, and quatuor denariis,
quamdiu terrae ad ipsam villam and tenentes ejusdem pertinentes cultae fuerint
and seminatae, and residuum dictae summae non solutum de nobis seu deputatis
nostris ad hoc assignatis anuis singulis similiter percipietis and habebitis;
si autem hujusmodi terrae ex casu fortuito incultae, vel ad pasturam jaceant
and seminatae non fuerint, tunc vobis and vestrum alteri diutius viventi, per
manus nostras aut deputati nostri hujusmodi de dicta Annuitate sex marcarum pro
termino vitae vestrae, ut praefertur, plenarie erit satisfactum in moneta
Angliae per acquales portiones ad Festa S. Martini in hyeme and Penrecost.
percipienda. Ad quae omnia and singula sic, ut praemittitur, per nos and
successores nostros been and fideliter facienda obligamus nos and Monasterium
nostrum praedictum firmiter per praesentes Sigillo nostro communi roboratas.
Data Dunelm. in domo nostra Cap^tula^ (...) ^se ment^s Junu, Anno Dom. 1474.


1475. John Carliel John Rample 1476. The same. Peter Bewick 1477. John Cook
John Heaton William Dudley Bishop of Durham. Petitio Immunitatis Ecclesiae
Cathedralis Dunelm. per Christophorum Holme.
MEMORAND. Quod quarto die mensis Junii Anno Dom. 1477. Christophorus Holme
coram Dom. Thoma Caly, Sub-priore Ecclesiae Cathedralis Dunelm. Notario etiam
and testibus subscriptis in Ecclesia praedicta personaliter constiturus,
confessus est quod ipse Christophorus una cum Henrico Stobbet and Humfrido
Usher, vigesimo quarto die mensis Aprilis ultimo praeteriti, a pud villam Novi
Castri super Tynam, obvium habuit quendam Willielmum Marlee, in quem idem
Christophorus adtune and ibidem insultum fecit, and ipsum Willielmum cum quodam
baculo vocato Wallshbyll graviter percussit and vulneravit, ita quod inde and
de aliis plagis in ipsum Willielmum per ipsum Christophorum and alios adtunc
and ibidem impositis, mors secuta fuit dictum Willielmum ut dicitur: unde idem
Christophorus immunitatem Ecclesiae praeditae, juxta privilegia and libertates
ejusdem, cum omni contritione and humilitate cordis instanter ob honorem Dei
and S. Cuthberti petiit and obtinuit praesentibus; tunc ibidem Roberto Bartram
publico auctoritate Apostolica Notario, Roberto Holburn de Gatesheved, and
Johanne Laweson de Hilton testibus ad praemissa vocatis and specialiter
requisitis.

Christopher Holme's Petition to be admitted Partaker of the Immunity of the
Cathedral of Durham, upon his taking Sanctuary therein.
MEMORANDUM, That upon the 4th of June, Anno Dom. 1477. Christopher Holme
personally present in the said Church before Thomas Caly, Sub-prior of the
Cathedral of Durham, a Notary, and the Witnesses named below, made Confession,
that he the said Christopher together with Henry Stobbes and Humphrey Usher,
upon the 24th of April last past, meeting one William Marlee in the Town of
Newcastle upon Tyne, whom the said Chirstopher did then and there assault and
grievously beat, and wounded the said William with acertain Club called a
Wallshbyll, so that thereby, as also by other Wounds then inflicted upon him by
the said Christopher and others, Death seized the said William, an was
reported, whereupon the said Christopher with great Penitence and Humility
instantly begged the Immunity of the said Cathedral, according to the
Previleges and Liberties thereof, for the Honor of GOD and St. Cuthbert, which
was readily granted, in the Presence of Robert Bartram, by Apostolical
Authority Public Notary: Robert Holburn of Gateside and John Lawson of Hilton
required especially to attest the Premises.


An' Christi. Mayors. Sheriffs. 1478. Robert Chambers John Ridsdale 1479. John
Rample William Scott 1480. John Carlisle William Bewley 1481. George Carr
William Cunningham 1482. John Cook Robert Harding The King dies.
Richard III.

John Sherwood Bishop of Durham.


1483. John Carlisle Robert Stockett 1484. George Carr George Bird Henry VII.

King Richard III. slain.


1485. Robert Chambers Thomas Harbourn 1486. George Carr Robert Brigham 1487.
The same. John Penrith 1488. Tho. Lockwood William Richardson 1489. George Carr
William Chambers Petitio Immunitatis Ecclesiae Cathedralis Dunelm. per
Alexandrum Taylerour.
ALexander Taylerour Pistor de Novo Castro tertio die mensis Januar. Anno Dom.
1489. in navi Ecclesiae Cathedralis Dunelm. meique Dom. Willielmi Cawthorne
adtunc Cancellarii ejusdem Ecclesiae and testium subscriptorum praesentia
personali^^ (...) Ecclesiae and libertatis ejusdem, pro eo quod ipse die
Mercurii proximo post Festum Epiphaniae, Anno Dom. supradicto, in Novo Castro
juxta Cayse-cross quendam Thomam Smythe ibidem, ut asseruit in defensione sui
corporis, cum quodam gestro in pectore sub mamilla sinistra felonice percuffit,
unde idem Thomas mortuus est eodem die praesentibus ibidem Dom. Georgio
Cornforth Sacrista pro tunc ejusdem Ecclesiae, Edwardo Pattonsune, Willielmo
Sawfurth, and Hugone Wall, testibus ad praemissa vocatis specialiter and
requisitis.


1490. Peter Bewick Thomas Morpeth 1491. George Carr Robert Harding 1492. The
same. Barth. Young Page 185. par. 8.] Confirmatio Henrici VII. super Carta
Henrici IV. de Redditu Novi Castri concesso Monachis de Farne.
HENRICUS Dei Gratia Rex Angliae and Franoiae, and Dominus Hibernia, omnibus ad
quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, salutem. Inspeximus Literas Patentes
Domini Henrici quarti nuper Regis Angliae, progenitoris nostri, factas in ha^c
verba. Henrious Dei Gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae, and Dominus Hiberniae, and
Dux Aquitaniae, omnibus ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, salutem.
Inspeximus Literas Patentes Domini Edwardi nuper Regis Angliae, progenitoris
nostri, factas in haec verba. Edwardus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae and Dominus
Hibernia, and Dux Aquitaniae, omnibus ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint,
salutem. Quia ex testimonio illorum, quibus fiduciam adhibemus, quod D.
Edwardus nuper Rex Angliae, pater noster, in vita sua verbo tenus concessit
Monachis in lusula de Farne Island juxta Bamburgh in Comitatu Northumbriae,
quae quidem Insula est Prioratus Dunelm. commorantibus december quarteria frumenti
and duo dolia vini percipienda singulis annis per manus Majoris and Ballivorum
de Novo Castro super Tynam de elemosina ipsius patris nostri in perperuum, and
quod concessio illn in vita ipsius patris non fuit executioni debite demandata
noc literis suis aliquibus roborata, Nos, pro salute animae ipstus patris
nostri, volentes voluntatem suam in hac part adimplere and continuare,
concessimus Monachis praedictas in recompensationem frumenti and vini
praedictorum tresdecim marcas and decent solidos percipiendos singulis annis ad
Fostum S. Micha^lis per manum Majoris and Ballivorum dictae villae de Novo
Castro super Tynam qui pro tempore fuerint de firma ejusdem Villae, viz.
quinque marcas pro quolibot dolio vuni, etc quinque folidos pro quolibet
quarterio frumenti, habenda eisdem Monachis and successoribus suis Monachis, in
Insula praedicta commorantibus. de eleimosina nostra in perpetuum. In cujus rei
Testimonium has Litems nostras fiori focimus Patentes. Test Mcipso apud
Rokesburgh 31. die Januarii, anno Regni nostri nono, viz, 1815. Nos auiom
concessionem praedictam ratam habentes and gratam eam pro nobis and haeredibus
nostris, quantum in nobis est, acceptamus and approbamus, ac nunc Monachis in
Insula praedicta commorantibus, and eorum succossoribus, Monachis ibidem
commoraturis, concedimus and confirmamus, prout Literae praedictae
rationabiliter testantur, and prout iidem nunc Monaehi and praedecessores sui
Monachi, qui ibidem moram traxerunt dictas tresdecim marcas and december solidos
annuos a tempore confectionis Literarum praedictarum rationabiliter percipere
consueverunt. In cujus rei Testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus
Patentes. Test Meipso apud Westmonaster. 20. die Februarii, Anno Rigni nostri
secundo, viz. 1327. Nos autem Literas praedictas ac omnia and singula in eisdem
contenta, rata, habentes and grata, ea pro nobis and haeredibus nostris,
quantum in nobis est, acceptamus and approbamus, ac nunc Monachis in Insula
praedicta commorantibus, and eorum successoribus Monachis ibidem commorantibus,
ratificamus and confirmamus, prout Literae praedictae rationabiliter restantur.
In cujus rei Testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Test
Meipso apud Westmonaster. 27. die Maii, Anno Regni nostri septimo, 1492.


1493. George Bird Thomas Harbreek Petitio Immunitatis Ecclesiae Cathedralis
Dunelm. per Robertum Grene de South Sheles.
VIcesimo quarto die mensis Augusti, Anno Dom. 1493. Robertus Grene de South
Sheles in Com. Dunelm. venit ad Ecclesiam Cathedralem Dunelm. and ibi pulsata
campana instanter petiit Immunitatem dictae Ecclesiae and libertatem S.
Cuthberti, in eo and pro eo quod primo die mensis Augusti and Anno Dom.
supradicto in Novo Castro super Tynam in quodam vico vocato le Close, per
insultum super eo factum per quendam Robertum Nicholson de Wynlaton nuper de
Comitatu praedicto, sibi in praedicto vico vi and armis cum diversis suis
adhaerentibus infidiando, ut asseruit, praedictum Robertum cum uno le
Scottes-Axe bis in pectore percussit and felonice vulneravit, ex quibus plagis
and vulneribus sic impositis idem Robertus Nicholson incontinenter ibidem
obiit. Pro qua quidem felonia praefatus Robertus Grene instantissime petiit
Immunitatem and Libertatem S. Cuthberti in tuitionem sui corporis and bonorum
suorum infra Tynam and Tysam, praesentibus Dom. Roberto Milner, Magistro
Scholae Grammaticalis Abbathiae Dunelm. Willielmo Hulet, Valecto and Custode
Equorum Dom. Prioris Dunelm. Willielmo Grene and Thoma Grene de Wyvestow,
Husbandmen, testibus ad praemissa rogatis and requisitis.


1494. The same. Thomas Grame Richard Fox Bishop of Durham.
1495. The same. Christoph. Brigham Petitio Immunitatis Ecclesiae Cathedralis
Dunelm. per Johannem Boner de Gatesheved.
SExto decimo die mensis Decembris, Anno Dom. 1495. Johannes Boner de
Gatesheved in Com. Dunelm. Laborer, venit ad Eccles^^^ Cathedralem (...) in suo
propri^ (...) and ibidem pulsara campana petiic Immunitatem and Libertatem S.
Cuthberti, in eo and pro eo quod ipse quadam die Dominica proxima ante Festum
S. Petri quod dicitur ad Vincula, ad quatuordecim annos elapsos insultum fecit
in quendam Alexandrum Stevenson juxta parcum de Doteland in Comitat.
Hagustaldens. ac ipsum Alexandrum cum uno le dager, alio nomine le whynzard, in
pectore felonice percussit, ex qua percussione praefatus Alexander
incontinenter obiit. Pro qua quidem felonia praedictus Johannes Boner
instantissime petiit Immunitatem and Libertatem S. Cuthberti and Ecclesiae
Cathedralis praedictae praesentibus ibidem honestis viris Stephano Byris,
Bucher, Hugone Wall, and Willielmo Blyth de Dunelmo.


1496. The same. William Hayning 1497. Robert Harding William Davell 1498.
George Carr John Penrith 1499. Robert Brigham John Snow Litera Fraternitatis
concessa Willielmo Richardson villae Novi Castri super Tynam, Mercatori, and
Janae uxori suae.
THOMAS CASTLE Permissione Divina Prior Ecclesiae Cathedralis Dunelm. and
ejusdem loci Capitulum, dilectis nobis in Christo Willielmo Rychardson villae
Novi Castri super Tynam, Mercatori, and Janae uxori suae, salutem in Domino
sempiternam. Mentis devotio and sinceri cordis affectus, quos erga
gloriosissimum Confessorum S. Cuthbertum Patromun nostrum ac Monasterium
nostrum Dunelm. habuistis and habetis merito nos excitant and inducunt, ut
vobis gratitudinis vicissitudinem rependamus: unde vos in Confratrem and
Consororem spirititales Capituli nostri Dunelm. admittimus per praesentes, and
quantum in nobis est, omnium Missarum, Vigiliarum, Jejuniorum, Orationum,
Praedicationum, Divinorum Officiorum, caererorumque operum pietatis, quae per
nos and successores nostros tam in dicto Monasterio nostro, quam in Cellis ab
codem dependentibus fiunt aut siont in perpetuum, Domino largiente
participationem vobis concedimus specialem; cumque ab hac luce per mortem
fueritis revocati, and hoc nobis certitudinaliter fuerit intimatum, pro vobis
sicut pro aliis fratribus and sororibus defuncbis consucta orationum suffragia
singulis annis futuris perpetuis temporibus persolvemus. In cujus rye
Testimonium Sigillum commune Capitulli nostri praefentibus est appensum. Data
Dunelm, decimo die Januarii, Ao Dom. 1499.


1500. George Carr William Ridle 1501. Barth. Young William Selby William
Severus Bishop of Durham.
1502. George Carr Thomas Hall 1503. John Snow Robert Baxter 1504. Christoph.
Brigham John Blaxton 1505. The same. John Brandling 1506. George Bird Thomas
Sanderson Christopher Bainbrig Bishop of Durham.
1507. Barth. Young William Harbred 1508. Robert Baxter Thomas Leighton The
King died April 22. and Henry VIII. was proclaimed King.
Hen. VIII.

Thomas Ruthall Bishop of Durham.

Commissio Domini Regis facta Johanni Dalton super Officio Collectoris and
Custumatoris Lanarum, Coriorum and Pellium Lanatarum in portu villae Novi
Castri super Tynam.

HENRICUS Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, and Franciae, and Dominus Hiberniae, dilecto
sibi Johanni Dalton salutem. Sciatis quod nos de fidelitate and circumspectione
tuis before confidentes, assignavimus te ad Custumam nostram Lanarum,
Coriorum, and Pellium lanatarum nobis de haereditate nostra debitam in portu
villae Novi Castri super Tynam, and in singulis locis and crecis eidem portui
adjacentibus levandam and colligendam and ad opus nostrum recipiendam; ac ad
Sigillum nostrum quod dicitur Coket in portu praedicto custodiendum, ita quod
de denariis nobis inde provenientibus nobis respondeas ad Scaccarium nostrum.
Habendum and occupandum officium praedictum quamdiu nobis placuerit, cum
vadiis, feodis, and regardis eidem officio debitis and consuetis. Et ideo tibi
praecipimus quod circa praemissa diligenter intendas, ac ea facias and
exequaris in forma praedicta. In cujus rei Testimonium (...) facimus (...)
Test Meipso apud Westmonast, vigesimo secundo die November. Anno Regni nostri
primo.

Litera Fraternitatis in Ecclesia Cathedralis Dunelm. concessa Georgio Bird,
Aldermanno villae Novi Castri super Tynam.
THOMAS Permissione Divina Prior Ecclesiae Cathedralis Dunelm. and ejusdem loci
Capitulum, dilecto nobis in Christo Magistro Georgio Bird, Aldermanno villae
Novi Castri super Tynam, salutem in Domino sempiternam. Mentis devotio and
sinceri cordis affectio, quas erga gloriosissimum Confessorem S. Cuthbertum
Patronum nostrum, nos and Monasterium nostrum Dunelm. habuistis, habetis, and
credimus in futurun habebitis, merito nos excitant and inducunt ut vobis
gratitudinis vicem rependamus: unde vos in Confratrem nostrum spiritualem
Capituli nostri Dunelm. admittimus per praesentes, and quantum in nobis est,
omnium Missarum, Vigiliarium, Jejuniorum, Orationum, Praedicationum, Divinorum
Officiorum, caeterorumque operum pietatis, quae per nos and successores
nostros, tam in dicto Monasterio nostro, quam in Cellis ab eodem dependentibus,
fiunt aut fient in perpetuum, Domino largiente, participationem vobis
concedimus specialem: cumque ab hac Iuce per mortem Deus vos evocaverit, and
hoc nobis certitudinaliter intimatum fuerit, pro vobis sicut pro aliis
Confratribus nostris defunctis consueta orationum suffragia singulis annis
futuris perpetuis temporibus persolvemus. In cujus rei Testimonium Sigillum
nostrum commune Capituli nostri praesentibus est appensum. Data Dunelm. in domo
nostra Capitulari nono die mensis Aprilis, Ao Dom. 1509.

Letters of Confraternity in the Cathedral of Durham granted to George Bird,
Alderman of the Town of Newcastle upon Tyne.
THOMAS by Divinae Permission Prior of the Cathedral of Durham, together with
the Chapter thereof, send eternal Health in the Lord to our beloved in Christ
Mr. George Bird, Alderman of the Town of Newcastle upon Tyne. The inward
Devotion, and that unaffected Sincerity of Heart you have entertained, do
possess, and, as we believe, shall afterward harbor toward the glorious
Confessor St. Cuthbert our Patron, us, and our Monastery of Durham, do justly
require us to offer you our Returns of Gratitude; wherefore by these Presents
we admit you a spiritual Brother of our Chapter of Durham, and to the best of
our Power, by the Divine Assistance grant you the special Participation of all
Masses, Vigils, Fasts, Prayers, Sermons, Divine Offices, and other Works of
Piety, which at present are, or afterward shall be performed by us and our
Successors, as well in our Monastery aforesaid, as in the Cells depending upon
it; and when it shall please GOD to call you from this Life, and certain
Intimation thereof shall be given us, in futurity we shall annually offer up in
your Behalf the usual Suffrages of Prayer, as hitherto has been done for others
of our spiritual Brethren deceased. In Testimony whereof the common Seal of our
Chapter is affixed to those Presents. Dated at Durham in our Chapter House this
ninth Day of April, 1509.


1509. John Brandling Edward Baxter An' Christi. Mayors. Sheriffs. 1510. Thomas
Riddell Roger Dent 1511. George Bird John Paslopp 1512. John Brandling Thomas
Horsley Petitio Immunitatis Ecclesiae Cathedralis Dunelm. pro Roberto Lee.
UNdecimo die mensis Octobris Anno Dom. 1512. venit ad Ecclesiam Cathedralem
Dunelm, Robertus Lee, ibique pulsata campana, ut moris est, instanter petiit
Immunitatem dictae Ecclesiae and Libertatem S. Cuthberti, pro eo and ex eo quod
idem Robertus simul cum aliis, inter muros villae Novi Castri super Tynam etc.
aquam de Tyne deorsum pontem de Tyne, erat personaliter, quando quidam Johannes
Fresill dactaliter percussit quendam Willielmum Wright, cum uno daggar super
dorsum inter scapulas nono die mensis praedicti, de qua percussione dictus
Willielmus eodem die obiit: and quia idem Robertus Lee, ut asserit, dedit opem
and auxilium dicto Johanni homicidae ad evadendum manus circumstantium ideo
petit pro dicto facto instantissime Immunitatem and Libertatem praedictas,
praesentibus Johanne Watson, Literato, and Jacobo Johnson, Laico, testibus ad
praemissa vocatis and specialiter rogatis.


1513. John Baxton William Harding On the 9th of September. this Year James IV.
King of Scotland being slain in the Battle of Flodden Field, Thomas Howard Earl
of Surrey, General of the English Army, having taken care that the dead Body
should be embalmed, carried it first to Newcastle, whence it was conveyed to
Shene in Surrey, where it was interred. Ld. Herbert. Echard.

Litera Fraternitatis in Ecclesia Cathedrali Dunelm. concessa Edwardo Baxster,
Aldermanno villae Novi Castri super Tynam, and Aliciae uxori suae.
THOMAS Permissione Divina Prior Ecclesiae Cathedralis Dunelm. and ejusdem loci
Capitulum, dilectis nobis in Christo Edwardo Baxster and Aliciae uxori suae,
salutem in Domino sempiternam. Mentis devotio and sinceri cordis affectio, quas
erga gloriosissimum Confessorem S. Cuthbertum Patronum nostrum, nos, ac
Monasterium nostrum Dunelm. habetis, and ut firmiter credimus, in futurum
habebitis, merito nos incitant and inducunt ut vobis gratitudinis vicem
rependamus; unde vos in Confratrem and Consovorem spirituales Capituli nostri
Dunelm. admittimus per praesentes, and quantum in nobis est, and Altissimo
placuerit, omnium Missarum, Vigiliarum, Jejuniorum, Orationum, Praedicationum,
Divinorum Officiorum, caeterorumque operum pietatis, quac per nos and
successores nostros, tam in dicto nostro Monasterio Dunelm. quam in Cellis ab
eodem dependentibus, fiunt aut fient in perpetuum, Domino largiente,
participationem vobis concedimus specialem; cumque ab hac luce per mortem Deus
vos evocaverit, and hoc nobis certitudinaliter intimatum fuerit, pro vobis,
sicut pro aliis Confratribus and Consororibus nostris spiritualibus detunctis
consueta orationum suffragia singulis annis futuris perpetuis temporibus
persolvemus. In cujus rei Testimonium Sigillum commune Capituli nostri
praesentibus est appensum. Data Dunelm. in domo nostra Capitulari decimo die
mensis Augusti, Ao Dom. 1513.


1514. Thomas Horsley Robert Watson Petitio Immunitatis Ecclesiae Cathedralis
Dunelm. pro Jacobo Horsley de Novo Castro.
VIcesimo secundo die mensis Maii, Anno Dom. 1514. venit ad Ecclesiam
Cathedralem Dunelm. quidam Jacobus Horsley de villa Novi Castri super Tynam,
and ibi pulsata campana, ut moris est, instanter petiit Immunitatem Ecclesiae
Cathedralis praedictae and Libertatem S. Cuthberti, pro eo and ex co quod idem
Jacobus decimo die mensis Decembris, Ao Dom. 1513. apud Sandhill in dicta villa
Novi Castri, ex insultu super eum facto, ut asseruit, per quendam Johannem
Taytte, eundem Johannem Taytte cum uno dagario in dextra part pectoris
felonice and laetaliter percussit, imponendo ei plagam mortalem; de qua quidem
plaga sic imposita idem Johannes Taytte incontinenti obiit. Pro qua quidem
felonia sic perpetrata idem Jacobus Horsley captus and attachiatus fuerat per
officiarios sive ministros Domini Regis in hujusmodi villa existentes, and in
prisona vocata Newgate ibidem positus; quam quidem prisonam idem Jacobus
selonice fregit and evasit. Pro qua quidem felonia and e prisona evasione idem
Jacobus instantissime Immunitatem Ecclesiae Cathedralis praedictae and
Libertatem S. Cuthberti petiit praesentibus tune ibidem Johanne Gower, Helisca
Kelsay, and Thoma Byres, Dunelm. Dioces. testibus ad praemissa vocatis
specialiter and rogatis.


1515. Roger Dent Robert Bubell Petitio Immunitatis Ecclesiae Cathedralis
Dunelm.pro Rolando Hall de Marley super Montem.
NOno die mensis September. Ao Dom. 1515. venit ad Ecclesiam Cathedralem Dunelm.
quidam Rolandus Hall de Marley super Montem parochiae de Whikham, and ibidem
pulsata campana, ut moris est, instanter petiit Immunitatem Ecclesiae
Cathedralis praedictae and Libertatem S. Cuthberti, pro eo and ex eo quod idem
Rolandus ex insultu super eum facto, ut asserit, quendam Thomam Heryson de
Whikham praedicta apud Close-yate infra villam Novi Castri super Tynam cum uno
gladio percussit in Festo Nativitatis Dominiae Mariae, Anno Domini supradicto,
imponendo eidem Thomae plagam mortalem in ventre, de qua quidem percussione
idem Thomas Heryson eodem die obiit; pro qua quidem felonia sic perpetrata
supradictus Rolandus Immunitatem and Libertatem supradictas instantissime
petiit, praesentibus tunc Ibidem Johanne Halle de Dunelm. Draper, Willielmo
Raw, and Thomae Byre^s Dunelm. Dioces. testibus ad praemissa vocatis and debite
recuisitis.


1516. John Brandling Peter Chaitor 1517. Edward Baxter Nich. Richardson 1518.
The same. Thomas Baxter 1519. Thomas Horsley Gilbert Middleton 1520. John
Brandling Henry Anderson 1521. Thomas Riddell George Davell 1522. Edward Baxter
Robert Bartram Litera Fraternitatis in Ecclesia Cathedrali Dunelm. concessa
Edwardo Swynburne, Aldermanno villae Novi Castri super Tynam, and Janetae uxori
suae.
HUGO WHITEHEAD Permissione Divina Prior Ecclesiae Cathedralis Dunelm. and
ejusdem loci Capitulum, dilectis nobis in Christo Edwardo Swynborne and Janetae
uxori suae, salutem in Domino sempiternam. Mentis devotio and sinceri cordis
affectio, quas erga gloriosissimum Confessorem S. Cuthbertum Patronum nostrum,
nos, ac Monasterium nostrum Dunelm. habuistis, habetis, and in futurum, ut
firmiter credimus, habebitis, merito nos excitant and inducunt ut vobis
gratitudinis vicem rependamus: unde vos in Confratrem and Consororem
spirituales Capituli nostri Dunelm. admittimus per praesentes, and quantum in
nobis est, and Altissimo placuerit, omnium Missarum, Vigiliarum, Jejuniorum,
Orationum, Praedicationum, Divinorum Officiorum, caeterorumque operum pietatis,
quae per nos and successores nostros, tam in dicto Monasterio nostro Dunelm.
quam in Cellis ab codem dependentibus, fiunt aut fient in perpetuum, Domino
largiente, participationem vobis concedimus specialem; cumque ab hac luce per
mortem Deus vos evocaverit, and hoc nobis certitudinaliter intimatum fuerit,
pro vobis sicut pro aliis Confratribus and Consororibus nostris defunctis,
orationum suffragia singulis annis futuris perpetuis temporibus persolvemus. In
cujus rei Testimonium Sigillum commune Capituli nostri praesentibus est
appensum. Data Dunelm. in domo nostra Capitulari decimo quinto die mensis
Februar. Ao Dom. 1522.


1523. The same. James Lawson Thomas Woolsey Bishop of Durham.
1524. Thomas Horsley Robert Brandling 1525. The same. John Watson 1526. Thomas
Riddell Edward Swinburn 1527. John Blaxston William Carr Acquietantia Majoris
and Vicecomitis villae Novi Castri super Tynam, pro Annuitate viginti Librarum
a Rege concessa pro sustentatione Murorum and Pontis dictae villae.
NOVERINT Universi per praesentes Nos Thomam Riddell, Majorem villae Novi
Castri super Tynam, and Edwardum Swinburne, Vicecomitem, and Camerarium
Comitatus ejusdem, recepisse and habuisse die confectionis praesentium de
Leonardo Musgrave, Armigero, Collectore Custum. and Subsidior. Domini Regis in
portu villae Novi Castri praedictae viginti Libras legalis monetae Angliae, pro
anno instanti finiendo in Festo S. Michaelis Archangeli, Ao Dom. 1527. in
plenam solutionem cujusdam Annuitatis viginti Librarum per Illustrissimum
Principem Dominum nostrum Henricum Octavum, Dei Gratia Angliae and Franciae
Regem, Fidei Defensorem, and Dominum Hiberniae, ad sustentationem Murorum and
Pontis villae Novi Castri praedictae devote concessae. De qua quidem summa
viginti Librarum fatemur nos plene fore solutos, and dictum Leonardum Musgrave
inde fore quietum per praesentes, Sigillo nostro communi sigillatos, datos 5o
die mensis Augusti, Ao Dom. 1527.


1528. Edward Swinburn Andrew Bewick A Recommendation of the Company of
Merchants of Newcastle to the Merchants-Adventurers of England, in Behalf of
John Chaytour, a Free Merchant.
TO the Right Worshipful Masters, Governors, and Assistants of the Right
Honorable Fellowship of Merchant-Adventurers of the Noble Realm of England,
Edward Swinborne Mayor, and Governor of the Fellowship of Merchants of the Town
of Newcastle upon Tyne, Robert Hoppime and John Blenkinsop. Wardens of the said
Fellowship, send greeting in our Lord GOD everlasting, and to whom appertains
due Honor and Reverence: We intimate, show, and declare to your Universities,
that John Chaytour, Bearer hereof, was at this Time the Apprentice and Servant
of Peter Chaytour, Merchant, Whilst he lived, late of the said Town of
Newcastle upon Tyne, deceased, bound by Indenture for the Space of seven Years,
after the accustomed laudable Manner used and observed in semblable Cases
heretofore within this Realm of England, as by the Purpors of the same
Indenture of Apprenticehood more at large it does appear; and sithence the
Departure of the said Peter Chaytour has served Robert Hordson, Merchant, of
the King's Town of Newcastle aforesaid, being of honest Conversation and
virtuous Demennour, without any sinister Impediment, but that the said John
Chaytour may with your lawful Favor be Admitted to his Freedom, and to enjoy
the Liberties of the same accordingly, for the accustomed Duties paying. In
Witness whereof to these Presents we have put the accustomed Seal of the same
Fellowship. Given at Newcastle aforesaid.


1529. James Lawson Bartholomew Be Officium Clerici Minerarum Episcopatus
Dunelm. concessum Willielmo Thomlyngson, Parcario Parci de Gatesheved, and
Thomae Thomlyngson filio suo.
THOMAS Miseratione Divina tituli S. Ceciliae SS. Romanae Ecclesiae Presbyter
Cardinalis, Ebor. Archiepiscopus, Apostolicae Sedis tam natus quam etiam de
Latere Legatus, Angliae Primas and Cancellarius, ac Ecclesiae Cathedralis
Dunelm. Episcopus, Omnibus ad quos praesentes Literae nostrae pervenerint,
salutem. Sciatis quod nos de gratia nostra speciali, ac pro bono and laudabili
servitio quod dilectus serviens noster Willielmus Thomlyngson de Gatished nobis
hactenus impendit, and in futurum nobis and successoribus nostris ac Ecclesiae
Dunelm. fideliter impendet, ordinamus and constituimus ipsum Willielmum
Thomlyngson and Thomam Thomlyngson ipsius filium naturalem Clericum omnium
Minerarum nostrarum tam plumbi and ferri quam carbonum existentium in
quibuscunque locis infra Dominia nostra Episcopatus Dunelm. nec non officium
Clerici Minerarum praedictarum eisdem Willielmo and Thomae conjunctim and
divisim damus and concedimus per praesentes, Habendum, exercendum, and
occupandum officium illud per seipsos aut eorum sufficientem deputatum, pro quo
nobis and successoribus nostris respondere voluerint, durante termino vitae
eorundem and alterius eorum diutius viventis, percipiendo annuatim in eodem
officio de nobis and successoribus nostris durante termino vitae eorundem
Willielmi and Thomae, and alterius eorum diutius viventis, december marcas monetae
Angliae, ad Festum S. Michaelis Archangeli, ad Scaccarium nostrum Dunelm. per
manus Receptoris nostri generalis pro tempore existentis solvendas: nec non
damus and concedimus eisdem Willielmo and Thomae, and eorum alteri diutius
viventi, unam celdram carbonum de qualibet minera carbonum nobis and
successoribus nostris pertinente infra Dominia nostra de Gatished, Whikeham,
and Lynne-deane dietim solvendam and deliberandam; una cum omnibus aliis
proficuis, commoditatibus, rectitudinibus, custubus, and expensis eidem officio
ab antiquo debitis and consuetis, ac in tam amplioribus modo and forma prout
aliquis Clericus in officio illo ante haec tempora habuit and recepit, feu
habere and percipere consuevit. Damus autem universis and singulis Ballivis,
Firmariis, and Ministris nostris and successorum nostrorum omnium Minerarum
nostrarum praedictarum firmiter in mandatis, quatenus praefatis Willielmo and
Thomae, and eorum alteri in faciendo, exercendo, and occupando officium
praedictum sint intendentes, obedientes, and auxiliantes prout decet. In cujus
rei Testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Test Willielmo
Frankeleyne Clerico Cancellario nostro apud Dunelm. primo die mensis October.
Anno Pontif. nostri sexto Ao Dom. 1529.

Cardinal Wolsey's Patent, constituting William Thomlyngson, then Keeper of
Gateside Park, and Thomas Thomlyngson his Son, Clerk of the Mines belonging to
the Bishopric of Durham.
THOMAS, by Divine Mercy, Presbyter Cardinal of the Title of S. Cecilia in the
holy Church of Rome, Archbishop of York, Legate born, as also de Latere of the
Apostolical See, Primate and Chancellor of England, and Bishop of the Cathedral
Church of Durham, to all to whom these our present Letters shall come,
greeting. Know ye, that we, of our especial Grace, and in Return for the good
and commendable Services hitherto performed for us by our beloved Servant
William Thomlyngson of Gateside, and henceforth shall faithfully execute for
us, our Successors, and the Church of Durham, do ordain, and have constituted
William Thomlyngson himself, and Thomas Thomlyngson his natural Son, Clerk of
all our Mines, as well of Lead and Iron, as of Coals, being wheresoever within
the Demesne Lands of our Bishopric of Durham: And by these Presents we give
and grant the said Office of Clerk of the Mines to the said William and Thomas
jointly and separately, to have, exercise, and enjoy by themselves personally,
or their sufficient Deputy, for whose Behavior they shall be answerable,
during the Term of their Lives, or of the Survivor, receiving yearly in the
said Office of us and our Successors, during the Term of Life of thy said
William and Thomas, and the Surviver of them; ten Marks of English Money, to be
paid at our Exchequer of Durham, at the Feast of S. Michael the Archangel, by
the Hands of our General Receiver who shall then be in Office. We likewise give
and grant to the said William and Thomas, and to the Survivor of them, one
Chalder of Coals of each Coal Mine belonging to us and our Successors within
our Demesnes of Gateside, Whikeham, and Lynne-deane, to be daily paid and
delivered, together with all other Profits, Advantages, Rights, Costs, and
Expenses of old accustomed and pertaining to the said Office, and in as
extensive Manner and Form as in the said Office any Clerk formerly had and
received, or used to have and receive. And we firmly command all and singular
our Bailiffs, Farmers, and Officers in the said Mines, that they shall be
observant, obedient, and assistant to the said William and Thomas, and to each
of them, in the Performance, Execution and Possession of the aforesaid Office,
as in Decency they ought. In Testimony whereof, we have commanded these our
Letter to be made Patent, Witnessed by William Frankeleyne, our Chancellor of
Durham, this sixth Day of October, in the sixth Year of our Pontificate, and
the Year of our Lord 1529.


1530. Gilbert Middleton. Roger Mitford. Cuthbert Tunstall, Master of the
Rolls, Bishop of Durham.
1531. Henry Anderson. John Anderson. 1532. Robert Brandling. Ralph Carr. 1533.
Thomas Horsley. William Dent. 1534. Ralph Carr. Peter Bewick. 1535. Thomas
Baxster. Thomas Bewick. 1536. Robert Brandling. John Ord. 1537. John Sanderson.
John White. 1538. Andrew Bewick. George Selby. 1539. Henry Anderson. John
Hilton. 1540. James Lawson. Robert Brigham. This Year War being declared
against Scotland, William Fitz-Williams, Earl of Southampton, Captain of the
Foreward, died at Newcastle; a brave Lord, and so much esteemed, that his
Standard was born in the Foreward in all this Expedition. Lord Herbert.
1541. James Hilton. Robert Cowin. The Scotch Army being routed this Year by an
inconsiderable Number of the English, and the Earls of Glencarn and Cassills,
the Lords Maxwell, Somerville, Oliphant, Gray, and Oliver Sinclair, being,
taken Prisoners, and carried to London, a few Days after the Birth of Mary
Princess of Scotland, and of James the Vth her Father's Death; coming together,
King Henry the VIIIth thought it a favorable Juncture to unite Scotland to
England, by matching his Son Edward with the new Queen of Scotland: He caused
the Lords the Prisoners to be sounded upon this Head, and finding them inclined
to second the Overture, he set them at Liberty, on Condition they would give
Hostages for their Return, in Case the Project of the Marriage did not succeed:
This Condition being accepted, they were conducted to Newcastle, from whence
they returned home, upon Delivery of the Hostages. Rapin.
1542. Henry Anderson. Mark Shaftoe. 1543. Robert Brandling. Barth Anderson. In
this Year, being the 36th of King Henry the VIIIth Reign, an Invasion of
Scotland being determined, Edward Seymour Earl of Hertford, and John Dudley
Lord Lisle High Admiral, were appointed for this Expedition: The former led the
Army to Newcastle, where that Admiral arrived with a Fleet of Men of War and
200 Transport-Ships, on board of which the Troops were embarked: The Earl of
Hertford landed near Leith, took that Town with some Difficulty, and then
marched directly to Edinburgh, of which he became Master with the same Ease.
That City was sacked and burnt, but the English attacked not the Castle for
fear of being engaged in too long a Siege. After that, they returned to Leith,
and burning the Town, returned to Berwick the 18th Day of May. Rapin.
1544. Robert Lewin. Cuthbert Ellison. 1545. George Deval. Oswold Chapman. Edw.
VI.

Upon the 28th of January the King died, in the 59th Year of his Age, and 37th
of his Reign, and was succeeded by Edward his Son, in the 9th Year of his Age.


1546. Henry Anderson Edward Baxter. In this Year, the first of K. Edward VI.
an Army was prepared for the Invasion of Scotland, under the Command of Edward
Seymour Duke of Somerset, Lord Protector. The Army first assembled at
Newcastle, and were there mustered by John Dudley, Earl of Warwick: Here they
sojourned three Days, in which Time the King's Fleet arrived, consisting of 65
Bottoms, whereof one open Galley and 34 tall Ships were well appointed for
Fight: The rest served for Carriage of Ammunition and Victuals. Of the Fleet
Edward Lord Clinton was Admiral, and Sir William Woodhouse his Vice Admiral. In
this Time also a General Muster was taken, the whole Army consisting of between
1200 and 1300 Foot, and 1300 Men at Arms, 2000 Light Horse, being such Men for
their goodly Personages, their ready Horses, their brave Apparel, their Armor,
and Weapons, as never before was an Army set forth in all Points better
appointted. Sir J Haywood.


1547. Robert Brandling. Thomas Scott. 1548. Mark Shaftoe. Cuthbert Blunt.
1549. Cuthbert Ellison Richard Hodgson. 1550. Robert Brigham. Cuthbert
Musgrave. 1551. Barthol. Anderson. Christopher Mitford. In the last Year of
King Edward VI. passed an Act for suppressing the Bishopric of Durham, the
same being void of a Prelate by the Deprivation of Bishop Tunstall, so that the
Gift thereof was in the King's Pleasure, and the Compass of it being so large,
extending to so many Shires so far distant, that it could not be sufficiently
served by one Bishop, and the King being willing to have two Bishoprics for
that Diocese, the one at Durham, which should have 2000 Marks Revenue, and
another at Newcastle, which should have 1000 Marks-Revenue, and also to found a
Cathedral Church at Newcastle, with a Deanery and Chapter out of the Revenues of
the said Bishopric. Therefore the Bishopric is utterly extinguished and
dissolved, and Authority given, by Letters Patents, to erect the two new
Bishoprics, together with the Deanery and Chapter at Newcastle, with a Proviso,
that the Rights of the Dean and Chapter of Durham should suffer nothing by this
Act.

Burnet Hist. Reform. Part II. Book I. page 204.

The King died, and Mary eldest Daughter of King Henry VIII. proclaimed Queen.


1552. Robert Lewin John Law. 1553. Cuthbert Blunt. Robert Ellison. Q. Mary.

In the 3d Session of the Parliament of the first Year of Queen Mary, King
Edward's Act to dissolve the Bishopric of Durham was repealed; and Bishop
Tunstall restored to his Bishopric.


1554. Cuthbert Ellison. William Dixon. 1555. Richard Hodgson. John Wilkinson.
1556. Christop. Mitford William Dent. 1557. Bartram Anderson. William Carr.
1558. Oswald Chapman. Andrew Surety. The Queen died Nov. 17. and was succeeded
by her Sister Elizabeth, younger Daughter of K. Henry. VIII.
1559. Robert Ellison. Robert Anderson. Q. Elizabeth.
1560. Cuthbert Musgrave. Francis Anderson. James Pilkington Bishop of Durham.
1561. John Williamson. Stephen Southeren. 1562. William Dent. George Selby.
1563. Bartram Anderson. Thomas Lidle. 1564. Robert Brandling. W. Selby. 1565.
William Carr. Anthony Swinburn. 1566. Richard Hodgson. Henry Brandling.
Original of Extempore Prayer, never to be forgotten, which the Covenant and
Directory may boast of.
WHILE Queen Elizabeth and her excellent Ministry endeavored to establish the
Church of England upon the best Foundations, and sensible of the Attempts
against her Liturgy, first at Geneva, and afterward at Francfort, and all
reasonable Propositions to convince the Puritans, Rome offers openly to abet
that Separation, in a Way so plausible, that had not Heaven detected the first
Agent, the Anabaptism of Germany must have rooted in England under so gifted a
Teacher as Faithful Cummin, a noted Dominican, whose History I transcribe from
Scrype's Life of Archbishop Parker, page 230 and 244.

In this Year came one of these Dissenting Preachers, in Appearance (but in
Truth a Dominican Friar) to Maidstone, to the Maidenhead Inn there, with diverse
others his Followers; where, as Guests, they bespa e a Dinner: Diverse others
resorted hither, enquiring for this Man, whose Name was Faithful Cummin. These
were his Congregation. Being thus met in the Room they had taken up, Cummin
exercised extemporary Prayer for about two Hours, groaning and weeping much.
The Exercise being over, most of the Company departed; some few carried and
partook with the Exerciser of the Dinner provided.

Of this Meeting John Clarkson, the Archbishop's Chaplain, being informed,
acquainted his Grace, and be the Queen and Council. Before whom at length this
Man was convened the next Year, as a Sower of Sedition among the Queen's
Subjects: Here the Archbishop examined him; he acknowledged he was ordained by
Cardinal Pole, but said that he was fallen off from Rome, and that he was a
Preacher of the Gospel; but that he had no License to preach from any of the
Bishops, since the Reformation. And when the Archbishop asked him, if he had no
such License, how any could be assured that he was not of the Romish Church? He
would prove that by his Prayers and Sermons, wherein he had spoken against Rome
and the Pope, as much as any of the Clergy. And he pretented, that it was
License enough to preach, to have the Spirit which he said he had. When the
Archbishop again demanded, whether that could be the Spirit, that complied not
with the Orders of the Church, lately purged and cleansed from Idolatry? He
replied, he endeavored to make the Church purer than it was. This Man had a
Congregation, that followed him; which he termed Men of tender Consciences: And
with them he prayed and preached, and administered the Sacrament. When he
preached in public, he would be absent till the Divine Service were over (for
the English Liturgy he could not away with) and then he could come into the
Church and preach.

After his former Examination, and giving Bail for his farther Appearance, he
found Opportunity to escape beyond Sea; telling his Congregation, that he was
warned of God to travel abroad, to instruct Protestants in the other Parts of
the World, and would come again to them: Leaving these as his last Words to
them, That spiritual Prayer was the chief Testimony of a true Protestant; and
that the Set Form of Prayer was but the Mass translated; and so praying with
them, and getting Money from them to bear his Expenses, in many Tears he parted
from them; and was afterward seen in the Low Countries, went to Rome, and upon
declaring his Services to the Pope, who, after commending him, gave him a
Reward of Two Thousand Ducati. This is more amply related in the First Part of
Foxes and Firebrands, page 13.


1567 Robert Anderson. John Watson. Nov. 3. this Year died Nicholas Carr, a
Native of this Town, eminent not only for his Learning, but also for his great
Suceess in the Practice of Physic at Cambridge.
1568 Henry Brandling. William Jennison. 1569. Christoph. Mitford. George
Simpson. 1570. Robert Ellison. George Briggs. 1571. William Jennison. Henry
Anderson. 1572. Thomas Liddell. Robert Barker. 1573. William Selby. Mark
Shaftoe. 1574. John Watson. Roger Law. 1575. Henry Brandling. William Ridle.
1576. Henry Brandling. Christopher Lewen. 1577. Robert Baker. Edward Lewen.
Richard Barnes Bishop of Durham.
1578. Mark Shaftoe. Henry Leonard. 1579. Roger Raw. James Carr. 1580. Richard
Hodgson. Robert Atkinson. 1581. William Jennison. Henry Chapman. 1582. William
Riddel. Henry Mitford. 1583. Henry Anderson. Roger Nicholson. 1584. Henry
Mitford. Lionel Maddison. 1585. Robert Barker. George Whitfield. 1586. Henry
Chapman. Robert Dudley. 1587. Edward Lewin. Robert Eden. 1588. Roger Nicholson.
George Farnaby. 1589. William Selby. John Gibson. Matthew Hutton Bishop of
Durham.

This Year, being the 31st of Q. Elizabeth, Newcastle was made a Free Town of
itself, and for ever to be known by the Name of the Mayor and Burgesses of the
Town of Newcastle upon Tyne, in the County of Newcastle upon Tyne, with License
to purchase Lands and Tenements by that Name, to them and their Successors, in
Fee and Perpetuity; and to give, grant, and demise the same; and to have a
Common Seal for transacting their Affairs. and the same to break, change, or
alter; and to pay per Annum 100 l. and to have the Town granted in Fee; and
used to have the Goods, Chattels, Waves, Estreys, and Treasure found.

This Year likewise was granted to the Town an Admiralty Jurisdiction within
their own Liberties, together with Confirmation of the Declaration Ao 19 K.
Hen. VIII. from Arthur Plantagenet Viscount Dusley Lord High Admiral, That
Newcastle upon Tyne was exempt from his Jurisdiction.


1590. William Riddel. Ralph Jennison. 1591. George Farnaby. William Greenwell.
1592. Roger Raw. Thomas Lidle. 1593. Lionel Maddison. William Jennison. 1594.
Henry Anderson. George Selby. Matthew Hutton Bishop of Durham translated to
York, was succeeded in the Bishopric of Durham by Tobias Matthew Dean of
Durham.
1595. William Riddell. Francis Anderson. 1596. Ralph Jennison, Andrian
Hedworth. Henry Chapman. 1597. Thomas Liddell. William Huntley. 1598. George
Farnaby. William Warmouth. 1599. William Jennison. James Clavering. 1600.
George Selby. Robert Anderson. March 22. this Year, being the 42d of Q.
Elizabeth, was confirmed the Custom of Foreign Bought and Foreign Sold, in the
following Words:

That no Merchant being a Foreigner or Stranger from the Liberty of the Town of
Newcastle, should or might sell any of the Merchandises or Wares within the s^w
Town, except victuals, and except in the Markets and Fairs to be kept within
the aforesaid Town and Liberties, and Precincts of the same, unto any Foreign
Merchants: Neither might or should any such Foreign Merchants buy any Ware or
Merchandise, except what are before excepted, and except in the Fairs to be
kept in the aforesaid Town, the Limits and Liberties of the same, as aforesaid,
from any Foreign Merchant within the same Town, the Liberties and Precincts of
the same, upon Pain of Forfeiture of those Merchandises, so as aforesaid bought
and sold, to the public Use of the said Mayor and Burgesses, by them or their
Officers to be levied or seized for ever.


1601. Francis Anderson. Thomas Ridle. 1602. Robert Dudley. Francis Burrell.
March 24. died the Queen, and was succeeded by King James I. and sixth of the
Name in Scotland.
1603. Will. Warmouth. Matthew Chapman. James I.

When King James I. came from Scotland to take Possession of the Crown of
England, he arrived at Newcastle on the 9th of April 1603. where he staid three
Days, and heard Tobias Matthew Bishop of Durham preach on the Sunday: And the
Inhabitants were so transported with his Arrival and Presence, that during his
Stay they bore all the Charges of his Household. Echard.


1604. Thomas Riddell. Peter Ridle. This Town was thought worthy to give the
Honor of the Title of Earl to the Duke of Lenox.
1605. Lionel Maddison. Henry Maddison. 1606. Sir George Selby. Hugh Selby.
Tobias Matthew Bishop of Durham was translated to York, and succeeded by
William James Dean of Durham.
1607. James Clavering. Robert Shaftoe. 1608. Henry Chapman William Hall. 1609.
Thomas Liddell. Thomas Lidle. 1610. William Jennison. Timothy Draper. 1611. Sir
George Selby. Alexander Davison. 1612. Francis Anderson. Roger Anderson. 1613.
Sir Henry Anderson. Henry Chapman This Year was apprehended at Glasgow one
Ogleby a Jesuit, sent by Command of his Superiors in the College of Gratts in
Stiria: By the King's Command, he was interrogated upon five several Questions;
viz. Whether the Pope be Judge in Spiritualibus over his Majesty; and whether
in Temporalibus, if it be in Ordine ad Spiritualia? Whereto he answers in
Writing to the first Part affirmatively, in Spiritualibus; but whether in
Temporalibus, he is not obliged to answer to any but a Judge of Controversies
in Religion, the Pope, or one of his Authority. 2. Whether the Pope has a Power
to depose Kings after their Excommunication, and in particular his Majesty? To
this he answered, He will not declare but to a lawful Judge of Religion. 3.
Whether the Pope has Power to excommunicate Kings, such as are not of his
Church, as his Majesty? To this he answered affirmatively; and that all People
baptized are under the Pope's Power. 4. Whether it be no Murder to kill the
King so deposed? 5. Whether he has Power to assoil Subjects from the Oath of
their Allegiance to his Majesty? To these he answers ut supra.

He railed at the Oath of Allegiance as damnable and treasonable against God;
so became unworthy of Mercy, and ordered to prepare for his Trial; and the
Evening before it began, was told, that he was not to be tried for any thing
relating to his Religion, but for his former Answers to the Questions, which he
may recall, and crave Mercy: This he utterly refused. Upon his Trial, he
protests not to acknowledge the Judges nor Judgment lawful: The King to have no
Authority but derivative from his Predecessors, who acknowledged the Pope's
Jurisdiction: If the King will be to me, as they were to mine, he shall be my
King; if otherwise, I value him not: And that I repent only for not having been
so busy as I should in that which you call perverting of Subjects, and I call
saving of Souls: I do decline the King's Authority, and will do it still in
Matters of Religion; most of your Ministers maintain it, and if they be wise,
will continue in that Mind. His insolent Speech was shortened by the Jurors
quick Return, who found him guilty, and he had Sentence of Treason; and to stop
his Raillery, he was after Noon the same Day hanged at Glasgow.

He was a desperate second Ravillae, and ready in that Devilish Doctrine of
Deposing and Dethroning Kings; which he urged the more (he said) as consonant
to the Kir^ Ministers Tenets; and that nothing troubled him, but to be taken
away 'ere he had done That which all Scotland and England should not have
prevented; and had it been performed, no Torments would have been by him
refused.


1614. Will. Warmouth. John Cook. 1615. Francis Burrell. Robert Bewick. 1616.
Sir Thomas Riddell. Nicholas Misburn. 1617. Lionel Maddison. William Bonner.
Richard Neile Bishop of Durham.

King James at his going into Scotland this Year, gave Directions for repairing
and orderly adorning his Chapel, and Officers sent out of England with
Necessaries, and some Portraits and Pictures of the Apostles carved for the
Pews and Stalls; but the People exclaim at the Sights, that such Images were to
be set up; the Organs were come before, and after comes the Mass. The King was
angry at their Ignorance, and sent them word to distinguish betwixt Pictures
intended for Ornament and Decoration, and Images erected for Worship and
Adoration. So the Scots Kirk can endure Dogs, Bears, and Bulls, nay
Devils-Dressings, to be figured in Churches, but not the Patriarchs, nor
Apostles. Frankland's Annals, p. 28.


1618. James Clavering. John Clavering. 1619. Sir Peter Riddell. Robert
Anderson. 1620. Henry Chapman. Nicholas Tempest. 1621. William Jennison. Henry
Lidle. 1622. Sir George Selby. Richard Ledgar, William Jackson.
1623. Henry Maddison Henry Bows, William Jennison.
1624. William Hall. William Jackson. Charles I. The King died March 24. and
was succeeded by his only Son King Charles I.
1625. Thomas Liddell. Ralph Cole. 1626. Alexander Davison. Ralph Cock. 1627.
Henry Chapman. Henry Cock. George Montaigne Bishop of Durham.
1628. Robert Bewick. Ralph Gray. John Howson Bishop of Durham.
1629. John Clavering. Robert Shaftoe. 1630. Robert Anderson. James Carr. 1631.
Will. Warmouth. Henry Warmouth. This Year the Sheriff of of Durham was ordered
by the King and Council to apprehend Offenders damaging the River Tyne, and to
carry them before the Mayor of Newcastle, Conservator of the said River.
1632. Sir Lionel Maddison Francis Bows. Thomas Morton Bishop of Durham.
1633. Ralph Cole. Nicholas Cole. His Majesty this Year, in his Journey to be
crowned in Scotland, arrived at Durham upon Saturday, June the 1st, and was
received by the Bishop, Dean, and Prebendaries, with the truest Marks of
Veneration. Upon Sunday the Bishop preached before his Majesty in the
Cathedral, and upon Monday, June the 3d, set forwards for Newcastle about Ten
in the Morning, and arrived there in the Evening, attended by the Earls of
Northumberland, Arundel, Pembroke, Southampton, Holland, the Marquis Hamilton,
Dr. Laud Bishop of London, and many other Persons of Quality; who were all
entertained by the Magistrates and Town. Echard.
1634. Ralph Cock. John Marley. 1635. Sir Peter Riddell. Leonard Carr. 1636.
Thomas Liddoll. Henry Lawson. 1637. John Marley. Peter Maddison. This Year
Card. Richlieu's secret Attempts against England, in Return for our Help to the
Rochellers, took Effect, in Consequence of innumerable secret Plots and
Undertakings parallel to those we have mentioned above, viz. 1566 in England,
and 1611, 1617 in Scotland: Since July the 23d, a zealous Woman kindled the
first Firebrand, in the Presence of the Privy Council, Archbishop and Bishops,
at Reading the Liturgy in St. Giles's Church in Edinburgh, she first casting a
Stool at the Reader thereof, with most opprobrious Language, whereby the Mob
became exasperated to so great a Height, that after innumerable Curses, they
endangered the Life of that Bishop with Stones, Seats, Stools, and Cudgels, who
attempted from the Pulpit to allay their Fury. Frankland's Annals, p. 609.
1638. Alexander Davison. Mark Milbank. In Consequence of last Year's
Insurrection at Edinburgh, the Solemn League and Covenant was universally
accepted in Scotland, the Snare into which England was soon after drawn, to its
own general Ruin, Newcastle being the first Victim sacrificed to that Idol.

October. 31. A. Declaration published in Scotch against the Service Book, and
Aid solicited from France.


1639. Robert Bewick. John Emmerson. His Majesty, at the Head of a gallant
Army, marched from York against the Scotch Covenanters, and Duke Hamilton with
the English Fleet, and 5000 Foot on board, enters the Frith, which struck a
general Terror in the Rebels, they having so many fast Friends about the King,
were not so apprehensive of the Army, thereby procuring a pacifick Dissolution
of their Enemies while their own Officers were retained in Pay, and the Men
secured, to be ready at Command.

Afterward, in the Assembly, they censure the King's large Declaration of
those Troubles, and upon Surmize only, name Dr. Balcanqual, Dean of Durham,
Author thereof, and demand he may be sent to Scotland to abide his Trial, which
would have been more than Ordeal. Frankland's Annals, p. 787.


1640. Sir N. Cole, Knight. Bar. Francis Lidle. The Scottish Covenanters Letter of
Submission to the French King, presented by his Majesty to his Parliament of
England.

In this Mayor's Time the Scots, under the Command of General Lesley, Montross,
and others, upon Friday August ^1. invaded the Kingdom of England without any
Opposition; and, to give the greater Encouragement to the Soldiers, the Earl of
Montross leading the Van, alighted off his Horse, and went through the River
Tweed on Foot, so zealous did he still seem for the Cause. The Army advancing
unmolested through Northumberland, came to Newburne upon the River Tyne, four
Miles above Newcastle, opposite to which the Lord Conway was advantagiously
posted with 3000 Foot and 1500 Horse, able to have made a sufficient
Resistance. The Armies being in View, Lesley sent a Messenger to the Lord
Conway, desiring Leave tp pass, with a Petition to his Majesty, To which Answer
was returned, That he might have Liberty to pass with a few, but not with his
Army; upon which Lesley commanded 300 Horse to ford the River, which they did,
but were soon forced to retire by the Musketeers from behind an Intrenchment;
which Lesley perceiving, played so furiously upon it with his Cannon, that the
Soldiers soon abandoned their Post, threw down their Arms, and fled: Whereupon
the Scots Cavalry advance again, and are entertained by Commissioner-General;
Wilmot, who gallantly charged them back into the River; but these were
overpowered by Numbers of the Scots, and being withal galled and annoyed by the
Scottish Ordnance, were forced to retire in Disorder, 200 English being slain
and taken Prisoners. The Lord Conway retired to North-Allerton, where the Noble
Earl of Strafford was very severe upon him, because of this Defeat, which my
Lord Clarendon calls an infamous and irreparable Rout.

The immediate Consequence was, Numbers of People fled, with their Families and
Goods, into Yorkshire, Bishop Morton to his Castle at Stockton, and thence into
the South Dr. Balcanqual their Countryman, the Dean, made haste to secure
himself, the Scots threatening to treat him as an Incendiary for Penning the
King's large Declaration. The next Day the Scots were attended by Commissiners
from Newcastle, Sir Jacob Ashley, their Governor, judging the Town not tenable,
and sinking his Ordinance in the River, thought fit to desert it, to treat for
the Surrender of that important Town. On Sunday the, 30th of August the Scotch
Army entered. Newcastle, where they took Possession of the King's Magazines of
Arms, Ammunitions, and Victuals, and an Opportunity of enlarging Mr. Colvil,
who had been sent by the Covenanters into France with Letters to the French
King and Cardinal Richlieu. The same Day Mr. Henderson preached in St. Nicholas
Church, and after Sermon the General and Nobility was treated by the Mayor. The
Earl of Lothian was made Governor of the Place, with a Garrison of 2000 Men.
Which Trust they thought he well deserved, such was his Zeal to the Cause, that
though both his Father and himself owed all their Wealth and Greatness to the
King's Bounty, yet he was one of the first that engaged against him. At the
same Time a more dismal Fate attended the Lord Haddington, who, having a
vowedly fallen from the King's Side, and listed under Lesley, was left at home
with his Regiment to attend the Motions of the Garrison of Berwick. For that
purpose, he kept his Quarters at Dunglass, where standing at Noonday in the
Courtyard with about sixty Gentlemen, the Castle having a Magazine of Powder,
which suddenly taking Fire, was blown up, and in a Moment buried him and all
his Company, so that they were never more seen. This Tragical Event being
reported at Court, the Royalists were not so moderate in their Consures as the
King himself, who only said, that he had been very ungrateful to him, yet he
was sorry he had not Time to repent.

Under these discouraging Circumstances the Earl of Strafford met the English
Army at Durham, where he highly blamed the Lord Conway for the late Dishonor.
After that, he found it necessary to retire to the skirts of Yorkshire, leaving
all Northumberland, and the Bishopric of Durham, to the Pleasure of the
Conquerors, who besides Provisions of Coals and Forage, sessed these Parts at a
Contribution of 850 l. per Day, that is, 300 l. to be paid out of
Northumberland, 350 l. out of the Bishopric, and 200 l. out of the Town of
Newcastle. Echard's Hist, Lib. 1. Cap, 3.

The Agreement between the Scots and Newcastle, relating to the Payment of the
200 l. per Day, is as follows, taken from the Original.
AT Newcastle the Twenty-Third Day of September, the Year of God One Thousand
Six Hundredth and Forty Years. It is appointed and agreit, betwixt them of the
Commit of Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland under subscribed on the one
Part, and the Mayor and Aldermen of the said Town of Newcastle upon Tyne under
subscribed, for themselves and in the Name of the remeinant Burgesses, and
other Inhabitants of the said Town, on the other Part, in manner following
(that is to say) the said Mayor and Aldermen, at the Request of the said
Commit, and for eschewing further Inconveniences, have condescendedit to
lend the Somes of Money following in manner; viz. the Some of Two Hundred
Pound Sterlinge daily, beginning the first Day's Payment thereof at the
Fourteenth Day of September Instant, and swaforth daily hereafter duringe the
Abode of the Scottish Army at Newcastle; and because here is already nine Days
spent, they oblidge them to pay the whole ten Days, upon the Twenty-third and
Twenty-fifth Days of September Instant, and swaforth daily, at least weekley
thereafter, beginning for the Week following on Tuesday the Twenty-ninth of
this Instant, and swaforth weeley thereafter, with special Condition, that
after the said first Some for the said first Ten Days is paid, that what
Necessaries for the Entertainment of the Army of any Kind of Victual or other
Provision, is or shall be received by the General Commissioner, the same shall
be allowit in Payment either in Whole or in Part of the said Some daily to be
lent, as said is for the quhilks Causes, These of the said Commit under
subscribed, bynds and oblidges them for themselves, and in the Name of the
Estates of the said Kingdom of Scotland, to refound and pay the said Somes, at
least so much thereof as shall be received by the General Commissioner, either
in Money, Victual, or other Provision, at the Prices condescendit upon to the
said Mayor, Aldermen, and their Successors, betwixt the Daite thereof and the
last Day of November, in this Instant Year of God One Thousand Six Hundrith and
Forty Years, together with the Some of Ten Pounds Money for ille Hundred
Pounds, together also with the ordinary Interest thereof, swalong as the same
shall remain unpaid, after the last Day of November next. And further, the
said Commit, for themselves, and in the Name of the General and Others of the
Scottish Army, does hereby oblidge them, that neither the said Mayor, Aldermen,
nor any of the said Burgesses, or other the Inhabitants foresaid, shall be
troubled in their Persons, Trades, Houses, Lands, or Possessions, but shall
have a full and ample Safeguard for any Harm can come to them, or any of them.

Providing every one of them pay their several Proportions according as it
shall be set down amongst themselves. With Declaration always, that none of
those who have carried Arms and appeared against the sottish Army, shall have
any Benefit of this Agreement. And in Case any of the said Bursses, or others
the Inhabitants, shall be refractory, and refuse to lend their Proportions, the
Under-subscribed shall be free of so much of the foresaid Some^^ as comes to
their Part, the said Mayor and Aldermen giving up a List of their Names and
Somes, and make it good that they are responsable Persons, and has Goods or
Land within the said Town able to pay their Proportion.

After this Agreement was signed, they seated themselves in the Town. Where (as
the Authority mentioned says) they were indulged with good Provisions, and
better Entertainment than they enjoyed in their own Country, which cost the
Town a vast Sum of Money, for they continued too long a Time before the People
were rightly safed of them. Besides the 850 l. a Day, they seized the Rents of
the Bishop, Dean, and Chapter, and Papists, as Enemies to their Designs; and
Lesley suffered his Soldiers to rifle and break open Shops and Houses, and
likewise seized on four great English Ships laden with Corn as lawful Prize.
Echard.


An' Christi. Mayors. Sheriffs. 1641. The same. Francis Anderson. May 21.

There was a Message sent to the Lord; touching the disbanding the two Armies,
if not totally, yet Part and Part at a Time: Upon which Master Treasurer made a
Report that there as an Arrear to the Scots of 120000 l. besides the 300000 l.
In the Afternoon the Commons voted it, and it was confirmed by the Lords, that
both Armies should be satisfied and disbanded by the second of the next Month.

June 19.

There was a great Debate about the Payment of the 300000 l. allowed the Scots;
at length it was concluded, that they should have 100000 l. of it paid at
Michaelmas come Twelve-months, and the other 200000 l. at Midsummer Two-years
after.

June 22.

It was voted, that eight of the Lords, and six of the Commons, should be
appointed as Commissioners to pay the Scots the Money of Assistance allowed
them.

July 7.

At a Conference betwixt both Houses, there was a Debate about disbanding the
Armies; and it was concluded on, that there should be 50000 l. presently sent
down for the disbanding the English Army, and the Scots to have 60000 l. to
disband theirs, to be paid by the Earl of Warwick.

August 6-

At a Conference, the Lord Lowdon made a Report from the rest of the Lords in
Scotland, that they had accepted the Articles of Pacification with much
Thankfulness, and had agreed for the speedy disbanding of their Army, and given
Public Faith upon it.

August 24.

There came Letters this Day of the Scots marching away, and that his Majesty
had prevailed with the Parliament of Scotland, that their Ordnance and
Ammunition should be left at Newcastle to be conveyed to London.


1642. Sir John Marley, Knight. Henry Maddison. In this Year just before the
breaking out of the Civil Wars, King Charles I. ordered the Earl of Newcastle
[William Cavendish] to securce the Town of Newcastle; which was done, though with
much Difficulty; and then he caused Tinmouth Castle to be seized also. Rapin.

In this Year also Leonard Carr, Esquire an Alderman of this Place, had the
following Articles exhibited against him by the Commonwealth, to each of which
my Authority has made a marginal Remark; which take as follows.

I.
He the said Leonard Carr joined with Sir John Marley and others This first
Article is really true, that he and about thirty more raised 300 l. amongst
them; but they could not get one Man to prove it.
in Newcastle, in lending Money to the late King Charles, after he had left and
deserted the Parliament in the Year 1642.

II.
The said Mr. Carr joined with Sir John Marley and other Aldermen, The Truth of
his Article may appear under his Hand in the Common Council Chamber.
in disposing of 706 l. out of the Town's Treasury, which was lent and sent to
the King accordingly, at his first raising War against the Parliament.

III.
He the said Mr. Carr did join with Sir John Marley in laying an Imposition of
Threepence upon every Ch^ldron of Goals, This Article also may be proved his
Hand in the Towns's Books at this Day.
for maintaining of the Garrison of Newcastle, and for satisfying of the Sums
of Money taken up by Sir John Marley and others, for the Maintenance of the War
against the Parliament.

IV.
The said Mr. Carr being Governor of the Merchants Company, This may be proved
under his Hand in the Merchants Company's Books.

The several Subscriptions were shown to the Committee appointed by the
Council.


acquainted them with the King's great Want of Money, and pressed them to a
Contribution, and thereupon a considerable Sum of Money was raised and sent
away to his Majesty.

V.
He the said Mr. Carr was appointed by Sir John Marley and others, This is
known to all the Town and Country
as chief Surveyor for the building of a Fort in Newcastle, against the
Parliament's Forces; which he performed so well, that for his Merit they called
it by his Name, CARR's BATTERY.

VI.
He the said Mr. Carr did, This is certainly true, and I can give Oath of it,
the Writing being his own Hand.
by a Writing under his own Hand (which was found at the Storming of Newcastle
among the Governor's Papers) subscribe the Earl of Essex and the Parliament of
England Traitors, for taking up Arms against the King.

VII.
He the said Mr. Carr, upon the Parliament's Forces approaching Newcastle, This
will be proved upon Oath by the Persons who owed the Houses, Informations being
given in already
caused to be pulled down some Houses in a Place called Sandgate, to the utter
undoing of the poor Inhabitants.

VIII.
The said Mr. Carr did join with Sir John Marley and others, This Mr. Carr
confessed before Major General Hammond, and I saw his Hand to a peremptory
Letter
in writing a Letter to General Lesley, and the English Commissioners,
positively refusing to deliver up the Town when they, in the Parliament's Name,
and for their Use, made Demand thereof in Writing.

IX.
And further, The Answer he gave himself before his Highness's Council to these
Articles, I have seen Courage failed him in the day of Battle; he was like Man
sinking, who will catch at the smallest sinking, Reed to save his life.
However, set aside a Frailty too common still be looked upon as a Lover of his
King and Country.
he the said Mr. Carr, was summoned before the Committee for Sequestration for
his Delinquency, where he was upon his Examination of the Articles against him,
declared a Delinquent, and since that Time before the Committee confessed
himself a Delinquent, and craved the honorable Respects to him.


This Year, in July, the Lord Gray of Wark, and others, were sent by the
Parliament to invite the Scots once more to invade England, who the following
Month sent the Solemn League and Covenant to them, which was readily read in
Parliament, and taken by the House of Commons Sept. 23. in St. Margaret's, and
Oct. 15. by the Lords in Westminster-Abbey. A sit Prelude to their sanctified
Reformation, and a proper Imitation of that at Munster!
1643. The same. Cuthbert Carr. 1644. The same Henry Warmouth
James Cole. Robert Ellison On the 15th of January, this year, in a dismal
snowy Season, the Scots, contrary to all Faith and Loyalty, passed the River
Tweed at Berwick, accompanied by a select Committee of their own, and there met
another from England, who were to conduct and supply them in the most loving
Manner: Upon their Conjunction, was framed the General Committee of both
Kingdoms, and in Effect became a united Camp-Parliament. Before the Advance of
the Army by a Trumpeter, they sent a Letter to Sir Thomas Glenham, and the rest
of the Commanders and Gentlemen of Northumberland, at Alnwick; in which they
insisted upon the Solemn League and Covenant, and declared their well-weighed
Resolutions, to prevent that imminent Danger, not only of Corruption, but of
Ruin, which they saw evidently intended to the true Protestant Religion, by the
Popish and Prelatical Faction; and to rescue his Majesty's Person and Honor
from the Counsels of those, whose Ends are little better than Popery and
Tyranny. Therefore, they expected the Concurrence of them, and all others; and
if they met with any Opposition, the Law of Nature, and their own Reason, would
tell them what they are to expect. With this Letter they sent also a Copy of
the Scotch Declaration, to give it the greater Force and Authority among the
Vulgar.

The brave Sir Thomas Glenham, after a serious Consultation with the Officers
and Gentry, how most to incommode the Enemy's March, returned a sharp Answer;
in which he and the rest declare. That, without the Sight of that Letter, they
could not have believed that the Scottish Nation, or the present prevailing
Party in that Nation, would have attempted an Invasion of England, so contrary
to the Laws of God, of Nations, and of both Kingdoms, but especially to the
late Act of Pacification; so opposite to their Allegiance and Gratitude to his
Majesty, to that neighbourly Love they pretend, to that discreet Care they
should have of their own Safety. They declare, that no Order of Committees
whatsoever, of Men, or Angels, could give Power to make War against their
natural Sovereign, upon the empty Pretense of nameless evil Counselors; and
for the English Agents, they could not believe them any Commissioners lawfully
authorized by the Two Houses of Parliament, or yet by the House of Commons,
whence so many Members were expelled by partial Voting, so many banished by
seditious Tumults, so many voluntarily absent out of Conscience; where
Desperation, Want of Opportunity to depart, or Fear of certain Plunder, were
the chief Bonds which held the little Remnant together from Dissipation, where
the venerable Name of Parliament was made a State to countenance the pernicious
Counsels and Acts of a close Committee.

As to the Scots, they declare, that no Covenant whatsoever could justify such
Proceedings, begun without any Necessity, or so much as Provocation. After
answering their Pretensions, they desire them to consider, that there must be
an Account given to God of all the Blood which should be shed in this Quarrel:
And since their Insults were such, that a vanquished Nation could scarce
endure, from their Conquerors, they could not think they were grown so same, as
to desert there Religion, Laws, Liberties, and Estates, upon Command of
Foreigners; and to suffer themselves to be made Beggars, and Slaves, without
Opposition.

These Paper-Skirmishes had no other Effect, than to gain some little Time for
Sir Thomas Glenham to draw his Forces and Artillery to Newcastle, for Alnwick
was not tenable; besides, he found several of the Gentlemen of Northumberland,
especially such as were allied to the Lord Gray of Wark, either for fear of the
Scotch, or Affection to their Cause, were very backward in opposing the Enemy.
The Scotch marched after him by slow and difficult Marches, by Reason of the
Snow and Floods, and on the 3d of February summoned the Town of Newcastle, but
finding they were not able to take the Place, after three Weeks Stay, and some
Skirmishes, they passed the River Tyne on the 28th of February, and on the 4th
of March entered Sunderland. The Marquis of Newcastle, General for the King in
these Northern Parts, having reinforced his Army to about 14,000 Horse and
Foot, attended so near the Scotch Army, and so intercepted their Supplies, that
sometimes they had neither Meat nor Drink, and were never possessed of above
twenty-four Hours Provision; but they colored over their necessity by keeping
a solemn Fast; and pressing on toward Durham for better Quarters, to stop
their advancing, on the Twenty-third of March the Marquis drew up his Army at
Hilton, on the North of the River Were; the Scots were drawn up on Whitburn
Lizard, a Hill East from them, adjoining to the Sea: So the Armies faced each
other, and skirmished in Parties; the Field-Word given by the Marquis being
prophetically enough, Now or Never; and by the Scots, in their assuming Way,
The Lord of Hosts is with us. The Marquis not being able to force the Scots to
a Battle, retreated toward his Quarters at Durham, and the Scots followed
slowly, but could make no considerable Advance, till the Lord Fairfax, and the
rest of the Parliament Forces, by a new Diversion, gave them Opportunity to
descend into Yorkshire. Echard.

In the same Year, after the City of York had surrendered to the Parliament,
the three Armies thought sit to separate; the Scottish Army was ordered to
march Northwards, and joining with the Earl of Calander, who had entered
England with 10,000 Scots, laid Siege to Newcastle on the 13th of August; the
Siege lasted above two Months, and proved one of the most resolute in the
Kingdom; all Sorts of Policy of Peace and War; by Treaty, by Mines, by
Assaults, having been used to little Effect, the Inhabitants resolving (if
possible) never to fall into the Hands of the Scots. But on Saturday the 19th
of October the whole Scotch Army furiously set upon the Town, and having made
three Breaches, after a tedious and bloody Storm, they at last mastered it. Sir
John Marley, Sir Nicholas Cole, and Sir George Barker, got into the Castle,
where being forced by Necessity, they came to a Capitulation, and surrendered
on the 27th of the same Month. The Town being taken by Assault, was
sufficiently plundered; but the Surrendry proved of great Importance to the
City of London, where the poorer Sort of People, for the two last Years, were
almost starved for want of Fuel, Coals having been risen to the Price of 4 l.
a Chaldron; a Price never known before that Time. Echard.

In this Year the round Tower under the Moot-Hall, toward the Sand-Hill,
called the Half Moon, which was the old Castle of Monkchester, was by Sir John
Marley made use of to secure the River and Key-side against the Scots, and the
other Castle he put into good Repair, which was very ruinous: On the former he
laid great Guns, for the Use abovementioned; and on the latter he laid great
Ordnance, to beat off those Guns which the Scots had laid upon the Banks of
Gateshead against the Town. And this he managed bravely for a long time; for
the Scots began the siege about July, and it was the 19th of October before
they could take it; which they did by Storm, upon the Day after St. Luke's Day;
and it was (...) by the White Friar Tower and Sandgate, where the Colliers of
Elswick and Benwell were employed under one John Osbourn (a false rebellious
Scot) to undermine the Walls; which they did, and blew them up, and so got and
plundered the Town. And no marvel, for they were accounted 30,000 Men, and the
Townsmen were but, in all, 1500 Men, wearied with continual Watch and Duty,
though Men of great Courage, and sought it gallantly to the last; for the Newgate
Ward, which was under Capt. Cuthbert Carr, was taken by the Enemy, who entered
at the asoresaid Places, and encompassed them before and behind; and
Pilgrim-street Gate was maintained by Capt. George Errington, Lieutenant
William Robson, and Ensign Thomas Swan, who sought and killed very many, they
themselves not having one hurt, until they were encompassed by the Enemy before
and behind: And even then they would not parley with the Scots who fought
against them without, but did capitulate with Lieutenant Colonel Sinclair, who
loved and honored them, and kept his Agreement so well with them, that not one
of them was robbed of his Clothes or Money, nor were any of his Men suffered to
give any evil Word; and it was the great Blessing of God, that, in all that
Time, there was not one Man slain, nor hurt, although that Company consisted of
Ninescore Men, all TradesMen, and there were diverse Sallies made out at that
Gate; for it was the longest of all the Gates of the Town, it being barrocaded
and shut up. And after they had surrendered, and the Enemy was called over at
that Breach, they durst not approach, but shot at their Friends that called
them, and would not believe that the Town was taken. MS. Milbank.

It is not improper to place here the Lord Hume's Relation of the Conclusion of
this Siege, in his Letter to the Lord Chancellor of Scotland, with the rest of
the Commissioners at London.

Right Honorable,
I Should have gone into Newcastle on Thursday, but was put off till Friday by
these obstinate Miscreants, especially the Mayor of that Town. Sir David Hume,
John Rutherford, and I my self, went in on Friday at Nine in the Morning; we
had Commission from General Lesley and Committees, if we found real Dealings,
to yield to honorable Conditions.

The Mayor, Sir Nicholas Cole, and Sir George Baker, were treating with us;
they gave us big Words; do what we could, they would not so much as come to
speak of Conditions of rendering up the Town; and after three or four Hours
Debate, all that we could draw from them, was, that they would think upon our
Propositions, and return them within three or four Days; and that, when all
Conditions were agreed upon, they would give Hostages to surrender in case
Relief came not in twenty Days; nor would they so much as write to the General
their own Propositions. So that, after our Return, we sent to the Town these
Conditions, forthwith to be accepted.

That all Officers should have Liberty to stay, or to march out in all Honor,
with Arms, Bagg and Baggage. to any Garrison, with a Convoy, within sixty
Miles; and all others not Soldiers, shall have the like Liberty: The Town to
enjoy all their former Liberties and Charter, with all manner of Protection to
the Inhabitants from Plunder: Freedom as any Town subject to the Parliament: No
free Billeting imposed: None to enter the Town, but only a competent Garrison
signed by the General, with this Caveat, that they should send out Hostages by
Eight of the Clock the next Morning, for Surrender of the Town before Monday
the 21 of October. Instead of which, they sent out to us a bitter Invective
Letter, though they knew all our Batteries and Mines were ready; yet they boldly
drew from us these Enforcements: Therefore, this Morning the Scots make three
Breaches, and to spring four Mines, and so to fall on: The Breaches were made
reasonable low before Three a Clock Afternoon: All Mines played well, and yet
the Town stood out obstinate: My Lord Chancellour's Regiment and Backelough 's
entered a Breach at Closegate: The General of the Artillery his Regiment and
that other of Edinburgh 's entered at Nine under the White Tower: Col. Stuart
's and Gask 's Regiments entered at a Mine, but with hot Dispute, at Westgate;
this was our Quarter: Lieutenant General Bally had another Quarter at Newgate,
with five Regiments, his own, Waughton 's, Cowper 's, Dunferling 's, and Dudhop
's, who entered by a Breach, many of our Officers killed, Major Robert Hepburn
much lamented. Castles, Kelhead, Wedderburn, Marshall, and the Master of
Yesters, they had the third Quarter. Sinclaire, Alton, Niddery, the Master of
Cranston, and the Lord Niddery, had the fourth Quarter, who entered at two
Mines. They within made their utmost Opposition, with great Execution on us,
but we forced them; and the Mayor, with others, Gentlemen of Quality, got to
the Castle. More you shall have within a Day or two.

October 19, 1644. Your Lordship's Humble Servant, A. HUME.


And presently upon this Letter, Thanksgiving was made at London, with hearty
Thanks to God for his great Mercy in giving up the Town of New Castle in
England to our Brethren of Scotland; and the 27th October the Castle likewise
surrendered, with three hundred Persons; the Lords Crawford, Rea, and Maxwell,
were sent to Edinburgh to be executed; and the Town being taken by a great
Slaughter, was plundered to the full; and the Scots excused themselves, that
therein the Parliament of England would be the better pleased. Thus was the
Town taken from the King after an obstinate and gallant Defense, and well may
assume the Motto Bestowed upon it, FORTITER DEFENDENDO TRIUMPHANS.

Newcastle, the 17th of Nov. 1644.
The COMMITTEE'S DECLARATION.
THE Committees of both Kingdoms, after many Meetings and serious Debates
amongst themselves, and the hearing of sundry Persons well experienced in the
Collieries and Coal-Works about the Town of Newcastle, and having taken into
their serious Consideration sundry Propositions for the Good of those Works,
and the driving on of that Trade for the Benefit of the Parliament, and the Pay
of the Army, have at length concluded and agreed amongst themselves, that some
of the most notorious Delinquents and Malignants, late Coal-Owners in the Town
of Newcastle, should be wholly excluded from intermeddling with any Shares or
Parts of Collieries, or Interest in any Coals whatsomever, that formerly they
have laid Claim unto, and that the rest of the said Delinquents deserve not to
have any Benefit of the said Coals or Collieries: But in regard the Delinquents
and Malignants belonging to those Collieries were very many in Number, they did
not conceive it for the Service of the Parliament, or the Army, to put them all
out at once, and so to hazard the retarding of the present setting on of the
Works, and ruining of the same, in regard they were furnished with Materials
and Utensils, and had Things ready at hand, and did best know where to find
Workmen, which Strangers would have had Difficulty to find, and could not
possibly on the sudden sufficiently provide themselves to set on the Works; and
having made Trial to let some Delinquents Collieries, and, for this Purpose,
having treated with some well-affected Persons what Profit might be raised, and
how they might be let for the most Benefit to the Parliament, were constrained
for the present rather to make Use of those Delinquents in working their own
Collieries as Tenants and Servants to the Parliament, than to engage our
Friends upon Incertainties, and hazard their Loss, as our own Hindrance in
setting forward the Works, for the Use and Benefit of the Parliament. Wherefore
the Committees of both Kingdoms, seeing the Necessity of dispatching away the
Ships that every Day call upon us for their Lading, and lie at Charges in
Expectation of getting Coals for their Money, have thought fit to make the
following Declaration to all, but such as are expected as beforementioned, and
whose Names are hereafter written.

1st. That for the present Time there be allowed, on the behalf of the rest of
the late Coal-Owners, 10 s. Sterling upon every Chaldron of Ship-Coals, for
desraying the Charges in the Works underground, Carriage thereof to the
Staiths, and from thence in Keels to the Ships, paying the Town-Dues, as was
formerly paid (viz.) 3 d. for the Town, and 3 d. for the Garrison per Chalder,
and the usual and accustomed Rents for the Pits; and as a competent
Consideration for the Support of the said late Owners themselves, and this
Allowance is made, as well for the Coals at the Staiths and Pits ready wrought,
as those to be wrought, the said Owners, Collieries and Workmen, being always
obliged to set on Foot with all Diligence, and maintain their Coal-Works, make
ready their Keels, and all other Necessaries sit for the same; and the
Coal-Workers who are to receive the Benefit of Payment, as abovesaid, for their
Work out of the Coals already above ground, are obliged to continue in working
the said Coals at the ordinary Rate and Conditions, as was formerly accustomed,
And whatsoover more Price the said Chalders of Coals (being sold to Merchants
or Masters of ships) shall yield above the said 10 s. per Chalder, together
with what Custom and impost is or shall be put upon the same; and the old
Custom of 1 s. upon the Chalder formerly paid by the Owners to his Majesty, to
be employed for the Pay and Maintenance of the Army, upon Account, to the
Parliament of England, or their Committes.

2dly. That the Coals already wrought above-ground, either at Pits or Staiths,
Belonging to Friends, have like Allowance of 10 s. upon the Chalder, they
paying the said Town's Duties (viz.) 3 d. to the Town, and 3 d. to the Garrison
per Chalder. And the Surplus of the Price which they shall yield (^eing sold to
Merchants or Ship Masters) to be employed for the said public: Use by Way of
Loan; and that they have the public Faith for the same. The Owners, Taxmen and
Workers, being always tied, to put on Foot and maintain the said Works,
remitting to the Determination of the Parliament what other Conditions they
will be pleased to grant them for the Coals henceforth to be wrought.

3dly. It is thought fit that the Price of Coals be 15 s. per Chalder, with the
Assess of 4 s. upon the Chalder, and the ancient 12 d, to the King, is 20 s.
for every Chalder to Merchant or Skipper, for all Coals vended in this Port of
Newcastle; and for those exported, to pay the same Rate, and such further
Custom as is ordained by the Book of Custom-Rates.

4thly. That Certification be made to the several Owners, of which we doubt not
our Friends will take special Notice, and instantly apply themselves to set on
their Works, that if presently they use not all possible Diligence in getting
on Foot their several Coal-Works, and in maintaining thereof, in that Case to
be declared incapable of any future Benefit, which they might expect out of
their said Collieries, and that other Persons shall be employed forworking the
same, for the public Use and Benefit of the Parliament and Army.

The Parties Names excepted out of this Declaration and Agreement, as
beforementioned. Sir JOHN MARLEY, Knight. Sir THOMAS RIDDELL, Knight. Sir
THOMAS LIDDELL, Knight. Sir ALEXANDER DAVISON, Knight. Sir JOHN MINNS, Knight.
Sir FRANCIS ANDERSON, Knight. WILLIAM ROW, Secr. Commissioners.




An' Christi. Mayors. Sheriffs. 1645. John Blackston. Christopher Nicholson.
1646. Henry Dawson. Henry Rawling. In this year, when King Charles I. by his
ill Success, was reduced to the lowest Ebb, he, upon some Assurances of
Protection from the Scots, then besieging Newark, repaired to their Army, and
immediately gave Orders to the Lord Bellasis to surrender Newark, which might
have held out several Months longer; which done, the Scots Army, before they
could have received any Orders from the Parliament, with uncommon Expedition,
marched with him to Newcastle, where they arrived May the 13th. About the
Middle of July the Parliament sent their Commissioners, the Earls of Pembroke
and Suffolk, of the Peers, and Sir Walter Earl, Sir John Hippisley, Robert
Goodwin, and Luke Robinson, Esqrs. for the Commons, with 10 Propositions for
his Majesty to assent to, [ See Rushworth.] Demands of such a horrid and
destructive Nature, as would, if granted, have rendered the King and his Memory
inglorious and despicable both at home and abroad. The King perceiving all
Things tending to his Ruin, he seemed to hearken most to his old false Friend
William Murray of the Bedchamber, who privately proposed an Escape, and
offered to make his Way, and to have a ship in Readiness to transport his
Majesty beyond Sea. The Project appeared plausible, and the King had disguised
himself for it, but was discovered in the Attempt. Whether he was faithful to
his Majesty in this Point, is uncertain, since Sir Robert Murray was concerned
in it; but Bishop Guthry says it was divulged before the set Time, so that
there was no Discourse throughout the Army but of Murray's Plot to carry away
the King. Thereupon a Guard of Soldiers was immediately planted at his Chamber,
Door, both within and without; by which his Majesty was not only deprived of
Liberty, but also of Quiet and Retirement; and having an Antipathy against
Tobacco, was much disturbed by their bold and continual smoking in his
Presence: A military Presage of the same heathenish Barbarity at going to the
Block before Whitehall.

Upon his Majesty's Entry into Newcastle, he was caressed with Bonfires and
Ringing of Bells, Drums and Trumpets, and Peals of Ordnance; but guarded by 300
of the Scottish Horse, these near him bare-headed. He lodged at General Levin's
Quarters, who proclaims that Papists or Delinquents should not come near his
Person.

And that although his Majesty was present, yet all Men whatsoever should yield
Obedience to the Ordinance of Parliament.

The Scotch Army are now, they imagine, Masters of all, by their Power of the
King's Person, and levy intolerable Taxes and Assessments upon all Northern
Counties, which very coursely resent them, and complain to the Parliament at
Westminsters, not without some Rising of the People standing upon their Guard:
And all the Scotch Horse formerly sent into Scotland are returned into
Yorkshire; which makes the House of Common debate and vote, That this Kingdom
had no further Need of the Army of our Brethren the Scots in this Kingdom, and
that the Sum of 100,000 l. should be advanced and paid to that Army as
follows, viz, 50,000 l. thereof after their surrendering of Newcastle,
Carlisle, and other English Garrisons possessed by them in England, and the
other 50,000 l. after they are advanced into Scotland, and Order shall be taken
for Payment of their Arrears.

And forthwith Mr. Alexander Henderson, the Scots Apostolic: Minister, and one
of their Commissioners, was sent from Westminster to Newcastle to dispute with
the King, and to convince him to the Covenant; where, after several Discourse
and Meetings, the King is pleased to descend so low as to argue Reasons by
Writings, which continued several Encounters by Papers till the 16th of July,
concerning Church Matters, by Auth^rity of the Fathers, and Practice of the
Church, which Henderson would avoid, by Texts of Scripture, and from thence,
his own Opinion should guide him beyond all universal Consent or Practice of
the Primitive Church which were erroneous, which was not contradicted by
orthodox learned Men in the Times of the first Practice, as is easily
percieved: That these Desections were, some of them justly called Rebellions,
which Henderson mentions. And lastly, that alleit he never esteemed any
Authority equal to the Scripture, yet he thanks the numerous Consent of the
Fathers, and the universal Practice of the Primitive Church, to be the best and
Authentical Interpreters of God's Word, and consequently the purest Judges
between him and Henderson, until better may be sound; as for Example, he says,
I think Mr. Henderson the best Preacher in Newcastle, yet I believe you may
err, and possibly a better Preacher may come; but till then I must retain my
Opinion. C.R.

These Disputes are in Print, which shows his Majesty's Temper and Knowledge,
to treat so long with a peevish Presbyter.

Only the King was rid of one troublesome Guest Mr. Henderson; who had been
disputed into so much Reason and Understanding, that being convinced by the
King, he fell into some Distemper at Newcastle, and therefore was sent home to
Scotland, where he died perfectly reconciled to the King's Affairs, and an
Apostate from the Scots Army and their Proceedings. Sanderson's Hist. of K.
Charles I. p. 904, 905, 921.

The King gives Earnest of his sincere Intentions of holding a personal Treaty
with the Parliament of London, by sending the following Warrant.

Having designed to comply with the Designs of our Parliament, in every thing
that may be for the Good of our Subjects, and leave no Means unattempted for
removing of Differences between us; therefore we have thought the more to
evidence the Reality of our Intention of settling a happy Peace, to require
you, upon Honorable Conditions, to quit the Towns, Castles, and Forts
entrusted to you by us, and to disband all the Forces under your several
Commands. Given at Newcastle the 10th of June, 1646.

To our Trusty and Well-beloved Sir Thomas Glenham, Sir Thomas Tisby, Colonel
Washington, Colonel Blague, Governors of our Cities and Towns of Oxford,
Worcester, Litchfield, and Wallingford; and to all other Commanders of any
other Towns, Castles, or Forts within the Kingdom of England, or Dominion of
Wales.
The Scots now in some Jealousy how mightily the King complies with his
Parliament, and that they should not be able, perhaps, to effect their Designs
by Force, endeavor it by Fraud and Cunning, by insinuating to the Parliament,
that their Conscience bears them Witness, of their constant Endeavors to
preserve the Union of both Kingdoms; yet never more than since the King's
coming to their Army, by effecting such Messages from his Majesty as might be a
sure Ground of Peace to his People, and Happiness to himself. And although we
have not as yet prevailed over his Principles, deeply rooted in him, as to
obtain the utmost of our Desires, which we hope in a short Time to effect; and
we hope that accordingly the Parliament will be pleased to send their
Propositions of Peace to him, upon whose Answer we shall clearly know how to
proceed in the intendedPacification, and to satisfy the Parliament in
disbanding our Armies, delivering up the Garrisons Possessed by us, and
retiring home for the Good of both Kingdoms.

This was dated at Newcastle the 10th of June 1646, and signed by General
Levens and all the Scotch Commissioners, and directed to the Parliament.

After many Alterations and Disputes between the Scots and the Parliament
relating to the King, it was at last agreed to deliver him up, upon their being
paid 400,000 l. for their Arrears. Whereupon the two Houses at Westminster
sent, of the Lord the Earl^ of Pombroke and Donbigh, and Lord Montague; of the
Commons, Sir John Holland, Sir Walter Earl, Sir James Harrington, Sir John
Cook, Sir. John Crew, and Major General Brown; together with some private
Gentlemen, and two of their Chaplains, Mr. Marshall and Mr. Caryl, to receive
the King. These arrived at Newcastle the 23d of January, and on Saturday,
January the 30th (a Day of the King's Imprisonment, and Martyrdom two Years
after) they set out from Newcastle, with the King, for Holmby House in
Northamptonshire, where he arrived February the 16th. The same Day that the
King left Newcastle, the Scots also departed from it, and marched into their
own Country, passing over the Tweed on the 11th of February, after they had
continued a little above three Years in the Kingdom of England. Echard.

A little after the King's coming to Newcastle, a Scotch Minister preached
boldly before him; and when his Sermon was done, called for the 52d Psalm,
which begins,

Why do thou, Tyrant, boast thy self,
Thy wicked Works to praise?
Whereupon his Majesty stood up and called for the 56th Psalm, which begins,

Have Mercy, Lord, on me, I pray,
For Men would me devour.
The People wa^ed the Minisiter's Psalm, and sung that which the King called
for. Whitlock's's Memoirs, p. 234.


Feb. 1. the Scotch Army marched toward Scotland, well satisfied with the
Produce of their long Stay in England, and not displeased with the Money paid
by the Parliament for delivering the King's Person to the Commissioners of
Parliament.
1647. Thomas Ledger. Robert Young. Dec. 5. the King's Concession voted
satisfactory; whereupon the next Day many Members are imprisoned or secluded by
the Army.

To the HIGH COURT of PARLIAMENT.
The Humble PETITION of the Mayor, Aldermen, Common Council, and the Rest of
the Well-affected of the Town of Newcastle,
Humbly shows,
THAT we cannot but deeply resent what has been presented to you by the
Well-affected in the Southern Parts, as concerning the present Treaty, that if,
after all the Experience of the Mischiefs which have happened unto us from
former Treaties, of all God's wonderfully owning of you both formerly and of
late, in Midst of so many Oppositions from all Hands, and of all his gracious
Appearings, the K. his Party you go on to treat, before full and exemplary
Justice be done upon the great Incendiaries of the Kingdom, the Fomentors of,
and Actors in the first and second War, and the late bringing in of the Scots,
We can expect nothing as the Issue thereof but the sudden Desolution of
Parliament and Army, Desolation of all the Well-affected, the involving the
Nation in more Blood, Misery, and Slavery then ever.

May it therefore please you, in this Conjuncture of Time, to hearken to your
Petitioners, who have constantly adhered to you; and before you conclude this
Treaty, to extend Importance and speedy Justice upon the greatest Offenders,
wherein you cannot want the greatest Assistance from God and from Man to
strengthen you in your Endeavors to settle this Kingdom in Peace and Right.

Thomas Ledger, Mayor. Thomas Bonner. John Richardson. William Dawson. Michael
Bonner. Richard Baker. James Jackson. Richard Ward. Robert Carr. Robert
Plimpton. John Mow. Rob. Young, Alderman. George Fenwicke. George Dawson.
George Blakiston. William Bonner. Peter Bureill. John Lodge. George Beadnall.
T. Erington, Post-Mastr. Phineas Allan sen. Robert Dalton. Robert Ogle. Wiliam
Thompson. James Turner. Henry Rawling. Samuel Rawling. Richard Readhead. Thomas
Smith. John Pigg. Cuthbert Nicholson. Cuthbert Wilson. Thomas Betson. Thomas
Traemble. Thomas Foster. Edward Reed, Brewer. Timothy Bonner. Francis Hall.
Thomas Young. Thomas (...). George Carr. Peter Tailor. John Watson. Edward
Kirton. George Usher. Henry Bell. John Spurr. Thomas Mallard. John Hall jun.
Henry Hawksworth. Phineas Allan jun. Anthony Robinson. Robert Blaigden. Thomas
Wilson. Robert Carr. Henry Bowet. William Wilkinson. William Armstrong. Robert
Sharp. Henry Heighley. (...). Samuel Powell. Henry Barker. Richard March. John
Tailor. Peter Story. Edward Stockdale. James Chantler: Humphry Flint. Francis
Tarnis. Richard Binfeild. Richard Knowells. John Readhead. John Bird. George
Penckerton. Thomas Tailor. Christopher Greetham. John Whitfield. William
Thompson. John Hall sen. Ralph Dining. George Air. James Smith. Christopher
Ellison.


A Second PETITION.
THE Mayor, Aldermen, and Commonalty of this Town, did most freely and
unanimously join in a Petition to the House of Commons, for speedy and
impartial Justice upon the great Incendiaries betwixt these two Kingdoms, and
the chief Promoters of this Election, who have already confessed themselves
guilty of all the Blood which has been shed by this unnatural War, who have
been twice conquered by Us, and this we ground upon our Solemn League and
Covenant, to which we have always adhered, and by which all Delinquents ought
to be brought to condign Punishment, without Exception; though our Treaties
have, upon what Grounds we know not, nor are not yet satisfied, admitted of a
Personal Treaty with the Chief of Them, as if, after twice conquered, he or
his Party was sensible thereof, and of whom, as we yet hear of, any Conviction
of Conscience or Judgment, but only for an Opportunity to cut the Throats of Us
and all others, that have engaged against them in this Nation; and being so
unhappy that we could not by any Means obtain their Judgment thereof, or
Intentions thereupon, it has added many sad Fears and Thoughts to our former
Perplexities, and even astonshed Us to consider how our Bondage and Ruin is by
this Treaty, since our Petition, so just, rational, and in Prosecution of our
Covenant, and their own Proceedings, should appear unworthy of the least
Respects or Consideration; and therefore. We must still endeavor to keep our
first Integrity without Spott and Blemish, for if we would never bow the Knee
to Baal at the King's Command, we will never do it at the Parliament's; and if
they act against the Truth reposed in them by the People, the People are bound
in Conscience and Duty to act against them, Salus Populi being Suprema Lex. The
Lord direct Us for his Glory, and the Good of the poor Commons of England, who
are like to be bought and sold, because they are ignorant of their own Freedom
and Birthright, which they are willing to sell for a Mease of Pottage, so they
may enjoy a slavish Peace, though it has cost much precious Blood in the Time
of their Prosecution of this unnatural War for the Preservation of them.


1648. Thomas Bonner. Ralph Jennison. An' Christi. Mayors. Sheriffs. 1649.
William Dawson. Samuel Rawling. The Statute Ao 35 Eliz. against Sectaries
repealed, whereby that Inundation of Heresies overspread the Nation at this
Time, although the Causers of the Rebellion complained before heavily thereof in
Gangraena. Gromwell made General, marched toward Scotland.
Cromwell with his Army arrived at Berwick June the 21st, and on September the
3d defeated the Scots Army at Dunbar, with the Lost of 3000 slain, and 9000
taken Prisoners: Of the last, he dismissed the wounded, weak, and such as were
of no Value; the rest were driven like Turkeys, to Newcastle, whereof Sir
Arthur Haslerig was Governor, where about 1600 of them were starved, having
nothing to eat but green, Cabbage Leaves, and Oats in a small proportion: The
stronger Persons that subsisted with this Diet were condemned to the
Suga-Mills, and by the English Planters were transported to the West Indies.
Echard.
1650. George Dawson. John Lodge. At Durham Fair happened the following sad
Accident: Capt. Blet, an Officer of the Garrison of Newcastle, going to buy
some Sheep there, some Words passed between a Countryman of 60 Years of Age and
him, whom the Captain struck with his Cane, and the Countryman having a Batt or
Staff in his Hand, therewith gave him a Stroke on his Head, that he presently
after died. Perfect Diurnal, No 78. p 1083.
1651. Thomas Bonner. Peter Sanderson. 1652. Henry Dawson. George Dawson.
John Butler. April the 20th the Rump Parliament turned out by the Army, after
sitting twelve Years, six Months, and seventeen Days, and July the 30th the
little Convention began, which merited the Name of Barbones Parliament, which
passed the Godly Act for marrying by Justices of the Place.

NEW CASTLE Address to CROMWELL. For his HIGHNESS the LORD PROTECTOR.
May it please Your HIGHNESS,
MANY of the Precious Servants of God in these Nations, over which the Lord
has set your Highness, have gotten upon their Watchtower, to see if they can
discover what has been eminent in the Design of the Lord in the^e (...) Days;
for the All wise ^od has of late visibly been out of the common Road of
Providence; his Paths has been in Tempests and thick Darkness, plucking up by
the Roots the greatest of Men and the highest of Powers like Cedars in Lebanon,
that he might make Way for the glorious bringing forth of Truth and
Righteousness; and we question not but the Lord is fulfilling that great
Prophecy, Isaiah lx. 17. I will make thy Officers Peace, and thy Exacters
Righteosness; for when we consider how the Lord has eminently made your
Highness instrumental for the breaking of the Iron Yoke from of the Neck of
these three Nations, and likewise has invested you with the supreme Power of
this Commonwealth, whereby you may be exceedingly instrumental to the Lord
Jesus, in the advancing of his Kingdom in Righteousness and Peace: We having
the Sense of these Things with W^ight upon our Spirits, have judged it our Duty
to profess our great Resentment of this signal Mercy from the Hands of our
God, and do solemnly bless the Lord for setting up your Highness over this
great People, and shall endeavor, through the Strength of Christ, to live in
all humble Obedience to your Highness, as becomes those who are under your
Government and Protection.

Signed in the Name, and by Order of the Common Council of Newcastle upon
Tyne, WILLIAM JOHNSON, Mayor.
Feb. 25. 1653.

1653. William Johnson. Robert Johnson. 1654. The same. John Rumney. 1655.
Robert Shaftoe. Henry Thompson. 1656. Henry Rawling. George Blakiston.
Whitehall, April 27.

Alderman Fowke, and the two Sheriff's of London, represented to the Council,
in the Name of the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, that there are 300 Sail of
Ships at Newcastle to take in Goals, but are hundred by some new Impositions by
the Hoastmen there, so that the Price of Coals is raised, which unless some
Care were taken, would be very prejudicial to the City of London, and
especially to the Poor; and making it their humble Request that Course might be
taken for a speedy dispatching of the Ships away with their Lading at the same
Rates as they paid last Year, and some Time appointed to hear the Business
touching those new Impositions, they thereupon withdrew.

The Council, out of their Respect and Care of the Public Good, having had the
Business of the Stop of the Trade of Coats before under Consideration, and a
Report being brought in this Day concerning it by a Commit of the Connect, to
whom the Matter had been reformed; it was thereupon ordered by his Highness the
Lord Protector and the Council, that the said Corporation of Hoastmen be
required and enjoined to permit the Ships which trade to Newcastle for Coals,
to lade Coals for six Months now next ensuing, or until the Matter upon
Complaint be heard and settled, at the like Rates, both for Coals and the Fare
of Keels, as they did lade in April 1655, to the (...) the Commonwealth may be
supplied.

And in order to the Determination of this Matter; the Parties concerned
therein are to have as Hearing upon the 21st of May next, before a Committee of
the Council.

And, in order to the further Encouragement and Preservation of the Coal-Trade,
and the constant Supply of this great City, and the Parts adjacent, with Coals,
which is so necessary a Commodity for all Sorts of People, the Council have
been pleased to appoint a Convoy for the securing of Ships that go to and fro
betwixt London and Newcastle. Public Intelligencer, No 29. p. 493.


1657. George Dawson. George Thursby. This Year, Aug. 29. died at Eltham,
Lieutenant Col. John Lilburn, and was two Days after brought to London and
buried in the Quakers Yard. He was born at Bishop-Weremouth in the County of
Durham, a Person of so impetuous a Temper, as could never be kept within
Bounds. In the Year 1638, by a just Sentence, he was whipped from the Fleett to
Westminister, which afterward procured his Commission in the Army, where his
obstinate Disobedience was more conspicuous, so as to become obnoxiuos to his
Fellows: He was often indicted, and under Cromwell 's Administration committed
Prisoner to Dover Castle, where he became of a more came Hurmour than formerly,
having put on the Garb of a Quaker; and declared himself, by Letters to his
Friends, to be of the same Judgment with those which have taken up that Way and
Opinion. Public Intelligencer.


1658. Mark Milbank. John Watson. 1659. Thomas Bonner. James Biggs. In this
Year, after General Lambert had dissolved the Long Parliament, and the
Government was settled in what was called the Committee of Safety, most of them
Officers of the Army, General Monk in Scotland having declared for the
Parliament; Lambert was sent against him with a much superior Army, who made
Newcastle the place of Rendezvous, where he stayed above a Month, increasing
his Troops, and expecting Monk 's March into England: But Portsmouth and the
Fleet declaring for the Parliament, which was soon after restored, he marched
Southward, when being deserted by many of his Troops, and by the rest confined,
he was conveyed Prisoner to London; and sent to the Tower. Echard. Rapin.
1660. John Emmerson. William Blackett. Soon after the meeting of the
Parliament which restored King Charles II. Sir Arthur Haslerigg came to General
Monk, and delivered up his two Regiments, and the (...) of Do^wich, Newcastle,
and Tinmouth, which were given him by the late Powers, on Condition to have his
Life and Estate preserved; which were generously assured to him. Echard.

This Year Dr. John Cousin, Dean of Peterborough, was consecrated Bishop of
Durham, Dec. 2:

In the Year 1644. William Robson, Parish Clerk of All Saints; was Oct. 20. put
out of his Office by the Rebels, and was this Year restored by his Majesty's
Writ, July 28. being ejected for his Loyalty.

In the Spring this Year, all unknown Gentleman came to refitle at Winlaton,
living very private, and daily more inquisitive after News, and every
Circumstance of the Restoration; who upon: understanding the passing the Act of
Indemnity, together with the Exception of the Murderers of the three King, went
into an adjoining Wood and hanged himself.


1661. Sir John Marley. Thomas Jennison. May. the 22d the Solemn League and
Covenant was burnt in London and Westminster, and afterward all England over,
which was before rescinded by Parliament in Scotland.
1662. Sir Fran. Anderson. Henry Brabant. 1663. Sir James Clavering. Robert
Shaftoe. This Mayor procured for Sir William Fenwick a Shore a little below the
Bill, which is called Wilcolme Key; it is built over Wallsend Deane. He has
only left a Gate to convey away the Water, having built a Vault under the same,
in which, if a few Stones decay, the Water will stop and overflow the whole
Shore. MS. Milbank.
1664. Sir Francis Liddell. Francis Liddell. 1665. Henry Maddison. William
Carr. Part of a Letter from Tho. Naylor, Vicar of Newcastle, to the Archidams
of Northumberland.
AT my coming to Newcastle, I sent for George Headhall, and acquainted him with
the Contents of your Lotter; I let him know that you had spared no Pains,
either by Tongue or Pen, whereby he might be convinced of him Error, and
informed in the Truth, in Relmion to his present Case. I also gave him Notice,
that you had decreed a Commission to me to absolve him upon a ^^ratory Caution.
To this he answered, that such a Caution was all could be required of him in
case he were imprisoned upon a Writ de ^xwinmieni^ir^^ inpiendo. I replied to
him, that it were easier for him now to perform that Condition, than if the Law
made further Process against him. He concluded, he will come and wait on my
Lord Bishop in Whitson-Week, and if you will be in Duresme, he will speak to
you about the Business of his Absolution. Thus does he shift off the Business
from Time to Time, to gain Time; and from Person to Person, thinking, as I
conceive, to slip away from them all.



An' Christi. Mayors. Sheriffs. 1666. William Blackett. Timothy Davison. 1667.
Henry Brabant. Ralph Gray. 1668. Ralph Jennison. Robert Jennison. A Letter of
the Vicar of Newcastle to Dr. Basire, Archdeacon of Northumberland.
AT my coming home, I received a Letter from my Lord of Durham, wherein he was
pleased to give me the Honor as to intimate unto me the Concerns of his
Majesty's Letter to our Magistrates, much concurrent with the Intelligence you
received from Court, and desired me to press Mr. Mayor, Sir James Clavering,
and Sir Fracis Anderson, with this necessary Duty of suppressing these illegal,
riotous, schismatical, and, as near as may be conjectured, seditious
Assemblies: And this to be done with the Concurrence of the rest of the
Ministers. I have had little Time since my coming; but Mr. Shaw, who is instar
omnium, is come to Town, and in Health, and he will second me; upon Monday we
purpose to prepare our selves, that we may discourse the Matter with Mr. Mayor
and the rest of our Magistrates.

This for the Account of our Zeal to suppress those Caterpillars, and our
Obedience to my Lord's Commands. Now for Matter of Fact, I know not of any
thing as yet done; it is publicly known that a Letter is come from the King
about them: The Magistrates, I hear, have been consulting about it; what the
Result is, I know not; their Actings will discover their Counsels, I hope well
of them: But if I had been a Magistrate, and none had been wiser than I, they
should have been secured before this Time. I shall from Time to Time give you
an Account what I see or know to be done in this grand Affair; in the mean
time, beg your Acceptance of these Lines, from him who is,

Reverend SIR, Your most Affectionate, though Most Unworthy Servant, T. NAYLOR.
Newcastle, Dec. 12. 1668.

A Letter from the Mayor and Five Aldermen of Newcastle to the Bishop of Durham.
My LORD,
WE received your Lordship's Letter, with his Majesty's Royal Letter enclosed,
in which his Majesty takes Notice that there are numerous Conventicles held in
this Town: My Lord, we are sorry that there is any Cause of Complaint upon this
Occasion; we have this to answer for our selves, that we have put the Laws
against Conventicles in Execution, so for as we had any Information, and have
convicted several Persons upon the late Act against Conventicles, and taken
Care to prevent these Meetings under Pretense of Worship, by employing the
Churchwardens to give Information, in Case they could discover any. We do take
the late Statute against Conventicles to be in Force, and shall be always ready
to proceed to punish Offenders against it; and if any Offenders have not been
punished, it was for Want of Evidence to convict them; and if those Persons
that informed your Lordship would have been pleased to have acquainted us, we
would have taken away all Cause of Complaint,

We desire your Lordship would please to take Care of the Enclosed, and
acquaint the King with our Proceedings herein: We should not have been so bold
with your Lordship, to have given your Lordship so much Trouble, but that we
were encouraged to it by your Lordship's Letter. My Lord, we crave your
Lordship's Pardon for this Trouble, and shall remain

Your LORDSHIP 'S Humble Servants, RA. JENNISON, Mayor. JAMES CLAVERING, J.
EMMERSON. ROBERT SHAFTOE, WILL. BLACKETT. MAR. MILBANKE.

Newcastle, Dec. 15. 1668.

Mr. MAYOR, And the Aldermen of Newcastle, London, December. 22. 1668.
I Have received your Letter of the 15th Instant, together with the Enclosed,
which I delivered to Mr. Secretary. Sir John Trever, who read it to me, and
has acquainted his Majesty with it.

I am glad to find by both these your Letters, that you declare your Readiness
to put the Laws in Execution against Conventicles, and unlawful Assemblies, for
pretended religious Worship in that Town, whereinto both you and my self are in
this Case entrusted to have a particular and diligent Inspection. But on the
other Side, I am sorry to hear from you, that you have had neither any
Information, nor any Evidence given you against such unlawful Assemblies in
your Town, when the Notoriety of the Fact, by their numerous Meeting at your
Barber-Chirurgeon 's Hall upon All Saints Day last, being Sunday the 1st of
November, was such, that it was voic'd and made known to all the Town and
Country about; Notice being also taken what special Psalm, or New Rejoicing
Song, they then chose and applied to themselves, as Holy Saints, of Bearing a
double-edged Sword in their Hands to bind kings in Chains and Lords in Iron
Bands: of which notorious and unlawful Meeting both my self and diverse others
here at this Distance were shortly after informed; and I took the best Care I
could thereupon to have an Address made unto you, Mr. Mayor, by a special
Person under my Episcopal Jurisdiction, to desire you that you would not suffer
any such scandalous and offensive Meetings to be, held among you, contrary to
the known Laws of this Church and Realm of England, and greatly endangering the
Public Peace thereof: And this I did before I acquainted his Majesty or his
Principal Secretaries with it; neither was there any Letter sent to you and the
Aldermen from his Majesty concerning this Matter, before a second Information
came both to my self, and Mr. Brabant, one of your own Society, of another
numerous and unlawful Meeting at one of the Ringleader's Houses, upon the 25th
of November, wherein they appointed and kept a Fast, with Preaching and
Praying, which they held out from Eight a Clock in the Morning till Four in the
Evening, the Work being held forth by their four chief Leaders and Abettors,
Mr. Gilpine, Mr. Durant, Mr. Leaver, and Mr. Pringle. Of all which surely you
had or might have had Knowledge; and if you had not, you will give me Leave to
say, without Offense, that many of your Townsmen are very backward in
discovering to you and arresting their Knowledge of such disorderly Assemblies,
and that you are very great Strangers to the Affairs and Disturbances of your
own Town, the Government whereof, under his Majesty, is committed to your Care.

It is well taken that, as you write, you have proceeded and convicted several
of these disobedient Persons already, and that you will take Care to prevent
their Meetings against Law for Time to come; which good Resolution being
observed by you, will highly please his Majesty, and express the Duty that we
owe to his Laws, and the good Government of this Realm: Otherwise, if we any
ways neglect to do herein what belongs to us, we shall deservedly suffer the
Blame of it, and incur the King's Displeasure, which always most carefully to
avoid, is the bounden Duty both of you and my self, who am,

Mr. MAYOR, etc. Your most Affectionate Bishop, and Humble Servant, JO. DURESME.



An' Christi. Mayors. Sheriffs. 1669. Thomas Davison. John Rogers. Mr. MAYOR,
and the rest of the Corporation of Newcastle,
Public Peace being the Life of the Kingdom, and Execution the Life of the
Laws, it has been my Endeavor to procure and preserve both, as in my Diocese
in general, so in your Corporation in particular, being one of the most
considerable Towns under my Episcopal Charge; witness my frequent Letters to
you in order to those good Ends. I should have been right glad to have seen,
and would as gladly to your Advantage have reported the good Effects, as I am
heartily sorry to hear still the contrary, which cannot be otherwise as long as
the Ringleaders of the Factious are suffered to walk at Liberty, so expressly
contrary to the Act 17 Carol. 11. which lies before you, to which the King's
late Proclamation ought to have given fresh Vigor. I would fain vindicate the
Town of Newcastle from the foul Imputation of being the Nursery of Faction in
these Northern Parts; which as Things now stand I cannot do, but rather must,
and according to my Duty will, report the contrary to the King, and his
Council, and then any one may easily foresee the evil Consequences. Out of my
special Respect to your Town and Corporation, I forbear still, in Expectation
of a speedy Account that both the Act of Parliament, and the King's
Proclamation in this behalf, are really obeyed, that is, duly executed. If, as
I hear, any of the Seducers pretend they have subscribed and taken the Oath
required by the Act 17 Car. II. I desire you would speedily send me their
Certificates; mean while, I hope that you will make good Use of this my last
Warning, tendered unto you, out of my tender Care of the Welfare of your Town.
I commend you all to the Grace of God, and remain.

Your loving Pastor and Servant, JO. DURESME.
From my Castle at Duresme, this 6th of July, 1669.

Mr. MAYOR, etc.
SEeing that the Chappelry of St. Andrew's in the Town of Newcastle is now
vacant, by the Death of Mr. Ashburnham the late Curate there: Therefore, out of
my Pastoral Care for that Place, I do recommend to you, and to the rest of your
Corporation, Mr. Robert Bonner to supply that Cure; the rather because born in
your Town and formerly officiating in that Chappelry, and consequently supposed
to be both more acceptable and also profitable among you; and the more, because
unblameable both in Life and Doctrine; for the public Good of you all, I shall
not be unwilling to dispense with his Residence at Harbourne, being assured
that he will provide a sufficient Curate and Preacher there, to whom he will
give a good and competent Stipend for that Purpose. I doubt not of your
Acceptance of this my Motion, in order to his Admission at St. Andrew's by my
Episcopal Authority; and whereas I was lately informed that Mr. Bonner had
declined this Place at St. Andrew's, I have now since that Time certainly
understood, that he is not only willing but desirous to attend that Cure, and
with all Diligence to bestow his Care and Pains upon it; which Desire of his
being seconded by the other Ministers of your Town, I hope you will the better
regard it. Thus commending you to God's Protection, I remain,

GENTLEMEN, Your loving Pastor and Servant, JO. DURESME.
Duresme, Aug. 12. 1669.


An' Christi. Mayors. Sheriffs. 1670. William Carr. Richard Wright. Robert
Roddam.
Januar. 15. this Year died the learned Dr. John Cousin Lord Bishop of Durham.
1671. Ralph Gray. Matthew Jefferson. 1672. Mark Milbank. Robert Mallibar. 1673.
Timothy Davison. George Morton. This Year Nathaniel Crew Lord Bishop of Oxford
was translated to Durham.
1674. Thomas Jennison. Henry Jennison. 1675. Sir Fr. Anderson. William
Christian. The CASE of Gosforth CHAPEL, and the Repairs thereof.
Dr. BASIRE Archdeacon of Northumberland 's Letter to Dr. THO. SMITH, Dean of
Carlisle, dated Durham, Sept. 15. 1674.
Reverend and Honored SIR,
I Did purposely delay my Answer to your last of the 22d past, till at my last
Visitation I had enquired after, and examined the Reparation of the Chapel of
Gosforth, within the Vicarage of Newcastle; the Result whereof is, 1. The said
Chapel is not a Chapel of Ease, but a Parochial Chapel, which the
Mother Church is not bound to repair, but belongs to themselves: You know very
well the Episcopal Sentence at the Dedication of such Chapels, the Body
whereof lies upon the Parishioners of the Chapel, and the Chancel upon the
Impropriators or Appropriators. 2. That by Order of Mr. George Willoughby,
Tenant to the Lord Bishop of Carlisle, for his Part of the Tithes, Mr. Carr
Alderman of Newcastle, his Sub-Tenant, has configned 10. l. about the 8th
Instant into the Hands of Capt. Fenwick and Mr. William Musgrave Curate of
Gosforth, for the Repair of the same; and I am confident the Dean and Chapter
will be as forward to follow that Example. 3. You were mi^^nformed concerning
the Obligation of the poor Vicar of St. Nicholas to repair the Chapel, upon a
Supposition that the Benefit of the Mortuaries, and of the Burials there,
belongs to him, which you say are 13 s. 4 d. for each Burial, whereof the Vicar
receives but 6 s. 8 d. but the Burden of repairing the Chapels would, it is
siad, surcharge the Vicarage in Value thrice over.

Having no more to trouble you withal at this Time, but to commend my self to
your good Prayers, I remain,

Reverend SIR, Your very Affectionate Friend, and Faithful Servant, ISAAC
BASIRE.
Pray present my humble Service to my Lord your Bishop,



A CASE touching the Chancel of the Church of South Gosforth, and some
Proceedings concerning the same, truly Stated.
1. IT is clear Law, that when no Person or Persons appear who are liable to
the Repair of either Church or Chancol; that in such Case the Tithes or other
Profits within that Parish are to be sequestered for the said Repair, after
Notice given to the Parties concerned in such Profits. Constitut. D. Othon, p.
80, etc.

De Facto, Notice was frequently given to the Lord Bishop and Dean and Chapter
of Carlisle, who are Impropriators of the Tythan within the Parish of Gosforth,
and to their Farmers likewise, who should have appeared and showed something in
Discharge of the Onus Reparandi; for Gosforth Church is neither Chapel of
Ease, non-Parochial Chapel within the Rectory of St. Nicholas, as the Case was
mistated to Dr. Exton; 1. Because Gosforth is reputed and taken to be a Church
and Parish distinct 2. The Parish of St. Nicholas is no Rectory, but a
Vicarage; and in Cast two Churches Parochial be united, as probably these may
be, the Reparation shall be several as before, Hob. 67. 3. The Case was
mistated to Dr. Exton in a material and essential Part thereof, being put, of
an Impropriator who repairs a Mother Church; for, first, non Consent, in the
Case of Gosforth Church that St. Nicholas is the Mother Church, but rather the
contrary, as above. Secondly; it is notorious that the Do^^ and Chapter of
Carlisle have refused to repair the Chancel of St. Nicholas, and particularly
to allow the late Dean's Accounts, who de facto once repaired it; so that the
Case put to Dr. Exton differing essentially from this, his Opinion, which is
allowed to be good Law, cannot reach this.

The Impropriators of the Parish of Gosforth may be soon satisfied, though it was
once denied them, from the Authorities formerly sent, that Impropriators, as
well as the Parson de Communi Jure, ought to repair the Chancel, unless they
can prove contrary by Custom or Composition.

Dr. SMITH Dean of Carlisle's Letter to Dr. BASIRE.
Reverend SIR, Cockermouth, Jan. 14. 1674.
UPON reading of your Paper which you sent enclosed to my Lord our Bishop,
touching the Repairs of Gosforth Chapel, I presently observed that the
Authorities therein quoted are indeed very clear and full, as to the repairing
of the Mother Church, but reach not at all to Chapels, the Burden whereof I
have always been told did lie wholly upon the Inhabitants within each such
Chapplery, the Parson or Impropriators being no Way liable thereunto. However,
for my better Satisfaction, I wrote to a Friend of mine in London, and
requested him to consult some able Civilian about it, and send me down his
Opinion. The Quaere which I sent up was expressed in these very Words:

Whether an Impropriator be obliged, of common Right, to repair and uphold the
Chancels, not only of the Mother Church, but of all the Chapels likewise
within the Rectory; and whether the Distinction of Chapels Parochial and
Chapels of Ease make any Difference in the Case?

The Person consulted was Dr. Exton, Chancellor to the Bishop of London, whose
Opinion, under his own Hand, I here send you enclosed, hoping it will give you
Satisfaction; or if not, that you will please to let me know, that so we may
consider what is further to be done.

With my true Respects and Service to your self and your Lady, craving the
Continuance of your good Prayers, I remain ever,

SIR, Your Faithful Servant, THO. SMITH.

Dr. EXTON'S Opinion, mentioned above.
THE Law is certain, that where there is a Mother Church and a Chapel of Ease,
or a Parochial Chapel, which makes no Difference, if the Mother Church be out
of Repair, those Inhabitants within the Chappelries shall contribute toward
the Repair of that Church: But e contra neither the Impropriator nor
Parishioners of the Mother Church shall at all contribute toward the Repairs
of those Chapels: Except either they have done it, and so suffered a Custom to
grow upon them, or there be some Reservation so to do it in the Foundation of
those Chapels. But those Persons only that have the Benefit of those Chapels
shall repair.

THO. EXTON.

Mr. Willoughby the Bishop's Lessee, for one Moiety of the Tithes, did
voluntarily, before Sequestration, pay 10 l. toward the Reparation of the
Chancel, and the Sequestrators employed that 10 l. and such Portion of the
Tithes sequestered, amounting to the Value of 10 l. more, whereby the said
Chancel was soon repaired, as it has been duly since that Time.


An' Christi Mayors. Sheriffs. 1676. Sir Ralph Carr. Michael Blackett. 1677.
Robert Roddam. Timothy Robson. 1678. Matthew Jefferson. Nicholas Fenwick. 1679.
George Morton. William Aubone. Upon May the 3d Dr. Sharp, Archbishop of St.
Andrew 's in Scotland, was assassinated in his Coach by twelve Russians, in
Consequence of the Solemn League and Covenant; the same Month a Rebellion
breaking out there, but suppressed the next Month.


1680. Sir Nath. Johnson. Joseph Bonner. 1681. Timothy Robson. John Squire.
1682. Nicholas Fenwick. Nicholas Ridley. 1683. William Blackett. John Rumney.
1684. William Aubone. William Proctor. James II. Feb. 6. died at Whitehall that
excellent Prince King Charles the Second, and was succeeded by his Brother
James, before Duke of York.


1685. Sir Henry Brabant. Ralph Elstob. The Rebellion this Year by the Earl of
Argyle in Scotland, and the Duke of Monmouth in England, did no way incommode
the Town of Newcastle, both being speedily deserted, taken Prisoners, and
executed.


1686. Nicholas Cole. Thomas Paise. 1687. John Squire. Sir William Creah.
William Ramsay. Samuel Gill.
In November, this Year, the Town of Newcastle received the Lord Lumley, and
declared for the Prince of Orange and a Free Parliament. Echard.

At that Time a beautiful Statue of King James on Horseback, erected upon a
White Marble Basis, before the Exchange in the Midst of the Sand-Hill, was
barbarously demolished by the Mob, who dragged the Statue and its Horse upon
the Key, and turned them over the same into the River.


1688. Will. Hutchinson. Nicholas Ridley.
Matthias Partis. Matthew White.
K. William Q. Mary.

April 1. King William and Queen Mary were crowned. In July following was
passed an Act of Parliament for erecting a Court of Conscience in this Town.
Complete History of England, Vol. III. p. 532.


1689. William Carr. William Fetherstonhaugh. 1690. William Ramsey. Thomas
Wasse. 1691. Matthew White. Joseph Atkinson. 1692. Thomas Wasse. Benjamin
Davison. 1693. Sir Ralph Carr. George Whinfield. Dec. 28. Queen Mary that
excellent Princess departed this Life.


1694. Joseph Atkinson. Robert Eden. April 2. an Act for the better
Admeasurement of Keels and Keel-Boats in the Port of Newcastle, and the Members
thereunto belonging, had the Royal Assent. Complete Hist. of England, Vol. III.
p. 686.


1695. Timothy Robson. George Henderson. 1696. George Whinfield. William Ramsey.
1697. Nicholas Fenwick. George Cuthbertson. July 5. was passed an Act for the
better supplying the Town with fresh Water. Complete Hist of England, Vol. III.
p. 752.


School. Sir W. Blackett Bar. Edward Harrison. 1699. Robert Eden. Jonathan
Hargrave. 1700. George Henderson. John Bows. 1701. William Ramsey. William
Boutflower. Q. Anne. March 8. the King died, and was succeeded by Queen Anne.
1702. William Carr. John Bell. 1703. Matthew White. Allan Bateman. 1704.
Thomas Wasse. Matthew Matsen. Jonathan Roddam.
1705. Sir Ralph Carr. William Ellison. 1706. Nicholas Ridley. Matthew
Fetherstonhaugh. 1707. Joseph Atkinson. Henry Reay. 1708. Robert Fenwick.
Edward Johnson. 1709. George Whinfield. Jonathan Roddam.
Henry Dalston. 1710. William Ellison. Ralph Reed. 1711. M. Fetherstonhaugh
Francis Rudston. 1712. Henry Reay. Joseph Green. 1713. Richard Ridley. Nicholas
Fenwick. 1714. Edward Johnson. Roger Matsen. K. George I. The Queen died Aug. 1.


1715. Henry Dalston. Nathaniel Clayton. About the Middle of October a Party of
Rebels got together at Alnwick in Northumberland; whereupon some Troops of
Dragoons and Companies of Foot marched immediately to secure Newcastle, where
the Remembrance of the Hardships imposed upon that Place by the Scots during
the Rebellion against King Charles I. armed the Inhabitants against every
Inclination of admitting their Northern Neighbors, and their Guests, newly
come out of Scotland. But afterward, when these Dangers were overpast, upon
the Arrival of some Swiss Dragoons, who, seeing the Prosperity and Riches of
the Inhabitants, had entertained strong Resolutions to plunder the Town, were
generously prevented by the English Soldiers quartered there.


1716. Ralph Reed. Francis Johnson. 1717. Francis Rudston. John Kelly. 1718.
Sir W. Blackett Bar. Thomas Stephenson. 1719. Joseph Green. Cuthbert Fenwick.
1720. Nicholas Fenwick. Jacob Rutter. 1721. Francis Johnson. Stephen Coulson.
This Year, Sept. 18. died Nathaniel Lord Crewe, Bishop of Durham, and was
succeeded by Dr. William Talbot, translated from Salisbury.
1722. William Ellison. Robert Sorsbie. 1723. M. Fetherstonhaugh Richard
Swinburne. 1724. William Carr. James Moncaster. 1725. Nathaniel Clayton. Thomas
Wasse. 1726. Nicholas Fenwick. Joseph Liddell. 1727. Cuthbert Fenwick. Robert
Johnson. K. George II. The King died June 11.


1728. Stephen Coulson. John Stephenson. 1729. Henry Reay. Cuthbert Smith. This
Year, Oct. 10. died Dr. William Talbot, Bishop of Durham, and was succeeded by
Dr. Edward Chandler, translated from Coventry and Lichfield.
1730. Francis Rudston. William Harbottle. 1731. Robert Sorsbie. Challoner
Cooper. 1732. Richard Ridley. William Fenwick. 1733. Matthew Ridley. John
Simpson. 1734. William Ellison. Robert Ellison. 1735. Walter Blackett. John
Wilkinson.

APPENDIX.
Add to Page 56, after the first Paragraph.
Carta Nicholai Episcopi Dunelm. facta Ecclesiae de Karliol. super Ecclesiis in
proprios Usus retinendis.
OMNIBUS Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae Filiis ad quos praesens Scriptum pervenerit
Nicholaus Dei gratia, Dunelm. Episcopus salutem in Domino. Noverit Universitas
vestra quod Nos attendentes renuitatem seu paupertatem Possessionum Episcopatus
and Ecclesiae Karliol. Ecclesias de talibus locis in proprios Usus retinendas
Fructibus and Proventibus earundem Ecclesiarum, aequalibus portionibus inter
ipsos distribuendis salvis competentibus Vicariis, and sustentatione honesta
Vicariorum, in praefatis Ecclesiis, quos Vicarios Nobis and successoribus
nostris praesentabunt per Nos and successores nostros instituendos; salvis
etiam Nobis and successoribus nostris in perpetuum Jure, Auctoritate and
Diguitate Episcopali in omnibus Ecclesiis antedictis: salvis etiam quadraginta
Marcis annuis de Bonis earundem Ecclesiarum a dicto Venerabili Fratre Silvestro
Karliol. Episcopo cum Termino solvendis Dunelm. ad Scaccarium nostrum quoad
vixerit and post ejusdem Episcopi Discessum salvis quadraginta Libris
Sterlingorum ab Episcopis Karliol. and dictis Priore and Conventu Karliol. and
eorum successoribus in perpetuum Termino antedicto ad Scaccarium Dunelm.
persolvendis de Bonis Ecclesiarum memoratarum.

Confirmatio Capituli Dunelm. super Carta praedicta.
Omnibus Christi Fidelibus Bertramus Prior and Conventus Dunelm. Ecclesiae
salutem in Domino Noveritis Nos inspexisse Cartam Venerabilis Patris, Domini
Nicholai Dunelm. Episcopi, cujus Tenor talis est. Omnibus S. Matris, etc. Nos
igitur Apparationem seu Contessionem antedictam Ecclesiarum praefato Episcopo
Karliol. and successoribus suis, ac Priori and Capitulo Karliol. factam, prout
Canonice facta est. ratam habentes Ipsam Munimine Sigilli Capituli nostri
confirmamus septimo die Augusti, Anno Domini 1246.

Carta Hugonis Episcopi Dunelm. Priori and Conventui Karliol. de omnibus
Ecclesiis quas tenent in Dioces. Dunelm.
HUGO Dei gratia Dunelm. Episcopus Omnibus Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae Filiis ad
quos Literae istae pervenerint salutem. Noverit Universitas vestra Nos in Anno
Incarnationis Domini Millesimo, Centesimo, Nonagesimo tertio pridie ante
Cathedram S. Petri de communi Consilio Personarum and Ecclesiae Nostrae
concessisse, and praesenti Carta nostra confirmasse dilectis Filiis nostris
Johanni Priori and Conventui B. Mariae Karleol. omnes Ecclesias quas in
Episcopatu nostro tenent and habent, ut viventibus Personis, quae tunc Eas
tenebant, ab Eis annuatim Pensiones solitas percipiant, scil. de Ecclesia de
Novo Castello super Tynam 26 Marcas. De Ecclesia de Neuburn 12 Marcas. De
Ecclesia de Werkeworth 25 Marcas. De Ecclesia de Routhebery 9 Marcas. De
Ecclesia de Whittincham 9 Marcas. De Ecclesia de Corbrig. Medietatem tam Terrae
quam Decimarum, and omnium aliarum Obventionum. Et Petrus de Ros Karliol.
Archidiaconus, quem ad Eorum Praesentationem in alia Medietate Personam
instituimus aliam Medietatem in omnibus teneat, reddendo inde dictis Priori and
Canonicis annuatim unam Libram Incensi ad Assumptionem B. Mariae apud
Karleolum. Et Ipsi pariter supportabunt Onus deserviendi Ecclesiae per honestos
Vicarios, and reddendi Synodalia and Hospitia Archidiacono inveniendi.
Praedictis autem Personis ab hac luce migrantibus Ipsi vacantes Ecclesias in
propria manu sua retineant and habeant, and earum Fructus and Exitus in
proprios Usus suos ad libitum suum convertant, and in singulis honestos
Vicarios, sicut aliae Personae faciunt, ponant, qui Ecclesiis honest
deserviant and Curam Animarum habeant. Ipsi vero tanquam Personae Archidiacono
and aliis Officialibus nostris, de his, quae ad Ipsos pertinent, respondebunt
and satisfaciant: Verumtamen de Hospitiis nostris and communibus Auxiliis
quieti crunt: Ipsi vero pro tam gratuita Benignitate nostra quam Eis
impendimus, in Recompensationem Hospitiorum nostrorum and Auxiliorum Nobis and
Successoribus nostris annuatim in perpetuum quadraginta Marcas viginti scil, ad
Pentecost, and viginti ad Festum S. Martini persolvent; sed de december quicti
erunt, donec aliqua praedictarum Ecclesiarum in Eorum Proprietatem deveniat.
His Testibus Bertramo Priore Dunelm, Burchardo and Willielmo Archidiaconis,
Symone Camerario, Magro. Ricardo de Coldingham, Magro. Willo. Blesensi, Willo.
de Hoveden, Magro, Rob. de Adington, Symone, Johanne, and Ricardo Capollanis,
Nicholao Medico, Rob. de Ellewych, Rob. de Hedon, Rob. de Dunelm. Magro. Will.
Elemosinario, Adam. Ricardo, Hagrun, and Will. de Norham Clericis, and multis
aliis.

Obligatio Episcopi and Prioris Karliol. de Indemnitate Confirmationis
Ecclesiarum Eorundent in proprios Usus.
OMnibus hoc Scriptum visuris vel audituris Silvester Dei gratia Karliol.
Episcopus, and Robertus Prior and Conventus Karliol. salutem in Domino. Ne
processu temporis Priori and Capitulo Dunelm. Ecclesiae possit aliquo Eventu
dispendium provenire per hoc quod Ratihabitionem, quam ratificavit Dominus
Ricardus Dei gratia Dunelm. Episcopus super Ecclesiis de Novo Castro, Newburne,
de Workworth, de Corbrigg, and medietate Ecclesiae de Wytingham Nobis and
Successoribus nostris in proprios Usus secundum Ordinationem Magistrorum
Wilhelmi de Kylkenny Archidiaconi Coventrens. Thomae de Wymundham Precentoris
Lichseldens. Odinis de Kylkenny, and Walteri de Merton Clericorum liberaliter
confirmarunt, praesenti Scripti Nos and successores nostros and Ecclesiam
Karliol. in perpetuum obligamus, quod conservabimus Indemnes in omnibus and per
omnia praefatos Priorem and Conventum Dunelm. quoad hoc: In cujus Rei
Testimonium praesenti Scripto Sigilla nostra fecimus apponi. Datum 22 die
Octobris Ao Dni 1248.

Add to Page 73.
I suppose Thomas Harelred died the ninth of King Henry VII. having so good a
Voucher as the following Record, enrolled in the Chancery Rolls at Durham
during the Vacation of that See after the Death of John Sherwood, and before
the succeeding Bishop, Richard Fox, was inthroned Bishop there, although
nominated.

An Enrollment of an Arbitrament between Humfrey Lysle, Esquire and the Vicar of
Newcastle upon Tyne.
MEMORAND. Quod Umfridus Lysle Arm. vicesimo die Martii Anno Regni Regis
Henrici septimi nono, sede Episcopali Dunelm. vacant, coram ipso Domino Rege
in Cancellaria sua Dunelm. coram Magistro Radulpho Both Clerico Cancellario
dicti Domini Regis, sede vacant, venit and Cognovit Scriptum subsequens, and
omnia contenta in eodem esse Factum suum, and petiit ut irrotularetur in
Rotulis Cancellariae Dunelm. in forma sequente.

Memorand. That in the Presence of Rauff Both, Chaunceller of Durham, it is
agreid between Umfray Lysle on that oon Party, and John Deye Doctor Theologia,
and Vicare of Newcastell upon Tyne on that other Party; that the said Umfray
shall leve of his Hands, and not to meal with the Chirch or Chapyll of Sowth
Gosford (...) duyted thereunto belonging, nor put in noe Priest to ministre the
Sacrament nor Sacraments, nor magnteyn no such to be, nor magnteyn noon other
manner of Man to recyve any manner of duyte to the said Chirch or Chapel
belonging, but peasbley sufre the said Vicare an his Deutyes, Ministers,
Officers, Tenaunts, and Servaunts, to occupye, receve, and enjoye all manner of
Rightys there, and if Need be to suye for the same without Let or Perturbance
of the said Umfray or any in his Name, or any other Wrong doing by him or any
of his, till the reverent Fadre in God Richard now Byssshop of Bathe determyn
or decree the contrary, and there of make Notice to the said Chaunceller; and
thus truly to perform the said Umfray feithfully promitteth on his Faith and
Honest all: Also the said Umfray byndeth him to my said Lord of Bathe, that he
shall keep and bear the Kyng's Pass ayenste the said Vicare, his Servaunts,
Deutyes, Tenaunts, and all his Officers there upon peyn of C. Marcs? And also of
brekyng of his Faith, nether by him self nor by the procuryng or stirring of
any other as far as he may let. And to this keeping of Peasse Sir Rauff Bows
the Shirreff of the Bysshopprick is bounden to the said Chaunceller in the of
C. Marcs, and that thies Premissez shall be keped either of the Parties haf
subscribled this with their Sign Manuale, and delivered this for their Deed
to remain for a Record, and to be enrowled by the said Chaunceller as Mat^r
of Records in the Chau^^ of Durham. Writyn at Durham in the Fest of Saint
Cuthbert in March the 9th Year of the Reign of King Henry the 7th. 1494.

UMFRAY LEYLL, R. CHAMBER, in the Name and for Sir RAUFF BOWS.

Add to Page 139.
Confirmatio Ordinationis Hospitalis de Walknoll, infra Villam Novi Castri.
UNiversis Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae Filiis ad quos praesentes Literae
pervenerint Thomas Permissione Divina Dunelm. Episcopus, salutem in Eo quem
peperit Uterus Virginalis. Universitati vestrae innotescimus per praesentes
quod quandam Cartam Quatripartitam Willielmi de Acketon Burgensis Villae Novi
Castri super Tynam nostrae Dioces. super Ordinatione cujusdam Hospitalis
Ordinis Sanctae Trinitatis super le Walknoll infra dictam Villam Novi Castri
per ipsum factam, Sigillo ejusdem Willielmi; ac Sigillo communi dictae Villae
Novi Castri Sigillatam, sanam, and integram, ac omni suspicionis vitio carentem
recepimus and inspeximus in haec Verba.

In Nomine Sanctae and Individuae Trinitatis, Patris and Filii and Spiritus
Sancti, per hanc Cartam quatripartitam pateat Universis quod Ego Willielmus de
Acketon Burgens. Villae Novi Castri super Tynam Dunelm. Dioces. inter Opera
Pietatis Deo grata reputans and acceptum, per Augmentum Cultus Divini and
Pietatis, praecipue Ministerio Sacerdotum, and per Exhibitionem sustentationis
Pauperum, Infirmorum, and Clericorum Terrena and Transitoria in Aeterna and
Coelestia felici commercio commutare, Auctoritate and Consensu Venerabilis
Patris Domini Thomae Dunelm. Episcopi, Loci Diocesani, and sui Capituli
Ecclesiae Cathedralis Dunelm. dedi, concessi, and hac praesenti Carta mea
quatripartita consirmavi, Intuitu Caritatis, and pro Salubri Statu dicti
Venerabilis Patris, and Serenissimi Principis, Domini Edvardi Dei gratia Regis
Angliae and Franciae illustris, Progenitorum and Haeredum suorum, pro salute
Corporum and Animarum, Mei, Mariae Uxoris meae, Roberti de Oggell, Willielmi
del Strother, and Roberti de Angerton, and pro salute Animarum Willielmi de
Thorald, Dionisiae Uxoris suae, Willielmi de Acketon Patris mei, Isoldae Uxoris
suae Matris meae, Johannis, Thomae, Walteri, Edae, Adae, Edmundi, Willielmi,
Petri, and omnium Antecessorum, Benefactorum, Amicorum meorum and successorum
eorum, and omnium Fidelium defunctorum, Licentia dicti Domini Regis super hoc
concessa and optenta, Deo and Sanctae Trinitati, quae est Pater and Filius and
Spiritus Sanctus, and hi tres Unum sunt, and Willielmo de Wackefeld Fratri
Ordinis Sanctae Trinitatis and Confratribus dicti Ordinis, Pauperibus, and
Insicmis, sive Clericis, totam illam Terram vocaram le Walknoll in praedicta
Villa Novi Castri cum suis Pertinentiis, super quam Terram edificavi unum
Hospitale in Honor Sanctae Trinitatis, pro Inhabitatione unius Custodis
perpetui. Confratrum Pauperum, Infirmorum, and Clericorum, qui in eodem
Hospitali moranbuntur, and successorum suorum, in perpetuum dedi and concessi
Deo and sanctae Trinitati, ac praedictis Fratri Willielmo de Wackefeld,
Confratribus, Pauperibus, Infirmis, and Clericis supradictis in dicto Hospitali
morantibus, and in perpetuum moraturis, in puram and perpetuam Elemosinam, and
sustentationem Eorundem and successorum suorum, unum Messuagium cum
Pertinentiis suis quod quondam fuit Hugonis de Haldenby, sicut jacet per suas
rectas and antiquas Divisas in praedicta Villa Novi Castri, inter Tenementum in
quo Robertus de Norrays inhabitat ex part una and Venellum in quo Johannes
Graper inhabitat ex part altera. Dedi etiam and concessi Deo and sanctae
Trinitati and praedicto Willielmo de Wackefeld, Confratribus, Pauperibus,
Infirmis, sive Clericis supradictis duo Celaria in anteriore part Messuagii in
quo Robertus Elward inhabitat, sicut jacent in longitudine inter Terram Thomae
de Kelson ex una part ex opposito del Calecross ejusdem Villae, and Venellum
Johannis Abell ex altera, and extendit se in latitudine a Via Regia usque ad
Celarium dicti Roberti dicti Messuagii, excepto Introitu dicti Roberti. Dedi
etiam and concessi Deo and sanctae Trinitati, and praedicto Willielmo de
Wakeseld, Confratribus, Pauperibus, Infirmis, sive Clericis supradictis unam
Placeam Terrae cum suis Pertinentiis jacentem in Villa praedicta Novi Castri,
sicut jacet per suas rectas and antiquas Divisas, in latitudine inter Terram
Johannis de Stanhoppe ex part una, and Terram quondam Thomae Milson ex part
altera, and extendit se in longitudine a Via juxta Murum, Domini Regis usque ad
Gardinum meum de tentorio. Concessi etiam Deo and sanctae Trinitati and
praedicto Willielmo de Wackeselde, Confratribus, Pauperibus, sive Clericis
supradictis unum Annum Redditum Triginta and trium Solidorum and quatuor
Denariorum exeuntem de quodam Tenemento meo in Villa praedicta Novi Castri
juxta Lorteburne, quod Adam Market quondam tenuit. Concessi etiam Deo and
Sanctae Trinitati, and Willielmo de Wackefeld, Confratribus, Pauperibus, and
Clericis supradictis unum Annuum Redditum Triginta and sex solidorum and octo
Denariorum exeuntem de toto Tenemento meo in Villa praedicta juxta Lorteburne,
quod Alicia de Brandon quondam tenuit, quae quidem Tenementa jacent inter
Terram David de Rodam ex part Boriali and Tenementum Roberti de Angerton ex
part Australi. Concessi etiam Deo and sanctae Trinitati, and Willielmo de
Wackefelde, Confratribus, Pauperibus, and Clericis supradictis, unum annuum
Redditum Quinquaginta and septem solidorum and quatuor Denariorum exeuntem de
toto illo Tenemento quod Robertus Elward de Me tenet in Villa praedicta in Vico
vocato le Flesshewer Raw, sicut jacet inter Terram Thomae de Kelson ex part
una, and Terram Johannis Abell ex altera. Concessi etiam Deo, and sanctae
Trinitati, and Willielmo de Wakefeld, Confratribus, Pauperibus, and Clericis
supradictis unum annuum Redditum december solidorum exeuntem de Tenemento Thomae
de Kelson ex opposito le Calecrosse in Villa praedicta in puram and perpetuam
Elemosinam, ad inveniend. and sustinendtres Fratres Capellanos dicti Ordinis
vel aptos Ordinibus, ita quod sint infra duos annos Capellani Canonice
ordinati: Quorum Unus sit Custos perpetuus dicti Hospitalis tres Pauperes and
Infirmos, tres Clericos scolatizantes and addiscentes in dicto Hospitali
moraturi and in Capella dicti Hospitalis instructuri. Ut Custos and Confratres
sui praedicti, Capellani, Pauperes, and Clerici supradicti, in dicto Hospitali,
and infra Mansum ejusdem Hospitalis habitabunt, and de Bonis communibus dicti
Hospitalis in Esculentis, and Potulentis, and Lectis, sustentationem suam
percipiant and habebunt, secundum Posse dicti Hospitalis, ac tres Lectos
competentes pro Hospitibus ibidem accedentes habebunt and invenient paratos.
Volo etiam and dispono, quod praedicti Custos and Confratres singulis diebus
Horas suas Canonicas in Capella dicti Hospitalis dicant vel psallent tempore
competent, and cessante Impedimento, singulis diebus Missas suas celebrent sive
dicant in Capella dicti Hospitalis, prout ad Commoditatem Peregrinorum and
aliorum Extraneorum ad dictam Villam accedentium and ab eadem redeuntium melius
videbitur expedire. Dictique Pauperes, Infirmi, sive Clerici Orationes and
Preces suas faciant pro salubri statu Viventium, and pro salubri statu Corporum
and Animarum Praedictorum: Ita viz. quod Eorum quilibet dicat singulis diebus
Viginti Pater Noster and totidem Ave, vice and Horae nomine matu^i^inalis, or
vice and Horae nomino primae quinque Pater Noster and Ave, and pro singulis
horis diei totidem, viz. tertiae, sextae, nonae, Vesperarum, and Completorii:
and quod praedicti Clerici in omnibus Festis duplicibus per totum Annum and in
Vigiliis Eorundem, in Capella dicti Hospitalis ministrent and deservient, and
ad Ista facienda and complenda onerentur singuli, Custos, Sacerdotes, Pauperes,
Infirmi, sive Clerici, in periculum Animarum eorundem. Dicti Custos, Fratres,
Pauperes, Infirmi, sive Clerici, qui pro tempore fuerint, singulis diebus in
Noctis Crepusculo, in Capella dicti Hospitalis simul conveniant, and facta
Pulsatione aliquali, ut est moris Antiphoniam de Gloriosa Virgin Maria, scil.
salve Regina, vel aliam Antiphoniam, de Domina decantent devotius qua poterunt
alta voce, and quali sexta Feria, vel semel in qualibet hebdomade dicant sive
psallent dicti Custos and Confratres, qui pro tempore fuerint, Placebo, and
Dirige pro Personis and Animabus supradictis, quorum Nomina in dicta Capella
specialiter recitantur, ut sic dicti Custos and Confratres ad sanctam Regulam
and Disciplinam dicti Ordinis simul viventes, ac dicti Pauperes, Infirmi, and
Clerici ibidem pacificae and modestae Conversationis, salubrius Orationibus and
Praecibus vacare, and Domino valiant deservire. Volo insuper and dispono, quod
omnes Redditus, Tenementa, Messuagia, Celaria, and Placeae supradictae ad Usum
and Sustentationem dictorum Custodis, Fratrum, Pauperum, Infirmorum, and
Clericorum, and Successorum suorum in dicto Hospitali commorantium integraliter
and inviolabiliter conserventur, and in nullos alios Usus quomodolibet
convertantur: Ad quorum conservationem and fidelem Custodiam quilibet Custos ad
Regimen dicti Hospitalis ordinandus in Admissione sua Vinculo Juramenti
Corporaliter praestiti specialiter oneretur. Ita quod non liceat dictis
Custodi, Confratribus, Pauperibus, Infirmis, five Clericis, nec little
successoribus dictum Hospitale, Redditus, Tenementa, Messuagia, Celaria, vel
Placeas supradicta, seu aliquam partem Eorundem alicui alienare, impignorare,
seu diminuere, and si aliquid factum vel acceptum fuerit in contrarium, de Jure
non valeat quovismodo. Si vero praedicti Redditus, seu aliqua pars corundem, a
retro fuerint ad aliquem Terminum, viz. ad Festum Pentecost. and S. Martini in
hyeme non soluti, quod tunc been liceat dicto Custodi qui pro tempore suerit,
per se vel per Alium in praedictis Tenementis intrare and quolibet Tenemento
praedictorum, pro Redditu a retro existente, unde praedicta Tenementa onerantur
intrare, distringere, and Districtiones capere, asportare, and retinere,
quousque de praedicto annuo Redditu a retro existente, cum Arreragiis, si quae
sint, plenarie Eis fuerit satisfactum. Cum antem Custos dicti Hospitalis qui
pro tempore fuerit in fata decedat, cesserit, seu renunciaverit Regimen dicti
Hospitalis, sive propter Crimen vel Defectum, seu aliam Causam notabilem,
amotus fuerit a Regimine praedicto, tunc in omni Casu praedicto per Me quamdiu
vixero, and post mortem meam volo, quod tunc been liceat dictis Confratribus,
in dicto Hospitali qui pro tempore suerint commorantibus infra Quindenam, post
mortem alicujus Custodis, Cessionem, seu Renunciationem, idoneam Personam de
Scipsis, vel de Conventu de Knaresburgh Ordinis praedicti eligere, and Ipsum
sic electum Ministro de Knaresburgh praesentare, and Ipse sic electus and
praesentatus per ipsum Ministrum praedictum recipiatur, and in Custodia dicti
Hospitalis instituatur secundum Ordinationes and Fundationes meas supraedictas:
Quod si contingat quod praedicti Fratres in praedicto Hospitali morantes
concordare non possunt super Electionem praedictam, volo quod Minister de
Knaresburgh and Conventus ejusdem Domus, infra tres Septimanas tunc proxime
sequentes, idoneam Personam de Ordine praedicto praesentant, and Ille sic
praesentatus sit Custos perpetuus dicti Hospitalis secundum Ordinationem and
Fundationem meas supradictas: Et si praedicti Minister and Conventus dictae
Domus de Knaresburgh, non praesentaverint Idioneam personam, ut praefertur,
volo quod Minister dictus Provincialis Ordinis praedicti in Anglia Idoneam
Personam Ordinis praedicti ad Custodiam dicti Hospitalis infra quindenam extunc
proxime sequentem praesentet, and Ille sic praesentatus sit Custos dicti
Hospitalis secundum Ordinationem and Fundationem supradictas: Et quod si
praedictus Minister dictus Provincialis non praesentaverit idoneam Personam ad
Custodiam dicti Hospitalis ut praesertur, volo and concedo quod tunc been
liceat Majori and Ballivis Villae Novi Castri super Tynam qui pro tempore
fuerint, idoneam Personam de Ordine praedicto ad Ministrum de Knaresburgh, qui
pro tempore fuerit praesentare, and Ipse sic praesentatus per praedictum
Ministrum in Costodia dicti Hospitalis instituatur secundum Fundationem and
Ordinationem supradictas. Item ordino and dispono de Voluntate and Assensu
Ministri and Conventus Domus praedictae S. Roberti de Knaresburgh, quod
Minister ejusdem Domus vel ejus Vicarius ejusdem Ordinis cum Uno suo Confratre
and aliis duobus per Equos ad dictum Hospitale singulis Annis post mortem
Willielmi de Wakefeld Custodis Hospitalis praedicti, infra Quindenam proximam
post Festum S. Trinitatis personaliter accedat, and sumptus moderatos dicti
Hospitalis per sex dies veniendo, morando, and redeundo percipiat per manus
Custodis persolvendos: Idemque Minister, quem solum Ordinarium and dicti
Hospitalis Praesidentem esse volo, adeo quod nullus alius Judex seu Ordinarius
de Statu dicti Hospitalis, seu Personis and Rebus ejusdem se nullatenus
intromittat, Inquisitionem diligentem, and Visitationem plenam, de Personis,
and Rebus dicti Hospitalis faciat ac exerceat, ac Defectus ibidem compertos
corrigat and emendet, prout secundum Deum and Aequitatem melius videbitur
expedire. Et Minister dictus and Conventus de Knaresburgh, qui pro tempore
fuerint, habebunt annuatim pro labor suo Visitationis dicti Hospitalis Pondus
unius Equi Piscium per manus Custodis dicti Hospitalis apud Villam Novi Castri
super Tynam recipiendum, decenter persolvendum: Et quod dictus Custos, nec
Hospitale praedictum ulterius oneretur pro labor praedicto. Et volo quod
quandocunque and quotiescunque aliqui Fratres pauperes sive Clerici dicti
Hospitalis decesserint, recesserint, vel aliis Causis rationabilibus, sive ex
Causa rationabili amoti fuerint ab Hospitali praedicto, quod per Me, dum
vixero, and post mortem meam per praedictos Custodem and Confratres dicti
Hospitalis, alii Fratres idonei, Pauperes, Infirmi, and Clerici loco
decedentium, recedentium, and amotorum, infra tres septimanas, ut praemittitur
assumantur, and in eodem Hospitali ponantur: Quod si contingat quod praedicti
Custos and Confratres dicti Hospitalis infra tres Septimanes supradictas, ut
praemittitur, praedictam Assumptionem Fratrum Pauperum, Infirmorum and
Clericorum non adimpleverint, quod tunc been liceat Majori and Ballivis dictae
Villae Novi Castri, qui pro tempore fuerint, alios Fratres idoneos, Pauperes,
Infirmos, and Clericos assumere, and in eodem Hospitali ponere moraturos,
secundum Ordinationem meam and Fundationem supradictam.

Et in Assumptione and Praefixione Fratrum, Pauperum, Infirmorum, and
Clericorum, in dicto Hospitali ponendorum, Volo quod Personae de
Consanguinitate and Affinitate mea, si quae fuerint, alioquin de Originariis
and Oriundis de dicta Villa Novi Castri, vel de aliis praeferantur. Caeterum
inter dictum Ministrum and Confratres dictae Domus de Knaresburgh and Me
concorditer est conventum, quod si Minister dictae Domus, qui erit pro tempore,
ad dictum Hospitale Causa Visitationis, Inquisitionis, and Correctionis
faciendarum, temporibus statutis supradictis, personaliter, vel ejus Vicarius
accedere, and ea, quae in hac Causa requiruntur, non curaverit seu neglexerit,
absque Impedimento, legitime adimplere singulis Annis quibus adimplere
neglexerit, dicti Minister and Confratres Domus de Knaresburgh omni Commodo and
Jurisdictione omnino careant and perdent: Et volo quod tunc been liceat Priori
Dunelm. qui pro tempore fuerit, post Quindenam postquam dictus Minister Domus
de Knaresburgh a Visitatione dicti Hospitalis defecerit contra Formam
praenominatam, infra Quindenam proxime sequentem faciat, and quae concernunt ad
Visitationem dicti Hospitalis adimpleat Modo and Forma Fundationis antedictae.
Et quod si dictus Prior Ea, quae concernunt ad Visitationem supradictam,
neglexerit, quod tunc been liceat Vicario Villae Novi Castri super Tynam, qui
pro tempore fuerit, dictam Visitationem dicti Hospitalis facere, ut
praemittitur. Et volo insuper and dispono quod neque Minister Domus de
Knaresburgh, quem Praesidentem dicti Hospitalis ordinamus, ut est dictum, nec
Major nec Ballivi dictae Villae Novi Castri, nullam Potestatem habeant aliqua
Bona dicti Hospitalis minuendi, sibi vel Domui de Knaresburgh, vel alteri
cuicunque applicandi vel transferendi, sed quod ipsa Bona omnia and singula in
Usus dicti Custodis, Fratrum, Pauperum, Infirmorum, Clericorum and Successorum
suorum totaliter convertantur. Habenda and tenenda dictam Terram, Hospitale
praedictum, Messuagia, Celaria, and Placeas supradictas, ac Redditus
praedictos, percipienda cum omnibus suis Pertinentiis praedicto Fratri
Willielmo de Wackefeld, Confratribus, Pauperibus, Infirmis, and Clericis in
dicto Hospitali morantibus, and in futurum moraturis, ibidem Deo servituris,
and successoribus suis in perpetuum, in puram and perpetuam Elemosinam, ad
inveniendum, sustentandum, and perficiendum Omnia antedicta modo and forma
praenominatis in eodem Hospitali Ita quod quandocunque and quotiescunque
praedicti Custos, Confratres, Pauperes, Infirmi, Clerici vel successores sui
defecerit vel defecerint in aliquo Articulo Praemissorum, and debita Correctio
dicti Defectus infra Quadraginta dies proxime sequentes post Visitationem
sactam, per praedictum Ministrum de Knaresburgh vel ejus Vicarium per Priorem
Dunelm. vel per Vacarium de Novo Castro super Tynam, qui pro tempore suerit,
non fiet, quod tunc been liceat Mihi in tota Vita mea, and post Decessum meum
Majori and Ballivis, qui pro tempore fuerint, in omnibus meis Celariis,
Placeis, and Redditibus supradictis intrare, distringere, and Ea in manu mea,
dum vixero, and post mortem meam, in manibus dicti Majoris and Ballivorum, qui
pro tempore fuerint, retinere, quousque debita Correctio fiet de Defectu
invento aliquorum Articulorum supradictorum contra Ordinationem and Fundationem
supradictas. Salvo tamen quod omnes Redditus and Proficui inde provenientes in
Usum Inhabitantium, viz. Custodis, Fratrum, Pauperum, Infirmorum, and
Clericorum in dicto Hospitali, and non in alios Usus convertantur quomodolibet.
Et Ego vero Willielmus de Acketon Burgensis Villae Novi Castri super Tynam and
Haeredes mei praedictam Terram, Hospitale praedictum, Messuagia, Celaria, and
Placeas supradictas, ac Redditus supradictos cum omnibus suis Pertinentiis
praedicto Willielmo de Wackefelde, Confratribus, Pauperibus, Infirmis, and
Clericis in dicto Hospitali morantibus, and in futurum moraturis, and
successoribus suis, modo and forma praenominatis contra omnes Genres
warantizabimus and desendemus in perpetuum. In cujus Rei Testimonium Parti
hujus Indenturae quadripartitae penes Me remanenti Sigillum Willielmi de
Wackefeld, and Sigillum Capituli Domus de Knaresburgh sunt apposita: Alteri
vero Parti penes dictum Willielmum and Hospitale praedictum remanenti Sigillum
meum and Sigillum commune dictae Villae Novi Castri sunt appensa: Tertiae vero
Parti penes Majorem and Ballivos Villae Novi Castri super Tynam, and in Communi
Cista ejusdem Villae romanenti Sigilla dicti Willielmi de Wackefeld and dicti
Capituli de Knaresburgh and Sigillum meum sunt appensa: Quartae vero Parti
penes Magistrum and Conventum Domus de Knaresburgh remanenti Sigillum meum and
Sigillum Willielmi de Wackefelde Custodis dicti Hospitalis. una cum Siuillo
communi Novi Castri sunt apposita. His Testibus, Willielmo de la Strother tunc
Majore Villae Novi Castri super Tynam, Johanne de Emeldon, Nicholao Bagot, and
Johanne de Camera tunc Ballivts, Roberto de Angerton, Thoma de Hett, Roberto
Qware, Johanne de Bikere, Ada. Ord, Johanne Plumber, Nicholao Soco and aliis.
Datum apud Villam Novi Castri super Tynam die Mercur. proximo ante Festum
Pentecost. Anno Domini Millesimo, Trecentesimo, Sexagesimo.

Nos igitur Thomas Permissione Divina Dunelm. Episcopus antedictus attentis,
pensatis, and diligenter consideratis Praemissis omnibus and singulis and eorum
Causis, nec non laudabili Opere hujusmodi and Proposito dicti Willielmi de
Acketon, quae omnia pia, utilia, and necessaria reputamus, praefatam Cartam, ac
Omnia and Singula in eadem contenta, tanquam rite and legitime facta, quatenus
ad Nos attinet, pro Nobis and Successoribus nostris Dunelm. Episcopis
acceptamus, approbamus, ratificamus, and tenore Praesentium confirmamus, Jure,
Jurisdictione, Dignitate, and Honor Nostris and Ecclesiae nostrae Dunelm. in
omnibus and per omnia semper salvis. In cujus Rei Testimonium Sigillum nostrum
Praesentibus est appensum. Datum in Manerio nostro de Aukland secundo die
Mensis October. Anno Domini Milles. Trecent. Sexag. primo, and Consecrationis
nostrae decimo septimo.

Et Nos Prior and Capitulum Ecclesiae Dunelm. Praemissa omnia and singula per
dictum Venerabilem Patrem facta rata habentes, and qnatenus in Nobis est, and
ad Nos pertinet, approbantes, Sigillum nostrum Commune ad majorem Securitatem
and Evidentiam Praesentium duximus apponendum. Datum ergo, quod ad Nos in
Capitulari Domo nostra Dunelm. Vicesimo die Mensis Aprilis Anno Domini Milles.
Trecentes. Sesages. Tertio.

FINIS.

