Lud. Du Guernier inv. et sculp



THE FAIR PENITENT. A TRAGEDY.

Written by N. ROW, Esquire

Quin morere, ut merita es, ferroque averte dolorem.
Virg. Aen. Lib. 4.

LONDON: Printed for Jacob Tonson at Shakespeare's Head over against
Catherine-street in the Strand. MDCCXIV.

TO HER GRACE the DUCHESS OF ORMOND.
MADAM,
THE Privilege of Poetry (or it may be the Vanity of the Pretenders to it) has
given 'em a kind of Right to pretend, at the same time, to the Favor of those,
whom their high Birth and excellent Qualities have placed in a very
distinguishing manner above the rest of the World. If this be not a received
Maxim, yet I am sure I am to wish it were, that I may have at least some kind
of Excuse for laying this Tragedy at Your Grace's Feet. I have too much reason
to fear that it may prove but an indifferent Entertainment to Your Grace, since
if I have any way succeeded in it, it has been in describing those violent
Passions which have been always Strangers to so happy a Temper, and so noble
and so exalted a Virtue as Your Grace is Mistress of. Yet for all this, I
cannot but confess the Vanity which I have, to hope that there may be something
so moving in the Misfortunes and Distress of the Play, as may be not altogether
unworthy of Your Grace's Pity. This is one of the main Designs of Tragedy, and
to excite this generous Pity in the greatest Minds, may pass for some kind of
Success in this way of Writing. I am sensible of the Presumption I am guilty of
by this Hope, and how much it is that I pretend to in Your Grace's Approbation;
if it be my good Fortune to meet with any little Share of it, I shall always
look upon it as much more to me than the general Applause of the Theater, or
even the Praise of a good Critic. Your Grace's Name is the best Protection
this Play can hope for, since the World, ill-natured as it is, agrees in an
universal Respect and Deference for Your Grace's Person and Character. In so
censorious an Age as this is, where Malice furnishes out all the Public
Conversations, where every Body pulls and is pulled to pieces of course, and
where there is hardly such a thing as being merry, but at another's Expense;
yet by a public and uncommon Justice to the Duchess of Ormond, Her Name has
never been mentioned, but as it ought, though She has Beauty enough to provoke
Detraction from the Fairest of Her own Sex, and Virtue enough to make the Loose
and Dissolute of the other (a very formidable Party) Her Enemies. Instead of
this they agree to say nothing of Her but what She deserves, That Her Spirit is
worthy of Her Birth; Her Sweetness, of the Love and Respect of all the World;
Her Piety, of Her Religion; Her Service, of Her Royal Mistress; and Her Beauty
and Truth, of Her Lord; that in short every part of Her Character is Just, and
that She is the best Reward for one of the greatest Hero's this Age has
produced. This, Madam, is what You must allow People every where to say; those
whom You shall leave behind You in England will have something further to add,
the Loss we shall suffer by your Grace's Journey to Ireland; the Queen's
Pleasure, and the Impatient Wishes of that Nation are about to deprive us of
Two of our Public Ornaments. But there is no arguing against Reasons so
prevalent as these. Those who shall lament your Grace's Absence will yet
acquiesce in the Wisdom and Justice of Her Majesty's Choice: Among all whose
Royal Favors none could be so agreeable, upon a thousand Accounts, to that
People, as the Duke of Ormond. With what Joy, what Acclamations shall they meet
a Governor, who beside their former Obligations to His Family, has so lately
ventured His Life and Fortune for their Preservation; What Duty, what
Submission shall they not pay to that Authority which the Queen has delegated
to a Person so dear to 'em? And with what Honor, what Respect shall they
receive Your Grace, when they look upon You as the Noblest and Best Pattern Her
Majesty could send 'em, of her own Royal Goodness, and Personal Virtues? They
shall behold Your Grace with the same Pleasure the English shall take when ever
it shall be their good Fortune to see You return again to Your Native Country.
In England Your Grace is become a Public Concern, and as Your going away will
be attended with a general Sorrow, so Your Return shall give as general a Joy;
and to none of those many, more than to,

MADAM, Your GRACE's most Obedient, and most Humble Servant N. Row.

PROLOGUE,
Spoken by Mr. Betterton. LONG has the Fate of Kings and Empires been
The common Business of the Tragic Scene,
As if Misfortune made the Throne her Seat,
And none cou d be unhappy but the Great.
Dearly it is true each buys the Crown he wears,
And many are the mighty Monarch's Cares:
By foreign Foes and homebred Factions pressed,
Few are the Joys he knows and short his Hours of Rest.
Stories like these with Wonder we may hear,
But far remote and in a higher Sphere,
We never can pity what we never can share.
Like distant Battles of the Pole and Swede,
Which frugal Citizens over Coffee read,
Careless for who shall fail or who succeed.
Therefore an humbler Theme our Author chose,
A melancholy Tale of private Woes:
No Princes here lost Royalty bemoan,
But you shall meet with Sorrows like your own;
Here see imperious Love his Vassals treat,
As hardly as Ambition does the Great;
See how succeeding Passions rage by turns,
How fierce the Youth with Joy and Rapture burns,
And how to Death for Beauty lost, he mourns.
Let no nice Taste the Poet's Art arraign,
If some frail vicious Characters he feign:
Who Writes should still let Nature be his Care,
Mix Shades with Lights and not paint all things fair,
But show you Men and Women as they are.
With Deference to the Fair he bad me say,
Few to Perfection ever found the Way;
Many in many Parts are known to excel,
But 'twere too hard for One to act all well;
Whom justly Life should through each Scene commend,
The Maid, the Wife the Mistress, and the Friend:
This Age, it is true has one great Instance seen,
And Heaven in Justice made that One a Queen.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
SCiolto, a Nobleman of Genoa, Father to Calista. Mr. Bowman. Altamont, a young
Lord, in Love with Calista, and designed her Husband by Sciolto. Mr.
Verbruggen. Horatio, his Friend. Mr. Betterton. Lothario, a young Lord, Enemy
to Altamont. Mr. Powell. Rossano, his Friend. Mr. Baily.
WOMEN.
Calista, Daughter to Sciolto. Mrs. Barry. Lavinia, Sister to Altamont, and
Wife to Horatio. Mrs. Bracegirdle. Lucilla, Confident to Calista. Mrs. Prince.
Servants to Sciolto.
SCENE, Sciolto's Palace and Garden, with some part of the Street near it, in
GENOA.

THE FAIR PENITENT.
ACT I. SCENE I.
SCENE a Garden belonging to Sciolto's Palace. Enter Altamont and Horatio.
ALTAMONT. LET this auspicious Day be ever sacred,
No Mourning, no Misfortunes happen on it;
Let it be marked for Triumphs and Rejoycings;
Let happy Lovers ever make it hely,
Choose it to bless their Hopes, and crown their Wishes,
This happy Day that gives me my Calista.

Hor. Yes, Altamont; to Day thy better Stars
Are joined, to shed their kindest Influence on thee.
Sciolto's noble Hand, that raised thee first,
Half dead and drooping over thy Father's Grave,
Compleats its Bounty, and restores thy Name
To that high Rank and Luster which it boasted,
Before ungrateful Genoa had forgot
The Merit of thy Godlike Father's Arms;
Before that Country which he long had served,
In watchful Councils, and in Winter Camps,
Had cast off his white Age to Want and Wretchedness,
And made their Court to faction by his Ruin.

Alt. Oh great Sciolto! oh my more than Father!
Let me not live, but at thy very Name
My eager Heart springs up, and leaps with Joy.
When I forget the vast vast Debt I owe thee,
Forget! (but it is impossible) then let me
Forget the Use and Privilege of Reason,
Be driven from the Commerce of Mankind,
To wander in the Desert among Brutes,
To bear the various Fury of the Seasons,
The Night's unwholsom Dew and Noon-day's Heat,
To be the Scorn of Earth and Curse of Heaven.

Hor. So open, so unbounded was his Goodness,
It reached even me, because I was thy Friend.
When that Great Man I loved, thy Noble Father,
Bequeathed thy gentle Sister to my Arms,
His last dear Pledge and Legacy of Friendship,
That happy Tie made me Sciolto's Son;
He called us his, and with a Parent's Fondness
Indulged us in his Wealth, blessed us with Plenty,
Healed all our Cares, and sweetened Love it self.

Alt. By Heaven, he found my Fortunes so abandoned,
That nothing but a Miracle could raise 'em;
My Father's Bounty, and the State's Ingratitude,
Had stripped him bare, nor left him even a Grave;
Undone my self, and sinking with his Ruin,
I had no Wealth to bring, nothing to succor him,
But fruitless Tears.

Hor. Yet what thou could thou did,
And did it like a Son; when his hard Creditors,
Urged and assisted by Lothario's Father,
(Foe to thy House, and Rival of their Greatness)
By Sentence of the cruel Law, forbid
His venerable Corpse to rest in Earth,
Thou gav'st thy self a Ransom for his Bones;
With Piety uncommon, did give up
Thy hopeful Youth to Slaves who never knew Mercy,
Sour, unrelenting, Mony-loving Villains,
Who laugh at human Nature and Forgiveness,
And are like Fiends the Factors for Destruction.
Heaven, who beheld the pious Act, approved it,
And bad Sciolto's Bounty be its Proxy,
To bless thy filial Virtue with Abundance.

Alt. But see he comes, the Author of my Happiness,
The Man who saved my Life from deadly Sorrow,
Who bids my Days be blessed with Peace and Plenty,
And satisfies my Soul with Love and Beauty.

Enter Sciolto, he runs to Altamont and embraces him. Sci. Joy to thee,
Altamont! Joy to my self!
Joy to this happy Morn, that makes thee mine,
That kindly grants what Nature had denied me,
And makes me Father of a Son like thee.

Alt. My Father! oh let me unlade my Breast,
Pour out the fullness of my Soul before you,
Show every tender, every grateful Thought,
This wondrous Goodness stirs. But it is impossible,
And Utterance all is vile; since I can only
Swear you reign here, but never tell how much.

Sci. It is enough; I know thee thou art honest;
Goodness innate, and Worth hereditary
Are in thy Mind; thy noble Father's Virtues
Spring freshly forth, and blossom in thy Youth.

Alt. Thus Heaven from nothing raised his fair Creation,
And then with wondrous Joy beheld its Beauty,
Well pleased to see the Excellence he gave.

Sci. Oh noble Youth! I swear since first I knew thee,
Even from that day of Sorrows when I saw thee,
Adorned and lovely in thy filial Tears,
The Mourner and Redeemer of thy Father,
I set thee down and sealed thee for my own:
Thou art my Son, even near me as Calista.
Horatio and Lavinia too are mine;
[Embraces Horatio. All are my Children, and shall share my Heart.
But wherefore waste we thus this happy Day?
The laughing Minutes summon thee to Joy,
And with new Pleasures court thee as they pass;
Thy waiting Bride even chides thee for delaying,
And swears thou come not with a Bridegroom's Haste.

Alt. Oh! could I hope there was one Thought of Altamont
One kind Remembrance in Calista's Breast,
The Winds, with all their Wings, would be too slow
To bear me to her Feet. For oh! my Father,
Amidst this Stream of Joy that bears me on,
Blessed as I am, and honored in your Friendship,
There is one Pain that hangs upon my Heart.

Sci. What means my Son?

Alt. When, at your Intercession,
Last Night Calista yielded to my Happiness,
Just ere we parted, as I sealed my Vows
With Rapture on her Lips, I found her Cold,
As a dead Lover's Statue on his Tomb;
A rising storm of Passion shook her Breast,
Her Eyes a piteous shower of Tears let fall,
And then she sighed as if her Heart were breaking.
With all the tenderest Eloquence of Love
I begged to be a Sharer in her Grief;
But she, with Looks averse, and Eyes that froze me,
Sadly replied, her Sorrows were her own,
Nor in a Father's Power to dispose of.

Sci. Away! it is the Cosenage of their Sex,
One of the common Arts they practice on us,
To sigh and weep, then when their Hearts beat high,
With expectation of the coming Joy:
Thou have in Camps, and fighting Fields been bred,
Unknowing in the Subtleties of Women;
The Virgin Bride, who swoons with deadly Fear,
To see the end of all her Wishes near,
When blushing from the Light and public Eyes,
To the kind Covert of the Night she flies,
With equal Fires to meet the Bridegroom moves,
Melts in his Arms, and with a loose she loves.
[Exeunt.
Enter Lothario and Rossano. Loath. The Father and the Husband!

Ross. Let them pass,
They saw us not.

Loath. I care not if they did,
Ere long I mean to meet 'em Face to Face,
And gaul 'em with my Triumph over Calista.

Ross. You loved her once.

Loath. I liked her, would have married her,
But that it pleased her Father to refuse me,
To make this Honorable Fool her Husband.
For which, if I forget him, may the Shame
I mean to brand his Name with, stick on mine.

Ross. She, gentle Soul, was kinder than her Father.

Loath. She was, and often in private gave me hearing,
'Till by long listening to the soothing Tale,
At length her easy Heart was wholly mine.

Ross. I have heard you often describe her, Haughty, Insolent,
And fierce with high Disdain; it moves my wonder,
That Virtue thus defended, should be yielded
A Prey to loose Desires.

Loath. Hear, then I Will tell thee.
Once in a lone, and secret Hour of Night,
When every Eye was closed, and the pale Moon
And Stars alone, shone conscious of the Theft,
Hot with the Tuscan Grape, and high in Blood,
Hap'ly I stole unheeded to her Chamber.

Ross. That Minute sure was lucky.

Loath. Oh 'twas great.
I found the Fond, Believing, Lovesick Maid,
Loose, unattir'd, warm, tender, full of Wishes;
Fierceness and Pride, the Guardians of her Honor,
Were charmed to Rest, and Love alone was waking.
Within her rising Bosom all was calm,
As peaceful Seas that know no Storms, and only
Are gently lifted up and down by Tides.
I snatched the glorious, golden Opportunity,
And with prevailing, youthful Ardour pressed her,
Till with short Sighs, and murmuring Reluctance,
The yielding Fair One gave me perfect Happiness.
Even all the live-long Night we past in Bliss,
In Ecstasies too fierce to last for ever;
At length the Morn and cold Indifference came;
When fully sated with the luscious Banquet,
I hastily took leave, and left the Nymph
To think on what was past, and sigh alone.

Ross. You saw her soon again.

Loath. Too soon I saw her;
For oh! that Meeting was not like the former;
I found my Heart no more beat high with Transport,
No more I sighed, and languish'd for Enjoyment,
'Twas past, and Reason took her turn to reign,
While every Weakness fell before her Throne.

Ross. What of the Lady?

Loath. With uneasy Fondness
She hung upon me, wept, and sighed, and swore
She was undone; talked of a Priest and Marriage,
Of flying with me from her Father's Power;
Called every Saint and blessed Angel down,
To witness for her that she was my Wife.
I started at that Name.

Ross. What Answer made you?

Loath. None; but pretending sudden Pain and Illness
Escaped the Persecution; two Nights since,
By Message urged, and frequent Importunity,
Again I saw her. Strait with Tears and Sighs,
With swelling Breasts, with Swooning, with Distraction,
With all the Subtleties, and powerful Arts
Of wilful Woman laboring for her purpose,
Again she told the same dull nauseous Tale.
Unmoved, I begged her spare the ungrateful Subject,
Since I resolved, that Love and Peace of Mind
Might flourish long inviolate betwixt us,
Never to load it with the Marriage Chain;
That I would still retain her in my Heart,
My ever gentle Mistress, and my Friend;
But for those other Names of Wise and Husband,
They only meant Ill Nature, Cares, and Quarrels.

Ross. How bore she this Reply?

Loath. Even as the Earth,
When, (Winds pent up, or eating Fires beneath
Shaking the Mass) she labors with Destruction.
At first her Rage was dumb, and wanted Words,
But when the Storm found way, 'twas wild and loud,
Mad as the Priestess of the Delphick God,
Enthusiastic Passion swelled her Breast,
Enlarged her Voice, and ruffled all her Form;
Proud, and disdainful of the Love I proffered,
She called me Villain! Monster! Base! Betrayer!
At last, in very bitterness of Soul,
With deadly Imprecations on her self,
She vowed severely never to see me more;
Then bid me fly that minute; I obeyed,
And bowing left her to grow cool at leisure.

Ross. She has relented since, else why this Message,
To meet the Keeper of her Secrets here
This Morning?

Loath. See the Person whom you named.
Enter Lucilla. Well, my Embassadress, what must we treat of?
Come you to menace War and proud Defiance,
Or does the peaceful Olive grace your Message?
Is your Fair Mistress calmer? does she soften?
And must we love again? Perhaps she means
To treat in Juncture with her new Ally,
And make her Husband Party to the Agreement.

Lucil. Is this well done, my Lord? Have you put off
All Sense of Human Nature? keep a little,
A little Pity to distinguish Manhood,
Lest other Men, though cruel, should disclaim you,
And judge you to be numbered with the Brutes.

Loath. I see thou'st learnt to rail.

Lucil. I Have learnt to weep;
That Lesson my sad Mistress often gives me;
By Day she seeks some melancholy Shade,
To hide her Sorrows from the prying World;
At Night she watches all the long long Hours,
And listens to the Winds and beating Rain,
With Sighs as loud, and Tears that fall as fast.
Then ever and anon she wrings her Hands.
And cries, False! false Lothario.

Loath. Oh no more!
I swear thou wilt spoil thy pretty Face with Crying,
And thou have Beauty that may make thy Fortune;
Some keeping Cardinal shall dote upon thee,
And barter his Church Treasure for thy Freshness.

Lucil. What! shall I fell my Innocence and Youth,
For Wealth or Titles, to perfidious Man!
To Man! who makes his Mirth of our Undoing!
The base, professed Betrayer of our Sex:
Let me grow old in all Misfortunes else,
Rather than know the Sorrows of Calista.

Loath. Does she send thee to chide in her behalf?
I swear thou do it with so good a Grace,
That I could almost love thee for thy frowning.

Lucil. Read there, my Lord, there in her own sad Lines, [Giving a Letter.
Which best can tell the Story of her woes,
That Grief of Heart which your Unkindness gives her.
Lothario reads.] Your Cruelty -- Obedience to my Father -- give my Hand to
Altamont.


By Heaven! it is well; such ever be the Gifts,
With which I greet the Man whom my Soul hates. [Aside.
But to go on!
-- Wish -- Heart -- Honor -- too faithless -- Weakness -- to morrow -- last
Trouble -- lost Calista.


Women I see change as well as Men;
She writes me here, forsaken as I am,
That I should bind my Brows with mournful Willow,
For she has given her Hand to Altamont:
Yet tell the Fair Inconstant --

Lucil. How, my Lord?

Loath. Nay, no more angry Words, say to Calista,
The humblest of her Slaves shall wait her Pleasure;
If she can leave her happy Husband's Arms,
To think upon so lost a thing as I am.

Lucil. Alas! for pity come with gentler Looks;
Wound not her Heart with this unmanly Triumph;
And though you love her not, yet swear you do,
So shall Dissembling once be virtuous in you.

Loath. Ha! who comes here?

Lucil. The Bridegroom's Friend, Horatio.
He must not see us here; to morrow early
Be at the Garden Gate.

Loath. Bear to my Love
My kindest Thoughts, and swear I will not fail her.
[ Lothario putting up the Letter hastily, drops it as he goes out. [Exeunt
Lothario and Rossano one way, Lucilla another.
Enter Horatio. Hor. Sure it is the very Error of my Eyes:
Waking I dream, or I beheld Lothario;
He seemed conferring with Calista's Woman:
At my approach they started, and retired.
What Business could he have here, and with her?
I know he bears the noble Altamont
Professed and deadly Hate -- What Paper's this? [Taking up the Letter.
Ha! to Lothario! -- 's Death! Calista's Name! [Opening it.
Confusion and Misfortune!
[Reads. YOUR Cruelty has at length determined me, and I have resolved this
Morning to yield a perfect Obedience to my Father, and to give my Hand to
Altamont, in spite of my Weakness for the false Lothario. I could almost wish
I had that Heart, and that Honor to bestow with it, which you have robbed me
of:


Damnation! to the rest --
[Reads again. But oh! I fear, could I retrieve 'em I should again be undone by
the too faithless yet too lovely Lothario; this is the last weakness of my Pen,
and to morrow shall be the last in which I will indulge my Eyes. Lucilla shall
conduct you if you are kind enough to let me see you; it shall be the last
Trouble you shall meet with from

The lost Calista.


The lost indeed! for thou art gone as far
As there can be Perdition. Fire and Sulphur,
Hell is the sole Avenger of such Crimes.
Oh that the Ruin were but all thy own!
Thou will even make thy Father curse his Age,
At sight of this black Scrowl, the gentle Altamont,
(For oh! I know his Heart is set upon thee)
Shall droop and hang his discontented Head,
Like Merit scorned by insolent Authority,
And never grace the Public with his Virtues. --
Perhaps even now he gazes fondly on her,
And thinking Soul and Body both alike,
Blesses the perfect Wormanship of Heaven;
Then sighing, to his every Care speaks Peace,
And bids his Heart be satisfied with Happiness.
Oh wretched Husband! while she hangs about thee
With idle Blandishments, and plays the fond one,
Even then her hot Imagination wanders,
Contriving Riot, and loose scapes of Love;
And while she clasps thee close makes thee a Monster.
What if I give this Paper to her Father?
It follows that his Justice dooms her dead,
And breaks his Heart with Sorrow; hard Return,
For all the Good his Hand has heaped on us:
Hold, let me take a Moment's Thought.

Enter Lavinia. Lav. My Lord!
Trust me it joys my Heart that I have found you.
Enquiring wherefore you had left the Company,
Before my Brother's Nuptial Rites were ended,
They told me you had felt some sudden Illness;
Where are you sick? Is it your Head? your Heart?
Tell me my Love, and ease my anxious Thoughts,
That I may take you gently in my Arms,
Sooth you to Rest, and soften all your Pains.

Hor. It were unjust, no let me spare my Friend,
Lock up the fatal Secret in my Breast,
Nor tell him that which will undo his Quiet.

Lav. What means my Lord?

Hor. Ha! said thou my Lavinia?

Lav. Alas! you know not what you make me suffer;
Why are you pale? Why did you start and tremble?
Whence is that Sigh? And wherefore are your Eyes
Severely raised to Heaven? The sick Man thus,
Acknowledging the Summons of his Fate,
Lifts up his feeble Hands and Eyes for Mercy,
And with Confusion thinks upon his Audit.

Hor. Oh no! thou have mistook my Sickness quite,
These Pangs are of the Soul. Would I had met
Sharpest Convulsions, spotted Pestilences,
Or any other deadly Foe to Life,
Rather than heave beneath this load of Thought.

Lav. Alas, what is it? Wherefore turn you from me?
Why did you falsely call me your Lavinia,
And swear I was Horatio's better half,
Since now you mourn unkindly by your self,
And rob me of my Partnership of Sadness?
Witness you Holy Powers, who know my Truth,
There cannot be a Chance in Life so miserable,
Nothing so very hard but I could bear it,
Much rather than my Love should treat me coldly,
And use me like a Stranger to his Heart.

Hor. Seek not to know what I would hide from all,
But most from thee. I never knew a Pleasure,
Ought that was joyful, fortunate, or good,
But strait I ran to bless thee with the Tidings,
And laid up all my Happiness with thee:
But wherefore, wherefore should I give thee Pain?
Then spare me, I conjure thee, ask no further;
Allow my melancholy Thoughts this privilege,
And let 'em brood in secret over their Sorrows.

Lav. It is enough, chide not, and all is well;
Forgive me if I saw you sad, Horatio,
And asked to weep out part of your Misfortunes;
I wo'not press to know what you forbid me.
Yet, my loved Lord, yet you must grant me this,
Forget your Cares for this one happy Day,
Devote this Day to Mirth, and to your Altamont;
For his dear sake let Peace be in your Looks.
Even now the jocund Bridegroom wants your Wishes,
He thinks the Priest has but half blessed his Marriage,
'Till his Friend Hails him with the sound of Joy.

Hor. Oh never! never! never! Thou art innocent,
Simplicity from Ill, pure native Truth,
And Candor of the Mind adorn thee ever;
But there are such, such false ones in the World,
'Twou'd fill thy gentle Soul wild Amazement
To hear their Story told.

Lav. False ones, my Lord?

Hor. Fatally Fair they are, and in their Smiles,
The Graces, little Loves, and young Desires inhabit;
But all that gaze upon 'em are undone,
For they are false; luxurious in their Appetites,
And all the Heaven they hope for is Variety:
One Lover to another still succeeds,
Another, and another after that,
And the last Fool is welcome as the former;
'Till having loved his Hour out, he gives place,
And mingles with the Herd that went before him.

Lav. Can there be such? And have they peace of Mind?
Have they in all the Series of their changing
One happy Hour? if Women are such things,
How was I formed so different from my Sex!
My little Heart is satisfied with you,
You take up all her room; as in a Cottage
Which harbors some Benighted Princely Stranger,
Where the good Man, proud of his Hospitality,
Yields all his homely Dwelling to his Guest,
And hardly keeps a Corner for himself.

Hor. Oh were they all like thee Men would adore 'em,
And all the Business of their Lives be loving;
The Nuptial Band should be the Pledge of Peace,
And all Domestic Cares and Quarrels cease;
The World should learn to love by Virtuous Rules,
And Marriage be no more the Jest of Fools.
[Exeunt.
ACT II. SCENE I.
SCENE, a Hall. Enter Calista and Lucilla. Call. BE dumb for ever, silent as the
Grave,
Nor let thy fond officious Love disturb
My solemn Sadness, with the sound of Joy.
If thou will sooth me, tell some dismal Tale
Of pining Discontent, and black Despair;
For oh! I Have gone around through all my Thoughts,
But all are Indignation, Love, or Shame,
And my dear Peace of Mind is lost for ever.

Luc. Why do you follow still that wandering Fire,
That has misled your weary Steps, and leaves you
Benighted in a Wilderness of Woe?
That false Lothario! Turn from the Deceiver;
Turn, and behold where gentle Altamont,
Kind as the softest Virgin of our Sex,
And faithful as the simple Village Swain,
That never knew the Courtly Vice of Changing,
Sighs at your Feet, and wooes you to be happy.

Call. Away, I think not of him. My sad Soul
Has formed a dismal melancholy Scene,
Such a Retreat as I would wish to find;
An unfrequented Vale, o'er-grown with Trees
Mossie and old, within whose lonesome Shade,
Ravens, and Birds ill omen'd, only dwell;
No Sound to break the Silence, but a Brook
That bubling wind's among the Weeds: no Mark
Of any Human Shape that had been there,
Unless a Skeleton of some poor Wretch,
Who had long since, like me, by Love undone,
Sought that sad Place out to despair and die in.

Luc. Alas for Pity!

Call. There I fain would hide me,
From the base World, from Malice, and from Shame;
For it is the solemn Counsel of my Soul,
Never to live with public Loss of Honor:
It Is fixed to die, rather than bear the Insolence
Of each affected She that tells my Story,
And blesses her good Stars that she is virtuous.
To be a Tale for Fools! Scorned by the Women,
And pitied by the Men! oh insupportable!

Luc. Can you perceive the manifest Destruction,
The gaping Gulf that opens just before you,
And yet rush on, though conscious of the Danger?
Oh hear me, hear your ever faithful Creature;
By all the Good I wish, by all the Ill
My trembling Heart forebodes, let me entreat you,
Never to see this faithless Man again:
Let me forbid his coming.

Call. On thy Life
I charge thee no; my Genius drives me on;
I must, I will behold him once again:
Perhaps it is the Crisis of my Fate,
And this one Enterview shall end my Cares.
My laboring Heart, that swells with Indignation,
Heaves to discharge the Burden; that once done,
The busy thing shall rest within its Cell,
And never beat again.

Luc. Trust not to that;
Rage is the shortest Passion of our Souls,
Like narrow Brooks that rise with sudden Showers.
It swells in haste, and falls again as soon;
Still as it ebbs the softer Thoughts flow in,
And the Deceiver Love supplies its place.

Call. I have been wronged enough, to arm my Temper
Against the smooth Delusion; but alas!
(Chide not my Weakness, gentle Maid, but pity me)
A Woman's Softness hangs about me still:
Then let me blush, and tell thee all my Folly.
I swear I could not see the dear Betrayer
Kneel at my Feet, and sigh to be forgiven,
But my relenting Heart would pardon all,
And quite forget 'twas he that had undone me.

Lucil. Ye sacred Powers, whose gracious Providence
Is watchful for our Good, guard me from Men,
From their deceitful Tongues, their Vows and Flatteries;
Still let me pass neglected by their Eyes,
Let my Bloom wither, and my Form decay,
That none may think it worth his while to ruin me,
And fatal Love may never be my Bane.

Call Ha! Altamont? Calista now be wary,
And guard thy Soul's Accesses with Dissembling;
Nor let this Hostile Husband's Eyes explore
The warring Passions, and tumultuous Thoughts,
That rage within thee, and deform thy Reason.

Enter Altamont. Alt. Be gone my Cares, I give you to the Winds,
Far to be born, far from the happy Altamont;
For from this sacred Era of my Love,
A better Order of succeeding Days
Come smiling forward, white and lucky all.
Calista is the Mistress of the Year,
She crowns the Seasons with auspicious Beauty,
And bids even all my Hours be good and joyful.

Call. If I was ever Mistress of such Happiness,
Oh! wherefore did I play the unthrifty Fool,
And wasting all on others, leave my self
Without one Thought of Joy to give me Comfort?

Alt. Oh mighty Love! Shall that fair Face profane
This thy great Festival with Frowns and Sadness!
I swear it sha' not be, for I will woo thee
With Sighs so moving, with so warm a Transport,
That thou shall catch the gentle Flame from me,
And kindle into Joy.

Call. I tell thee, Altamont.
Such Hearts as ours were never paired above,
Ill suited to each other; joined, not matched;
Some sullen Influence, a Foe to both,
Has wrought this fatal Marriage to undo us.
Mark but the Frame and Temper of our Minds,
How very much we differ. Even this Day,
That fills thee with such Ecstasy and Transport,
To me brings nothing that should make me bless it,
Or think it better than the Day before,
Or any other in the Course of Time,
That dully took its turn, and was forgotten.

Alt. If to behold thee as my Pledge of Happiness,
To know none fail, none excellent beside thee;
If still to love thee with unwearied Constancy,
Through every Season, every Change of Life,
Through wrinkled Age, through Sickness and Misfortune,
Be worth the least Return of grateful Love,
Oh then let my Calista bless this Day,
And set it down for happy.

Call. It Is the Day
In which my Father gave my Hand to Altamont;
As such I will remember it for ever.

Enter Sciolto, Horatio, and Lavinia. Sci. Let Mirth go on, let Pleasure know
no pause,
But fill up every Minute of this Day.
It Is yours, my Children, sacred to your Loves;
The glorious Sun himself for you looks gay,
He shines for Altamont and for Calista.
Let there be Music, let the Master touch
The sprightly String, and softly-breathing Flute,
'Till Harmony rouse every gentle Passion,
Teach the cold Maid to lose her Fears in Love,
And the fierce Youth to languish at her Feet.
Begin, even Age it self is cheered with Music,
It wakes a glad Remembrance of our Youth,
Calls back past Joys, and warms us into Transport.

[Here an Entertainment of Music and Dancing. SONG.
By Mr. GONGREVE.
I.
AH stay! ah turn! ah whither would you fly
Too charming, too relentless Maid?
I follow not to Conquer but to Die,
You of the fearful are afraid.
II.
In vain I call; for she like fleeting Air,
When pressed by some tempestuous Wind,
Flies swifter from the Voice of my Despair,
Nor casts one pitying Look behind.
Sci. Take care my Gates be open, bid all welcome;
All who rejoice with me to Day are Friends:
Let each indulge his Genius, each be glad,
Jocund and free, and swell the Feast with Mirth.
The sprightly Bowl shall cheerfully go round,
None shall be grave, nor too severely wise;
Losses and Disappointments, Cares and Poverty,
The rich Man's Insolence, and great Man's Scorn,
In Wine shall be forgotten all. Tomorrow
Will be too soon to think, and to be wretched.
Oh! grant, ye Powers, that I may see these happy, [Pointing to Alt. and
Calista.
Completely blessed, and I have Life enough;
And leave the rest indifferently to Fate.
[Exeunt.
Manet Horatio. Hor. What if, while all are here intent on Revelling,
I privately went forth, and sought Lothario?
This Letter may be forged; perhaps the Wantonness
Of his vain Youth, to stain a Lady's Fame;
Perhaps his Malice, to disturb my Friend.
Oh no! my Heart forebodes it must be true.
Methought even now I marked the starts of Guilt,
That shook her Soul; though damned Dissimulation
Skrcen'd her dark Thoughts, and set to public View
A specious Face of Innocence and Beauty.
Oh false Appearance! What is all our Sovereignty,
Our boasted Power? when they oppose their Arts,
Still they prevail, and we are found their Fools.
With such smooth Looks, and many a gentle Word,
The first fair She beguiled her easy Lord;
Too blind with Love and Beauty to beware,
He fell unthinking in the fatal Snare;
Nor could believe, that such a Heavenly Face
Had bargained with the Devil, to damn her wretched Race.
[Exit.
SCENE II.
SCENE, the Street near Sciolto's Palace. Enter Lothario and Rossano. Loath. To
tell thee then the Purport of my Thoughts;
The Loss of this fond Paper would not give me
A moment of Disquiet, were it not
My Instrument of Vengeance on this Altamont:
Therefore I mean to wait some Opportunity
Of speaking with the Maid we saw this Morning.

Ross. I wish you, Sir, to think upon the Danger
Of being seen; to Day their Friends are round 'em,
And any Eye, that lights by chance on you,
Shall put your Life and Safety to the Hazard.
[They confer aside.
Enter Horatio. Hor. Still I must doubt some Mystery of Mischief,
Some Artifice beneath; Lothario's Father
I knew him well, he was sagacious, cunning,
Fluent in Words, and bold in peaceful Councils,
But of a cold, unactive hand in War.
Yet with these Coward's Virtues he undid
My unsuspecting, valiant, honest Friend.
This Son, if Fame mistakes not, is more hot,
More open, and unartful -- Ha! he is here! [Seeing him.

Loath. Damnation! He again! -- This second time
To Day he has crossed me like my evil Genius.

Hor. I sought you, Sir.

Loath. It Is well then I am found.

Hor. It Is well you are: The Man who wrongs my Friend
To the Earth's utmost Verge I would pursue;
No Place, though ever so holy, should protect him;
No Shape that artful Fear ever formed should hide him,
'Till he fair Answer made, and did me Justice.

Loath. Ha! do thou know me? that I am Lothario?
As great a Name as this proud City boasts of.
Who is this mighty Man then, this Horatio,
That I should basely hide me from his Anger,
Lest he should chide me for his Friend's Displeasure?

Hor. The Brave, it is true, do never shun the Light,
Just are their Thoughts, and open are their Tempers,
Freely without Disguise they love and hate,
Still are they found in the fair face of Day,
And Heaven and Men are Judges of their Actions.

Loath. Such let 'em be of mine; there is not a Purpose,
Which my Soul ever framed, or my Hand acted,
But I could well have bid the World look on,
And what I once durst do, have dared to justify.

Hor. Where was this open Boldness, this free Spirit?
When but this very Morning I surpised thee,
In base, dishonest Privacy, consulting
And bribing a poor mercenary Wretch,
To sell her Lady's Secrets, stain her Honor,
And with a forged Contrivance blast her Virtue:
At Sight of me thou fledst!

Loath. Ha! Fled from thee?

Hor. Thou fled'st, and Guilt was on thee, like a Thief,
A Pilferer descried in some dark Corner,
Who there had lodged, with mischievous Intent
To rob and ravage at the Hour of Rest,
And do a Midnight Murder on the Sleepers.

Loath. Slave! Villain! --
[Offers to draw, Rossano holds him.
Ross. Hold, my Lord! think where you are,
Think how unsafe, and hurtful to your Honor,
It were to urge a Quarrel in this Place,
And shock the peaceful City with a Broil.

Loath. Then since thou do provoke my Vengeance, know
I would not for this City's Wealth, for all
Which the Sea wafts to our Ligurian Shore,
But that the Joys I reaped with that fond Wanton,
The Wife of Altamont, should be as public
As is the Noonday Sun, Air, Earth, or Water,
Or any common Benefit of Nature:
Think thou I meant the Shame should be concealed?
Oh no! by Hell and Vengeance, all I wanted
Was some fit Messenger to bear the News
To the dull doting Husband; now I have found him,
And thou art he.

Hor. I hold thee base enough,
To break through Law, and spurn at Sacred Order,
And do a brutal Injury like this;
Yet mark me well, young Lord, I think Calista
Too Nice, too Noble, and too Great of Soul,
To be the Prey of such a Thing as thou art.
'Twas base and poor, unworthy of a Man,
To forge a Scrowl so villainous and loose,
And Mark it with a noble Lady's Name;
These are the mean, dishonest Arts of Cowards.
Strangers to Manhood, and to glorious Dangers;
Who bred at Home in Idleness and Riot,
Ransack for Mistresses the unwholesome Stews,
And never know the worth of virtuous Love.

Loath. Think thou I forged the Letter? Think so still,
'Till the broad Shame comes staring in thy Face,
And Boys shall hoot the Cuckold as he passes.

Hor. Away, no Woman could descend so low:
A skipping, dancing, worthless Tribe you are,
Fit only for your selves, you Herd together;
And when the circling Glass warms your vain Hearts,
You talk of Beauties that you never saw,
And fancy Raptures that you never knew.
Legends of Saints, who never yet had Being,
Or being, never were Saints, are not so false
As the fond Tales which you recount of Love.

Loath. But that I do not hold it worth my Leisure,
I could produce such damning Proof --

Hor. It Is false,
You blast the Fair with Lies because they scorn you,
Hate you like Age, like Ugliness and Impotence:
Rather than make you blessed they would die Virgins,
And stop the Propagation of Mankind.

Loath. It is the Curse of Fools to be secure,
and that be thine and Altamont's: Dream on,
^or think upon my Vengeance 'till thou feel'st it.

Hor. Hold, Sir, another Word, and then farewell;
Though I think greatly of Calista's Virtue,
and hold it far beyond thy Power to hurt;
Yet as she shares the Honor of my Altamont,
That Treasure of a Soldier, bought with Blood,
And kept at Life's Expense, I must not have
(Mark me, young Sir) her very Name profaned.
Learn to restrain the License of your Speech;
It Is held you are too lavish, when you are met
Among your Set of Fools, talk of your Dress,
Of Dice, of Whores, of Horses, and your Selves;
It Is safer, and becomes your Understandings.

Loath. What if we pass beyond this solemn Order?
And, in Defiance of the stern Horatio,
Indulge our gayer Thoughts, let Laughter loose,
And use his sacred Friendship for our Mirth.

Hor. It Is well! Sir, you are pleasant --

Loath. By the Joys,
Which yet my Soul has uncontrolled pursued,
I would not turn aside from my least Pleasure,
Though all thy Force were armed to bar my Way;
But like the Birds, great Nature's happy Commoners,
That haunt in Woods, in Meads, and flowery Gardens,
Rifle the Sweets, and taste the choicest Fruits,
Yet scorn to ask the Lordly Owners leave.

Hor. What Liberty has vain presumptuous Youth,
That thou should dare provoke me unchastis'd?
But henceforth, Boy, I warn thee shun my Walks;
If in the Bounds of yon forbidden Place
Again you are found, expect a Punishment,
Such as great Souls, impatient of an Injury,
Exact from those who wrong 'em much, even Death;
Or something worse; an injured Husband's Vengeance
Shall print a thousand Wounds, tear thy fine Form,
And scatter thee to all the Winds of Heaven,

Loath. Is then my Way in Genoa prescribed,
By a Dependant on the wretched Altamont,
A talking Sir, that brawls for him in Taverns,
And vouches for his Valor's Reputation?

Hor. Away, thy Speech is fouler than thy Manners.

Loath. Or if there be a Name more vile, his Parasite.
A Beggar's Parasite! --

Hor. Now learn Humanity,
[Offers to strike him, Rossano interposes. Since Brutes and Boys are only
taught with Blows.

Loath. Damnation!
[They Draw.
Ross. Hold, this goes no further here,
Horatio, it is too much; already see,
The Crowd are gathering to us.

Loath. Oh Rossano!
Or give me way, or you are no more my Friend.

Ross. Sciolto's Servants too have taken the Alarm.
You Will be oppressed by Numbers, be advised,
Or I must force you hence; take it on my Word
You shall have Justice done you on Horatio.
Put up, my Lord.

Loath. This wo' not brook Delay;
West of the Town a Mile, among the Rocks,
Two Hours ever Noon to morrow I expect thee,
Thy single Hand to mine.

Hor. I Will meet thee there.

Loath. To morrow, oh my better Stars! to morrow,
Exert your Influence, shine strongly for me;
It Is not a common Conquest I would gain,
Since Love, as well as Arms, must grace my Triumph.
[Exeunt Lothario and Rossano.
Hor. Two Hours ever Noon to morrow! ha! ever that
He sees Calista! oh unthinking Fool --
What if I urged her with the Crime and Danger?
If any Spark from Heaven remain unquench'd
Within her Breast, my Breath perhaps may wake it;
Could I but prosper there, I would not doubt
My Combat with that loud vainglorious Boaster.
Were you, ye Fair, but cautious whom ye trust,
Did you but think how seldom Fools are just,
So many of your Sex would not in vain,
Of broken Vows and faithless Men complain.
Of all the various Wretches Love has made,
How few have been by Men of Sense betrayed?
Convinced by Reason, they your Power confess,
Pleased to he happy, as you're pleased to bless,
And conscious of your Worth, can never love you less.
[Exit.
ACT III. SCENE I.
SCENE an Apartment in Sciolto's Palace. Enter Sciolto and Calista. Sci. NOW by
my Life, my Honor, it is too much;
Have I not marked thee wayward as thou art,
Perverse and sullen all this Day of Joy?
When every Heart was cheered, and Mirth went round,
Sorrow, Displeasure, and repining Anguish
Sat on thy Brow; like some malignant Planet,
Foe to the Harvest, and the healthy Year,
Who scouls adverse, and lours upon the World;
When all the other Stars, with gentle Aspect,
Propitious shine, and meaning Good to Man.

Call. Is then the Task of Duty half performed?
Has not your Daughter given her self to Altamont,
Yielded the native Freedom of her Will,
To an Imperious Husband's lordly Rule,
To gratify a Father's stern Command?

Sci. Do thou complain?

Call. For pity do not frown then,
If in despite of all my vowed Obedience,
A Sigh breaks out, or a Tear falls by chance;
For oh! that Sorrow which has drawn your Anger,
Is the sad Native of Calista's Breast,
And once possessed will never quit its Dwelling,
'Till Life, the Prop of all, shall leave the Building,
To tumble down, and moulder into Ruin,

Sci. Now by the sacred Dust of that dear Saint
That was thy Mother, by her wondrous Goodness,
Her soft, her tender, most complying Sweetness,
I swear some sullen Thought that shuns the Light,
Lurks underneath that Sadness in thy Visage.
But mark me well, though by yon Heaven I love thee,
As much, I think, as a fond Parent can;
Yet should thou (which the Powers above forbid)
Ever stain the Honor of thy Name with Infamy,
I cast thee off, as one whose Impious Hands
Had rent asunder Nature's nearest Ties,
Which once divided never join again.
To Day, I have made a noble Youth thy Husband,
Consider well his Worth, reward his Love.
Be willing to he happy, and thou art so.
[Exit Sciolto.
Call. How hard is the Condition of our Sex,
Through every State of Life the Slaves of Man?
In all the dear delighful Days of Youth,
A riged Father dictates to our Wills,
And deals out Pleasure with a scanty Hand;
To his, the Tyrant Husband's Reign succeeds
Proud with Opinion of superior Reason,
He holds Domestic Business and Devotion
All we are capable to know, and shuts us,
Like Cloistered Idiots, from the World's Acquaintance,
And all the Joys of Freedom; wherefore are we
Born with high Souls, but to assert our selves,
Shake off this vile Obedience they exact,
And claim an equal Empire over the World?

Enter Horatio. Hor. She Is here! yet oh! my Tongue is at a loss,
Teach me, some Power, that happy Art of Speech,
To dress my Purpose up in gracious Words;
Such as may softly steal upon her Soul,
And never waken the Tempestuous Passions.
By Heaven she weeps! -- Forgive me, Fair Calista,
If I presume, on Privilege of Friendship,
To join my Grief to yours, and mourn the Evils
That hurt your Peace, and quench those Eyes in Tears.

Call. To steal unlooked for on my private Sorrow,
Speaks not the Man of Honor, nor the Friend,
But rather means the Spy.

Hor. Unkindly said!
For oh! as sure as you accuse me falsely,
I come to prove my self Calista's Friend.

Call. You are my Husband's Friend, the Friend of Altamont.

Hor. Are you not one? Are you not joined by Heaven,
Each interwoven with the other's Fate?
Are you not mixed like Streams of meeting Rivers,
Whose blended Waters are no more distinguished,
But roll into the Sea, one common Flood?
Then, who can give his Friendship: but to one?
Who can be Altamont's, and not Calista's?

Call. Force, and the Wills of our Imperious Rulers,
May bind two Bodies in one wretched Chain;
But Minds will still look back to their own Choice.
So the poor Captive in a Foreign Realm,
Stands on the Shore, and sends his Wishes back
To the dear Native Land from whence he came.

Hor. When Souls that should agree to Will the same,
To have one common Object for their Wishes,
Look different ways regardless of each other,
Think what a Train of Wretchedness ensues,
Love shall be banished from the Genial Bed,
The Nights shall all be lonely and unquiet,
And every Day shall be a Day of Cares.

Call. Then all the boasted Office of thy Friendship,
Was but to tell Calista what a Wretch she is;
Alas! what needed that?

Hor. Oh! rather say,
I came to tell her how she might be happy;
To sooth the secret Anguish of her Soul,
To comfort that Fair Mourner, that forlorn one,
And teach her Steps to know the Paths of Peace.

Call. Say thou to whom this Paradise is known,
Where lies the blissful Region? Mark my way to it,
For oh! it is sure, I long to be at Rest.

Hor. Then -- to be Good is to be Happy; -- Angels
Are happier than Mankind, because they are better.
Guilt is the source of Sorrow; it is the Fiend,
The avenging Fiend, that follows us behind
With Whips and Stings; the blessed know none of this,
But rest in everlasting Peace of Mind,
And find the height of all their Heaven is Goodness.

Call. And what bold Parasite's officious Tongue
Shall dare to tax Calista's Name with Guilt?

Hor. None should; but it is a busy, talking World,
That with licentious Breath blows like the Wnd,
As freely on the Palace, as the Cottage.

Call. What mystic Riddle lurks beneath thy Words,
Which thou would seem unwilling to express,
As if it meant Dishonor to my Virtue?
Away with this ambiguous shuffling Phrase,
And let thy Oracle be understood.

Hor. Lothario!

Call. Ha! what would thou mean by him?

Hor. Lothario and Calista! -- Thus they join
Two Names, which Heaven decreed should never meet;
Hence have the Talkers of this populous City,
A shameful Tale to tell for public Sport,
Of an unhappy Beauty, a false Fair one,
Who plighted to a noble Youth her Faith,
When she had given her Honor to a Wretch.

Call. Death! and Confusion! Have I lived to this?
Thus to be treated with unmanly Insolence!
To be the Sport of a loose Ruffian's Tongue!
Thus to be used! thus! like the vilest Creature,
That ever was a Slave to Vice and Infamy.

Hor. By Honor and fair Truth, you wrong me much
For on my Soul nothing but strong Necessity,
Could urge my Tongue to this ungrateful Office:
I came with strong Reluctance, as if Death
Had stood across my Way, to save your Honor,
Yours and Sciolto's, yours and Altamont's;
Like one who ventures through a burning Pile,
To save his tender Wife, with all her Brood
Of little Fondlings, from the dreadful Ruin.

Call. Is this! Is this the famous Friend of Altamont,
For noble Worth, and Deeds of Arms renowned?
Is this! this Tale-bearing, officious Fellow,
That watches for Intelligence from Eyes;
This wretched Argus of a jealous Husband,
That fills his easy Ears with monstrous Tales,
And makes him toss, and rave, and wreak at length
Bloody Revenge on his defenseless Wife;
Who guiltless dies, because her Fool ran mad.

Hor. Alas! this Rage is vain; for if your Fame,
Or Peace be worth your Care, you must be calm,
And listen to the Means are left to save 'em.
It Is now the lucky Minute of your Fate,
By me your Genius speaks, by me it warns you,
Never to see that cursed Lothario more,
Unless you mean to be despised, be shunned,
By all your virtuous Maids and noble Matrons;
Unless you have devoted this rare Beauty
To Infamy, Diseases, Prostitution --

Call. Dishonor blast thee, base, unmanner'd Slave?
That dare forgot my Birth, and sacred Sex,
And shock me with the rude unhallowed Sound.

Hor. Here kneel, and in the awful Face of Heaven,
Breath out a solemn Vow, never to see,
Nor think, if possible, on him that ruined thee;
Or by my Altamont's dear Life I swear,
This Paper! -- Nay you must not fly! -- This Paper, [Holding her.
This guilty Paper shall divulge your Shame --

Call. What mean thou by that Paper? What Contrivance
Have thou been forging to deceive my Father,
To turn his Heart against his wretched Daughter,
That Altamont and thou may share his Wealth?
A Wrong like this will make me even forget
The Weakness of my Sex. -- Oh for a Sword,
To urge my Vengeance on the Villain's Hand
That forged the Scrowl.

Hor. Behold, can this be forged?
See where Calista's Name -- [Shewing the Letter near.

Call. To Atoms thus, [Tearing it.
Thus let me tear the vile, detested Falsehood,
The wicked, lying Evidence of Shame.

Hor. Confusion!

Call. Henceforth, thou officious Fool,
Meddle no more, nor dare even on thy Life
To breath an Accent that may touch my Virtue:
I am my self the Guardian of my Honor,
And wo' not bear so insolent a Monitor.

Enter Altamont. Alt. Where is my Life, my Love, my charming Bride,
Joy of my Heart, and Pleasure of my Eyes,
The Wish, the Care, and Business of my Youth?
Oh! let me find her, snatch her to my Breast?
And tell her she delays my Bliss too long,
'Till my soft Soul even sickens with Desire.
Disordered! -- and in Tears! Horatio too!
My Friend is in Amaze! -- What can it mean?
Tell me, Calista, who has done thee wrong,
That my swift Sword may find out the Offender,
And do thee ample Justice.

Call. Turn to him,

Alt. Horatio!

Call. To that Insolent!

Alt. My Friend!
Could he do this? He, who was half my self!
One Faith has ever bound us, and one Reason
Guided our Wills: Have I not found him just,
Honest as Truth it self? And could he break
The Sanctity of Friendship? Could he wound
The Heart of Altamont in his Calista?

Call. I thought what Justice I should find from thee!
Go fawn upon him, listen to his Tale,
Applaud his Malice, that would blast my Fame,
And treat me like a common Prostitute.
Thou art perhaps Confederate in his Mischief,
And wilt believe the Legend, if he tells it.

Alt. Oh Impious! What presumptuous Wretch shall dare
To offer at an Injury like that?
Priesthood, nor Age, nor Cowardice it self,
Shall save him from the Fury of my Vengeance.

Call. The Man who dared to do it was Horatio!
Thy darling Friend! 'Twas Altamont's Horatio!
But mark me well! While thy divided Heart
Doats on a Villain that has wronged me thus,
No Force shall drag me to thy hated Bed;
Nor can my cruel Father's Power do more
Than shut me in a Cloister; there, well pleased,
Religious Hardships will I learn to bear,
To fast, and freeze at Midnight Hours of Prayer;
Nor think it hard, within a lonely Cell,
With melancholy, speechless Saints to dwell;
But bless the Day I to that Refuge ran,
Free from the Marriage Chain, and from that Tyrant, Man.
[Exit Calista.
Alt. She Is gone; and as she went, Ten thousand Fires
Shot from her angry Eyes, as if she meant
Too well to keep the cruel Vow she made.
Now as thou art a Man, Horatio, tell me,
What means this wild Confusion in thy Looks?
As if thou were at variance with thy self,
Madness and Reason combating within thee,
And thou were doubtful which should get the better.

Hor. I would be dumb for ever, but thy Fate
Has otherwise decreed it; thou have seen
That Idol of thy Soul, that fair Calista,
Thou have beheld her Tears.

Alt. I have seen her weep,
I have seen that lovely one, that dear Calista,
Complaining in the Bitterness of Sorrow,
That thou! my Friend! Horatio! thou had wronged her,

Hor. That I have wronged her! Had her Eyes been fed
From that rich Stream which warms her Heart, and numbered
For every falling Tear a drop of Blood,
It had not been too much; for she has ruined thee,
Even thee, my Altamont! She has undone thee.

Alt. Do thou join Ruin with Calista's Name?
What is so fair, so exquisitely good?
Is she not more than Painting can express,
Or youthful Poets fancy, when they love?
Does she not come, like Wisdom, or good Fortune,
Repleat with Blessings, giving Wealth and Honor?
The Dowry which she brings is Peace and Pleasure,
And everlasting Joys are in her Arms.

Hor. It had been better thou had lived a Beggar,
And fed on Scraps at great Men's surly Doors,
Than to have matched with one so false, so fatal. --

Alt. It is too much for Friendship to allow thee;
Because I tamely bore the Wrong thou did her,
Thou do avow the barbarous, brutal Part,
And urge the Injury even to my Face.

Hor. I see she has got Possession of thy Heart,
She has charmed thee, like a Siren, to her Bed,
With Looks of Love, and with enchanting Sounds:
Too late the Rocks and Quicksands will appear.
When thou art wreckt upon the faithless Shore,
Then vainly wish thou had not left thy Friend,
To follow her Delusion.

Alt. If thy Friendship
Do churlishly deny my Love a Room,
It is not worth my keeping, I disclaim it.

Hor. Can thou so soon forget what l've been to thee?
I shared the Task of Nature with thy Father,
And formed with Care thy unexperienced Youth
To Virtue and to Arms.
Thy noble Father, oh thou light young Man!
Would he have used me thus? One Fortune fed us,
For his was ever mine, mine his, and both
Together flourished, and together fell.
He called me Friend, like thee; would he have left me
Thus? for a Woman? nay, a vile one too?

Alt. Thou can not, dare not mean it; speak again,
Say, who is vile? but dare not name Calista.

Hor. I had not spoke at first, unless compelled,
And forced to clear my self; but since thus urged,
I must avow I do not know a viler.

Alt. Thou were my Father's Friend, he loved thee well;
A kind of venerable Mark of him
Hangs round thee, and protects thee from my Vengeance;
I cannot, dare not list my Sword against thee,
But henceforth never let me see thee more. [Going out.

Hor. I love thee still, ungrateful as thou art,
And must, and will preserve thee from Dishonor,
Even in despite of thee.
[Holds him.
Alt. Let go my Arm.

Hor. If Honor be thy Care, if thou would live,
Without the Name of credulous, wittal Husband,
Avoid thy Bride, shun her detested Bed,
The Joys it yields are dashed with Poison. --

Alt. Off!
To urge me but a Minute more is fatal.

Hor. She is polluted! stained!

Alt. Madness and Raving!
But hence!

Hor. Dishonored by the Man you hate --

Alt. I prithee loose me yet, for thy own sake,
If Life be worth the keeping --

Hor. By Lothario.

Alt. Perdition take thee, Villain, for the falsehood.
[Strikes him. Now nothing but thy Life can make Atonement.

Hor. A Blow! Thou have used well --
[Draws.
Alt. This to thy Heart --

Hor. Yet hold! -- By Heaven his Father's in his Face.
Spite of my Wrongs my Heart runs over with Tenderness,
And I could rather die my self, than hurt him.

Alt. Defend thy self, for by my much wronged Love,
I swear the poor Evasion shall not save thee.

Hor. Yet hold! thou know I dare! -- Think how
we have lived. --
[They fight; Altamont presses on Horatio, who retires. Nay! then it is brutal
Violence! And thus,
Thus Nature bids me guard the Life she gave.
[They fight.
Lavinia Enters, and runs between their Swords. Lav. My Brother! My Horatio! is
it possible?
Oh! turn your cruel Swords upon Lavinia.
If you must quench your impious Rage in Blood,
Behold, my Heart shall give you all her Store,
To save those dearer Streams that flow from yours.

Alt. It Is well thou have found a Safeguard; none but this,
No Power on Earth could save thee from my Fury.

Lav. Oh fatal, deadly Sound!

Hor. Safety from thee!
Away, vain Boy! Have thou forgot the Reverence
Due to my Arm, thy first, thy great Example,
Which pointed out thy way to noble Daring,
And showed thee what it was to be a Man?

Lav. What busy, meddling Friend, what Foe to Goodness,
Could kindle such a Discord? Oh! lay by
Those most ungentle Looks, and angry Weapons,
Unless you mean my Griefs, and killing Fears,
Should stretch me out at your relentless Feet,
A wretched Coarse, the Victim of your Fury.

Hor. Ask'st thou what made us Foes? 'twas base Ingratitude;
'Twas such a Sin to Friendship, as Heaven's Mercy,
That strives with Man's untoward, monstrous Wickedness,
Unwearied with Forgiving, scarce could pardon.
He, who was all to me, Child! Brother! Friend!
With barbarous, bloody Malice, sought my Life.

Alt. Thou art my Sister, and I would not make thee
The lonely Mourner of a widowed Bed,
Therefore thy Husband's Life is safe; but warn him,
No more to know this Hospitable Roof.
He has but ill repaid Sciolto's Bounty;
We must not meet; it is dangerous; farewell.
[He is going, Lavinia holds him.
Lav. Stay Altamont, my Brother stay, if ever
Nature, or what is nearer much than Nature,
The kind Consent of our agreeing Minds,
Have made us dear to one another, stay,
And speak one gentle Word to your Horatio.
Behold, his Anger melts, he longs to love you,
To call you Friend, then press you hard, with all
The tender, speechless Joy of Reconcilement.

Alt. It cannot, sha' not be! -- you must not hold me.

Lav. Look kindly then!

Alt. Each Minute that I stay,
Is a new Injury to fair Calista.
From thy false Friendship, to her Arms I Will fly;
There, if in any pause of Love I rest,
Breathless with Bliss, upon her panting Breast,
In broken, melting Accents I will swear,
Henceforth to trust my Heart with none but her;
Then own the Joys, which on her Charms attend,
Have more than paid me for my faithless Friend.
[ Altamont breaks from Lavinia, and Exit.
Hor. Oh raise thee, my Lavinia, from the Earth;
It is too much, this Tide of flowing Grief,
This wondrous waste of Tears, too much to give,
To an ungrateful Friend, and cruel Brother.

Lav. Is there not cause for Weeping? Oh Horatio!
A Brother and a Husband were my Treasure,
'Twas all the little Wealth, that poor Lavinia
Saved from the Shipwreck of her Father's Fortunes.
One half is lost already; if thou leave me,
If thou should prove unkind to me, as Altamout,
Whom shall I find to pity my Distress,
To have Compassion on a helpless Wanderer.
And give her where to lay her wretched Head?

Hor. Why do thou wound we with thy soft Complainings?
Though Altamont be false, and use me hardly,
Yet think not I impute his Crimes to thee,
Talk not of being forsaken, for I Will keep thee,
Next to my Heart, my certain Pledge of Happiness.
Heaven formed thee gentle, fair, and full of Goodness,
And made thee all my Portion here on Earth;
It gave thee to me, as a large amends,
For Fortune, Friends, and all the World beside.

Lav. Then you will love me still, cherish me ever,
And hide me from Misfortune in your Bosom:
Here end my Cares, nor will I lose one Thought,
How we shall live, or purchase Food and Raiment.
The holy Power, who clothes the senseless Earth,
With Woods, with Fruits, with Flowers, and verdant Grass,
Whose bounteous Hand feeds the whole Brute Creation,
Knows all our Wants, and has enough to give us.

Hor. From Genoa, from Falsehood and Inconstancy,
To some more honest distant Clime we'll go;
Nor will I be beholding to my Country,
For ought but thee, the Partner of my Flight.

Lav. Yes, I will follow thee; forsake, for thee,
My Country, Brother, Friends, even all I have;
Though mine is a little all; yet were it more,
And better far, it should be left for thee,
And all that I would keep should be Horatio.
So when the Merchant sees his Vessel lost,
Though richly Freighted from a Foreign Coast,
Gladly, for Life, the Treasure he won'd give;
And only wishes to escape, and live.
Gold and his Gains no more employ his Mind,
But driving over the Billows with the Wind,
Cleaves to one faithful Plank, and leaves the rest behind.
[Exeunt.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
SCENE, a Garden. Enter Altamont. Alt. WITH what unequal Tempers are we formed?
One Day the Soul, supine with Ease and Fullness,
Revels secure, and fondly tells her self,
The Hour of Evil can return no more;
The next, the Spirits palled, and sick of Riot,
Turn all to Discord, and we hate our Beings,
Curse the past Joy, and think it Folly all,
And Bitterness, and Anguish. Oh! last Night!
What has ungrateful Beauty paid me back,
For all that Mass of Friendship which I squandered?
Coldness, Aversion, Tears, and sullen Sorrow,
Dashed all my Bliss, and damped my Bridal Bed.
Soon as the Morning dawned, she vanished from me,
Relentless to the gentle Call of Love.
I have lost a Friend, and I have gained -- a Wife!
Turn not to Thought my Brain; but let me find
Some unfrequented Shade; there lay me down,
And let forgetful Dullness steal upon me,
To soften and assuage this Pain of Thinking.
[Exit.
Enter Lothario and Calista. Loath. Weep not my Fair, but let the God of Love
Laugh in thy Eyes, and Revel in thy Heart,
Kindle again his Torch, and hold it high,
To light us to new Joys; nor let a Thought
(...) Discord, or Disquiet past, molest thee;
(...) to a long Oblivion give thy Cares,
(...) let us melt the present Hour in Bliss.

Call. Seek not to sooth me with thy false Endearments,
(...) Charm me with thy Softness: it is in vain;
(...) can no more betray, nor I be ruined.
(...) Hours of Folly, and of fond Delight,
(...) wasted all and fled; those that remain
(...) doomed to Weeping, Anguish, and Repentance.
^^me to charge thee with a long Account,
(...) all the Sorrows I have known already,
(...) all I have to come; thou have undone me.

Loath. Unjust Calista! Do thou call it Ruin,
(...) Love as we have done; to melt, to languish,
(...) wish for somewhat exquisitely Happy,
(...) then be blessed even to that Wish's height?
(...) die with Joy, and straight to live again,
^^^^chless to gaze, and with tumultuous Transport --

Call. Oh! let me hear no more, I cannot bear it,
^^deadly to Remembrance; let that Night,
(...) guilty Night, be blotted from the Year,
(...) not the Voice of Mirth, or Music know it,
(...) it be dark and desolate, no Stars
(...) glitter over it; let it wish for Light,
(...) want it still, and vainly wait the Dawn;
(...) 'twas the Night that gave me up to Shame,
(...) Sorrow, to perfidious, false Lothario.

Loath. Hear this, ye Powers, mark how the Fair Deceiver
(...) complains of violated Truth;
(...) calls me false, even She, the faithless She,
(...) Day and Night, whom Heaven and Earth have heard
Sighing to vow, and tenderly protest,
Ten Thousand times, she would be only mine;
And yet, behold, she has given her self away,
Fled from my Arms, and wedded to another,
Even to the Man whom most I hate on Earth --

Call. Art thou so base, to upbraid me with a Crime,
Which nothing but thy Cruelty could cause?
If Indignation, raging in my Soul,
For thy unmanly Insolence and Scorn,
Urged me to do a Deed of Desperation,
And wound my self to be revenged on thee,
Think whom I should devote to Death and Hell,
Whom Curse, as my Undoer, but Lothario;
Had thou been Just, not all Sciolto's Power,
Not all the Vows and Prayers of sighing Altamont,
Could have prevailed, or won me to forsake thee.

Loath. How have I failed in Justice or in Love?
Burns not my Flame as brightly as at first?
Even now my Heart beats high, I languish for thee,
My Transports are as fierce, as strong my Wishes,
As if thou had never blessed me with thy Beauty.

Call. How did thou dare to think that I would live
A Slave to base Desires, and brutal Pleasures,
To be a wretched Wanton for thy Leisure,
To toy, and waste an Hour of idle Time with?
My Soul disdains thee for so mean a Thought.

Loath. The driving Storm of Passion will have way,
And I must yield before it; were thou calm,
Love, the poor Criminal, whom thou have doomed,
Has yet a thousand tender things to plead,
To charm thy Rage, and mitigate his Fate.

Enter behind them Altamont. Alt. I have lost my Peace -- Ha! do I live, and
wake! --

Call. Had thou been true, how happy had I been?
Nor Altamont, but thou had been my Lord.
But wherefore named I Happiness with thee?
It is for thee, for thee, that I am cursed;
For thee, my secret Soul each Hour arraigns me,
Calls me to answer for my Virtue stained,
My Honor lost to thee; for thee it haunts me,
With stern Sciolto vowing Vengeance on me;
With Altamont complaining for his Wrongs --

Alt. Behold him here -- [Coming forward.

Call. Ah! -- [Starting.

Alt. The Wretch! whom thou have made,
Curses and Sorrows have thou heaped upon him,
And Vengeance is the only Good is left. [Drawing.

Loath. Thou have taken me somewhat unawares, it is true,
But Love and War take turns like Day and Night,
And little Preparation serves my turn,
Equal to both, and armed for either Field.
We Have long been Foes, this moment ends our Quarrel;
Earth, Heaven and fair Calista judge the Combat.

Call. Distraction! Fury! Sorrow! Shame! and Death!

Alt. Thou have talked too much, thy Breath is Poison to me,
It taints the ambient Air; this for my Father,
This for Sciolto, and this last for Altamont.
[They Fight; Lothario is wounded once or twice, and then falls.
Loath. Oh Altamont! thy Genius is the stronger,
Thou have prevailed! -- My fierce, ambitious Soul
Declining droops, and all her Fires grow pale;
Yet let not this Advantage swell thy Pride,
I Conquered in my turn, in Love I Triumphed:
Those Joys are lodged beyond the reach of Fate;
That sweet Revenge comes smiling to my Thoughts,
Adorns my Fall, and chears my Heart in dying.
[Dies,
Call. And what remains for me? Beset with Shame,
Encompas'd round with Wretchedness, there is
But this one way, to break the Toil and 'scape.
[She catches up Lothario's Sword, and offers to kill her self, Altamont runs
to her, and wrests it from her.
Alt. What means thy frantic Rage?

Call. Off! let me go.

Alt. Oh! thou have more than murdered me, yet still,
Still art thou here! and my Soul starts with Horror,
At thought of any Danger that may reach thee.

Call. Think thou I mean to live? to be forgiven?
Oh! thou have known but little of Calista;
If thou had never heard my Shame, if only
The midnight Moon, and silent Stars had seen it,
I would not bear to be reproached by them,
But dig down deep to find a Grave beneath,
And hide me from their Beams.

Sciolto within.] What ho! my Son!

Alt. It is Sciolto calls; come near, and find me,
The wretched'st Thing of all my Kind on Earth.

Call. Is it the Voice of Thunder, or my Father?
Madness! Confusion! let the Storm come on,
Let the tumultuous Roar drive all upon me,
Dash my devoted Bark; ye Surges, break it;
It Is for my Ruin that the Tempest rises.
When I am lost, sunk to the bottom low,
Peace shall return, and all be calm again.

Enter Sciolto. Sci. Even now Rossano leaped the Garden Walls --
Ha! Death has been among you -- Oh my Fears!
Last Night thou had a difference with thy Friend.
The Cause thou gav'st me for it was a damned one;
Did thou not wrong the Man who told thee Truth?
Answer me quick --

Alt. Oh! press me not to speak.
Even now my Heart is breaking, and the mention
Will lay me dead before you; see that Body,
And guess my Shame! my Ruin! oh Calista!

Sci. It is enough! but I am slow to Execute,
And Justice lingers in my lazy Hand;
Thus let me wipe Dishonor from my Name,
And cut thee from the Earth, thou Stain to Goodness. --
[Offers to kill Calista, Altamont holds hins.
Alt. Stay thee, Sciolto, thou rash Father stay,
Or turn the Point on me, and through my Breast
Cut out the bloody Passage to Calista;
So shall my Love be perfect, while for her
I die, for whom alone I wished to live.

Call. No, Altamont! my Heart, that scorned thy Love,
Shall never be indebted to thy Pity;
Thus torn, desac'd, and wretched as I seem,
Still I have something of Sciolto's Virtue.
Yes! yes, my Father, I applaud thy Justice,
Strike home, and I will bless thee for the Blow,
Be merciful, and free me from my Pain,
It Is sharp, it is terrible, and I could curse
The cheerful Day, Men, Earth, and Heaven, and Thee,
Even thee, thou venerable good Old Man,
For being Author of a Wretch like me.

Alt. Listen not to the Wildness of her Raving,
Remember Nature! Should thy Daughter's Murder
Defile that Hand, so just, so great in Arms,
Her Blood would rest upon thee to Posterity,
Pollute thy Name, and fully all thy Wars.

Call. Have I not wronged his gentle Nature much?
And yet behold him pleading for my Life.
Lost as thou art, to Virtue, oh Calista!
I think thou can not bear to be cutdone;
Then haste to die, and be obliged no more.

Sci. Thy pious Care has given me time to think,
And saved me from a Crime; then rest my Sword;
To Honor have I kept thee ever sacred,
Nor will stain thee with a rash Revenge;
But, mark me well, I will have Justice done;
Hope not to bear away thy Crimes unpunished,
I will see Justice executed on thee,
Even to a Roman strictness; and thou, Nature,
Or whatsoever thou art that plead'st within me,
Be still, thy tender Strugglings are in vain.

Call. Then am I doomed to live, and bear your Triumph
To groan beneath your Scorn and fierce Upbraidings,
Daily to be reproached, and have my Misery
At Morn, at Noon and Night told over to me,
Lest my Remembrance might grow pitiful,
And grant a Moment's Interval of Peace;
Is this, is this the Mercy of a Father?
I only beg to die, and he denies me.

Sci. Hence from my sight, thy Father cannot bear thee;
Fly with thy Infamy to some dark Cell,
Where on the Confines of Eternal Night,
Mourning, Misfortune, Cares and Anguish dwell;
Where ugly Shame hides her opprobrious Head,
And Death and Hell detested Rule maintain;
There howl out the remainder of thy Life,
And wish thy Name may be no more remembered.

Call. Yes, I will fly to some such dismal Place,
And be more cursed than you can wish I were;
This fatal Form that drew on my Undoing,
Fasting, and Tears, and Hardship shall destroy,
Nor Light, nor Food, nor Comfort will I know,
Nor ought that may continue hated Life.
Then when you see me meagre, wan, and changed,
Stretched at my Length, and dying in my Cave,
On that cold Earth I mean shall be my Grave,
Perhaps you may relent, and sighing say,
At length her Tears have washed her Stains away,
At length it is time her Punishment should cease;
Die thou, poor suffering Wretch, and be at peace.
[Exit Calista.
Sci. Who of my Servants wait thee?
Enter two or three Servants. On our Lives
Take care my Doors be guarded well, that none
Pass out, or enter, but by my Appointment.
[Exeunt Servants.
Alt. There is a fatal Fury in your Visage,
It blazes fierce, and menaces Destrustion:
My Father, I am sick of many Sorrows,
Even now my easy Heart is breaking with 'em,
Yet, above all, one Fear distracts me most,
I tremble at the Vengeance which you meditate,
On the poor, faithless, lovely, dear Calista.

Sci. Have thou not read what brave Virginius did?
With his own Hand he slew his only Daughter,
To save her from the fierce Decemvir's Lust.
He slew her yet unspotted, to prevent
The Shame which she might know. Then what should I do?
But thou have tied my Hand. -- I wo' not kill her;
Yet by the Ruin she has brought upon us,
The common Infamy that brands us both,
She sha' not 'scape.

Alt. You mean that she shall dye then.

Sci. Ask me not what, nor how I have resolved,
For all within is Anarchy and Uproar.
Oh Altamont! what a vast Scheme of Joy
Has this one Day destroyed! Well did I hope
This Daughter would have blessed my latter Days,
That I should live to see you the World's Wonder;
So happy, great, and good, that none were like you.
While I, from busy Life and Care set free,
Had spent the Evening of my Age at home,
Among a little prattling Race of yours:
There, like an old Man talked a while, and then
Lain down and slept in Peace. Instead of this.
Sorrow and Shame must bring me to my Grave;
Oh damn her! damn her!

Enter a Servant. Ser. Arm your self, my Lord;
Rossano, who but now escaped the Garden,
Has gathered in the Street a Band of Rioters,
Who threaten you, and all your Friends, with Ruin,
Unless Lothario be returned in safety.

Sci. By Heaven, their Fury rises to my Wish,
Nor shall Misfortune know my House alone,
But thou, Lothario, and thy Race, shall pay me,
For a'l the Sorrows which my Age is cursed with,
I think my Name as great, my Friends as potent,
As any in the State; all shall be summoned.
I know that all will join their Hands to ours,
And vindicate thy Vengeance. Raise the Body,
And bear it in; his Friends shall buy him dearly,
I will have Blood for Ransom: When our Force
Is full, and armed, we shall expect thy Sword,
To join with us, and sacrifice to Justice. --
[Exit Sciolto. [The Body of Lothario is carried off by Servants.
Manet Altamont. Alt. There is a stupid Weight upon my Senses,
A dismal sullen Stillness, that succeeds
The Storm of Rage and Grief, like silent Death,
After the Tumult and the Noise of Life.
Would it were Death, as sure it is wondrous like it,
For I am sick of Living, my Soul's palled,
She kindles not with Anger or Revenge;
Love was th'informing, active Fire within,
Now that is quenched, the Mass forgets to move,
And longs to mingle with its kindred Earth.
[A tumultuous Noise with clashing of Swords as at a little distance.
Enter Lavinia, with two Servants, their Swords drawn. Lav. Fly, swiftly fly,
to my Horatio's Aid,
Nor lose your vain, officious Cares on me;
Bring me my Lord, my Husband to my Arms;
He is Lavinia's Life, bring him me safe,
And I shall be at ease, be well and happy.
[Exeunt Servants
Alt. Art thou Lavinia? Oh! what barbarous Hand
Could wrong thy poor, defenseless Innocence,
And leave such Marks of more than savage Fury?

Lav. My Brother! Oh my Heart is full of Fears;
Perhaps even now my dear Horatio bleeds. --
Not far from hence, as passing to the Port,
By a mad Multitude we were surrounded,
Who ran upon us with uplifted Swords,
And cried aloud for Vengeance, and Lothario.
My Lord, with ready Boldness stood the Shock,
To shelter me from Danger, but in vain,
Had not a Party, from Sciolto's Palace,
Rushed out, and snatched me from amidst the Fray.

Alt. What of my Friend?

Lav. Ha! by my Joys it is he, [Looking out.
He lives, he comes to bless me, he is safe! --

Enter Horatio, with two or three Servants, their Swords drawn. 1 Serve. 'Twere
at the utmost hazard of your Life
To venture forth again, 'till we are stronger;
Their number trebles ours.

Hor. No matter, let it;
Death is not half so shocking as that Traitor.
My honest Soul is mad with Indignation,
To think her Plainness could be so abused,
As to mistake that Wretch, and call him Friend;
I cannot bear the Sight.

Alt. Open thou Earth,
Gape wide, and take me down to thy dark Bosom,
To hide me from Horatio.

Hor. Oh Lavinia,
Believe not but I joy to see thee safe:
Would our ill Fortune had not drove us hither;
I could even wish, we rather had been wreckt
On any other Shore, than saved on this.

Lav. Oh let us bless the Mercy that preserved us,
That gracious Power that siv'd us for each other:
And to adorn the Sacrifice of Praise,
Offer Forgiveness too; be thou like Heav'r,
And put away th'Offences of thy Friend,
Far, far from thy Remembrance.

Alt. I have marked him,
To see if one forgiving Glance stole hither,
If any Spark of Friendship were alive,
That would, by Sympathy, at meeting glow,
And strive to kindle up the Flame anew;
It Is lost, it is gone, his Soul is quite estranged,
And knows me for its Counter-part no more.

Hor. Thou know thy Rule, thy Empire in Horatio,
Nor can thou ask in vain, command in vain,
Where Nature, Reason, nay where Love is Judge;
But when you urge my Temper, to comply
With what it most abhors, I cannot do it.

Lav. Where did thou get this sullen gloamy Hate?
It was not in thy Nature to be thus;
Come put it off, and let thy Heart be cheerful,
Be gay again, and know the Joys of Friendship,
The Trust, Security, and mutual Tenderness,
The double Joys, where each is glad for both;
Friendship, the Wealth, the last Retreat and Strength,
Secure against ill Fortune, and the World.

Her. I am not apt to take a light Offense,
But patient of the Failings of my Friends,
And willing to forgive; but when an Injury
Stabs to the Heart, and rouses my Resentment,
(Perhaps it is the Fault of my rude Nature)
I own I cannot easily forget it.

Alt. Thou have forgot me.

Hor. No.

Alt. Why are thy Eyes
Impatient of me then, scornful and fierce?

Hor. Because they speak the meaning of my Heart,
Because they are honest, and disdain a Villain.

Alt. I have wronged thee much, Horatio.

Hor. True thou have:
When I forget it, may I be a Wretch,
Vile as thy self, a false persidious Fellow,
An infamous, believing, British Husband.

Alt. I Have wronged thee much, and Heaven has well avenged it.
I have not, since we parted, been at Peace,
Nor known one Joy sincere; our broken Friendship
Pursued me to the last Retreat of Love,
Stood glaring like a Ghost, and made me cold with Horror.
Misfortunes on Misfortunes press upon me,
Swell over my Head, like Waves, and dash me down.
Sorrow, Remorse, and Shame, have torn my Soul,
They hang like Winter on my Youthful Hopes,
And blast the Spring and Promise of my Year.

Lav. So Flowers are gathered to adorn a Grave,
To lose their Fre shness amongst Bones and Rotteness,
And have their Odours stifled in the Dust.
Can thou hear this, thou cruel, hard Horatio?
Can thou behold thy Altamont undone?
That gentle, that dear Youth! can thou behold him,
His poor Heart broken, Death in his pale Visage,
And groaning out his Woes, yet stand unmoved?

Hor. The Brave and Wise I pity in Misfortune.
But when Ingratitude and Folly suffers,
It Is Weakness to be touched.

Alt. I wo' not ask thee
To pity or forgive me, but confess,
This Scorn, this Insolence of Hate is just;
It Is Constancy of Mind, and manly in thee.
But oh! had I been wronged by thee, Horatio,
There is a yielding Softness in my Heart
Could never have stood it out, but I had ran.
With streaming Eyes, and open Arms, upon thee,
And pressed thee close, close!

Hor. I must hear no more,
The Weakness is contagious, I shall catch it,
And be a tame fond Wretch.

Lav. Where would thou go?
Would thou part thus? You sha' not, it is impossible;
For I will bar thy Passage, kneeling thus;
Perhaps thy cruel Hand may spurn me off,
But I will throw my Body in thy way,
And thou shall trample over my faithful Bosom,
Tread on me, wound me, kill me ever thou pass.

Alt. Urge not in vain thy pious Suit, Lavinia,
I have enough to rid me of my Pain.
Calista, thou had reached my Heart before;
To make all sure, my Friend repeats the Blow:
But in the Grave our Cares shall be forgotten,
There Love and Friendship cease.
[Falls. [ Lavinia runs to him, and endeavors to raise him.
Lav. Speak to me, Altamont.
He faints! he dies! Now turn and see thy Triumph;
My Brother! But our Cares shall end together;
Here will I lay me down by thy dear Side,
Bemoan thy too hard Fate, then share it with thee,
And never see my cruel Lord again.
[ Horatio runs to Altamont, and raises him in his Arms
Hor. It is too much to bear! Look up, my Altamont!
My stubborn, unrelenting Heart has killed him.
Look up and bless me, tell me that thou liv'st.
Oh! I have urged thy Gentleness too far;
[He revives. Do thou and my Lavinia both forgive me;
A Flood of Tenderness comes over my Soul;
I cannot speak! -- I love! forgive! and pity thee. --

Alt. I thought that nothing could have stayed my Soul,
That long ere this her Flight had reached the Stars;
But thy known Voice has lured her back again.
Methinks I fain would set all right with thee,
Make up this most unlucky Breach, and then,
With thine, and Heavens Forgiveness on my Soul,
Shrink to my Grave, and be at ease for ever.

Hor. By Heaven my Heart bleeds for thee; even this moment
I feel thy Pangs of disappointed Love.
Is it not pity that this Youth should fail,
That all this wondrous Goodness should be lost,
And the World never know it? oh my Altamont!
Give me thy Sorrows, let me bear 'em for thee,
And shelter thee from Ruin.

Lav. Oh my Brother!
Think not but we will sha e in all thy Woes,
We'll sit all Day, and tell sad Tales of Love,
And when we light upon some faithless Woman,
Some Beauty, like Calista, false and fair,
We'll fix our Grief, and our Complaining, there;
We'll curse the Nymph that drew the Ruin on,
And mourn the Youth that was like thee undone.
[Exeunt.
ACT V. SCENE I.
SCENE is a Room hung with Black; on one side, Lothario's Body on a Bier; on
the other, a Table with a Skull and other Bones, a Book, and a Lamp on it.
Calista is discovered on a Couch in Black, her Hair hanging loose and
disordered: After Music and a Song, she rises and comes forward. SONG.
I.
HEAR, you Midnight Phantoms, hear,
You who pale and wan appear,
And fill the Wretch, who wakes, with Fear.
You who wander, scream, and groan,
Round the Mansions once your own,
You, whom still your Crimes upbraid,
You, who rest not with the dead;
From the Coverts where you stray,
Where you lurk, and shun the Day,
From the Charnel, and the Tomb,
Hither haste ye, hither come.
II.
Chide Calista for Delay,
Tell her, it is for her you stay;
Bid her die, and come away.
See the Sexton with his Spade,
See the Grave already made;
Listen, Fair one, to thy Knell,
This Music is thy passing Bell.
Call. It Is well! these Solemn Sounds, this Pomp of Horror,
Are fit to feed the Frenzy in my Soul,
Here Is room for Meditation, even to Madness,
'Till the Mind burst with Thinking; this dull Flame
Sleeps in the Socket; sure the Book was left
To tell me something; -- for Instruction then --
He teaches holy Sorrow, and Contrition,
And Penitence; -- Is it become an Art then?
A Trick that lazy, dull, luxurious Gown-men
Can teach us to do over; I Will no more on it; [Throwing away the Book.
I have more real Anguish in my Heart,
Than all their Pedant Discipline ever knew.
What Charnel has been rifled for these Bones?
Fie! this is Pageantry; -- they look uncoothly,
But what of that? If he or she that owned 'em,
Safe from Disquiet, sit, and smile to see
The Farce, their miserable Relics play.
But here is a Sight is terrible indeed;
Is this that Haughty, Gallant, Gay Lothario,
That dear perfidious -- Ah! -- how Pale he looks!
How Grim with clotted Blood, and those dead Eyes!
Ascend ye Ghosts, fantastic Forms of Night,
In all your different, dreadful Shapes ascend,
And match the present Horror if you can.

Enter Sciolto. Sci. This Dead of Night, this silent Hour of Darkness,
Nature for Rest ordained, and soft Repose,
And yet Distraction, and tumultuous Jars,
Keep all our frighted Citizens awake;
The Senate, weak, divided and irresolute,
Want Power to succor the afflicted State.
Vainly in Words and long Debates they are Wise,
While the fierce Factions scorn their peaceful Orders,
And drown the Voice of Law in Noise and Anarchy.
Amidst the general Wreck, see where she stands, [Pointing to Calista.
Like Helen, in the Night when Troy was sacked,
Spectatress of the Mischief which she made.

Call. It is Sciolto! be thy self, my Soul;
Be strong to bear his fatal Indignation,
That he may see thou art not lost so far,
But somewhat still of his great Spirit lives
In the forlorn Calista.

Sci. Thou were once
My Daughter.

Call. Happy were it I had died,
And never lost that Name.

Sci. That Is something yet;
Thou were the very Darling of my Age;
I thought the Day too short to gaze upon thee,
That all the Blessings I could gather for thee,
By Cares on Earth, and by my Prayers to Heaven,
Were little for my Fondness to bestow;
Why did thou turn to Folly then, and curse me?

Call. Because my Soul was rudely drawn from yours;
A poor imperfect Copy of my Father,
Where Goodness, and the strength of manly Virtue,
Was thinly planted, and the idle Void
Fili'd up with light Belief, and easy Fondness;
It was, because I loved, and was a Woman.

Sci. Had thou been honest, thou had been a Cherubin;
But of that Joy, as of a Gem long lost,
Beyond Redemption gone, think we no more.
Have thou ever dared to meditate on Death?

Call. I have, as on the end of Shame and Sorrow.

Sci. Ha! answer me! say, have thou cooly thought?
It Is not the Stoick's Lessons got by Rote,
The Pomp of Words, and Pedant Dissertations,
That can sustain thee in that Hour of Terror:
Books have taught Cowards to talk nobly of it,
But when the Trial comes, they start, and stand agas^;
Have thou considered what may happen after it?
How thy Account may stand, and what to answer?

Call. I have turned my Eyes inward upon my self,
Where foul Offense, and Shame have laid all waste;
Therefore my Soul abhors the wretched Dwelling,
And longs to find some better place of Rest.

Sci. It Is justly thought, and worthy of that Spirit
That dwelt in ancient Latian Breasts, when Rome
Was Mistress of the World. I would go on,
And tell thee all my Purpose, but it sticks,
Here at my Heart, and cannot find a way.

Call. Then spare the Telling, if it be a Pain,
And write the Meaning with your Poniard here.

Sci. Oh! truly guessed -- see thou this trembling Hand -- [Holding up a
Dagger.
Thrice Justice urged -- and thrice the slack'ning Sinews
Forgot their Office, and confessed the Father;
At length the stubborn Virtue has prevailed,
It must, it must be so -- Oh! take it then, [Giving the Dagger.
And know the rest untaught.

Call. I understand you,
It is but thus, and both are satisfied.
[She offers to kill her self, Sciolto catches hold of her Arm.
Sci. A Moment, give me yet a Moment's space;
The stern, the rigid Judge has been obeyed;
Now Nature, and the Father claim their turns;
I have held the Balance with an Iron Hand,
And put off every tender, human Thought,
To doom my Child to Death; but spare my Eyes
The most unnatural Sight, least their Strings crack,
And my old Brain split, and grow mad with Horror.

Call. Ha! Is it possible? and is there yet
Some little, dear Remain of Love and Tenderness,
For poor, undone Calista, in your Heart?

Sci. Oh! when I think what Pleasure I took in thee,
What Joys thou gav'st me in thy prattling Infancy,
Thy sprightly Wit, and early blooming Beauty,
How I have stood, and fed my Eyes upon thee,
Then lifted up my Hands, and wondering, blessed thee;
By my strong Grief, my Heart even melts within me,
I could curse Nature, and that Tyrant, Honor,
For making me thy Father, and thy Judge;
Thou art my Daughter still.

Call. For that kind Word,
Thus let me fall, thus humbly to the Earth;
Weep on your Feet, and bless you for this Goodness;
Oh! it is too much for this offending Wretch,
This Paricide, that Murders with her Crimes,
Shortens her Father's Age, and cuts him off,
Ever little more than half his Years be numbered.

Sci. Would it were otherwise -- but thou must die. --

Call. That I must die! it is my only Comfort;
Death is the Privilege of human Nature,
And Life without it were not worth our taking;
Thither the Poor, the Prisoner, and the Mourner,
Fly for Relief, and lay their Burdens down.
Come then, and take me now to thy cold Arms,
Thou meagre Shade; here let me breathe my last,
Charmed with my Father's Pity and Forgiveness,
More than if Angels tuned their Golden Viols,
And sung a Requiem to my parting Soul.

Sci. I am summoned hence, ever this my Friends expect me,
There is I know not what of sad Presage,
That tells me, I shall never see thee more;
If it be so, this is our last Farewell,
And these the parting Pangs which Nature feels,
When Anguish rends the Heart Strings -- Oh! my Daughter.
[Exit Sciolto.
Call. Now think thou, cursed Calista, now behold
The Desolation, Horror, Blood and Ruin,
Thy Crimes, and fatal Folly spread around,
That loudly cry for Vengeance on thy Head;
Yet Heaven, who knows our weak, imperfect Natures,
How blind with Passions, and how prone to Evil,
Makes not too strict Enquiry for Offenses,
But is atoned by Penitence and Prayer:
Cheap Recompense! here 'twou'd not be received,
Nothing but Blood can make the Expiation,
And cleanse the Soul from inbred, deep Pollution.
And see, another injured Wretch is come,
To call for Justice from my tardy Hand.

Enter Altamont. Alt. Hail to you Horrors! hail thou House of Death!
And thou the lovely Mistress of these Shades,
Whose Beauty gilds the more than midnight Darkness,
And makes it grateful as the Dawn of Day.
Oh! take me in a Fellow-Mourner with thee,
I Will number Groan for Groan, and Tear for Tear;
And when the Fountain of thy Eyes are dry,
Mine shall supply the Stream, and weep for both.

Call. I know thee well, thou art the injured Altamont,
Thou come to urge me with the Wrongs I have done thee;
But know I stand upon the Brink of Life,
And in a Moment mean to set me free
From Shame, and thy Upbraiding.

Alt. Falsely, falsely
Do thou accuse me; when did I complain,
Or murmur at my Fate? For thee I have
Forgot the Temper of Italian Husbands,
And Fondness has prevailed upon Revenge;
I bore my load of Infamy with Patience,
As Holy Men do Punishments from Heaven,
Nor thought it hard, because it came from thee;
Oh! then forbid me not to mourn thy Loss,
To wish some better Fate had ruled our Loves,
And that Calista had been mine, and true.

Call. Oh! Altamont, it is hard for Souls like mine,
Haughty and fierce, to yield they have done amiss;
But oh! behold my proud, disdainful Heart,
Bends to thy gentler Virtue; yes, I own,
Such is thy Truth, thy Tenderness and Love,
Such are the Graces that adorn thy Youth,
That were I not abandoned to Destruction,
With thee I might have lived, for Ages blessed,
And died in Peace within thy faithful Arms.

Alt. Then Happiness is still within our reach;
Here let Remembrance lose our past Misfortunes,
Tear all Records that hold the fatal Story;
Here let our Joys begin, from hence go on
In long successive Order.

Call, What! in Death?

Alt. Then art thou fixed to die -- But be it so,
We'll go together, my adventurous Love
Shall follow thee to those uncertain Beings;
Whether our lifeless Shades are doomed to wander,
In gloomy Groves, with discontented Ghosts,
Or whether through the upper Air we fleet,
And tread the Fields of Light, still I Will pursue thee,
'Till Fate ordains that we shall part no more.

Call. Oh no! Heaven has some better Lot in store
To Crown thee with; live, and be happy long;
Live for some Maid that shall deserve thy Goodness,
Some kind unpracticed Heart, that never yet
Has listened to the false ones of thy Sex,
Nor known the Arts of ours; she shall reward thee,
Meet thee with Virtues equal to thy own,
Charm thee with Sweetness, Beauty, and with Truth,
Be blessed in thee alone, and thou in her.

Enter Horatio. Hor. Now mourn indeed, ye miserable Pair,
For now the Measure of your Woes is full.

Alt. What do thou mean, Horatio?

Hor. Oh! it is dreadful:
The great, the good Sciolto dies this Moment.

Call. My Father!

Alt. That Is a deadly Stroke indeed.

Hor. Not long ago he privately went forth,
Attended but by few, and those unbidden;
I heard which way he took, and strait pursued him,
But found him compassed by Lothario's Faction,
Almost alone, amidst a Crowd of Foes;
Too late we brought him Aid, and drove them back;
Ever that his frantic Valor had provoked,
The Death he seemed to wish for from their Swords.

Call. And do thou bear me yet, thou patient Earth?
Do thou not labor with my murderous Weight?
And you ye glittering, heavenly Host of Stars,
Hide your Fair Heads in Clouds, or I shall blast you,
For I am all Contagion, Death, and Ruin,
And Nature sickens at me; rest thou World,
This Paricide shall be thy Plague no more;
Thus, thus I set thee free.
[Stabs her self.
Hor. Oh! fatal Rashness.

Alt. Thou do instruct me well; to lengthen Life,
Is but to trifle now.
[ Altamont offers to kill himself; Horatio prevents him, and wrests his Sword
from him.
Hor. Ha! what means
The frantic Altamont? Some Foe to Man
Has breathed on every Breast Contagious Fury,
And Epidemick Madness.

Enter Sciolto, pale and bloody, supported by Servants. Call. Oh my Heart!
Well may thou fail, for see the Spring that fed
Thy Vital Stream is wasted, and runs low.
My Father! will you now at last forgive me,
If after all my Crimes, and all your Sufferings,
I call you once again by that dear Name?
Will you forget my Shame, and those wide Wounds,
Lift up your Hand, and bless me ever I go
Down to my dark Abode.

Sci. Alas! my Daughter?
Thou have rashly ventured in a stormy Sea,
Where Life, Fame, Virtue, all were wrecked and lost;
But sure thou have born thy part in all the Anguish,
And smarted with the Pain, then rest in Peace,
Let Silence and Oblivion hide thy Name,
And save thee from the Malice of Posterity;
And may thou find with Heaven the same Forgiveness,
As with thy Father here. -- Die, and be happy.

Call. Celestial Sounds! Peace dawns upon my Soul,
And every Pain grows less. -- Oh! gentle Altamont,
Think not too hardly of me when I Am gone,
But pity me. -- Had I but early known
Thy wondrous Worth, thou excellent young Man,
We had been happier both: -- Now it is too late,
And yet my Eyes take Pleasure to behold thee,
Thou art their last dear Object. -- Mercy, Heaven!
[She dies.
Alt. Cold! dead and cold! and yet thou art not changed,
But lovely still! Had thou a thousand Faults,
What Heart so hard, what Virtue so severe,
But at that Beauty must of force relented,
Melted to Pity, Love, and to Forgiveness?

Sci. Oh! turn thee from the fatal Object; Altamont,
Come near, and let me bless thee ever I die.
To thee, and brave Horatio, I bequeath
My Fortunes. -- Lay me by thy Noble Father,
And love my Memory as thou have done his,
For thou have been my Son. -- Oh! gracious Heaven!
Thou that have endless Blessings still in store,
For Virtue, and for filial Piety,
Let Grief, Disgrace, and Want be far away,
But multiply thy Mercies on his Head;
Let Honor, Greatness, Goodness, still be with him,
And Peace in all his Ways. --
[He dies.
Alt. Take, take it all;
To thee, Horatio, I resign the Gift,
While I pursue my Father and my Love,
And find my only Portion in the Grave.

Hor. The Storm of Grief bears hard upon his Youth,
And bends him like a drooping Flower to Earth.
Raise him, and bear him in.
[ Altamont is carried off. By such Examples are we taught to prove,
The Sorrows that attend unlawful Love;
Death, or some worse Misfortunes, soon divide
The injured Bridegroom from his guilty Bride:
If you would have the Nuptial Union last,
Let Virtue be the Bond that ties it fast.
[Exeunt omnes.
EPILOGUE,
Spoken by Mrs. BRACEGIRDLE, who played Lavinia. YOU see the tripping Dame
could find no Favor,
Dearly she paid for Breach of good Behavior,
Nor could her loving Husband's Fondness save her.
Italian Ladies lead but scurvy Lives,
There Is dreadful dealing with Eloping Wives;
Thus it is, because these Husbands are obeyed
By force of Laws, which for themselves they made,
With Tales of old Prescriptions they confiae,
The Right of Marriage-rule to their Male Line,
And Hust, and Domineer by Right Divine,
Had we the Power we'd make the Tyrants know,
What it is to fail in Duties which they owe;
We'd teach the saunt'ring Squire, who loves to roam,
Forgetful of his own dear Spouse and Home;
Who Snores at Night supinely by her side,
'Twas not for this the Nuptial Knot was tied.
The plodding Petty-fogger, and the Cit,
Have learned at least this Modern way of Wit:
Each ill-bred, senseless Rogue, though never so dull,
Has the Impudence to think his Wife a Fool;
He spends the Night, where merry Wags resort,
With joking Clubs, and Eighteen-penny Port,
While she poor Soul's contented to regale,
By a sad Sea-cole Fire, with Wigs and Ale.
Well may the Cuckold-making Tribe find Grace,
And fill an absent Husband's empty place:
If you would ever bring Constancy in Fashion,
You Men must first begin the Reformation.
Then shall the Golden Age of Love return,
No Turtle for her wandering Mate shall mourn,
No Foreign Charms shall cause Domestic Strife,
But every married Man shall toast his Wife;
Phillis shall not be to the Country sent,
For Carnivals in Town to keep a tedious Lent:
Lampoons shall cease, and envious Scandal die,
And all shall live in Peace like my good Man and I.
FINIS.

