A TRACT ON DUELLING: WHEREIN The Opinions of some of the most celebrated
Writers ON CROWN LAW ARE EXAMINED AND CORRECTED Either by the Authority of the
same Writers, declared in contradictory Sentiments on the same Subject collated
from other Parts of their Works, Or, by the solemn Decisions of more ancient
Writers of (at least) equal Authority; in order to ascertain the due
Distinction between MANSLAUGHTER AND MURDER.

By GRANVILLE SHARP.

LONDON: (FIRST PRINTED IN 1773) SECOND EDITION WITH ADDITIONS PRINTED FOR B.
WHITE AND SON, FLEET STREET; AND C. DILLY, IN THE POULTRY. MDCCXC.

Whosoever sheddeth Man's blood, by Man shall his blood be shed: for in the image
of God made he Man. (Genesis ix. 6.) For blood it defiles the land. (Number. xxxv.
33) There cannot, therefore, be any legal Prerogative to pardon wilful
Manslaughter, but only where the King may do it BY HIS OATH, that is to say,
where a Man slays another in his own defense, or by misfortune. (2 Ed. iii.)
To pardon without one or other of these two favorable circumstances would be
an act highly disloyal to GOD and MAN, and even to THE LAND; for THE LAND
cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but the blood of him that
shed it. (Number. xxxv. 33.) Caedes manifest numerantur inter scelera nullo
humano jure expiabilia. (3 Inst. 47.)

PREFACE.
THE intention of the following Tract is to prove that the plea of sudden Anger
cannot remove the imputation and guilt of Murder, when a Mortal Wound is
wilfully given with a weapon:

That the indulgence allowed by the Courts to voluntary Manslaughter in
Rencounters, and in sudden Affrays and Duels, is indiscriminate, and without
foundation in Law:

And that impunity in such cases of voluntary Manslaughter is one of the
principal causes of the continuance and present increase of the base and
disgraceful practice of Duelling.

Universal Benevolence, including gentleness, patience and an unaffected
placability in our behavior, even toward those men who injure and affront us,
is manifestly required of all men, who profess the true religion; and yet,
unhappily for the Christian world, this most obvious doctrine of the gospel of
peace, is too commonly either misunderstood, or else absolutely rejected,
though the temporal as well as the eternal happiness of mankind, greatly
depends upon a conscientious and proper observation of it. For a man cannot be
a true Christian without observing this doctrine; and yet, so generally
received is the opposite and contradictory doctrine, concerning the necessity
of revenging every personal affront with sword and pistol, for the sake of,
what is falsely called, honor, that a true Christian is rarely to be with!
Nay, we are fallen into such gross depravity, that the writer of a late
publication on the principles of penal law, has ventured to assert, (though he is
in other respects, as I am informed, a sensible and ingenious young gentleman)
that the judge condemns the duellist, whilst he scarcely knows how in his own
heart to disapprove his behavior. (p. 224.) So that one would suppose
Christianity to be almost entirely extinct amongst us, if its principles are so
little regarded, even in our courts of justice, where they ought to be held
most sacred. My readers, perhaps, will start at such an idea in these
enlightened days of reformation; but I will even go farther, and venture to
assert, that the Europeans not only cease to be Christians, but will no longer
deserve the name even of men, if they persist in such a brutal and diabolical
contradiction to the most indispensible principles of the laws of God and
nature: for nothing deserves to be esteemed human that is unreasonable; and the
depravity, of which I complain, is not only incompatible with the laws of God,
but absolutely inconsistent with common sense.

Let us view the character of the modern man of honor (falsely so called) who
thinks it inconsistent with his reputation, to pass over a personal affront
with that Christian submission, which the gospel requires of all men, without
exception.

Such an one perhaps will allege, that his honor obliges him, whenever he
receives an affront, to call out his adversary, or to accept his challenge,
lest his courage should be questioned; and therefore in such case, the one must
give, and the other take, what is commonly called gentleman-like Satisfaction.
But let us examine this perversion of words. The Satisfaction to both parties
is the risk both of body and soul, in the perpetration of a most dishonorable,
base, and cowardly felony; which cannot, therefore, be gentleman-like, whatever
the satisfaction of it may be. And 1st. It is Felony; because no man can give,
or accept, a challenge, without being guilty of Wilful Murder, if he kills his
antagonist; which I hope is proved in the course of the following tract. 2ndly.
It is dishonorable, because it is an open violation of the indispensible
principles enjoined in the two great commandments of the supreme Law, viz. the
love of God, and the love of our neighbor: for, in this respect, the offender
is upon the same footing as culprits for burglary, theft, or any other felony;
the not having the fear of God before his eyes, being equally applicable to all
of them; and the common law of England esteems no man qualified to be a member
of society, who wants this principle. The act is therefore highly
dishonorable; and to use a still more humiliating term of the same import, I
must observe -- 3dly, that it is also base; because it affords the most
apparent proof of a little Soul Nec Christiani veteres hoc tantum viderunt, sed
et philosophi, qui dixerunt pusilli esse animi contumeliam far non posse, ut
alibi ostendimus, says the learned Grotius, in his 2d book De jure Belli et
Pacis, p. 172.
; being, in reality, a brutal revenge; brutal because unreasonable; (for how
can Honor be vindicated or retrieved by the commission of a notorious Felony?)
and what is unreasonable, must be disgraceful to human nature, and therefore is
truly base.

And lastly, it is cowardly (that is, when it cannot be imputed to Ignorance or
Folly) because a man submits to it contrary to the light of his own reason, for
fear his courage should be called in question; and yet he has not courage
enough to withstand the barbarous prejudices of a depraved world, lest he
should suffer some temporal inconveniences: and the slavish Fear which he
entertains of these (for cowards always dread the present evil most) deprives
him of that reasonable fear, which he ought to entertain of God's judgment,
because he thinks it at a distance, though, he knows, it must inevitably
follow! -- I condemn no man in particular; God forbid! I speak of the question
only in general: inveterate prejudices and customs may perhaps afford some
excuse in particular cases to some individuals, who have ignorantly yielded
thereto: but as ignorance is disgraceful to humanity, I sincerely wish that all
persons may enter into as careful an examination of this question as I have
done, by which they will not only be enabled to avoid a repetition of their
crime, but also be prevented from attempting to defend what is past, and
thereby afford the best proof of an ingenuous and honorable heart.

This abominable practice of duelling, which of late years has increased to a
most alarming degree, may chiefly be attributed (I humbly conceive) to the
improper indulgence which our English courts of justice, for about two
centuries back, have shown to persons convicted of killing in sudden affrays
and rencounters, through a false idea of mercy due to human failty, in cases of
sudden provocation; without preserving the proper distinction of those cases
wherein homicide, in sudden anger, is really excusable by the laws of God, and
of this kingdom; and the improper precedents, which have arisen from this
indiscriminate and corrupt practice, have so misled the more modern writers on
Crown Law, that even the greatest and most respectable of them have been
unhappily induced to admit doctrines on the subject of Manslaughter, which are
absolutely incompatible with the proper and necessary distinctions to be
observed between wilful murder and manslaughter, which they themselves have
laid down in other parts of their works: and it is on the authority of these
just distinctions, with the necessary consequences arising therefrom, (and not
on my own presumption) that this censure is founded; which the following tract
I hope will clearly demonstrate.

But as my readers might seem to give too much credit to an inconsiderable
person like myself, were they, (without a previous intimation of what is
proposed,) to risque any loss of time in the perusal of the arguments and
proofs at large, on which my vindication for this attempt depends, I think it
my duty to state the subject and intention of the tract, as briefly as I can,
in this prefatory address, that my readers may, thereby, be enabled to judge,
without much loss of time, whether the matter is of sufficient consequence to
merit any more of their attention.

I have already mentioned my opinion, that No man can give or accept a
challenge to fight with weapons, on any private difference whatever, without
being guilty of wilful murder if he kills his antagonist. And the intention of
the following tract is to show, that the writers on Crown Law have no just
warrant for admitting the contrary doctrines, which they have laid down
concerning sudden affrays and rencountres, viz. that the voluntary killing of a
man on a sudden provocation is only to be esteemed Manslaughter, and, as such,
is entitled to the benefit of Clergy. And they have also supposed that an
assault is a sufficient provocation to justify a voluntary manslaughter.

Now, certain it is; that some allowance ought to be made for heat of blood
upon a sudden provocation, in consideration of the extreme frailty of human
nature; provided that there are no circumstances of malice in the case. As if
(for instance) a man, in sudden anger, should strike another, merely with his
fist, or a small cane, or stick, meaning only to correct, and should
accidentally kill; this would be, properly, manslaughter; which, though it is
deemed Felony (as the act of striking, or beating another person is, in itself,
unlawful), is nevertheless pardonable both by the laws of God and man. But when
two persons fight with dangerous weapons, an intention of killing is expressed
by the weapons; and such intention renders the manslaughter voluntary, which is
the same thing as wilful; and consequently the "malice prepensed" (which
excludes the benefit of clergy) is necessarily implied, though the sudden anger
be but a moment before the fatal stroke; for "malice prepensed" is thus defined
by Sir Edward Coke, That is (says he) voluntary, and of set purpose, though
done upon a sudden occasion: for if it be voluntary the law implies malice. 3
Inst. c.xiii. p. 62.

And yet the same great lawyer in p. 55, speaks of voluntary manslaughter upon
some sudden falling out, as distinct from murder; which cannot, in reason, be
true; for if the killing be voluntary, the evil and malicious intention is
necessarily included in the act, even though the fatal blow be given merely
with the hand, or a small cane or stick, which I have before mentioned as
pardonable cases, when the killing is not intended; for a voluntary striking,
without intention to kill, is indeed pardonable, though death ensues; but a
voluntary killing is so far from being so, that the law, according to Lord
Coke's own rule, implies malice; and, consequently, the same must,
necessarily, be esteemed Murder, and not merely Manslaughter; because the
necessary marks, whereby manslaughter ought to be distinguished, are absolutely
wanting therein: for manslaughter must be "without malice express or implied" (
1 Hale 466. 4 Blackstone 191) " Murder being aggravated" (says Lord Hale) with
malice presumed or implied, but manslaghter not. And yet all these great and
excellent lawyers have unhappily fallen into the same error of treating the
voluntary branch of killing, as bare Homicide, or manslaughter; whereas, all
the older writers agree, that killing is pardonable only in cases of inevitable
necessity (Bracton, lib. iii. c. 4. p. 120. b. Fleta lib. i. c. 23.) And the
learned Judge Staunford says That the whole matter consists in the inevitable
necessity; without which the killing is by no means excusable There is but one
case of voluntary Killing, wherein the plea of sudden Anger and atrocious
provocation may seem entitled to some indulgence and consideration: See Note in
p. 46.
(n'est ascun voi excusable. P.C. lib. i. c. 7.)

Now, the absurd and depraved notions of honor, and gentleman-like
satisfaction, of which I complain, could not possibly exist, if every conqueror
in a duel, who kills his antagonist, was sure of being hanged up as an
ignominious felon, for his own gentleman-like satisfaction; and therefore I
apprehend, that the diabolical practice of settling private differences with
sword and pistol is chiefly to be attributed to the want of punishment due to
voluntary manslaughter, through the mistaken concessions of the Writers on
Crown Law, and the false mercy of Juries, in consideration of sudden anger;
because impunity fosters vice and depravity; but more especially in cases of
wilful manslaughter, impunity ought to be esteemed the bane of society; as the
guilt of blood is thereby thrown upon a whole nation or country; for it is a
supreme law, that whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed.
Genesis ix. 6. For blood it defiles the Land: and the Land cannot be cleansed of
the Blood that is shed therein, but by the Blood of him that shed it. (Number.
xxxv. 33.) And I hope I have proved by incontrovertable extracts from the laws
of God, that the said judgment is inevitably incurred by all voluntary killing,
except in the legal prosecution of justice, and in the necessary defense of our
lives and properties; so that no man has any legal or just right to pardon or
remit the punishment due to murder, or voluntary manslaughter (which are the
same crime, and equally unpardonable in this world); for such an indulgence is
not only a manifest sin against Almighty God, but also against the community at
large, or country; for Blood it defiles the land; and the land cannot be
cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed
it. Numb. xxxv. 33. This is not a ceremonial law, but a law of morality,
founded in divine Justice, which must, therefore, be ever binding. Now as the
Land cannot be cleansed, etc. but by manslaughter, so that even the king
himself is absolutely restrained from it. See an act of the 2 Edw. III. whereby
it is ordained, that a charter of pardon shall not be granted, but only where
the king may do it by his oath; that is to say, where a man slays another in
his own defense, or by misfortune. See also a Note in p. 48. on the further
limitation of Royal Prerogative by a subsequent Statute of 13 Ric. 2. (2 Stat.
c. 1.) rendering it obnoxious to the wrath of God!
the blood of him who shed it, the Land is surely entitled to that expiation,
as a matter of indispensible Right, which, when withheld or withdrawn by
Charters of Pardon to the guilty, is a manifest injury and wrong to the land,
i.e. to the whole Country or Kingdom; which opens to us the true ground and
reason why the Royal Prerogative is so strictly and expressly limited in this
point; for Non potest Rex gratiam facere cum injuria et damno aliorum: This is
an ancient and constant rule "of Law." (3 Inst. p. 236.) and an injury, wrong,
or damage is surely most intolerable, when it is liable to affect the whole
Land or Country, by rendering it obnoxious to the wrath of God!

I may probably be charged with an unpardonable temerity for presuming to
censure the writings of some of the greatest and most learned men that this
nation, perhaps, ever produced; and I am thoroughly sensible of the risk and
ill consequences to myself, in case I am mistaken; but a sincere persuasion of
being in the right, (arising from a laborious research and careful examination
of the most celebrated and approved writers on Crown Law) obliges me to prefer,
what I conceive to be truth, before the authority of the greatest names.

And even, though I should not have succeeded according to my own conceptions
of the subject, yet, I trust, that my impartial readers will pardon any
involuntary errors, that they find in the performance, especially if they see
no cause to suspect any want of uprightness in the intention of it: and, at all
events, I hope, that the attempt may, at least, be considered as a proof, that
I am not afraid of difficulties and labor, nor of the risk of personal
inconveniences, when I undertake any point with a view of serving my country,
or mankind in general.

London. 3d Sept. 1773 GRANVILLE SHARP.

A TRACT ON DUELLING.
NO MAN can give or accept a challenge to fight with weapons, and kill his
antagonist (on any private difference whatever) without being guilty of Wilful
Murder, such as ought to be excluded from the benefit of clergy. For Wilful
Murder is the killing of a man ex malitia proecogitata Pleas of the Crown 1678,
p. 35. also 1 Hal. P. C. 425.
; which malice is either implied or express, Fitzherbert's Justice of Peace, p.
21. Lambard's Eirenarcha, c. 7. p. 240. also 3 Inst. c. vii. p. 47.
or, as judge Hale calls it, Malice in Law, or ex presumptione Legis 1 Hal. P.
C. 451.
; and malice must necessarily be implied when a man wilfully strikes or wounds
another with any offensive weapon whatever, because that is an act that must
apparently introduce harm P. C. 1678, p. 36.
, and the intention to do harm makes it murder Ibid. 36.
; so that the allowance which the writers of the two last centuries have made
for sudden anger (without preserving a proper distinction of the case wherein
it really deserves consideration) is unjust in itself, as well as dangerous to
society; for few men would entertain such absurd notions of honor, as to think
themselves obliged to revenge affronts with their swords or pistols, if the
risque of being hanged up as felons and murderers for their own gentlemanlike
satisfaction, was rendered obvious by just and proper decisions of the Law on
this point.

In every charge of murder, the fact of killing being first proved, all the
circumstances of Accident, Necessity, or Infirmity are to be satisfactorily
proved by the prisoner, unless they arise out of the evidence produced against
him: for the law presumes the fact to have been founded in malice, until the
contrary appears. Judge Foster, 255.

The cases of homicide which are justified or excused by the abovementioned
circumstances of Accident and Necessity, are well understood, and, by many
eminent writers, sufficiently explained under the heads of Misfortune and
Self-defence. But with respect to those cases of Homicide, which are attended
with circumstances of infirmity (the third branch of circumstances mentioned
above) the writers on crown law in general have been very indiscriminate,
notwithstanding that the true distinction between Murder and Manslaughter
depends entirely on a clear stating of those cases of infirmity, which really
deserve consideration and excuse.

Judge Foster, indeed, is, for the most part, nice and accurate in his
distinctions; yet he has paid so great a regard to the authority of precedents,
that he has been unwarily led away (as well as other writers) from the
necessary conclusions of his own arguments upon this point; I shall,
nevertheless, make use of his words as far as they express my own opinion of
the subject. -- Whoever would shelter himself under the plea of Provocation
must prove his case to the satisfaction of the jury. The presumption of law is
against him, till that presumption is repelled by contrary evidence. What
degree of Provocation, and under what circumstances heat of blood, the Furor
brevis, will or will not avail the Defendant is now to be considered.

Words of Reproach, how grievous soever, are not a Provocation sufficient to
free the Party killing from the guilt of murder. Nor are indecent provoking
actions or gestures expressive of contempt or reproach, without an assault upon
the person. (p. 290.) But I think myself obliged to add that even an assault
See my Remarks (in p. (...), etc.) on Mr. Hawkins's assertions relating to this
point.
upon the person is NOT a Provocation sufficient to free the Party killing from
the guilt of murder, (though this learned judge seems to think otherwise. See
Sect. iii. p. 295) unless all the circumstances which are necessary to render
it excusable by the plea of selfdefence can clearly be proved. For if the
Killing in a sudden fray is not ex necessitate, (as in Self-defence, or in the
lawful Defense of others), it must be esteemed voluntary; and voluntary is the
same thing as wilful; which necessarily includes malice. For Bracton says,
Crimen non contrahitur nisi Voluntas nocendi intercedat and voluntas et
propositum distinguunt Maleficium, etc. The Guilt is not incurred unless the
intention of injuring intervenes, for the Intention and Purpose (or design)
marks the Felony (or malicious Deed.) Lib. iii. c. 17. So that malice must
necessarily be presumed, whenever the killing is not ex necessitate, especially
if the fatal blow be wilfully given with a weapon; for in that case a man must
necessarily be supposed to strike, cunt occidendi animo, -- with murderous
intent, because the Voluntas nocendi is apparent; and, consequently, the
malice, in such a case, is not only implied but clearly expressed; so that the
sudden anger is only a further proof of the malice and " intention to do harm."

Bracton has accurately laid down the proper distinction to be observed in the
plea of an excusable Necessity for killing.

Quo casu distinguendum est utrum Necessitas illa fuit evitabilis vel non. Si
autem evitabilis, et evadere posset absque occisione, tune erit reus homicidii,
(and a felonious homicide or manslaughter, in the days of Bracton, had the same
meaning that we now apply to Murder). Si autem inevitabilis, quia occidit
hominem sine odii meditatione in metu and dolor animi, se et sua liberando cum
aliter ( mortem propriam Fleta, lib. i. c. 23.) evadere non posset, non tenetur
ad poenam homicidii In which case it is necessary to distinguish whether that
Necessity was avoidable or not; for if it was avoidable and might have been
evaded without Killing, then he shall be guilty of Manslaughter, (i. e. Murder
in those days); but if it was inevitable, for that he killed the man without
(any) prepence of hatred, (but) in fear and grief of Mind, in delivering
himself and his own, when otherwise he could not escape, he shall not, (in such
case) be held (or be liable) to the penalty of Murder.
. Bract. lib. iii. c. 4. And Staunford remarks, that the necessity ought to be
so great, that it ought to be esteemed inevitable, or otherwise it shall not be
excused; so that the whole matter consists (says he) in the inevitable
necessity, without which the killing is by no means excusable Nota que la
necessite doit etre cy graunde; que il doit estre existime inevitable, ou
autrement il n'excusera, etc. eins tout la matier consist in le inevitable
necessite, sans quel, le tuer n'est ascun voi excusable. Staunford, P. C. lib.
i. c. 7.
so that the learned Judge Foster certainly goes too far, when he insinuates,
in the passage before cited, that an assault upon the person (without
mentioning the necessary exception concerning inevitable Necessity) is a
provocation sufficient to free the party killing from the guilt of murder. For
a farther distinction (besides that of inevitable necessity) is also to be
observed, which is very accurately laid down, even by judge Foster himself, in
p. 291, though the same would be useless, if an assault upon the person was to
be admitted as a sufficient provocation to the act of killing. It ought to be
remembered (says he) that in all other cases of homicide upon slight
provocation But I have already shown that no provocation whatever can justify a
voluntary or wilful killing.
, if it may be reasonably collected from the weapon made use of, or from any
other circumstance, that the Party intended to kill, or to do some great bodily
harm, such Homicide will be Murder. The mischief done is irreparable, and the
outrage is considered as flowing rather from brutal rage or diabolical
malignity, than from human frailty. And it is to human frailty, and to that
alone, the Law indulgeth in every case of felonious Homicide.

The first instance which he gives by way of illustration to this doctrine is
cited from Judge Hale, vol. i. p. 473. If A. come into the wood of B. and pull
his hedges, or cut his wood, and B. beat him, whereof he dies, this is
manslaughter, because, though it was not lawful for A. to cut the wood, it was
not lawful for B. to beat him, but either to bring him to a Justice of Peace,
or punish him otherwise according to law. But here Lord Hale is not
sufficiently distinct in stating the case; because circumstances are wanting,
which are necessary for the determination of such a case, whether it ought to
be esteemed manslaughter or murder. The accurate Judge Foster was sensible of
this want of necessary circumstances, and therefore adds, But it must be
understood (says he) that he beat him, not with a mischievous intention, but
merely to chastise him for the trespass, and to deter him from committing the
like. For if he had knocked his brains out with a bill or hedgestake, or had
given him an outrageous beating with an ordinary cudgel beyond the bounds of a
sudden resentment, whereof he had died, It had been Murder. For these
circumstances are some of the genuine symptoms of the Mala Men's, the heart bent
upon mischief, which, as I have already shown, enter into the true notion of
Malice in the legal sense of the word. P. 291.

The next instance he mentions is that of the parker tying the boy to his
horse's tail. Which was (says he) held to be murder. For it was a deliberate
act, and savoured of cruelty. But the third instance, viz. that of Stedman the
soldier killing a woman with a sword (which Judge Foster mentions as a case
that was held clearly to be no more than manslaughter) was, most certainly,
wilful murder: for though it appeared that the woman had struck the soldier on
the face with an iron patten; yet she afterward fled from him, and he pursuing
her, stabbed her in the back.

Now if such a case of wilful killing is to be esteemed only manslaughter, it
entirely perverts the just arguments already quoted from the same author
concerning the cases wherein human frailty deserves to be indulged! May I not
use his own words against him? That "these circumstances" (the pursuing, and
stabbing the woman in the back) are some of the genuine symptoms of the mala
men's, the heart bent upon mischief. Whereas, if he had struck her merely with
his fist, or with a small stick not likely to kill, and had unluckily, and
against his intention, killed, it had been but manslaughter. For this is the
necessary distinction for which I contend in all cases of killing where the
striking (not the killing) is voluntary: and I cannot so well express my
meaning as in the words of Judge Foster himself, though that sensible and acute
reasoner is afterward misled from the truth of his own doctrine, by paying too
much regard (I mean an indiscriminate regard) to the practice of the Courts,
which, in this point, has frequently been erroneous.

In page 290, after the 1st section (already quoted) concerning the
circumstances, which are not a provocation sufficient to free the Party Killing
from the Guilt of Murder, he adds, This rule will, I conceive (says he) govern
every case where the Party Killing upon such provocation makes use of a deadly
weapon, or otherwise manifests an intention to kill, or to do some some great
bodily harm. But if he had given the other a box on the ear, or had struck him
with a stick or other weapon not likely to kill, and had unluckily and against
his intention killed, it had been but manslaughter. The difference between the
cases is plainly this. In the former, the malitia, the wicked vindictive
disposition already mentioned, evidently appears: in the latter it is as
evidently wanting. The Party, in the first transport of his passion, intended
to chastise for a piece of insolence which few spirits can bear. In this case
the benignity of the law interposeth in favor of human frailty; in the other
its justice regards and punishes the apparent malignity of the heart. P. 290
and 291.

Nevertheless, the same author, in p. 296, endeavors to excuse killing in
sudden rencounters, without preserving this necessary distinction concerning
"the use of a deadly weapon," and the intention to kill.

To what I have offered (says he) with regard to sudden rencounters, let me
add, that the blood, already too much heated, kindles afresh at every pass or
blow. And in the tumult of the passions, in which mere instinct
self-preservation, has no inconsiderable share, the voice of reason is not
heard. And therefore the law, in condescension to the infirmities of flesh and
blood, has extenuated the offense. But the Law, in reality, makes no such
condescension, though the Courts of Law have, indeed, indiscriminately done so,
and have occasioned a multitude of bad precedents, wherein wilful murder has
been excused under the name of manslaughter; and this unhappy difference
between the Law, and the corrupt practice of the Courts, with respect to this
point, has unwarily led the more modern writers on crown-law into concessions,
which are absolutely contradictory to the just doctrines laid down in other
parts of their excellent works.

When I speak of such respectable and justly revered authors as Sir Edward
Coke, Sir Matthew Hale, Lord Chief Justice Holt, etc. No person can conceive
that I am misled by personal or party prejudice against their opinions; and as
I have, really, the highest esteem and veneration for their memory, not only as
great and learned lawyers, but as true patriots, and, above all, as sincere
Christians, and worthy honest men, I should not presume to controvert any point
that has been laid down by such excellent lawyers (so accomplished as above)
was I not armed by their own authority; for no other authority is sufficiently
authentic for the purpose of correcting such deservedly esteemed writers;
though I must acknowledge my obligation to the more ancient writers for the
discovery of the errors of which I complain.

The proper distinction to be observed between murder and manslaughter is well
laid down by Sir Matthew Hale. "Murder" (says he) being aggravated with malice
presumed or implied, but manslaughter Not. 1 Hale's P. C. 466 See also the
Statute 52 Hen. 3. c. 25. made at Marlbridge, A. D. 1267. -- Title. What kind
of Manslaughter shall be adjudged Murder. Murder from henceforth shall not be
judged before our justices, where it is found misfortune only, but it shall
take place in such as are slain by felony, and not otherwise.
.

This rule is good and unexceptionable; and therefore it must appear, that even
Sir Matthew Hale himself is mistaken in the paragraph preceding this quotation,
where he says that Manslaughter, or simple homicide, is the voluntary killing
of another without malice express or implied: for though there may be a
voluntary striking without malice, yet I hope I have already proved, that there
cannot be a voluntary killing without malice express or implied, except in the
legal execution of justice, and in the case of self-defence and its several
branches, which some writers (rather improperly have, indeed, called voluntary
Lambard's Eirenarcha 255. Sir Edward Coke's 3 Inst. p. 55 and 56.
though they proceed from an inevitable necessity See the note in page 4.
Nevertheless even the great Sir Edward Coke (and before him the learned
Lambard in his Eirenarcha, p. 250.) was guilty of this same impropriety of
expression. "Some manslaughters" (says Sir Edward Coke, 3 Inst. cap. viii. p.
55.) be voluntary, and not of malice forethought, upon some sudden falling out.
Delinquens per iram provocatus puniri debet mitius He who, provoked by anger,
offends, ought to be more mildly punished.
And this for distinction sake (says he) is called manslaughter. But it is a
very indiscriminate distinction (if I may use such an expression concerning the
writings of so great a man,) because the maxim "Delinquens per iram," etc. can
only be admitted in case where the malice is neither express nor implied: for
instance, when the Striking is voluntary; but the Killing, or Manslaughter, is
involuntary, and unexpected; as when a man, in sudden anger, gives an unlucky
blow merely with his fist, or with a small stick, or small stone, See judge
Foster's comment on Rowley's case, wherein the difference of striking with a
dangerous weapon, and with a small stick, or cudgel not likely to destroy, is
well expressed, pages 294 and 295. I have always thought Rowley's case (says
he) a very extraordinary one, as it is reported by Coke, from whom Hale cites
it. The son fights with another boy and is beaten; he runs home to his father
all bloody; the father takes a staff, runs three quarters of a mile, and beats
the other boy, who dies of this beating. This is said to have been ruled
manslaughter, because done in sudden heat and passion, (for which he cites 12
Rep. 87. and 1 Hale 453) "Surely" (continues judge Foster) the provocation was
not very grievous. The boy had fought with one who happened to be an overmatch
for him, and was worsted; a disaster slight enough, and very frequent among
boys. If upon this provocation the father, after running three quarters of a
mile, had set his strength against the child, had dispatched him with an
bedgestake or any other deadly weapon, or by repeated blows with his cudgel, it
must, in my opinion, have been murder; since any of these circumstances would
have been a plain indication of the malitia, that mischievous vindictive motive
before explained. But with regard to these circumstances, with what weapon, or
to what degree the child was beaten, Coke is totally silent. But Croke sets
the case in a much clearer light, and at the same time leads his readers into
the true grounds of the judgment. His words are, Rowley struck the child with a
small cudgel (God-bolt calls it a rod, meaning, I suppose, a small wand) of
which stroke he afterward died. I think it may be fairly collected from
Croke's manner of speaking, that the accident happened by a single stroke with
a cudgel not likely to destroy, and that death did not immediately ensue. The
stroke was given in heat of blood, and not with any of the circumstances which
import the malitia, the malignity of the heart attending the fact already
explained, and therefore Manslaughter. I observe that Lord Raymond lays great
stress on this circumstance, That the Stroke was with a Cudgel not likely to
Kill.
(meaning only to correct) which, undesignedly, occasions death; for, in such
cases, the malice is not implied; whereas, in a voluntary homicide, even a
Malice prepensed is implied, according to Sir Edward Coke's own definition of
that term, viz. "That it is voluntary, and of set purpose, though it be done
upon a Sudden Occasion: for if it be Voluntary, the law implies Malice, 3
Inst. c. xiii. p. 62. -- Sir William Blackstone has also fallen into the same
error in his 4th vol. chap. xiv. p. 191. where he informs us that Manslaughter
is the unlawful killing of another, without malice either express or implied:
which may be either voluntarily upon a sudden heat; or involuntarily, but in
the commission of some unlawful act. In both of which he is also mistaken; for,
with respect to the latter, his doctrine cannot be admitted, except in cases
where the circumstances of the unlawful act amount only to a bare trespass
Which he himself elsewhere allows. Judge Foster in his second discourse of
homicide, p. 258. where he treats of involuntary homicide in the commission of
an unlawful act, informs us, that if it be done in the prosecution of a
felonious intention it will be Murder, but if the intent went no farther than
to commit a bare trespass, Manslaughter, Though I confess (say he) Lord Coke
seems to think otherwise. That is, Lord Coke did not even make an allowance
for " a bare trespass," but seems to have been of opinion, That every case of
involuntary homicide is to be treated as Murder, whenever the act which
occasions death may be esteemed unlawful. See 3 Inst. p. 56. to which judge
Foster refers. But that learned judge could not mean, that he differed in
opinion from Lord Coke concerning the first case there stated under the head of
unlawful, viz. the unlawful shooting at a deer, whereby a boy was killed by the
glance of the arrow; because that case must necessarily be esteemed Murder
according to judge Foster's own rule abovementioned; for Lord Coke has clearly
stated a felonious intention, viz. A. meaning to steal a deer in the park of B.
etc. It must therefore appear, that he refers only to the 2d case, there
mentioned, of a man shooting at a cock or hen, or any tame fowl of another
man's; for a person might wantonly shoot at another man's pigeons, or poultry,
without any intention to steal them; which, I conceive, would amount, to no
more than a bare trespass in judge Foster's sense of the word; because voluntas
et propositum distinguunt maleficia; furtum vero non committitur sine affectu
furandi Fleta, lib. i. c. 33. p. 48. Whereas if Lord Coke had added, in the
supposed case, that there was an intention to steal the tame fowl, Judge Foster
could not, reasonably, have dissented from his opinion; because the crime must
necessarily have been adjudged Murder according to his own rule; for the very
same case has been so laid down by Lord Chief Justice Holt in a very clear
manner, (see pages 56 and 57 of this tract) in order to explain Lord Coke's
assertion; though Judge Holt himself is, as apparently, mistaken in his
Judgment of the other Case wherein the occasion was an intention to steal a
Deer, which is, at least, as felonious as the intention of stealing a Hen, that
is, if the Deer be tame and enclosed in a Park (as stated by Lord Coke) by
which the property is rendered apparent: but if the case had been stated that
the Deer was in a Forest or open chase, the offense (without the accident)
would be only a Trespass, (See Hawkins P. C. Book i. c. xxxiii. 26); and the
idea of this latter position may probably, have occasioned Lord Holt's mistake;
for this circumstance would have rendered the accidental Killing of the Boy,
only Manslaughter, agreeable to his opinions. Compare pages 54 and 57, wherein
Lord Holt's opinions of these two Cases are mentioned.


For I propose, in the course of this tract, to mention several allowed cases,
on good authority, wherein even the involuntary or undesigned killing is not
deemed manslaughter, but murder, when the acts, which occasioned death, were
unlawful: and, with the respect to the former, it is a manifest inconsistency,
in all these great writers, to rank voluntary killing under the head of
manslaughter, in the modern confined sense of that once general term; because a
voluntary killing (except in the case of self-defence, through inevitable
necessity, which some writers have, rather improperly, called voluntary
Lambard's Eirenarcha 255. "The last member (says he) of voluntary homicide is
where one man kills another in his own defense, etc." and Sir Edward Coke,
speaking of self-defence in 3 Inst. p. 55 and 56, says, "this is voluntary, and
yet no felony." Sir Matthew Hale is more accurate; for when he speaks of
homicide ex necessitate, he informs us that this necessity makes the homicide
not simply voluntary, but mixed, partly voluntary and partly involuntary, and
is of two kinds, etc. 1 vol. 478.
) is certainly the same thing as a wilful killing; and either of them must be
allowed to be the proper definition of what we now understand by the term
Murder (though the meaning of that word was, originally, very different. See le
Mirroir de justice, 1642, c. i. sect. xiii. p. 104. and Lambard's Eirenarcha,
c. vii. p. 239.) because, in a voluntary or wilful killing, malice is
necessarily implied; and, consequently, voluntary killing is excluded from the
favor due to manslaughter by the rule which these learned writers themselves
admit, viz. that manslaughter is without out malice express or implied; so that
they are really guilty of a contradiction in terms; because the malice, or
intention of killing, is undeniable, if the killing be voluntary And where a
man does any cruel and voluntary act whereby death ensues, it is murder, though
done of a sudden. See a little book dedicated to Lord Bathurst in 1724,
entitled, The Laws of Liberty and Property, p. 67.
: and therefore, as it is a maxim that Allegans contraria non est audiendus
(Jenk. Cent. fo. 16.) I am compelled to reject the definition of manslaughter
given by these learned writers, as far as it is contradictory to to that
excellent rule, already cited, for the distinction of manslaughter from murder,
which they themselves admit, viz. that manslaughter is without malice express
or implied.

The errors, of which I complain, were not originally occasioned by these
celebrated authors, but by a previous corrupt practice in the courts, which had
been introduced by degrees, and at last unhappily prevailed, through a false
idea of mercy and consideration for sudden anger; and also through the want of
preserving the proper distinction of cases, wherein manslaughter in sudden
anger is really excusable. The proper distinction to be observed is, when the
intention of killing is not necessarily impiled in the act itself; as when a
man strikes another merely with his hand, in sudden anger; or thrusts him
suddenly from him, whereby he falls and receives a hurt, which occasions death;
in these, and similar cases, the striking, or thrusting is, indeed, voluntary,
yet the killing, or manslaughter, is not so, but entirely undesigned and
unexpected; which proper and necessary distinction the Law Commentators have
unhappily neglected. For, though the act of striking or thrusting in anger
bears some resemblance to malice, and though such an act is certainly unlawful
in itself, yet it is reasonable to make some allowance for the frailty of human
nature, and the sudden passion of a man that is provoked, whenever a more
criminal malice is not necessarily impiled in the act itself, which occasions
death. And in this lenity we are justified by the laws of God, whereby such
cases of manslaughter in sudden anger, as I have mentioned, were excused
without any other penalty than that of banishment to a city of refuge. If he
thrust The thrusting, here mentioned (which some writers seem to have
misunderstood) does not mean a thrust with a sword or other weapon; for the
word (...) has no such meaning, but properly signifies a violent thrusting or
shoving away, as with the hand; or a sudden driving away, as chaff is drove
before the wind, as Bythner remarks, "Proprie dicitur de vento, qui rapta
prosequitur." Lyra prophetica, p. 6.
him suddenly(...)without enmity Here a proper distinction is preserved between
sudden anger and enmity.
((...) Numb. xxxv. 22.) -- the congregation shall restore him to the city of
his refuge, etc. v. 25.) Yet the very same action, if done in hatred, ((...)
see the 20th verse) and even a blow with the hand in enmity, ((...) see the
21st verse, apparently meaning, when there was an express proof of malice, or
intention to kill,) were to be deemed unpardonable; "he shall surely die."

But, it is remarkable, that these are the only two cases wherein an express
proof of malice was required; for in all the examples given in the same chapter
of killing with a weapon, or with a stone wherewith a man may die, (meaning
such a stone as from its shape or size might be deemed a sufficient weapon to
occasion death) there is not the least mention made of malice ((...) Hatred, or
(...) Enmity) which is a sufficient proof that the same were necessarily
implied from the stroke, when given with a weapon; for, in that case, the
command was peremptory. If he smite him with an instrument of iron, so that he
die, he is a murderer ((...) Retsch, or Killer, perhaps from thence the English
word wretch) "the murderer The Word Murder was anciently understood in the same
general sense, as the Hebrew (...) to kill; so that Judge Foster is mistaken
when he says (p. 307.) that our oldest writers made use of the term murder in a
very narrow limited sense. The Sense was afterward, indeed, restrained to
hidden manslaughter, whereof the author was not known; but in later times it
was, still once more, changed to the sense in which it is at present
understood, viz. that of wilful manslaughter, wherein "malice prepensed" is
either express, or implied. See Lambard 2 Book c.vii. p. 239 and 240. In old
time (says he) every killing of one man by another, was (of the effect) called
murder, because death ensued of it. For (as Postellus notes) of the Hebrew
word Moth came the Latin Mors and thereof our elders (the Saxons) called (...)
and (...), as we now sound it. Afterward (about the time of M. Bracton) murder
was restrained to a secret killing only: and therefore he, in the definition of
murder says, that it is occulta occisio, etc. with whom Britton agrees also.
But since the statute (14 Edw. III.c. 4. by which the presentment of
Englesherie was taken away) Murder is taken in a middle degree, neither so
largely as it first was, nor so narrowly as it afterward became to be. For
Murder is now construed to be, where one man of malice prepensed kills
another feloniously, that lives within the realm under the protection of the
queen, whether it be openly or privilie, and whether the party slain be
English or alien. And then he proceeds to show that the "malice prepensed" may
be either apparent, or implied.
shall surely be put to death: (v. 16.) the same also, if he smote him with a
stone wherewith he may die,) or with an hand weapon of wood. But in none of
these cases is there the least mention of malice; which was, therefore, most
certainly implied: and the congregation (to which our trials per Pares are in
some degree similar) were to judge "according to these judgments;" see 24th
verse. For the slayer was not to die, until he stood before the congregation in
judgment; see 12th verse: and then, if it did not appear, that the killing was
at unawares ((...) in error) see 11th verse, or, as the same meaning is
expressed in different words in Deuteronomy. xix. 4. (...) ignorantly, or without
knowledge (agreeable to the example, there laid down, for all other cases of
mere misfortune As when a man goes into the wood with his neighbor, to hew
wood, and his hand fetches a stroke with the ax to cut down the tree, and the
head slippeth from the helve, and lights upon his neighbor, that he die,
etc. (Deuteronomy. xix. 5.) or as it may, rather, be rendered, the iron glanceth from
the tree, (...) and finds his neighbor, that he die; which corresponds, in
some measure, with that less explicit case mentioned in Exodus xxi. 13. where
God is said to deliver, him into his hand, or rather, to make him meet his
hand, as Mr. Haak translated it in 1657; as if a man should accidentally come
in the way of a stroke that was aimed at some other object: for as God is the
Lord of life and death, whose Providence is over all his works, the scripture
teaches us to ascribe to him all such events, as in common phrase, are called
accidental. (Dr. Dodd) and so Castalio translates the passage. "In eum
fortefortuna incurrerit;" which he further explains in a note as follows: In
Hebraeo est, Deus ejus manui injecerit. Sed Deus pro fortuna Hebraice ideo
dicitur, quod quae putant homines casu fieri, utpote quae non praeviderint, ea
Dei providentia fiunt, cui nihil fortuitum esse potest. etc. The learned Seldom
(who was most deservedly esteemed for his knowledge in the laws both of God and
men) supposed also that the text in Exodus xxi. 13. might relate to involuntary
homicide; and he accordingly refers to it from his first division of that head,
Prima est quando (...) ex errore and ignorantia simplici atque infortunio, nec
tamen sine culpa levi ex negligentia aliqua, qualem prudentiores seu
cordatiores sugerent, contracta, omnino interea nolens quis hominem occiderat;
juxta illud in lege sacra (Exodus xxi. 13.) Qui non est insidiatus, sed Deus
tradidit illum in manum ejus, ponam tibi locum quo confugiat. (1 Tom. Tract. de
Jure Naturali and Gentium, cap. ii. de homicidio involuntario, seu quod casu
sactum ac errore, etc.)
) the malice was presumed from the weapon with which the stroke was made; for
the hatred(...) and enmity (...) were never enquired after in any cases where a
wilful stroke was given with "an instrument of iron," or a weapon of wood, or
even with "a stone (wherewith a man may die)" that is, if it were such a stone
as was apparently capable of occasioning the death of a man (see Numb. xxxv.
16. to 19.) all which crimes were unpardonable by the law of God; "he shall
surely die."

And the Levitical Law is, certainly, in this point, still binding, even under
the dispensation of the gospel; because the reason and justice of it still
subsists, as in other moral laws.

So that the allowance usually made for sudden anger, when the blow is given
with a weapon, is so far from deserving the name of "a proper distinction in
the crime of killing," (as some contend) that it is apparently founded in a
want of that proper distinction, which the laws of God and reason require,
concerning cases of manslaughter, wherein sudden anger is really excusable;
which can only be when the killing is not voluntary, or, at least, the
intention of killing not apparent; as in the cases beforementioned of a man
striking another merely with his hand, See a case supposed by Judge Holt in his
edition of Kelyng's Reports, 131. Regina versus Mawgridge. Suppose (says he)
upon provoking language given by B. to A. A. gives B. a box on the ear, or a
little blow with a stick, which happens to be so unlucky that it kills B. who
might have some imposthume in his head, or other ailment, which proves the
cause of his death; this blow, though not justisiable by law, but is a wrong,
yet it may be but manslaughter, because it does not appear that he designed
such a mischief,
or fist, in sudden anger; or the sudden thrusting See the case of Thompson and
Daws, cited by Lord Chief Justice Holt, in the case Rex versus Plumer, (Kelyng,
p. 115.) Thompson thrust away Daws, and threw him down upon an iron in the
chimney, which broke one of his ribs, of which he died; this, upon a special
verdict, was held to be only manslaughter, though the peace was broke, and the
person slain came only to keep the peace; and it is the same if he had been
constable, that is, if he did not declare his intention, (as it is afterward
explained) and charge the offending parties, in the king's name to keep the
peace. This case is properly excuscable manslaughter, because it did not appear
that the killing was voluntary, though the " thrusting away" was voluntary; and
therefore the malice, or intention, was neither express nor implied, as in
murder.
a man down, by which he is hurt in falling, so that death unexpectedly ensues.
In these and similar cases the malice or the intention of killing is not
necessarily implied in the action itself; and, therefore, if all the other
circumstances are also free from premeditated malice and laying in wait, the
law has reserved a reasonable use of an unreasonable popish indulgence, called
The Benefit of Clergy, to relieve the undesigning manslayer (if the occasion
was not unlawful) from the too great severity of the common law; for in such
cases we may safely admit Sir Edward Coke's maxim, Delinquens per iram
provocatus puniri debet mitius, 3 Inst. 55. "He who, provoked by anger,
offends, ought to be more mildly punished."


But a false idea of mercy, and consideration for sudden anger unhappily
prevailing in the Courts, this lenity was indiscriminately extended even to
cases where the prepensed malice was necessarily implied by the stroke; so that
the wretch, who stabbed his neighbor in brutal anger, escaped with impunity,
to the scandal of public justice. The bad effects of this false mercy, and
injustice, became so notorious in the reign of King James I. that the
legislature was obliged to seek a remedy; and a statute was then made (1 Jac.
I. c. 8.) by which the benefit of clergy was taken away from the offense of
mortally stabbing another, though done upon sudden provocation. Judge
Blackstone's Com. b. 4. c. xiv. p. 193. But unfortunately this remedy proved
almost as indiscriminate as the abuse intended to be corrected by it; for it
takes no notice of any other crime than that of stabbing; as if sudden anger
was not equally criminal, when a man is killed "by throwing a hammer or other
weapon;" or by a shot with a pistol. Ibid. p. 194. Whereas, in truth, no new
law was wanted: nothing but a better administration of the old laws
beforementioned; for, in all such furious sallies of sudden anger, the malice
was necessarily implied, or presumed, from the weapon, as well in the laws of
God (which I have already shown) as in the law of nations: -- " Ex telo
praesumitur malum consilium (says the learned Grotius) nisi contrarium
appareat. From the weapon the evil intention is presumed, unless the contrary
should appear.
And in his second book, de Jure Belli and Pacis, he remarks, "that either
iron, a club, or a stone, comes under the denomination of a weapon. Teli autem
nomine ferrum, fustis, and lapis venit, c. i. p. 175.

The reason of the severity in the divine law, against striking with a weapon,
is well expressed by Dr. Wells in his paraphrase on Numbers xxxv. 16 to 19.
Forasmuch (says he) as though he might have no malice to him beforehand, yet
his striking him with a sword, or hatchet, etc. shows he had an intention to do
him mischief; and, as another writer remarks though perhaps he had no formed
intention to kill the person; yet he ought to have moderated his passion, and
could not be ignorant that such an instrument was capable of inflicting a
deadly wound,

And, therefore, when a man is killed with a weapon (except it be by
misfortune, or in self-defence Regularly, it is necessary that, the person,
that kills another in his own defense, fly as far as he may to avoid the
violence of the assault before he turn upon his assailant; for though in cases
of hostility between two nations it is a reproach and piece of cowardice to fly
from an enemy, yet in cases of assaults and affrays between subjects under the
same law, the law owns not any such point of honor, because the king and his
laws are to be vindices injuriarum, and private persons are not trusted to take
capital revenge one of another. 1 Hale, p. 481.
, when the Slayer could retire no further to save himself without striking; or
else in such lawful and reasonable cases, wherein a man is not obliged to give
back; as in the case of a peace officer If a jailer be assaulted by his
prisoner, or if the Sheriff or his Minister be assaulted in the execution of
his office, he is not bound to give back to the wall, but if he kill the
assailant, it is in law adjudged sedefendendo, though he gave not back to the
wall. The like of a constable or watchman, etc. 1 Hale, p. 481. For which he
quotes Co. P. C. p. 56. 9. Co. Rep. 66. b. Machally's case.
who is assaulted in his duty; or when any other man endeavors to keep the
peace Ou il purra dire que il le tua en defendaunt nostre pees, etc. Britton,
p. 44. b.
or to save another person from violence and oppression For it is the duty of
every man to interpose in such cases, for preserving the public peace, and
preventing mischief. Foster, p. 272. for which he refers to Stanf. 13. and 2
Inst. 52. And in the latter place there are several cafes mentioned wherein a
private person may lawfully interfere by warrant in law without writ. -- Lord
Hale also allows, that every man is bound to use all possible lawful means to
prevent a felony, as well as to take the felon, and if he does not, he is
liable to a fine and imprisonment, therefore if B. and C. be at strife, A. a
bystander, is to use all lawful means that he may, without hazard of himself,
to part them, etc. -- If A. be traveling, and B. comes to rob him, if C. falls
into the company, he may kill B. in desence of A. and therefore much more, if
he come to kill him, and such his intent be apparent; for in such case of a
felony attempted, as well as of a felony committed, every man is thus far an
officer, that, at least, his killing of the attempter in case of necessity,
puts him in the condition of se defendendo in defending his neighbor. 1 Hale,
p. 484 and 485. Ou il purra dire que tout fist il le fait, nequedent ne le fist
il mye par felony purpense, mes par necessite soy defendaunt, ou sa femme, ou
sa meason, ou sa meyne, ou son seigniour, ou sa dame de la mort, etc. Britton,
p. 44. b. -- And again, ei qui just possidet, licitum erit cum armis contra
pacem venientem ut expellat, cum armis repellere, ut per arma tuitionis et
pacis, quae sunt justitiae, repellat injuriam, et vim injustam, et arma
injuriae: sed tamen cum talis discretionis moderamine, quod injuriam non
committat, non enim poterit sub tali pretextu hominem interficere, vulnerare,
vel male tractare, si alio modo suam tueri possit possessionem. Ei igitur qui
vult viribus uti, erit viribus viriliter resistendum cum armis vel sine, juxta
illud. Cum fortis armatus, etc. Bract. l. 4. c. 4. 162. b.
; or a woman A woman in defense of her chastity may lawfully kill a person
attempting to commit a rape upon her. The injury intended can never be repaired
or forgotten, etc. Foster 274.
in the necessary defense of chastity; or when any person resists the attack of
a Robber Thorp dit que chescun home peut prender larons, et s'ils ne voilent
soi render, mes estoient al defens ou fuont; in tiel cas il les peut occire
sans blame. Staundford, p. 13, Also, If a thief assault a true man, either
abroad or in his house, to rob or kill him, the true man is not bound to give
back, but may kill the assailant, and it is not felony. 1 Hale, p. 481. for
which he quotes Co. P. C. p. 56. -- But this rule is subject to just
restrictions; for even a thief is not to be killed but through necessity, "Si
alio modo suam tueri possit possessionem, etc. See the preceding quotation from
Bracton. -- Judge Hale, indeed, seems to think that a thief may lawfully be
killed, if he cannot otherwise be taken. If a person (says he) be indicted of
felony, and flies, or being arrested by warrant or process of law upon such
indictment, escapes and flies, and will not render himself, whereupon the
officer or minister cannot take him without killing of him, this is not felony,
etc. But if he may be taken without such severity, it is at least manslaughter
in him that kills him: therefore the jury is to enquire whether it were done of
necessity or not. 1 Hale 489. for which he cites 3 E. 3. Coron 288.22 Assiz.
55. Stamf. P. C. lib. 1. cap. 5. fol. 13, b. But this doctrine requires some
further restriction; for the necessity of taking a thief, or retaking a
prisoner, or that of executing a civil writ is not so great as to justify
killing when the person endeavors to escape merely by flight; the Necessity
can only be founded in his resistance, from which no man is bound to give back:
and this will appear by Lord Hale's own words in another place, viz. But if the
prisoner makes no resistance, but flies, yet the officer, either for fear that
he or some other of his party will rescue the prisoner, strikes the prisoner,
whereof he dies, this is murder, for here was no assault first made by the
prisoner, and so it cannot be se defendendo in the officer. -- And again, If a
man be in danger of arrest by a capias in debt or trespass, and he flies, and
the bailiff kills him, it is murder, etc. 1 Hales 481. The same point is still
more accurately explained by Judge Foster, chap. 2. p. 271. I rather choose to
say (says he) it will be murder or manslaughter, as circumstances may vary the
case. For if the officer in the heat of the pursuit, and merely in order to
overtake the defendant, should trip up his heels, or give him a stroke with an
ordinary cudgel, or other weapon, not likely to kill, and death should
unhappily ensue, I cannot think that this will amount to more than
manslaughter, if in some cases even to that offense. The blood was heated in
the pursuit, his prey, a lawful prey, just within his reach, and no signal
mischief was intended. But had he made use of a Deadly Weapon, (here is the
proper distinction for which I contend) it would have amounted to Murder. The
mischievous vindictive spirit, the Malitia, I have already explained, which
always must be collected from circumstances, determines the nature of the
offense.


) I say, excepting these, and similar cases, if a man wilfully strikes another
with a weapon in sudden anger, the design of killing is, by "the weapon,
rendered express, as I have before observed, though the prepensed malice may,
perhaps, more properly (upon a sudden provocation) be said to be implied; and
it, certainly, is implied or presumed in law, though the sudden anger was but a
moment before the fatal stroke I would willingly except from this rule (If I
may be allowed to do so) that sudden anger, which of all others, is most
deserving of indulgence and privilege, as being incited by the most atrocious
injury and affront, that one man can possibly receive from another; so far does
it surpass in villainy every other act of injustice and dishonesty; I mean the
case of a husband taking the Adulterer in the manner: to this case alone (as
Lord Bacon informs us) the ancient Roman law restrained the privilege of
passion to that rage and provocation only, (says he) it gave way, that it was
an homicide (which) was justifiable. But for a difference to be made (adds the
learned Chancellor) in case of killing and destroying man upon a fore thought
purpose (as in the case of duelling) between foul and fair, and as it were
between single murder and vyed murder; it is but a monstrous child of this
latter age, and there is no shadow of it in any law, Divine or Human!
; so that, if no proof can be produced by the prisoner, of an inevitable
necessity, as in se defendendo, the act must, in reason and justice, be deemed
"wilful murder of malice prepensed," such as was sufficiently excluded from the
benefit of clergy by two express acts of parliament (23 Hen. VIII.c. i. and 1
Edw. VI.c.xii.) previous to the undistinguishing act of James I. against
stabbing.

By an act of the 2 Edw. III. it was ordained that a charter of pardon shall
not be granted, but only where the king may do it by his oath This Statute was
confirmed and enforced by two subsequent statutes of the same reign (10 Ed. 3.
c. 2. and 14 Ed. 3. c. 15.) in the plainest terms that words are capable of
expressing; yet were they not sufficient to root up the disloyal practice of
pardoning murderers: for in the following reign, King Richard the II. (as if in
preparation to his own destruction) paid so little regard to these just and
necessary laws, that in the parliament of his 13th year, the Commons made
grievous complaint see 13 R. 2. St. 2.) of the outrageous mischiefs and damages
which have happened to his said realm, for that Treasons, Murders, and Rapes of
Women be commonly done and committed, and the more because charters of pardon
have been easily granted in such cases; and the said Commons requested quested
our Lord the King, that such charters might not be granted. The three former
Statutes were then, as they still are, unrepealed, and no subsequent Statute
had at that time been made, that could possibly be construed to affect them, or
abate their force, so that the King's disloyalty in granting such prohibited
charters was notorious; and his answer to the Commons was not less disloyal
than his practice, viz. That he will save his liberty and regality as his
progenitors have done heretofore. Richard, however, consented to admit some
considerable limitation of his pretended prerogative in pardoning murder. See 2
stat. c. 1. whereby it is ordained, that no charter of pardon from henceforth
shall be allowed FOR MURDER, or for the death of a man slain by await, assault,
or malice prepensed, Treason or Rape of a Woman, unless the same murder, etc.
be specified in the same charter. On a slight view, the word "UNLESS" may seem,
by a negative implication, to admit the allowance of a charter of pardon for
murder; but Sir Edward Coke has remarked upon it, that the intention of the
said act of 13 R. 2. was NOT that the King should grant a pardon for murder, by
express name in the charter; but because the whole Parliament conceived, that
he would never pardon Murder by special name for the causes aforesaid,
therefore was that provision made, which was grounded (says he) upon the Law of
God, Quicunque effuderit humanum sanguinem, fundetur sanguis illius; ad
imaginem quippe Dei creatus est Homo. NEC ALITER EXPIARI POTEST NISI PER EJUS
SANGUINEM qui alterius sanguinem effuderit. (Genesis 9.6. Number. 35.33.) So that
this learned Lawyer really resolves THE INTENTION OF THE SAID ACT into the
doctrine of the Divine Law, for which I contend, viz. "that blood" (i. e.
wilful murder) cannot be expiated but by the blood of the guilty. And happily
the Act seems also to have been effectual to accomplish that intention; for the
learned Judge Blackstone, after citing Sir Edward Coke's opinion, that it was
NOT THE INTENTION of the Parliament, that the King should ever PARDON MURDER
under these aggravations etc. adds, "and it is remarkable enough" (says he)
that there is NO PRECEDENT OF A PARDON in the register for any homicide than
that which happens SE DEFENDENDO, or PER INFORTUNIUM. And with respect to the
determination of the Court of K. B. cited by Salkeld 499, that the King may
pardon on an indictment of murder, as well as the subject may discharge an
appeal; I observe, that the force of the learned Judge Holt's argument for that
doctrine, rests on the repeal (in 16 R. 2. c. 6.) of the restrictions, and
great difficulties which are put upon those that shall be suitors for a pardon
of murder in this Act of 13 R. 2. which (said he) were found GRIEVOUS TO THE
SUBJECT: But that worthy and upright Judge would have acted on this point more
like himself, if he had previously examined the nature of the supposed
grievance, whereby he would have known, whether it was really true and just, or
only fained? For if the alleged "grievance to the subject" was only an unjust
suggestion, the whole Statute of Repeal, as far as relates to this point is
null and void for the want of truth, as well as for being contrary to the 2d
foundation of English law, "for contra veritatem nihil possumus:" and again
"contraveritatem lex nunquam aliquid permittit". (2 Inst. 252 Plowden, etc.)
But above all, the FATAL END of King Richard II. should warn and deter all
future Monarchs from presuming to assert a PREROGATIVE TO PARDON MURDER. The
ill-fated Monarch by his ignorance of the nature of Royal Prerogative in a
limited or politic government, prepared the way for his own destruction, not
considering that his regality had no foundation but the law; and that his
neglect of the latter, did necessarily undermine the former, which he
afterward severely experienced when compelled to deliver up both Crown and
Regality with a public confession of his own unworthiness to bear them: And it
is remarkable, that the murders which had increased through his criminal
indulgence, were awefully retalited afterward in his own blood: for, at last,
he was himself, also, most cruelly and wickedly murdered, contrary to the laws
of God and man, as if the blood which he had unjustly refused to cleanse from
the land, and expiate by the blood of the guilty, had fatally rested on his own
head!!!
that is to say, where a man slays another in his own defense, or by
misfortune. Now with respect to the first case, viz. " in his own defense," (or
se defendendo) "all writers, both ancient and modern, agree, that the killing
of a man must be "It must be inevitable necessity." (Pleas of the Crown, 1678,
p. 33.) "upon an inevitable cause." 3d Inst. chap. 8. p. 55 and 56. -- but care
must be taken that the resistance does not exceed the bounds of mere defense
and prevention; for then the defender would himself become an aggressor. 3
Blackstone 4 -- "this is not excuseable se defendendo, since there is no
absolute necessity," -- etc. 4 Blackstone 191. Eins tout la matier consist in
le inevitable necessite, sans quel le tuer n'est Ascun Voi Excusable.
Staunford, P. C. lib. 1. c. 7. -- He must fly so far as he may, and till he
be let by some wall, hedge, etc. -- that his necessity of defense may be
esteemed altogether great and inevitable, etc. Lambard's Eiren. c. 7. p. 256.
See note in p. 41.
inevitable, and that the manstayer must be able to prove, that he retired; and
that he was obliged, ex necessitate, to strike, in order to save his own life;
a plea which cannot be admitted in favor of a Man, who has accepted a
challenge; or who has drawn his sword, in sudden anger, merely to revenge an
affront.

And with respect to the second pardonable case, mentioned in the said act of
Edw. III. viz. by Misfortune, I must observe, that there are some cases of
homicide that may even be said to happen by misfortune, or without intention,
which are, nevertheless, deemed Murder. And the severity of the law, in this
respect, will enable me, by comparison, to point out, more clearly, the
absurdity and injustice of excusing homicide, in consideration of sudden anger,
when the mortal stroke is given with a weapon in rencounters.

The cases of Misfortune or Accident, which are deemed Murder, are those
wherein the act, which undesignedly occasions death, is in itself unlawful For
if the act be unlawful, I mean, if it be Malum in se, the case will amount to
felony, either murder or manslaughter, as circumstances may vary the nature of
it. If it be done in prosecution of a felonious intention, it will be Murder;
but if the intent went no further than to commit a bare trespass, manslaughter.
Judge Foster, p. 258. Though I confess (says he) Lord Coke seems to think
otherwise.
. If the act be unlawful (says Lord Coke) it is murder. As if A. meaning to
steal a deer in the park of B. shoots at the deer, and by the glance of the
arrow kills a boy that is hidden in a bush; this is murder, for that the act
was unlawful, although A. had no intent to hurt the boy, nor knew not of him. 3
Inst. 56. Lord Chief Justice Holt, indeed, says it is but manslaughter; in
which he is mistaken See note in ps. 23, 24 and 25, and Judge Holt's own
opinion on another case quoted in p. 56.
. (See his Edition of Kelyng. Rex versus Plummer, 117.) But whether this be
deemed murder or manslaughter, the killing is merely accidental, or by
misfortune; and, therefore, is certainly a much less crime than that of aiming
at, and striking a man with a weapon, or shooting at him in sudden anger,
howsoever great the previous affront may have been. For, in the former case,
though the shooting at a deer belonging to another person is both unlawful, and
voluntary, yet the manslaughter, which it accidentally occasions, is
involuntary, and without intention; whereas in the voluntary aiming, and
shooting at a man, the act itself is not only unlawful, but implies malice; or
rather, I may say, the malice is expressed by the act; and the sudden anger is
so far from being an excuse, that it is, absolutely, a further proof of the
malice and intention of killing. The malice was also implied in the case of the
Lord Dacres, though his Lordship was not half so criminal in his unlawful
hunting, as the passionate man who strikes with a weapon. See how the case is
mentioned by Lord Chief Justice Kelyng, (Rep. p. 87. published by Judge Holt.)

The Lord Dacres and Mansell, and others in his company came unlawfully to hunt
in a forest Judge Kelynge was mistaken in this point: for the Lord Dacres
probably would not have been treated with such severity, if the Trespass had
been in a Forest or open chase; but it was in a Park belonging to Mr. Pelham in
Surry (Crompton 25.) so that the unlawful Hunting was more than a bare
trespass. See note, p 23, 24, and 25. See also 1 Hawkins, cap. xxxi. 46. where
another ground for the imputation of Murder, in that case, seems to be
assigned, viz. a Resolution of Diverse Persons to resist all opposers in the
commission of a breach of the peace; though it be only, as he calls it, a bare
breach of the peace.
, and being resisted, one of the company, when the Lord Dacres was a great way
off, and not present, killed a man; judged murder in him and all the rest, and
the Lord Dacres was hanged.

Lord Chief Justice Holt supposes a case in his Rep. of Rex versus Plummer, p.
117. in the same book, which is in some degree similar. So (says he) if two men
have a design to steal a hen, and the one shoots at the hen for that purpose,
and a man be killed, it is murder in both, because the design was felonious.
See also the last paragraph of p. 56.3 Inst. concerning the shooting at a tame
fowl, of which this case, supposed by Judge Holt, is an explanation. But surely
the design must be much more felonious when a man wilfully strikes his
neighbor with a weapon in sudden anger; because this must necessarily be
allowed to be an act committed felleo animo, with a fell, furious, and
mischievous mind and intent, which is Lambard's definition of felony, c. vii.
p. 224.

The implication of malice in the owner of a beast that kills a man, after
warning given, will also further illustrate what has been said; for though mere
carelessness or inconsideration might occasion his neglect, so that the
accident may, in some degree, be esteemed a misfortune, yet the law implies
malice; for if one keep a mastiff dog (says Sir James Astry, in his charge to
grand juries, p. 18.) that is used to bite people near the common highway; or
bull or beast, that has hurt any one (after notice) they kill any one, that
will be murder in the Owner, although not present when the fact was done; and
yet in this, and the other precedent cases, here is no express malice to be
proved, but what the law construes to be so: this is agreeable to the doctrine
of Judge Staunford, P. C. lib. i. cap. 9. Que si home ad un jument que est
accustom male fair et le Owner ceo bien sachant, negliga luy, eins suffra
d'aller a large, et puis le jument tua un home: que ceo est felony in le
owner, eo que, per tiel sufferance: le owner semble d'aver volunte a tuer. See
also Crompton, p. 24. b. and 1 Hawkins, c. xxxi. 8. And, according to Bracton,
the Common Law imputes the death of a man by a beast, to any man, who follows,
or drives the beast at the time of the misfortune; -- vel dum insequitur quis
equum vel bovem, et aliquis a bove vel equo percussus fuerit, et hujusmodi hoc
imputatur ei. Bract. lib iii. c. iv. p. 120. b. If this law were still
enforced, we should not have such continual complaints of accidents in the
streets, by cattle, that are enraged, and made mad, through the cruelty of the
two-legged brutes who drive them. For the first step that ought to be taken, in
such cases, is, to seize the drivers; and, nineteen times out of twenty, it
will be found, that the poor beast will recover itself (when they are gone)
from the excess of fear and rage which the Brutality of the hurrying Drivers --
Si quis operam rei dederit illicitae, ut cum quis Boves velociter fugaverit,
quorum unus obviando hominem cornu occiderit, fugatori imputabitur, quia
diligentiam quam potuit non adhibuit. Fleta, lib. i. c. xxiii. p. 34.
had occasioned; so that it is plain where the guilt is to be imputed: but yet
even a brutal driver is not so base and detestable as the man who wilfully
strikes with a weapon in sudden anger. And again, he who aims to strike or
shoot at a man, and accidentally kills a different person (whom perhaps he did
not see) contrary to his intention (or by misfortune as it were) is,
nevertheless, deemed guilty of wilful murder, though he had not the least
anger, or resentment, against the person killed Homme sagitta a un ex malicia
praecogitata, et luy miss, et tue autre qui estoit decost, et a qui and
malice, unc' il est murder, eo que il ad intent de murder. Crompton's edition
of Fitzherbert's Justice of Peace, p. 23. -- As if a man, says Judge Holt, out
of malice to A. shoots at him to kill him, but misses him and kills B. it is no
less a murder than if he had killed the person intended, Lord Chief Justice
Holt's Rep. of Rex versus Plummer, in Kelyng's Rep. p. 111. for which he quotes
Dyer, p. 128. Cromp. p. 101. Plowden's Com. p. 474. Saunders's case, 9 Rep. 91.
Agnes Gore's case.
. But surely the man who actually kills the person he aims at, in his anger, is
at least as culpable! so that if sudden anger deserves no lenity in the former
case, it certainly deserves none in the latter. Several cases also are
mentioned by Sir William Blackstone, wherein sudden anger is not excusable,
even though the death may be said to be "by misfortune," as there was no real
intention of killing, yet rendered by the circumstances equivalent to a
deliberate act of slaughter. See Comment. b. iv. chap. xiv. p. 199 and 200.
Also if even upon a sudden provocation (says he) one beats another in a cruel
and unusual manner, so that he dies, though he did not intend his death, yet he
is guilty of murder by an express malice; that is, by an express evil design,
the genuine sense of malitia. As when a park-keeper tied a boy that was
stealing wood, to a horse's tail, and dragged him along the park; when a master
corrected his servant with an iron bar, and a schoolmaster stamped on his
scholar's belly; so that each of the sufferers died; these were justly held to
be murders, because the correction being excessive, and such as could not
proceed but from a bad heart, it was equivalent to a deliberate act of
slaughter. But is not an express evil design as apparent, in the act of
striking a man with a weapon, in anger, (be the anger ever so sudden) as it is
in these cases where death was not really intended? For surely the design of
killing, is by the weapon rendered express If one executes his revenge upon a
sudden provocation in such a cruel manner, with a dangerous weapon as shows a
malicious and deliberate intent to do mischief, and death ensues, it is express
malice from the nature of the fact, and murder. Wood's Inst. 3 Book, p. 608.
And this must always be the case when men presume to decide their quarrels with
dangerous weapons, be quarrels ever so sudden and unpremeditated: for the
"malice" is by the weapons, expressed, and the "malice prepensed" is therefore
implied. "Ex telo praesumitur malum consilium," etc. See p. 39.
; which equally fulfils "the genuine sense of malitia," though perhaps, the
prepensed malice may, more properly ( upon a sudden provocation as above) be
said to be implied than express. But whether it be express or implied, it
undoubtedly constitutes murder; for malice is the leading circumstance which
distinguishes manslaughter from murder, and therefore an express evil design,
such as is apparent in the voluntary killing of a man, cannot be admitted under
the head of simple homicide or manslaughter, because the necessary difference
is wanting in the degree of the offense according to the excellent rule before
cited from Sir Matthew Hale, viz. -- murder being aggravated with malice
presumed or implied; but manslaughter not, etc. 1 Hale, P. C. 466.

I may probably seem guilty of much tautology in this little Work; but hope my
Readers will excuse it, in consideration of the necessity I am under, of
repeatedly comparing the crimes of striking with a weapon in sudden Anger, and
of voluntary Killing, with so many other different cases, wherein even
involuntary and accidental Killing have been solemnly adjudged Murder: and I
apprehend that the severity of the Law, in the lastmentioned cases, must
sufficiently demonstrate such a general abhorrence in our Law to the shedding
of Human Blood, that we cannot reasonably suppose the same Law capable of
admitting an excuse for voluntary Manslaughter on any private difference,
howsoever great the provocation. Nevertheless, Mr. Hawkins ventures to assert a
very different doctrine in his Pleas of the Crown, 1 Book c. xxviii. 24. I see
no reason (says he) why a person, who without provocation is assaulted by
another in any place whatsoever, in such a manner as plainly shows an intent to
murder him, as by discharging a Pistol, or pushing at him with a drawn Sword,
etc. may not justify Killing such an Assailant, as much as if he had attempted
to rob him: for is not he, who attempts to Murder me (says he) more injurious
than he who barely attempts to rob me? And can it be more justifiable to fight
for my goods than for my life? And it is not only highly agreeable to reason,
that a man in such circumstances may lawfully Kill another, but it seems also
to be confirmed by the general Tenor of our Law Books, etc.

But howsoever specious this argument may appear, I hope I have already proved
"by the general Tenor of our Law Books;" that the Justifiable Killing of a Man
must be through an inevitable necessity: and therefore what Mr. Hawkins
afterward advances, in his comparison of such a case with Homicide in se
Defendendo, cannot in the least justify either his opinion on that point, or
his assertion concerning the general Tenor of the Law Books.

He endeavors to represent the Voluntary Killing of a Man as Justifiable
Homicide, and consequently he must suppose it a less crime than Excusable
Homicide, in se Defendendo.

He founds his opinion in the supposition of "some precedent Quarrel" in the
latter, "in which" (says he) both parties always are, or at least may justly be
supposed to have been, in some fault, so that the necessity, to which a Man is
at length reduced to kill another, is in some measure presumed to be owing to
himself: etc.

But may it not, as "justly be supposed" that the person, who Kills without
such necessity, is also "in some fault?" Is not the Presumption of Law against
him (as I have elsewhere shown) by the bloody FACT, when he cannot prove that
he endeavored, at least, to retreat, in order to avoid unnecessary bloodshed?
And is not FACT a more substantial ground for a criminal charge, than any idea
that a Court can possibly form concerning the Murderous Intentions, which the
Killer may attribute to the person Killed?

The single circumstance that the Killer was under no necessity of endeavoring
to retreat, and avoid the assailant, is not only a proof that his own
intentions (though he might not be the first aggressor) were nearly as
criminal, as those he attributes to the person Killed, but it also affords a
strong presumption, that the latter was not very strenuous or sanguine, either
in his attack, or in his supposed intention to commit murder: so that the very
pretense, by which Mr. Hawkins endeavors to justify such a voluntary Killing,
must necessarily fall to the ground, whenever the Killer is unable to prove,
that he endeavored to avoid the attack I have already made the necessary
exceptions concerning Civil Officers in the legal Execution of justice, etc.
And though the Deceased might have had a Weapon Drawn, yet that circumstance
affords no positive proof of his criminal intention; for he might have thought
himself obliged to draw in his own defense, through a reciprocal suspicion of
his adversary's criminal intentions: and as he cannot plead his own cause, it
is reasonable that the Law should presume, that he really did draw in his own
defense, especially as the circumstance, that the Killer was under no necessity
of endeavoring to avoid him, affords a sufficient Ground for such a
presumption:

And even in cases where it may be supposed that the person Killed might really
have had "an intent to murder," we ought to remember that the Laws of England
do not punish men merely for their "criminal intentions" without some fact!
and, therefore, it would be highly absurd to suppose, that the Law, without
some apparent necessity, would entrust every individual, indiscriminately, with
a supreme Authority, which it denies even to the Highest and most solemn Courts
of Justice; I mean an Authority to inflict capital punishment without a
previous Trial per pares; and that merely for "a Criminal Intention;" which, in
many cases, might as easily, (through fear, passion, or violent prejudice) be
mistaken, or imaginary, as be real!

And therefore an Assault upon the Person is not (as I have before insisted in
p. 5. against the opinion of Judge Foster) Provocation sufficient to free the
Party Killing from the Guilt of Murder.

The case of Gentlemen in the Army, nevertheless, seems peculiarly hard upon
such unhappy occasions. The first principle of their profession is Courage; and
the World, in general, is too depraved to distinguish in what cases a Man of
true Courage may retreat with honor from the Assault of an Enemy; so that
Military Men are liable to be unjustly despised, whenever they act reasonably
in cases either of insult, or assault!

Yet, at the same time, it ought to be remembered, that those men who submit to
the Slavish Yoke of other Men's depraved opinions or unreasonable customs (in
contradiction to that natural Knowledge of Good and Evil, which they inherit,
in common with the rest of Mankind, from our first Parents), cannot justly be
deemed Men of Honor; and, consequently, are unworthy of Rank in the honorable
Profession of Arms. And though such men may support an outward appearance of
Courage in the eye of the world, by daring to violate the Laws of God and Man
in private Quarrels, yet that very act affords the most manifest token of the
Want of real and steady Courage: for unless the submission to that depraved
custom can be attributed to inconsideration, or to the want of Knowledge, it
must necessarily be supposed, that the Duellist had not sufficient Courage to
assert his natural Right of Acting agreeable to the Dictates of his own reason
and conscience; and was unable to face the Terrors of an adverse Fortune in a
good Cause; and therefore, like a wretched Coward, he yielded himself a
prisoner and slave to the fashionable Depravity!

I am far from meaning however to charge all Soldiers with Cowardice that have
fought Duels: sometimes Passion and false Pride, but more frequently
inconsideration, and ignorance of the Laws of God and Man (as I have before
hinted) occasion the base submission and conformity to those false and
unreasonable notions of Honor, which almost universally prevail.

Nor do I so much blame the Military Gentlemen, for this unnatural depravity,
as I do the Professors of the Law; who ought to have set them a better example,
and yet, have rather contributed to the ignorance of the times, by the many
gross perversions of our Law, which they have admitted into the Books.
Gentlemen of the Army are not obliged, indeed, to acquire a critical knowledge
of the Law, but they must not forget that they are Men, as well as Soldiers;
and that if they do not maintain the Natural Privilege of Men, (viz. that of
thinking for themselves, and acting agreeable to the Dictates of their own
Conscience, as Members of the Community), they are unfit for British Soldiers,
of whom the Law requires an acknowledgement of her supremacy.

For the Law will not excuse an unlawful Act by a Soldier, even though he
commits it by the express Command of the highest military Authority in the
Kingdom: and much less is the Soldier obliged to conform himself implicitly to
the mere opinions and false Notions of Honor, which his Superiors may have
unfortunately adopted. -- Even in public military Service, or warlike
Expeditions by National authority, the Law manifestly requires the Soldier to
think for himself; and to consider, before he acts in any war, whether the same
be just; for, if it be otherwise, the Common Law of this Kingdom will impute to
him the Guilt of Murder.

And though the Law does not actually punish such general Crimes, as may
unfortunately have obtained, at any time, the Sanction of Government, yet the
time will certainly come, when all such temporizing military Murderers must be
responsible for the innocent blood that is shed in an unjust War, if they have
rendered themselves accessaries to it by an implicit, and, therefore, criminal
obedience to the promoters of it. Item fit Homicidium in Bello, (says the
learned Bracton) et tunc videndum utrum Bellum sit justum vel injustum. Si
autem injustum, tenebitur occisor: si autem justum, sicut pro defensione
patriae, non tenebitur, nisi hoc fecerit corrupta voluntate et intention
Bracton, Lib. 3. c. 4. de Corona, p. 121.


Men of true honor, therefore, at the same time that they are sensible of
their duty as Soldiers and Subjects to their King, must be mindful that they
are subject also to the empire of reason, and are bound thereby, in common with
all mankind, to maintain the dignity and natural freedom of Human Nature: and
those Soldiers, who, in addition to their natural reason, have a true sense of
Religion, will not only be mindful, that they are Soldiers and Subjects to an
earthly King, but that they are also Soldiers and Subjects to the King of
Kings; whose Laws and precepts they will, on all occasions, prefer to every
other Command; and will obey the same with such a steady courage, as may be
equal to every adversity, and undeserved suffering that threatens them. This
doctrine is censured by a Critic in the Monthly Review for Jan. 1774, who calls
it "a strange Principle!" In an age of Infidelity, indeed, it may, perhaps, be
allowed (in one sense) to be "a strange principle"; but then we have the
greatest reason to lament the ignorance and depravity of those men who esteem
it so in any other sense, than that of being too often neglected and
transgressed! For I trust that no man, who admits or believes the divine
authority of the Holy Scriptures, will doubt the truth of it. If this "strange
principle" had not been equally true, the English nation would long ago have
been enslaved, and even the very standing Army itself would, by this time, have
been reduced to that abject state of political slavery, which disgraces the
standing Armies of unlimited Monarchies, and renders them very truly the
"Abomination of Desolation," and the Belluina Potestas, or power of the Beast,
against which the vengeance of the Almighty is denounced in the Holy
Scriptures. See a Note on the word command, or imperium in p. 59 of my Tract,
on the Means of national Defense by a free Militia.


It was this indispensible, this happy disposition, and sense of superior duty,
which prevailed even in an unlawful standing Army, that had been raised, and
was expressly designed for arbitrary purposes, and which, nevertheless,
contrary to all expectation, exerted itself in saving this Kingdom, at the
Glorious Revolution, from the Political Slavery, which then threatened it, as
well as from the more intolerable Tyranny of the Romish Religion.

The Soldier, therefore, who has not Courage enough to profess, on all
occasions, a strict obedience to the Laws of his Country, according to the
dictates of his own reason and Conscience, in preference to every command, and
every other opinion whatever, is unworthy of the British military service;
being qualified rather to be inlisted with the slavish Troops of absolute
Monarchs; or to serve in the Black Banditti of the Emperor of Morocco!

But I must return once more to the opinions of the Professors of Law -- it is
said This opinion is in the true style of a Tradition, such as those, by which
the Jews of old "perverted the Law."
that if he who draws upon another in a sudden Quarrel, make no pass at him
till his sword is drawn, and then fight with him, and Kill him, is guilty of
Manslaughter only, etc. 1 Hawkins Pleas of the Crown, c.xxxi. 28. for which he
quotes Kelynge 55. 61. and 131: but the pretense for this indulgence is as
frivolous as the Doctrine is false, viz, "because (says Mr. Hawkins) that by
neglecting the opportunity of Killing the other before he was on his guard, and
in a condition to defend himself, with like Hazard to both, he showed that his
intent was not so much to kill, as to combat with the other, in compliance with
those common notions of Honor, etc. -- But is not "the intent to kill," or to
do some bodily harm, and certainly, at least, the Risque of Killing, included
in the intention "to Combat" with dangerous weapons? And is it Justice? Nay! is
it common Sense to excuse a Notorious Crime, by the Plea of an intention to
commit another Crime almost as bad?

I have already shown, by fair comparison with a variety of cases, that the
crime of wilfully striking or Combating with weapons in sudden Anger, is a much
more unlawful act than many others, wherein even involuntary and accidental
Homicide has been solemnly adjudged Murder, and has been generally admitted as
such by the Sages of our Law in their Reports; and it will therefore be highly
disgraceful to our Law, but more particularly (because deservedly) to the
professors of it, if they should still persist in the unreasonable and unjust
practice of punishing lesser Crimes with more severity than the crying Sin of
voluntary Manslaughter, which, as I have already proved in my preface, is
absolutely unpardonable in this World, by the Laws of God!

Glory in the highest to GOD;
And on Earth PEACE.
Toward Men GOODWILL.
A TABLE of the Authorities and Cases quoted, or examined in this Book.
TEXTS.
Genesis ix. 6 preface xvi. Exodus xxi. 13 pages 32.34 Numbers xxxv. 33. pref.
xviandxvii. -- Do. 20.22 and 25 p. 30 -- Do 21 p. 31 -- Do. 11, 12.16 and 24 p.
32, 33 -- Do. 16. to 19 p. 35 and 40 Deuteronomy xix. 4 and 5 p. 33.
AUTHORS and CASES.
Sir James Astry, p. 58 Army, -- Case of the Gentlemen in the Army considered,
p. 70 to 78 Lord Bacon, p. 47. Henry de Bracton, pref. xv. also p. 6, 7.32. 43,
44.59 and 75 John Britton (Bishop of Hereford) p. 32.42 and 43 Bythner's Lyra
Prophetica p. 29. Sir William Blackstone, pref. xiv. also p. 22, 23.39, 50. and
61 Sir Edward Coke, pref. xiii. also p. 1.17.19. 20, 21, 22, 23.38.42, 44,
49.51 54 and 57. Judge Croke, p. 21 Mr. Richard Crompton (his Edition of Judge
Fitzherbert's Justice de Peace) p. 1.56. 59and61 Sebastian Castalio, p. 34 Sir
James Dyer, p. 61 Lord Dacre's Case, p. 55 Fleta, pref. xv. also pages 8.24 and
60 Sir Anthony Fitzherbert, p. 56. Judge Foster, p. 3, 4, 5.7, 9.10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 20.23.24.31.53, 46.53.54 and 70 Grotius, pref. vii. also p. 39 40
Andrew Horn (his Mirroir de Justice) p. 26 Sir Matthew Hale, pref. xiv. also p.
1.9.17. 20.28.43, 44, 45, 46, 52, and 64 Lord Chief Justice Holt, p. 24,
25.36.50. 56.61 and 72. William Hawkins, Esquire. p. 5.25.56.59. 66, 68.78 and 79
Theodore Haak, p. 33 Judge Jenkins, p. 27 Judge Kelyng, p. 56 and 78 Mr.
William Lambard, p. 1.19.26, 31.52 and 57 Laws of Liberty and Property, printed
in 12mo. p. 27 Mirroir de Justice. (See Horn) The Principles of Penal Law,
pref. iv. Pleas of the Crown, printed in 1678, 8vo. p. 1, 2 and 50 Plowden p.
51. Sir Robert Raymond, p. 22 Rowley's Case, p. 20 Sir William Staunforde,
pref. xv. also p. 8. 45, 46.49.52 and 58. John Seldom, Esquire. p. 34 Stedman's
Case, p. 12 Statutes 52 Hen. III. c. 25. p. 18. 2 Edw. III. c. 2. pref. xvii.
also p. 47 and 48 -- 10 Edw. III. c. 2. p. 48. -- 14 Edw. III. c. 4. p. 32 --
13 Ric. II. Stat. 2. c. 1. p. xvii. 48, 49 -- 16 Ric. II. c. 6. p. 50 -- 23
Hen. VIII. c. 1. p. 47 -- 1 Edw. VI. c. 12. p. 47. -- 1 Jac. I. c. 8. p. 38 and
47 Thomson and Daws (Case) p. 36 Thomas Wood, L.L.D. p. 62 and 63

