THE POETICAL WORKS OF RICHARD WEST.

........ simplex nec despice carmen,
Nec vatem: non illa leves primordia motus,
Quanquam parva, dabunt.
GRAY, de Princip. Cogit. Just Heaven! what sin, ere life begins to bloom,
Devotes my head untimely to the tomb?
Did ever this hand against a brother's life
Drug the dire bowl, or point the murderous knife?
Did ever this tongue the sland'rer's tale proclaim,
Or madly violate my Maker's name?
Did ever this heart betray a friend or foe,
Or know a thought but all the world might know? --
But why repine? does life deserve my sigh?
Few will lament my loss whenever I die --
Yet some there are (ere spent my vital days)
Within whose breasts my tomb I wish to raise:
Loved in my life, lamented in my end,
Their praise would crown me as their precepts mend:
To them may these fond lines my name endear,
Not from the poet but the friend sincere. AD AMICOS.
EDINBURG: AT THE Apollo Press, BY THE MARTINS. Anno 1782.

MISCELLANIES.
Advertisement.
THE life of Mr. West was so short, and the events of it so few, that it was
judged better to insert the anecdotes which remain of this hopeful youth in the
preceding account of his friend than to reserve them for a detached article.
Mr. Walpole wished to see their Works united in one volume. The only objection
of Mr. Gray to this wish no longer now remains. Had he complied with Mr.
Walpole's desire, it is the opinion of Mr. Mason that he would have given only
the poems which follow.

AD AMICOS.
[Imitated from Tibullus, book iii. elegy 5, and Mr. Pope's letter in sickness
to Mr. Steel.]
YES, happy youths! on Camus' sedgy side
You feel each joy that friendship can divide,
Each realm of science and of art explore,
And with the ancient blend the modern lore,
Studious alone to learn whatever may tend
To raise the genius or the heart to mend;
Now pleased along the cloistered walks you rove,
And trace the verdant mazes of the grove,
Where social often and often alone ye choose
To catch the zephir and to court the Muse;
Mean-time at me (while all devoid of art
These lines give back the image of my heart)
At me the power that comes or soon or late,
Or aims or seems to aim the dart of Fate.
From you remote methinks alone I stand
Like some sad exile in a desert land,
Around no friends their lenient care to join
In mutual warmth, and mix their heart with mine.
Or real pains, or those which fancy raise,
For ever blot the sunshine of my days;
To sickness still, and still to grief, a prey
Health turns from me her rosy face away.
Just Heaven! what sin, ere life begins to bloom,
Devotes my head untimely to the tomb?
Did ever this hand against a brother's life
Drug the dire bowl, or point the murderous knife?
Did ever this tongue the sland'rer's tale proclaim,
Or madly violate my Maker's name?
Did ever this heart betray a friend or foe,
Or know a thought but all the world might know?
As yet just started from the lists of time
My growing years have scarcely told their prime;
Useless as yet through life I'ave idly run,
No pleasures tasted, and few duties done.
Ah! who ere autumn's mellowing suns appear
Would pluck the promise of the vernal year,
Or ere the grapes their purple hue betray
Tear the crude cluster from the mourning spray?
Stern power of Fate! whose ebon scepter rules
The Stygian deserts and Cimmerian pools,
Forbear, nor rashly smite my youthful heart,
A victim yet unworthy of thy dart;
Ah! stay till age shall blast my withering face,
Shake in my head and falter in my pace;
Then aim the shaft, then meditate the blow,
And to the dead my willing shade shall go.
How weak is man to Reason's judging eye!
Born in this moment, in the next we die;
Part mortal clay, and part ethereal fire,
Too proud to creep, too humble to aspire,
In vain our plans of happiness we raise;
Pain is our lot, and patience is our praise:
Wealth, lineage, honors, conquest, or a throne,
Are what the wise would fear to call their own.
Health is at best a vain precarious thing,
And fair-fac'd youth "Youth, at the very best, is but a betrayer of human life
in a gentler and smoother manner than age; it is like the stream that nourishes
a plant upon a bank, and causes it to flourish and blossom to the sight, but at
the same time is undermining it at the root in secret." Pope.
is ever on the wing:
It Is like the stream ^side whose watery bed
Some blooming plant exalts his flowery head,
Nursed by the wave the spreading branches rise,
Shade all the ground and flourish to the skies;
The waves the while beneath in secret flow,
And undermine the hollow bank below;
Wide and more wide the waters urge their way,
Bare all the roots and on their fibers prey:
Too late the plant bewails his foolish pride,
And sinks untimely in the whelming tide.
But why repine? does life deserve my sigh?
Few will lament my loss whenever I die.
For those the wretches "I am not at all uneasy at the thought that many men
whom I never had any esteem for are likely to enjoy this world after me." Pope.
I despise or hate
I neither envy nor regard their fate.
For me whenever all-conq'ring Death shall spread
His wings around my unrepining head
I care not "The morning after my exit the sun will rise as bright as ever, the
flowers smell as sweet, the plants spring as green; people will laugh, etc."
Pope.
: though this face be seen no more
The world will pass as cheerful as before,
Bright as before the day star will appear,
The fields as verdant and the skies as clear;
Nor storms nor comets will my doom declare,
Nor signs on earth nor portents in the air;
Unknown and silent will depart my breath,
Nor Nature ever take notice of my death.
Yet some there are (ere spent my vital days)
Within whose breasts my tomb I wish to raise:
Loved in my life, lamented in my end,
Their praise would crown me as their precepts mend:
To them may these fond lines my name endear,
Not from the poet but the friend sincere This Epistle was written from
Christ-church Oxford, July 4th 1737, in the 21st year of his age.
.
Vos tenet, Etruscis manat quae fontibus unda,
Unda sub aestivum non adeunda canem.
Nunc autem sacris Baiarum maxima lymphis,
Quum se purpureo vere remittit hiems.
At mihi Persephone nigram deununtiat horam
Inmerito juveni parce nocere, Dea.
Non ego tentavi nulli temeranda virorum
Audax laudandae sacra docere Deae.
Nec mea mortiseris infecit pocula succis
Dextera, nec quiquam taetra venena dedit.
Nec nos insana meditantes jurgia mente
^^pia in adversos solvimus ora Deos.
Et nondum cani nigros laesere capillos,
Nec venit tardo curva Senecta pede.
Natalem nostri primum videre parents
(Quum cecidit fato consul uterque pari.)
Quid fraudare juvat vitem crescentibus uvis?
Et modo nata mala vellere poma manu "There is," says Mr. Mason, "a peculiar
blemish in this line, arising from the synonymous mala and poma." -- But who
that can either construe or scan this line could have taken these words for
synonymous?
?
Parcite, pallentes undas quicumque tenetis,
Duraque sortiti tertia regna Dei.
Elysios olim liceat cognoscere campos,
Letheamque ratem, Cimmeriosque lacus,
Quum mea rugosa pallebunt ora senecta,
--
Atque utinam vano nequidquam terrear aestu!
ELEGIA.
QUOD mihi tam gratae misisti dona Camaenae,
Qualia Maenalius Pan Deus ipse velit,
Amplector te, Graie, et toto cord reposco,
Oh desiderium jam nimis usque meum:
Et mihi rura placent, et me quoque saepe volentem
Duxerunt Dryades per sua prata Deae;
Sicubi lympha fugit liquido pede, sive virentem,
Magna decus nemoris, quercus opacat humum:
Illuc mane novo vagor, illuc vespere sero,
Et, noto ut jacui gramine, nota cano.
Nec nostrae ignorant divinam Amaryllida sylvae:
Ah, si desit amor, nil mibi rura placent.
Ille jugis habitat Deus, ille in vallibus imis,
Regnat et in Coelis, regnat et Oceano;
Ille gregem taurosque domat, saevique leonem
Seminis; ille feros, ultus Adonin, apros:
Quin et servet amore nemus, ramoque sub omni
Concentu tremulo plurima gaudet avis.
Durae etiam in sylvis agitant connubia plantae,
Durae etiam et fertur saxa animasse Venus.
Durior et saxis, et robore durior ille est,
Sincero siquis pectore amare vetat:
Non illi in manibus sanctum deponere pignus,
Non illi arcanum cor aperire velim;
Nescit amicitias, teueros qui nescit amores:
Ah! si nulla Venus, nil mihi rura placent.
Me licet a patria long in tellure juberent
Externa positum ducere fata dies;
Si vultus modo amatus adesset, non ego contra
Plorarem magnos voce querente Deos.
At dulci in gremio curarum oblivia ducens
Nil cuperem praeter posse placere meae;
Nec bona fortunae aspiciens, neque munera regum,
Illa intra optarem brachia cara mori.
Sept. 17th 1738.
ELEGIA.
[Addressed to Mr. Gray.]
ERGO desidiae videor tibi crimine dignus;
Et merito: victas do tibi sponte manus.
Arguor et veteres nimium contemnere Musas,
Irata et nobis est Medicaea Venus.
Mean igitur statuas et inania saxa vereri!
Stultule! marmorea quid mihi cum Venere?
Hic verae, hic vivae Veneres, et mill per urbem,
Quarum nulla queat non placuisse Jovi.
Cedite Romanae formosae et cedite Graiae,
Sintque oblita Helenae nomen et Hermoniae!
Et, quascunque refert aetas vetus, Heroinae:
Unus honor nostris jam venit Angliasin.
Oh quales vultus, Oh quantum numen ocellis!
I nunc et Tuscas improbe confer opes.
Ne tamen haec obtusa nimis praecordia credas,
Neu me adeo nulla Pallade progenitum:
Testor Pieridumque umbras et flumina Pindi
Me quoque Calliopes semper amasse choros;
Et dudum Ausonias urbes, et visere Graias
Cura est, ingenio si licet ire meo:
Sive est Phidiacum marmor, seu mentoris era,
Seu paries Coo nobilis e calamo;
Nec minus artificum magna argumenta recentum
Romanique decus nominis et Veneti:
Qua Furor et Mavors et saevo in Marmore vultus,
Quaque et formoso mollior aere Venus.
Quaque loquax spirat fucus, vivique labores,
Et quicquid calamo dulcius ausa manus:
Hic nemora, et sola maerens Meliboeus in umbra,
Lymphaque muscoso prosiliens lapide;
Illic majus opus, faciesque in pariete major
Exurgens, Divum et numina Coelicolum;
O vos saelices, quibus haec cognoscere fas est,
Et tota Italia, qua patet usque, frui!
Nulla dies vobis eat injucunda, nec usquam
Noritis quid sit tempora amara pati.
-- It was the production of four o'clock in the morning, while I lay in my bed
tossing and coughing, and all unable to sleep. --

ANTE omnes morbos importunissima tussis,
Qua durare datur, traxitque sub ilia vires:
Dura etenim versans imo sub pectore regna,
Perpetuo exercet teneras luctamine costas,
Oraque distorquet, vocemque immutat anhelam:
Nec cessare locus: sed saevo concita motu
Molle domat latus, et corpus labor omne fatigat:
Unde molesta dies, noctemque insomnia turbant.
Nec Tua, si mecum Comes hic jucundus adesses,
Verba juvare queant, aut hunc lenire dolorem
Sufficiant tua vox dulcis, nec vultus amatus.
ODE.
DEAR Gray! that always in my heart
Possesses far the better part,
What mean these sudden blasts that rise,
And drive the zephirs from the skies?
O join with mine thy tuneful lay,
And invocate the tardy May.
Come, fairest nymph! resume thy reign,
Bring all the Graces in thy train:
With balmy breath and flowery tread
Rise from thy soft ambrosial bed,
Where in Elysian slumber bound
Embow'ring myrtles veil thee round.
Awake, in all thy glories dressed,
Recall the zephirs from the west;
Restore the sun, revive the skies,
At mine and Nature's call arise!
Great Nature's self upbraids thy stay,
And misses her accustomed May.
See! all her works demand thy aid,
The labors of Pomona fade;
A plaint is heard from every tree,
Each budding flow'ret calls for thee;
The birds forget to love and sing,
With storms alone the forests ring.
Come then, with Pleasure at thy side,
Diffuse thy vernal spirit wide;
Create wherever thou turn'st thy eye
Peace, plenty, love, and harmony,
Till every being share its part
And heaven and earth be glad at heart.
TRANSLATED FROM THE GREEK OF POSIDIPPUS.
PERSPICUI puerum ludentem in margin rivi
Immersit vitreae limpidus error aguae:
At gelido ut matter moribundum e flumine traxit
Credula, et amplexu funus inane fovet;
Paulatim puer in dilecto pectore, somno
Languidus, aeternum lumina composuit.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
TO MR. GRAY.
O Meae jucunda comes quietis!
Quae fere aegrotum solita es levare
Pectus, et sensim ah! nimis ingruentes
Fallere curas:
Quid canes? quanto Lyra dic furore
Gesties, quando hac reducem sodalem
Glauciam Mr. Gray.
gaudere simul videbis
Meque sub umbra?
CAETERA DESIDERANTUR.
CONTENTS.
GRAY.
Life of the Author, Page 5 His last will and testament, 25 Ode to memory of
Mr. Gray, by J. T. 29 ODES.
Ode I. on the spring, 35 Ode II. on the death of a favorite cat, 37 Ode III.
on a distant prospect of Eton College, 39 Ode IV. on adversity, 43 Ode V. the
progress of poesy, 46 Ode VI. the Bard, 54 Ode VII. the Fatal Sisters, 65 Ode
VIII. the descent of Odin, 68 Ode IX. the triumphs of Owen, 73 Ode X. the death
of Hoel, 75 Ode XI. for music, 76
MISCELLANIES.
A long story, 81 Elegy. Written in a country churchyard, 87 Epitaph on Mrs.
Clarke, 93 Translation from Statius, ib. Gray of himself, 94

WEST.
Ad Amicos, Page 1 Elegia, "Quod mihi," etc. 6 Ditto, addressed to Mr. Gray,
"Ergodesidiae," etc. 7 Production of four o'clock in the morning, "Ante omnes,"
etc. 8 Ode to May, 9 From the Greek of Posidippus, "Perspicui," etc. 10 To Mr.
Gray, "O meae jucunda," etc. 11
From the APOLLO PRESS, by the MARTINS, Aug. 3. 1782.

THE END.

