BELLS EDITION The POETS of GREAT BRITAIN COMPLETE FROM CHAUCER to CHURCHILL

MOORE. Then bending drew it to the Head:
Inraptured stood the loversick Maid.


Rebecca del. Bartolozzi sculp.

London Printed for John Bell British Library Strand May 5th.1782.



THE POETICAL WORKS OF EDWARD MOORE.

WITH THE LIFE OF THE AUTHOR.

Truth under fiction I impart
To weed out folly from the heart. --
I flatter none: the great and good
Are by their actions understood --
I echo not the voice of Fame
That dwells delighted on your name:
Her friendly tale, however true,
Were flattery if I told it you.
The proud, the envious, and the vain,
The jilt, the prude, demand my strain:
To these detesting praise I write,
And vent in charity my spite:
With friendly hand I hold the glass
To all promisc'ous as they pass;
Should Folly there her likeness view
I fret not that the mirror's true:
If the fantastic form offend
I made it not but would amend. --
Premising this your anger spare,
And claim the Fable you who dare.
FABLE I. EDINBURG: AT THE Apollo Press, BY THE MARTINS. Anno 1781.

THE POETICAL WORKS OF EDWARD MOORE. CONTAINING HIS FABLES, ODES, MISCELLANIES,
SONGS, etc. etc. etc.

Truth under fiction I impart
To weed out folly from the heart. --
I fllatter none: the great and good
Are by their actions understood. --
I echo not the voice of Fame
That dwells delighted on your name:
Her friendly tale, however true,
Were flattery if I told it you.
The proud, the envious, and the vain,
The jilt, the prude, demand my strain:
To these detesting praise I write,
And vent in charity my spite:
With friendly hand I hold the glass
To all promisc'ous as they pass;
Should Folly there her likeness view
I fret not that the mirror 's true:
If the fantastic form offend
I made it not but would amend. --
Premising this your anger spare,
And claim the Fable you who dare.
FABLE I. EDINBURG: AT THE Apollo Press, BY THE MARTINS. Anno 1781.

THE LIFE OF EDWARD MOORE.
OF the life of this ingenious writer few particulars are known, and none
respecting his descent, birth, education, or death; at least none which we have
been able to discover.

Mr. Moore was bred a linendraper, but whether from a stronger attachment to
the study than the counter, from a more ardent zeal in the pursuit of fame than
in the search after fortune, or whether from the cause assigned by our Author
himself in the Preface to the quarto edition of his works in 1756, that "his
marriage with the Muses, like most other marriages into that noble family, was
more from necessity than inclination," he quitted business to join the retinue
of these ladies; and he certainly had a very happy and pleasant talent in
poetry. In his Trial of Selim the Persian, which is a compliment to the first
and worthy Lord Lyttelton, he has shown himself a perfect master of the most
elegant kind of panegyric, that which is couched under the appearance of
accusation; and his Fables for the Female Sex, not only in the freedom and ease
of the verfification, but also in the forcibleness of the moral and poignancy
of the satire, approach nearer to the manner of Mr. Gay than any of the
numerous imitations of that author which have been attempted since the
publication of his Fables.

As a dramatick writer Mr. Moore has by no means met with the success his
pieces have merited, which are three in number, The Foundling and Gil Blas,
comedies, and The Gamester, a tragedy. The first has been condemned for its
supposed resemblance to the celebrated comedy of The Conscious Lovers; and The
Gamester met with a cold reception for no other apparent reason but because it
too nearly touched a favorite and fashionable vice The Gamester was also
objected to as too prosaick in the language, and too horrible in the
catastrophe, as observed and apologized for by the Author in his Preface to The
Gamester, quarto edition of 1756.
. Yet on the whole his plots are interesting, his characters well drawn, his
sentiments delicate, and his language poetical and pleasing; and what crowns
all and more forcibly claims for his Writings public notice, the greatest
purity pervades the whole, the obvious tendency of every piece being the
promotion of morality and virtue; as is indeed observed by the Author himself
in the Preface already referred to, when speaking of his Writings in general;
"Such as the Work now is I submit it to the public. Defects in it there are
many. -- Its merit (if it has any, and I may be allowed to name it) is its
being natural and unaffected, and tending to promote virtue."

Mr. Moore married a lady of the name of Hamilton, daughter to the Tabledecker
to the Princesses: she had a poetical turn, and has been said to have assisted
her husband in the writing of his plays. One specimen of her poetry was handed
about before their marriage, and has since appeared in different collections of
songs. It was addressed to a daughter of the famous Stephen Duck, and begins
with the following stanza: Would you think it my Duck! for the fault I must own,
Your Jenny at last is quite covetous grown;
Though millions if Fortune should lavishly pour
I still should be wretched if I had not More.
After half-a-dozen other stanzas, in which with great ingenuity and delicacy,
and yet in a manner that expresses a sincere affection, she has quibbled on our
Author's name, she concludes with the following lines: You will wonder my Girl!
who this dear one can be
Whose merit can boast such a conquest as me;
But you sh' n't know his name, though I told you before;
It begins with an M, but I dare not say More.


In the year 1753 Mr. Moore commenced a weekly miscellaneous paper entitled The
World, by Adam Fitz-Adam, in which undertaking he was assisted by Lord
Chesterfield and other distinguished characters. This paper was collected and
published in four volumes; and Mr. Moore died soon thereafter.

PREFACE.
MOST of the following Poems have already made their appearance in detached
pieces, but as many of them were printed without a name I was advised by some
particular friends to collect them into a volume and publish them by
subscription. The painful task of soliciting such a subscription was chiefly
undertaken by those friends, and with such spirit and zeal that I should be
greatly wanting in gratitude if I neglected any opportunity either public or
private of making them my most sincere acknowledgments. I am also obliged to a
very valuable friend in Ireland for a considerable number of subscribers in
that kingdom, a list of whose names I have not been favored with, and for
which I was desired not to delay publication. I mention this seeming neglect
that my friends on that side the water may not accuse me of any disrespect.

Such as the Work now is I submit it to the public. Defects in it there are
many, which I have wanted both time and abilities to amend as I could wish. Its
merit (if it has any, and I may be allowed to name it) is its being natural and
unaffected, and tending to promote virtue and good humor. Those parts of it
that have been published singly had the good fortune to please; those that are
now added will I hope be no discredit to them. Upon the whole, I have sent this
my offspring into the world in as decent a dress as I was able: a legitimate
one I am sure it is; and if it should be thought defective in strength, spirit,
or vigor, let it be considered that its father's marriage with the Muses, like
most other marriages into that noble family, was more from necessity than
inclination.

TO HIS GRACE THOMAS HOLLES, DUKE OF NEWCASTLE.
MY LORD,
HAD I the honor of being personally known to your Grace I had not thus
presumptuously addressed you without previous solicitation for so great an
indulgence; but that your Grace may neither be surprised nor offended at the
liberty I am taking my plea is, that the great and good man whose name is
prefixed to the first of these Poems was a friend and benefactor to me. The
favors I have received at his hands, and the kind assurances he was pleased to
give me of their continuance, which his death only prevented, have left me to
lament my own private loss amidst the general concern. It is from these favors
and assurances that I flatter myself with having a kind of privilege to address
your Grace upon this occasion, and to entreat your patronage of the following
sheets. I pretended to no merit with Mr. Pelham except that of honoring his
virtues, and wishing to have been serviceable to them: I pretend to no other
with your Grace. My hopes are, that while you are fulfilling every generous
intention of the brother whom you loved your Grace will not think me unworthy
of some small share of that notice with which he was once pleased to honor me.

I will not detain your Grace to echo back the voice of a whole people in
favor of your just and prudent administration of public affairs: that the
salutary measures you are pursuing may be as productive of tranquillity and
honor to your Grace as they are of happiness to these kingdoms is the sincere
wish of,

MY LORD, Your Grace's most humble, most obedient, and most devoted servant,
EDWARD MOORE.
Tully's Head, Pall Mall, Feb. 26th, 1756.
FABLES FOR THE LADIES.
FABLE I. THE EAGLE AND THE ASSEMBLY OF BIRDS.
To her Royal Highness THE PRINCESS OF WALES.
THE moral lay to beauty due
I write Fair Excellence! to you,
Wellpleas'd to hope my vacant hours
Have been employed to sweeten yours.
Truth under fiction I impart
To weed out folly from the heart,
And show the paths that lead astray
The wandering nymph from Wisdom's way.
I flatter none: the great and good
Are by their actions understood:
Your monument if actions raise
Shall I deface by idle praise?
I echo not the voice of Fame
That dwells delighted on your name:
Her friendly tale, however true,
Were flattery if I told it you.
The proud, the envious, and the vain,
The jilt, the prude, demand my strain:
To these detesting praise I write,
And vent in charity my spite:
With friendly hand I hold the glass
To all promisc'ous as they pass;
Should Folly there her likeness view
I fret not that the mirror 's true:
If the fantastic form offend
I made it not but would amend.
Virtue in every clime and age
Spurns at the folly-soothing page,
While satire that offends the ear
Of Vice and Passion pleases her.
Premising this your anger spare,
And claim the Fable you who dare.
The birds in place, by factions pressed,
To Jupiter their prayers addressed:
By specious lies the state was vexed,
Their counsels libellers perplexed;
They begged (to stop seditious tongues)
A gracious hearing of their wrongs.
Jove grants their suit. The Eagle sat
Decider of the grand debate.
The Pie, to trust and power preferred,
Demands permission to be heard:
Says he, "Prolixity of phrase
"You know I hate. This libel says
"Some birds there are who prone to noise
"Are hired to silence Wisdom's voice,
"And skilled to chatter out the hour
"Rise by their emptiness to power.
"That this is aimed direct at me
"No doubt you 'll readily agree;
"Yet well this sage assembly knows
"By parts to government I rose;
"My prudent counsels prop the state;
"Magpies were never known to prate."
The Kite rose up; his honest heart
In virtue's sufferings bore a part.
"That there were birds of prey he knew,
"So far the libeller said true,
"Voracious, bold, to rapine prone,
"Who knew no interest but their own,
"Who hovering over the farmer's yard
"Nor pigeon, chick, nor duckling, spared:
"This might be true, but if applied
"To him, in troth the sland'rer ly'd:
"Since ignorance then might be misled
"Such things he thought were best unsaid."
The Crow was vexed: as yester-morn
He flew across the newsown corn
A screaming boy was set for pay
He knew to drive the crows away;
Scandal had found out him in turn,
And buzzed abroad that crows love corn.
The Owl arose with solemn face,
And thus harangu'd upon the case:
"That Magpies prate it may be true,
"A Kite may be voracious too,
"Crows sometimes deal in newsown pease;
"He libels not who strikes at these:
"The slander 's here -- "But there are birds
"Whose wisdom lies in looks not words,
"Blund'rers who level in the dark,
"And always shoot beside the mark.
"He names not me, but these are hints
"Which manifest at whom he squints;
"I were indeed that blund'ring fowl
"To question if he meant an owl."
"Ye Wretches hence!" the Eagle cries,
"'It Is conscience, conscience that applies;
"The virtuous mind takes no alarm,
"Secured by innocence from harm,
"While Guilt and his associate Fear
"Are startled at the passing air."
FABLE II. THE PANTHER, THE HORSE, AND OTHER BEASTS.
THE man who seeks to win the fair
(So custom says) must truth forbear,
Must fawn and flatter, cringe and lie,
And raise the goddess to the sky,
For truth is hateful to her ear,
A rudeness which she cannot bear.
A rudeness! yes: I speak my thoughts,
For Truth upbraids her with her faults.
How wretched Cloe! then am I
Who love you and yet cannot lie,
And still to make you less my friend
I strive your errors to amend!
But shall the senseless fop impart
The softest passion to your heart,
While he who tells you honest truth,
And points to happiness your youth,
Determines by his care his lot,
And lives neglected and forgot?
Trust me my Dear! with greater ease
Your taste for flattery I could please,
And similies in each dull line
Like glowworms in the dark should shine.
What if I say your lips disclose
The freshness of the opening rose?
Or that your cheeks are beds of flowers
Enripen'd by refreshing showers?
Yet certain as these flowers shall fade
Time every beauty will invade.
The butterfly of various hue
More than the flower resembles you,
Fair, fluttering, fickle, busy, thing,
To pleasure ever on the wing,
Gayly coquetting for an hour,
To die and never be thought of more!
Would you the bloom of youth should last?
It Is virtue that must bind it fast,
An easy carriage, wholly free
From sour reserve or levity,
Goodnatur'd mirth, an open heart,
And looks unskilled in any art,
Humility enough to own
The frailties which a friend makes known,
And decent pride enough to know
The worth that virtue can bestow.
These are the charms which never decay
Though youth and beauty fade away;
And time which all things else removes
Still heightens virtue and improves.
You 'll frown and ask to what intent
This blunt address to you is sent?
I 'll spare the question, and confess
I 'd praise you if I loved you less;
But rail, be angry, or complain,
I will be rude while you are vain.
Beneath a lion's peaceful reign,
When beasts met friendly on the plain,
A Panther of majestic port,
(The vainest female of the court)
With spotted skin and eyes of fire,
Filled every bosom with desire:
Wherever she moved a servile crowd
Of fawning creatures cring'd and bowed;
Assemblies every week she held,
(Like modern belles) with coxcombs filled,
Where noise, and nonsense, and grimace,
And lies and scandal, filled the place.
Behold the gay fantastic thing
Encircled by the spacious ring:
Low-bowing with important look
As first in rank the Monkey spoke.
"Gad take me Madam! but I swear
"No angel ever looked so fair!
"Forgive my rudeness, but I vow
"You were not quite divine till now!
"Those limbs! that shape! and then those eyes!
"O! close them or the gazer dies!"
"Nay, gentle Pug! for goodness hush;
"I vow and swear you make me blush:
"I shall be angry at this rate;
"'It Is so like flattery, which I hate."
The Fox, in deeper cunning versed,
The beauties of her mind rehearsed,
And talked of knowledge, taste, and sense,
To which the fair have vast pretense!
Yet well he knew them always vain
Of what they strive not to attain,
And played so cunningly his part
That Pug was rivall'd in his art.
The Goat avowed his amorous flame,
And burnt -- for what he durst not name,
Yet hoped a meeting in the wood
Might make his meaning understood.
Half angry at the bold address
She frowned; but yet she must confess
Such beauties might inflame his blood;
But still his phrase was somewhat rude.
The Hog her neatness much admired,
The formal Ass her swiftness fired,
While all to feed her folly strove,
And by their praises shared her love.
The Horse, whose generous heart disdained
Applause by servile flattery gained,
With graceful courage silence broke,
And thus with indignation spoke:
"When flattering Monkies fawn and prate
"They justly raise contempt or hate,
"For merit is turned to ridicule
"Applauded by the grinning fool.
"The artful Fox your wit commends
"To lure you to his selfish ends;
"From the vile flatt'rer turn away,
"For knaves make friendships to betray.
"Dismiss the train of fops and fools,
"And learn to live by wisdom's rules.
"Such beauties might the Lion warm
"Did not your folly break the charm;
"For who would court that lovely shape
"To be the rival of an Ape?"
He said, and snorting in disdain
Spurned at the crowd and sought the plain.
FABLE III. THE NIGHTINGALE AND GLOWWORM.
THE prudent nymph whose cheeks disclose
The lily and the blushing rose
From public view her charms will screen
And rarely in the crowd be seen;
This simple truth shall keep her wise,
"The fairest fruits attract the flies."
One night a Glowworm, proud and vain,
Contemplating her glittering train,
Cried, "Sure there never was in Nature
"So elegant so fine a creature!
"All other insects that I see,
"The frugal ant, industrious be,
"Or silkworm, with contempt I view,
"With all that low mechanic crew
"Who servilely their lives employ
"In business, enemy to joy.
"Mean vulgar Herd! ye are my scorn;
"For grandeur only I was born,
"Or sure am sprung from race divine,
"And placed on earth to live and shine:
"Those lights that sparkle so on high
"Are but the Glowworms of the sky,
"And kings on earth their gems admire
"Because they imitate my fire."
She spoke: attentive on a spray
A Nightingale forebore his lay;
He saw the shining morsel near,
And flew directed by the glare;
A while he gazed with sober look,
And thus the trembling prey bespoke:
"Deluded Fool! with pride elate,
"Know it is thy beauty brings thy fate;
"Less dazzling long thou might have lain
"Unheeded on the velvet plain.
"Pride soon or late degraded mourns,
"And Beauty wrecks whom she adorns."
FABLE IV. HYMEN AND DEATH.
SIXTEEN, d' ye say? Nay then it is time;
Another year destroys your prime.
But stay -- The settlement! "That is made."
Why then is my simple girl afraid?
Yet hold a moment if you can,
And heedfully the fable scan.
The shades were fled, the morning blushed,
The winds were in their caverns hushed,
When Hymen, pensive and sedate,
Held over the fields his musing gait:
Behind him through the greenwood shade
Death's meagre form the god surveyed,
Who quickly with gigantick stride
Outwent his pace and joined his side;
The chat on various subjects ran
Till angry Hymen thus began:
"Relentless Death! whose iron sway
"Mortals reluctant must obey,
"Still of thy power shall I complain,
"And thy too partial hand arraign?
"When Cupid brings a pair of hearts
"All over stuck with equal darts,
"Thy cruel shafts my hopes deride,
"And cut the knot that Hymen tied.
"Shall not the bloody and the bold,
"The miser hoarding up his gold,
"The harlot reeking from the stew,
"Alone thy fell revenge pursue?
"But must the gentle and the kind
"Thy fury undistinguished find?"
The monarch calmly thus replied:
"Weigh well the cause and then decide.
"That friend of yours you lately named,
"Cupid, alone is to be blamed;
"Then let the charge be justly laid:
"That idle boy neglects his trade,
"And hardly once in twenty years
"A couple to your temple bears.
"The wretches whom your office blends
"Silenus now or Plutus sends,
"Hence care, and bitterness, and strife,
"Are common to the nuptial life.
"Believe me, more than all mankind
"Your vot'ries my compassion find;
"Yet cruel am I called and base
"Who seek the wretched to release,
"The captive from his bonds to free,
"Indissoluble but for me.
"'It Is I entice him to the yoke;
"By me your crowded altars smoke;
"For mortals boldly dare the noose,
"Secure that Death will set them loose.
FABLE V. THE POET AND HIS PATRON.
WHY Caelia! is your spreading waist
So loose, so negligently laced?
Why must the wrapping bedgown hide
Your snowy bosom's swelling pride?
How ill that dress adorns your head,
Distained and rumpled from the bed!
Those clouds that shade your blooming face
A little water might displace,
As Nature every morn bestows
The crystal dew to cleanse the rose;
Those tresses, as the raven black,
That waved in ringlets down your back,
Uncomb'd, and injured by neglect,
Destroy the face which once they decked.
Whence this forgetfulness of dress?
Pray Madam, are you married? Yes.
Nay then indeed the wonder ceases;
No matter now how loose your dress is:
The end is won, your fortune's made,
Your sister now may take the trade.
Alas! what pity it is to find
This fault in half the female kind!
From hence proceed aversion, strife,
And all that sours the wedded life.
Beauty can only point the dart,
It Is neatness guides it to the heart;
Let neatness then and beauty strive
To keep a wavering flame alive.
It Is harder far (you will find it true)
To keep the conquest than subdue:
Admit us once behind the screen
What is there farther to be seen?
A newer face may raise the flame,
But every woman is the same.
Then study chiefly to improve
The charm that fixed your husband's love.
Weigh well his humor. Was it dress
That gave your beauty power to bless?
Pursue it still; be neater seen;
It Is always frugal to be clean:
So shall you keep alive desire,
And Time's swift wing shall fan the fire.
In garret high (as stories say)
A Poet sung his tuneful lay;
So soft so smooth his verse, you would swear
Apollo and the Muses there.
Through all the Town his praises rung,
His sonnets at the playhouse sung;
High waving over his laboring head
The goddess Want her pinions spread,
And with poetic fury fired
What Phoebus faintly had inspired.
A noble youth of taste and wit
Approved the sprightly things he writ,
And sought him in his cobweb dome,
Discharged his rent and brought him home.
Behold him at the stately board,
Who but the Poet and my Lord!
Each day deliciously he dines,
And greedy quaffs the generous wines;
His sides were plump, his skin was sleek,
And plenty wantoned on his cheek;
Astonished at the change so new
Away the inspiring goddess slew.
Now, dropped for politics and news,
Neglected lay the drooping Muse;
Unmindful whence his fortune came,
He stifled the poetic flame;
Nor tale nor sonnet for my lady,
Lampoon nor epigram, was ready.
With just contempt his Patron saw,
(Resolved his bounty to withdraw)
And thus with anger in his look
The late-repenting fool bespoke:
"Blind to the good that courts thee grown,
"Whence has the sun of favor shone?
"Delighted with thy tuneful art,
"Esteem was growing in my heart,
"But idly thou reject'st the charm
"That gave it birth and kept it warm."
Unthinking fools alone despise
The arts that taught them first to rise.
FABLE VI. THE WOLF, THE SHEEP, AND THE LAMB.
DUTY demands the parent's voice
Should sanctify the daughter's choice;
In that is due obedience shown,
To choose belongs to her alone.
May horror seize his midnight hour
Who builds upon a parent'spow'r,
And claims by purchase vile and base
The loathing maid for his embrace!
Hence virtue sickens, and the breast
Where Peace had built her downy nest
Becomes the troubled seat of care,
And pines with anguish and despair.
A Wolf, rapacious, rough, and bold,
Whose nightly plunders thinn'd the fold,
Contemplating his illspent life,
And cloyed with thefts, would take a wife.
His purpose known the savage race
In numerous crowds attend the place,
For why, a mighty Wolf he was,
And held dominion in his jaws.
Her favorite whelp each mother brought,
And humbly his alliance sought;
But cold by age, or else too nice,
None found acceptance in his eyes.
It happened as at early dawn
He solitary crossed the lawn,
Strayed from the fold a sportive Lamb
Skipp'd wanton by her fleecy dam,
When Cupid, foe to man and beast,
Discharged an arrow at his breast.
The timorous breed the robber knew,
And trembling over the meadow flew;
Their nimblest speed the Wolf o'ertook,
And courteous thus the dam bespoke:
"Stay Fairest! and suspend your fear;
"Trust me no enemy is near:
"These jaws, in slaughter ost' imbrued,
"At length have known enough of blood,
"And kinder business brings me now
"Vanquished at Beauty's feet to bow.
"You have a daughter -- Sweet! forgive
"A Wolf's address. -- In her I live;
"Love from her eyes like lightning came
"And set my marrow all on flame:
"Let your consent confirm my choice
"And ratify our nuptial joys.
"Me ample wealth and power attend,
"Wide over the plains my realms extend;
"What midnight robber dare invade
"The fold if I the guard am made?
"At home the shepherd's cur may sleep
"While I secure his master's sheep."
Discourse like this attention claimed;
Grandeur the mother's breast inflamed:
Now fearless by his side she walked,
Of settlements and jointures talked,
Proposed and doubled her demands
Of flowery fields and turnip lands.
The Wolf agrees; her bosom swells;
To Miss her happy fate she tells,
And of the grand alliance vain
Contemns her kindred of the plain.
The loathing Lamb with horror hears,
And wearies out her dam with prayers;
But all in vain: mamma best knew
What unexperienced girls should do;
So to the neighboring meadow carried
A formal ass the couple married.
Torn from the tyrant-mother's side
The trembler goes a victim-bride,
Reluctant meets the rude embrace,
And bleats among the howling race.
With horror often her eyes behold
Her murdered kindred of the fold;
Each day a sister Lamb is served,
And at the glutton's table carved;
The crashing bones he grinds for food,
And slakes his thirst with streaming blood.
Love, who the cruel mind detests,
And lodges but in gentle breasts,
Was now no more: enjoyment past
The savage hunger'd for the feast;
But (as we find in human race
A mask conceals the villain's face)
Justice must authorize the treat;
Till then he longed but durst not eat.
As forth he walked in quest of prey
The hunters met him on the way;
Fear wings his flight, the marsh he sought,
The snuffing dogs are set at fault.
His stomach balk'd now hunger gnaws,
Howling he grinds his empty jaws;
Food must be had and Lamb is nigh,
His maw invokes the fraudful lie.
"Is this," (dissembling rage) he cried,
"The gentle virtue of a bride,
"That leagued with man's destroying race
"She sets her husband for the chase,
"By treach'ry prompts the noisy hound
"To scent his footsteps on the ground?
"Thou trait'ress vile! for this thy blood
"Shall glut my rage and dye the wood."
So saying on the Lamb he flies;
Beneath his jaws the victim dies.
FABLE VII. THE GOOSE AND THE SWANS.
I HATE the face, however fair,
That carries an affected air:
The lisping tone, the shape constrained,
The studied look, the passion feigned,
Are fopperies which only tend
To injure what they strive to mend.
With what superior grace enchants
The face which Nature's pencil paints,
Where eyes unexercis'd in art
Glow with the meaning of the heart,
Where freedom and good humor sit,
And easy gaiety and wit!
Though perfect beauty be not there,
The master lines, the finished air,
We catch from every look delight,
And grow enamored at the sight;
For beauty though we all approve
Excites our wonder more than love,
While the agreeable strikes sure,
And gives the wounds we cannot cure.
Why then my Amoret! this care
That forms you in effect less fair?
If Nature on your cheek bestows
A bloom that emulates the rose,
Or from some heavenly image drew
A form Apelles never knew,
Your ill-judg'd aid will you impart,
And spoil by meretricious art?
Or had you, Nature's error, come
Abortive from the mother's womb,
Your forming care she still rejects,
Which only heightens her defects.
When such, of glittering jewels proud,
Still press the foremost in the crowd,
At every public show are seen,
With look awry and awkward mien,
The gaudy dress attracts the eye
And magnifies deformity.
Nature may underdo her part,
But seldom wants the help of art:
Trust her, she is your surest friend,
Nor made your form for you to mend.
A Goose affected, empty, vain,
The shrillest of the cackling train,
With proud and elevated crest
Precedence claimed above the rest.
Says she, "I laugh at human race,
"Who say Geese hobble in their pace:
"Look here! the sland'rous lie detect;
"Not haughty man is so erect.
"That peacock yonder, Lord! how vain
"The creature is of his gaudy train!
"If both were stripped I 'd pawn my word
"A Goose would be the finer bird.
"Nature to hide her own defects
"Her bungled work with finery decks:
"Were Geese set off with half that show
"Would men admire the peacock? No."
Thus vaunting cross the mead she stalks,
The cackling breed attend her walks;
The sun shot down his noontide beams,
The Swans were sporting in the streams;
Their snowy plumes and stately pride
Provoked her spleen. "Why there," she cried,
"Again what arrogance we see!
"Those creatures! how they mimick me!
"Shall every fowl the waters skim
"Because we Geese are known to swim?
"Humility they soon shall learn,
"And their own emptiness discern."
So saying, with extended wings
Lightly upon the wave she springs,
Her bosom swells, she spreads her plumes,
And the Swan's stately crest assumes.
Contempt and mockery ensued,
And bursts of laughter shook the flood.
A Swan superior to the rest
Sprung forth, and thus the fool addressed:
"Conceited thing! elate with pride,
"Thy affectation all deride;
"These airs thy awkwardness impart,
"And show thee plainly as thou art.
"Among thy equals of the flock
"Thou had escaped the public mock,
"And as thy parts to good conduce
"Been deemed an honest hobbling Goose."
Learn hence to study wisdom's rules;
Know fopp'ry is the pride of fools;
And striving Nature to conceal
You only her defects reveal.
FABLE VIII. THE LAWYER AND JUSTICE.
LOVE! thou divinest good below,
Thy pure delights few mortals know;
Our rebel hearts thy sway disown,
While tyrant Lust usurps thy throne.
The bounteous God of Nature made
The sexes for each other's aid,
Their mutual talents to employ
To lessen ills and heighten joy.
To weaker woman he assigned
That softening gentleness of mind
That can by sympathy impart
Its likeness to the roughest heart,
Her eyes with magic power endu'd,
To fire the dull and awe the rude;
His rosy fingers on her face
Shed lavish every blooming grace,
And stamped (perfection to display)
His mildest image on her clay.
Man, active, resolute, and bold,
He fashioned in a different mould,
With useful arts his mind informed,
His breast with nobler passions warmed;
He gave him knowledge, taste, and sense,
And courage for the fair's defense:
Her frame, resistless to each wrong,
Demands protection from the strong;
To man she flies when fear alarms
And claims the temple of his arms.
By Nature's author thus declared
The woman's sovereign and her guard,
Shall man by treacherous wiles invade
The weakness he was meant to aid?
While beauty, given to inspire
Protecting love and soft desire,
Lights up a wildfire in the heart,
And to its own breast points the dart,
Becomes the spoiler's base pretense
To triumph over innocence?
The wolf that tears the timorous sheep
Was never set the fold to keep,
Nor was the tiger or the pard
Meant the benighted trav'ller's guard;
But man, the wildest beast of prey,
Wears friendship's semblance to betray,
His strength against the weak employs,
And where he should protect destroys.
Past twelve o'clock the Watchman cried,
His brief the studious Lawyer plied,
The all-prevailing fee lay nigh,
The earnest of tomorrow's lie;
Sudden the furious winds arise,
The jarring casement shattered flies,
The doors admit a hollow sound,
And rattling from their hinges bound,
When Justice in a blaze of light
Revealed her radiant form to sight.
The wretch with thrilling horror shook,
Loose every joint and pale his look.
Not having seen her in the courts,
Or found her mentioned in Reports,
He asked with falt'ring tongue her name,
Her errand there, and whence she came?
Sternly the white-rob'd Shade replied,
(A crimson glow her visage died)
"Can thou be doubtful who I am?
"Is Justice grown so strange a name?
"Were not your courts for Justice raised?
"'It Was there of old my altars blazed.
"My guardian thee did I elect
"My sacred temple to protect,
"That thou and all thy venal tribe
"Should spurn the goddess for the bribe?
"Aloud the ruined client cries
"Justice has neither ears nor eyes;
"In soul alliance with the bar
"'Against me the judge denounces war,
"And rarely issues his decree
"But with intent to baffle me."
She paused; her breast with fury burned;
The trembling Lawyer thus returned:
"I own the charge is justly laid,
"And weak the excuse that can be made;
"Yet search the spacious globe, and see
"If all mankind are not like me.
"The Gownman skilled in Romish lies
"By faith's false glass deludes our eyes,
"Over conscience rides without control,
"And robs the man to save his soul.
"The Doctor with important face
"By sly design mistakes the case,
"Prescribes, and spins out the disease
"To trick the patient of his fees.
"The Soldier, rough with many a scar,
"And red with slaughter, leads the war;
"If he a nation's trust betray
"The foe has offered double pay.
"When vice over all mankind prevails,
"And weighty interest turns the scales,
"Must I be better than the rest,
"And harbor Justice in my breast,
"On one side only take the fee,
"Content with poverty and thee?"
"Thou blind to sense and vile of mind!"
The exasperated Shade rejoined,
"If virtue from the world is flown
"Will others' frauds excuse thy own?
"For sickly souls the Priest was made,
"Physicians for the body's aid,
"The Soldier guarded liberty,
"Man woman, and the Lawyer me;
"If all are faithless to their trust
"They leave nor thee the less unjust.
"Henceforth your pleadings I disclaim,
"And bar the sanction of my name;
"Within your courts it shall be read
"That Justice from the Law is fled."
She spoke, and hid in shades her face
Till Hardwicke soothed her into grace.
FABLE IX. THE FARMER, THE SPANIEL, AND THE CAT.
WHY knits my dear her angry brow?
What rude offense alarms you now?
I said that Delia 's fair 't is true,
But did I say she equaled you?
Cannot I another's face commend,
Or to her virtues be a friend,
But instantly your forehead lowers,
As if her merit lessened yours?
From female envy never free,
All must be blind because you see.
Survey the gardens, fields, and bowers,
The buds, the blossoms, and the flowers,
Then tell me where the woodbine grows
That vies in sweetness with the rose?
Or where the lily's snowy white
That throws such beauties on the sight?
Yet folly is it to declare
That these are neither sweet nor fair.
The crystal shines with fainter rays
Before the diamond's brighter blaze,
And fops will say the diamond dies
Before the luster of your eyes;
But I who deal in truth deny
That neither shine when you are by.
When zephirs over the blossoms stray,
And sweets along the air convey,
Sha' n't I the fragrant breeze inhale
Because you breathe a sweeter gale?
Sweet are the flowers that deck the field,
Sweet is the smell the blossoms yield,
Sweet is the summer gale that blows,
And sweet, though sweeter you, the rose.
Shall envy then torment your breast
If you are lovelier than the rest?
For while I give to each her due
By praising them I flatter you,
And praising most I still declare
You fairest where the rest are fair.
As at his board a Farmer sat,
Replenished by his homely treat,
His favorite Spaniel near him stood,
And with his master shared the food;
The crackling bones his jaws devoured,
His lapping tongue the trenchers scoured,
Till sated now supine he lay,
And snor'd the rising fumes away.
The hungry Cat in turn drew near,
And humbly craved a servant's share;
Her modest worth the Master knew,
And straight the fatt'ning morsel threw;
Enraged the snarling Cur awoke,
And thus with spiteful envy spoke:
"They only claim a right to eat
"Who earn by services their meat:
"Me zeal and industry inflame
"To scour the fields and spring the game,
"Or plunging in the wintry wave
"For man the wounded bird to save.
"With watchful diligence I keep
"From prowling wolves his fleecy sheep,
"At home his midnight hours secure,
"And drive the robber from the door:
"For this his breast with kindness glows,
"For this his hand the food bestows;
"And shall thy indolence impart
"A warmer friendship to his heart,
"That thus he robs me of my due
"To pamper such vile things as you?"
"I own" (with meekness Puss replied)
"Superior merit on your side,
"Nor does my breast with envy swell
"To find it recompensed so well;
"Yet I in what my nature can
"Contribute to the good of man.
"Whose claws destroy the pilf'ring mouse?
"Who drives the vermin from the house?
"Or watchful for the laboring swain
"From lurking rats secures the grain?
"From hence if he rewards bestow
"Why should your heart with gall overflow?
"Why pine my happiness to see
"Since there 's enough for you and me?"
"Thy words are just," the Farmer cried,
"And spurned the snarler from his side.
FABLE X. THE SPIDER AND THE BE.
THE nymph who walks the public streets,
And sets her cap at all she meets,
May catch the fool who turns to stare,
But men of sense avoid the snare.
As on the margin of the flood
With silken line my Lydia stood,
I smiled to see the pains you took
To cover over the fraudful hook.
Along the forest as we strayed
You saw the boy his limetwigs spread;
Guessed you the reason of his fear?
Lest heedless we approach too near,
Far as behind the bush we lay
The linnet fluttered on the spray.
Needs there such caution to delude
The scaly fry and feathered brood?
And think you with inferior art
To captivate the human heart?
The maid who modestly conceals
Her beauties while she hides reveals;
Give but a glimpse and fancy draws
Whatever the Grecian Venus was.
From Eve's first figleaf to brocade
All dress was meant for fancy's aid,
Which evermore delighted dwells
On what the bashful nymph conceals.
When Caelia struts in man's attire
She shows too much to raise desire,
But from the hoop's bewitching round
Her very shoe has power to wound.
The roving eye, the bosom bare,
The forward laugh, the wanton air,
May catch the fop, for gudgeons strike
At the bare hook and bait alike,
While salmon play regardless by
Till art like nature forms the fly.
Beneath a peasant's homely thatch
A Spider long had held her watch;
From morn to night with restless care
She spun her web and wove her snare.
Within the limits of her reign
Lay many a heedless captive slain,
Or fluttering struggled in the toils
To burst the chains and shun her wiles.
A straying Be that perched hard by
Beheld her with disdainful eye,
And thus began: "Mean Thing! give over,
"And lay thy slender threads no more;
"A thoughtless fly or two at most
"Is all the conquest thou can boast,
"For Bees of sense thy arts evade,
"We see so plain the nets are laid.
"The gaudy tulip that displays
"Her spreading foliage to the gaze,
"That points her charms at all she sees,
"And yields to every wanton breeze,
"Attracts not me: where blushing grows
"Guarded with thorns the modest rose
"Enamored round and round I fly,
"Or on her fragrant bosom lie;
"Reluctant she my ardour meets,
"And bashful renders up her sweets.
"To wiser heads attention lend,
"And learn this lesson from a friend;
"She who with modesty retires
"Adds fuel to her lover's fires,
"While such incautious jilts as you
"By folly your own schemes undo."
FABLE XI. THE YOUNG LION AND THE APE.
IT IS true I blame your lover's choice
Though flattered by the public voice,
And peevish grow and sick to hear
His exclamations, O how fair!
I listen not to wild delights
And transports of expected nights:
What is to me your hoard of charms,
The whiteness of your neck and arms?
Needs there no acquisition more
To keep contention from the door?
Yes; pass a fortnight and you will find
All beauty cloys but of the mind.
Sense and good humor ever prove
The surest cords to fasten love;
Yet Phillis, simplest of your sex!
You never think but to perplex,
Coquetting it with every Ape
That struts abroad in human shape;
Not that the coxcomb is your taste,
But that it stings your lover's breast;
Tomorrow you resign the sway,
Prepared to honor and obey,
The tyrant-mistress change for life
To the submission of a wife.
Your sollies if you can suspend,
And learn instruction from a friend.
Reluctant heat the first address,
Think often ere you answer Yes,
But once resolved throw off disguise,
And wear your wishes in your eyes:
With caution every look forbear
That might create one jealous fear,
A lover's ripening hopes confound,
Or give the generous breast a wound;
Contemn the girlish arts to tease,
Nor use your power unless to please,
For fools alone with rigor sway
When soon or late they must obey.
The King of brutes in life's decline
Resolved dominion to resign;
The beasts were summoned to appear
And bend before the royal heir:
They came; a day was fixed: the crowd
Before their future monarch bowed.
A dapper Monkey pert and vain
Stepped forth and thus addressed the train:
"Why cringe my Friends! with slavish awe
"Before this pageant king of straw?
"Shall we anticipate the hour,
"And ere we feel it own his power?
"The counsels of experience prize;
"I know the maxims of the wise:
"Subjection let us cast away,
"And live the monarchs of today;
"'It Is ours the vacant hand to spurn,
"And play the tyrant each in turn:
"So shall he right from wrong discern,
"And mercy from oppression learn,
"At others' woes be taught to melt,
"And loathe the ills himself has felt."
He spoke; his bosom swelled with pride;
The youthful Lion thus replied:
"What madness prompts thee to provoke
"My wrath, and dare the impending stroke?
"Thou wretched Fool! can wrongs impart
"Compassion to the feeling heart,
"Or teach the grateful breast to glow,
"The hand to give, or eye to flow?
"Learned in the practice of their schools
"From women thou have drawn thy rules;
"To them return; in such a cause
"From only such expect applause:
"The partial sex I not condemn
"For liking those who copy them.
"Would thou the generous Lion bind?
"By kindness bribe him to be kind:
"Good offices their likeness get,
"And payment lessens not the debt:
"With multiplying hand he gives
"The good from others he receives,
"Or for the bad makes fair return,
"And pays with interest scorn for scorn."
FABLE XII. THE COLT AND THE FARMER.
TELL me Corinna, if you can,
Why so averse, so coy, to man?
Did Nature, lavish of her care,
From her best pattern form you fair
That you, ungrateful to her cause,
Should mock her gifts and spurn her laws,
And miser-like withhold that store
Which by imparting blesses more?
Beauty's a gift by Heaven assigned
The portion of the female kind;
For this the yielding maid demands
Protection at her lover's hands,
And though by wasting years it fade
Remembrance tells him once't was paid.
And will you then this wealth conceal
For age to rust or time to steal,
The summer of your youth to rove
A stranger to the joys of love?
Then when life's winter hastens on,
And youth's fair heritage is gone,
Dow'rless to court some peasant's arms
To guard your withered age from harms,
No gratitude to warm his breast
For blooming beauty once possessed,
How will you curse that stubborn pride
Which drove your bark across the tide,
And sailing before folly's wind
Left sense and happiness behind?
Corinna, lest these whims prevail
To such as you I write my Tale.
A Colt for blood and mettled speed
The choicest of the running breed,
Of youthful strength and beauty vain
Refused subjection to the rein.
In vain the groom's officious skill
Opposed his pride and checked his will,
In vain the master's forming care
Restrained with threats or soothed with prayer;
Of freedom proud and scorning man
Wild over the spacious plains he ran.
Wherever luxuriant Nature spread
Her flowery carpet over the mead,
Or bubbling streams soft-gliding pass
To cool and freshen up the grass,
Disdaining bounds he cropp'd the blade,
And wantoned in the spoil he made.
In plenty thus the summer past
Revolving winter came at last;
The trees no more a shelter yield,
The verdure withers from the field,
Perpetual snows infest the ground,
In icy chains the streams are bound,
Cold nipping winds and rattling hail
His lank unshelter'd sides assail.
As round he cast his rueful eyes
He saw the thatch'd-roof cottage rise;
The prospect touched his heart with cheer,
And promised kind deliverance near;
A stable, erst his scorn and hate,
Was now become his wished retreat:
His passion cool, his pride forgot,
A Farmer's welcome yard he sought.
The Master saw his woeful plight,
His limbs that tottered with his weight,
And friendly to the stable led,
And saw him litter'd, dressed, and fed.
In slothful ease all night he lay;
The servants rose at break of day;
The market calls: along the road
His back must bear the ponderous load:
In vain he struggles or complains,
Incessant blows reward his pains.
Tomorrow varies but his toil;
Chained to the plough he breaks the soil,
While scanty meals at night repay
The painful labors of the day.
Subdued by toil, with anguish rent,
His selfupbraidings found a vent:
"Wretch that I am!" he sighing said,
"By arrogance and folly led,
"Had but my restive youth been brought
"To learn the lesson Nature taught
"Then had I like my sires of yore
"The prize from every courser bore,
"While man bestowed rewards and praise,
"And females crowned my latter days:
"Now lasting servitude 's my lot,
"My birth contemned my speed forgot:
"Doomed am I for my pride to bear
"A living death from year to year."
FABLE XIII. THE OWL AND THE NIGHTINGALE.
TO know the mistress' humor right
See if her maids are clean and tight;
If Betty waits without her stays
She copies but her lady's ways;
When Miss comes in with boisterous shout,
And drops no curtsy going out,
Depend upon 't mamma is one
Who reads or drinks too much alone.
If bottled beer her thirst assuage
She feels enthusiastic rage,
And burns with ardour to inherit
The gifts and workings of the spirit:
If learning crack her giddy brains
No remedy but death remains.
Sum up the various ills of life
And all are sweet to such a wife.
At home superior wit she vaunts
And twits her husband with his wants;
Her ragged offspring all around
Like pigs are wallowing on the ground:
Impatient ever of control
She knows no order but of soul;
With books her litter'd floor is spread
Of nameless authors never read,
Foul linen, petticoats, and lace,
Fill up the intermediate space.
Abroad at visitings her tongue
Is never still, and always wrong;
All meanings she defines away,
And stands with truth and sense at bay.
If ever she meets a gentle heart
Skilled in the housewife's useful art,
Who makes her family her care,
And builds Contentment's temple there,
She starts at such mistakes in nature,
And cries, "Lord help us! what a creature!"
Melissa, if the moral strike
You Will find the Fable not unlike.
An Owl puss'd up with selfconceit
Loved learning better than his meat;
Old manuscripts he treasured up,
And rummag'd every grocer's shop;
At pastrycooks was known to ply,
And strip for science every pie.
For modern poetry and wit
He had read all that Blackmore writ;
So intimate with Curl was grown
His learned treasures were his own,
To all his authors had access,
And sometimes would correct the press.
In logic he acquired such knowledge
You Would swear him Fellow of a college;
Alike to every art and science
His daring genius bid defiance,
And swallowed wisdom with that haste
That cits do custards at a feast.
Within the shelter of a wood
One evening as he musing stood
Hard by upon a leafy spray
A Nightingale began his lay;
Sudden he starts with anger stung,
And screeching interrupts the song.
"Pert busy Thing! thy airs give over,
"And let my contemplation soar.
"What is the music of thy voice
"But jarring dissonance and noise?
"Be wise: true harmony thou 'lt find
"Not in the throat but in the mind,
"By empty chirping not attained,
"But by laborious study gained.
"Go read the authors Pope explodes,
"Fathom the depth of Cibber's Odes,
"With modern plays improve thy wit,
"Read all the learning Henley writ,
"And if thou needs must sing sing then,
"And emulate the ways of men;
"So shall thou grow like me refined,
"And bring improvement to thy kind."
"Thou Wretch!" the little Warbler cried,
"Made up of ignorance and pride,
"Ask all the birds, and they will declare
"A greater blockhead wings not air.
"Read over thyself, thy talents scan;
"Science was only meant for man.
"No useless authors me molest,
"I mind the duties of my nest,
"With careful wing protect my young,
"And cheer their ev'nings with a song.
"Thus following Nature and her laws
"From men and birds I claim applause,
"While nursed in pedantry and sloth
"An Owl is scorned alike by both."
FABLE XIV. THE SPARROW AND THE DOVE.
IT was, as learned traditions say,
Upon an April's blithesome day
When Pleasure, ever on the wing,
Returned companion of the Spring,
And cheered the birds with amorous heat,
Instructing little hearts to beat,
A Sparrow, frolic, gay, and young,
Of bold address and flippant tongue,
Just left his lady of a night,
Like him to follow new delight.
The youth of many a conquest vain
Flew off to seek the chirping train,
The chirping train he quickly found,
And with a saucy ease bowed round.
For every she his bosom burns,
And this and that he wooes by turns;
And here a sigh and there a bill,
And here -- "Those eyes, so formed to kill!"
And now with ready tongue he strings
Unmeaning soft resistless things,
With vows and Demme's skilled to woo
As other pretty fellows do:
Not that he thought this short essay
A prologue needful to his play;
No: trust me, says our learned letter,
He knew the virtuous sex much better;
But these he held as specious arts
To show his own superior parts,
The form of decency to shield,
And give a just pretense to yield.
Thus finishing his courtly play
He marked the favorite of the day,
With careless impudence drew near
And whispered Hebrew in her ear,
A hint which like the Mason's sign
The conscious can alone divine.
The fluttering nymph, expert at feigning,
Cried "Sir! -- pray Sir, explain your meaning --
"Go prate to those that may endure ye --
"To me this rudeness! -- I Will assure ye -- "
Then off she glided like a swallow,
As saying -- You guess where to follow.
To such as know the party set
It Is needless to declare they met;
The Parson's barn, as authors mention,
Confessed the fair had apprehension:
Her honor there secute from stain
She held all farther trifling vain,
No more affected to be coy,
But rushed licentious on the joy.
"Hist, Love!" the male companion cried,
"Retire a while; I fear we 're spied."
Nor was the caution vain; he saw
A Turtle rustling in the straw,
While over her callow brood she hung,
And fondly thus addressed her young:
"Ye tender objects of my care!
"Peace, peace, ye little helpless pair!
"Anon he comes your gentle sire,
"And brings you all your hearts require.
"For us his infants and his bride,
"For us, with only love to guide,
"Our lord assumes an eagle's speed,
"And like a lion dares to bleed:
"Nor yet by wintry skies confined
"He mounts upon the rudest wind,
"From danger tears the vital spoil,
"And with affection sweetens toil.
"Ah cease, too venurous! cease to dare;
"In thine our dearer safety spare!
"From him ye cruel Falcons! stray,
"And turn ye Fowlers! far away.
"Should I survive to see the day
"That tears me from myself away,
"That cancels all that Heaven could give,
"The life by which alone I live,
"Alas! how more than lost were I,
"Who in the thought already die!
"Ye Powers! whom men and birds obey,
"Great Rulers of your creatures! say
"Why mourning comes by bliss conveyed,
"And even the sweets of love allayed?
"Where grows enjoyment tall and fair
"Around it twines entangling care,
"While fear for what our souls possess
"Enervates every power to bless;
"Yet friendship forms the bliss above,
"And Life! what art thou without love?"
Our hero, who had heard apart,
Felt something moving in his heart,
But quickly with disdain suppressed
The virtue rising in his breast,
And first he seign'd to laugh aloud,
And next approaching smiled and bowed.
"Madam, you must not think me rude,
"Good manners never can intrude;
"I vow I come through pure good nature --
"(Upon my soul a charming creature!)
"Are these the comforts of a wife?
"This careful cloistered moping life?
"No doubt that odious thing called Duty
"Is a sweet province for a beauty.
"Thou pretty Ignorance! thy will
"Is measured to thy want of skill;
"That good oldfashion'd dame thy mother
"Has taught thy infant years no other.
"The greatest ill in the creation
"Is sure the want of education.
"But think ye -- tell me without feigning,
"Have all these charms no farther meaning?
"Dame Nature, if you do n't forget her,
"Might teach your Ladyship much better.
"For shame! reject this mean employment;
"Enter the world and taste enjoyment,
"Where time by circling bliss we measure;
"Beauty was formed alone for pleasure:
"Come, prove the blessing; follow me:
"Be wise, be happy, and be free."
"Kind Sir!" replied our matron chaste,
"Your zeal seems pretty much in haste.
"I own the fondness to be blessed
"Is a deep thirst in every breast;
"Of blessings too I have my store,
"Yet quarrel not should Heaven give more;
"Then prove the change to be expedient,
"And think me Sir your most obedient."
Here turning as to one inferior
Our gallant spoke, and smiled superior.
"Methinks to quit your boasted station
"Requires a world of hesitation:
"Where brats and bonds are held a blessing
"The case I doubt is past redressing.
"Why Child! suppose the joys I mention
"Were the mere fruits of my invention,
"You 'ave cause sufficient for your carriage
"In flying from the curse of marriage,
"That sly decoy with varied snares
"That takes your widgeon in by pairs,
"Alike to husband and to wife
"The cure of love and bane of life,
"The only method of forecasting
"To make misfortune firm and lasting,
"The sin by Heaven's peculiar sentence
"Unpardoned through a life's repentance:
"It is the double snake that weds
"A common tail to different heads,
"That leads the carcass still astray
"By dragging each a different way.
"Of all the ills that may attend me
"From marriage mighty Gods! de^^nd me.
"Give me frank Nature's wild demesne,
"And boundless track of air serene,
"Where fancy ever winged for change
"Delights to sport, delights to range;
"There Liberty! to thee is owing
"Whatever of bliss is worth bestowing;
"Delights still varied and divine
"Sweet goddess of the Hills! are thine.
"What say you now, you pretty pink you!
"Have I for once spoke reason think you?
"You take me now for no romancer --
"Come, never study for an answer:
"Away, cast every care behind ye,
"And fly where joy alone shall find ye."
"Soft yet," returned our female fencer,
"A question more or so -- and then Sir.
"You 'ave raily'd me with sense exceeding,
"With much fine wit and better breeding,
"But pray Sir, how do you contrive it?
"Do those of your world never wive it?"
"No no." "How then?" "Why, dare I tell;
"What does the business full as well."
"Do you never love?" "An hour at leisure."
"Have you no friendships?" "Yes, for pleasure."
"No care for little ones?" "We get 'em;
"The rest the mothers mind, and let 'em;"
"Thou Wretch! rejoined the kindling Dove,
"Quite lost to life as lost to love,
"Whenever misfortune comes how just!
"And come misfortune surely must:
"In the dread season of dismay,
"In that your hour of trial, say
"Who then shall prop your sinking heart,
"Who bear affliction's weightier part?
"Say, when the blackbrow'd welkin bends,
"And winter's gloomy form impends,
"To mourning turns all transient cheer,
"And blasts the melancholy year,
"For times at no persuasion stay,
"Nor vice can find perpetual May,
"Then where 's that tongue by folly fed,
"That soul of pertness whither fled?
"All shrunk within thy lonely nest,
"Forlorn, abandoned, and unblest,
"No friend by cordial bonds allied
"Shall seek thy cold unsocial side,
"No chirping prattlers to delight
"Shall turn the long-enduring night,
"No bride her words of balm impart,
"And warm thee at her constant heart.
"Freedom restrained by reason's force
"Is as the sun's unvarying course,
"Benignly active, sweetly bright,
"Affording warmth, affording light,
"But torn from virtue's sacred rules
"Becomes a comet gazed by fools,
"Foreboding cares, and storms, and strife,
"And fraught with all the plagues of life.
"Thou Fool! by union every creature
"Subsists through universal Nature,
"And this to beings void of mind
"Is wedlock of a meaner kind.
"While womb'd in space primeval clay
"A yet unfashion'd embryo lay,
"The Source of endless good above
"Shot down his spark of kindling love;
"Touched by the allenliv'ning flame
"Then motion first exulting came,
"Each atom sought its separate class
"Through many a fair enamored mass;
"Love cast the central charm around,
"And with eternal nuptials bound:
"Then form and order over the sky
"First trained their bridal pomp on high,
"The sun displayed his orb to sight
"And burnt with hymeneal light.
"Hence Nature's virgin-womb conceived,
"And with the genial burden heaved;
"Forth came the oak, her firstborn heir,
"And sealed the breathing steep of air;
"Then infant stems of various use
"Imbibed her soft maternal juice;
"The flowers in early bloom disclosed
"Upon her fragrant breast reposed;
"Within her warm embraces grew
"A race of endless form and hue;
"Then poured her lesser offspring round,
"And fondly clothed their parent ground.
"Nor here alone the virtue reigned
"By matter's cumb'ring form detained,
"But thence subliming and refined
"Aspired, and reached its kindred Mind;
"Caught in the fond celestial fire
"The mind perceived unknown desire,
"And now with kind effusion flowed,
"And now with cordial ardours glowed,
"Beheld the sympathetick fair,
"And loved its own resemblance there,
"On all with circling radiance shone,
"But centring fixed on one alone,
"There clasped the heav'n-appointed wife,
"And doubled every joy of life.
"Here ever blessing ever blessed
"Resides this beauty of the breast,
"As from his palace here the god
"Still beams effulgent bliss abroad,
"Here gems his own eternal round,
"The ring by which the world is bound,
"Here bids his seat of empire grow,
"And builds his little heaven below.
"The bridal partners thus allied,
"And thus in sweet accordance tied,
"One body, heart, and spirit, live,
"Enriched by every joy they give,
"Like Echo from her vocal hold
"Returned in music twenty fold;
"Their union firm and undecay'd
"Nor time can shake nor power invade,
"But as the stem and scion stand
"Ingrasted by a skilful hand,
"They check the tempest's wintry rage,
"And bloom and strengthen into age;
"A thousand amities unknown,
"And powers perceived by love alone,
"Endearing looks and chaste desire
"Fan and support the mutual fire,
"Whose flame perpetual as refined
"Is fed by an immortal mind.
"Nor yet the nuptial sanction ends,
"Like Nile it opens and descends,
"Which by apparent windings led
"We trace to its celestial head.
"The sire fiist springing from above
"Becomes the source of life and love,
"And gives his filial heir to flow
"In fondness down on sons below:
"Thus rolled in one continued tide
"To time's extremest verge they glide,
"While kindred streams on either hand
"Branch forth in blessings over the land.
"Thee Wretch! no lisping babe shall name,
"No late-returning brother claim,
"No kinsman on thy road rejoice,
"No sister greet thy entering voice,
"With partial eyes no parents see,
"And bless their years restored in thee.
"In age rejected or declined,
"An alien even among thy kind,
"The partner of thy scorned embrace
"Shall play the wanton in thy face,
"Each spark unplume thy little pride,
"All friendship fly thy faithless side,
"Thy name shall like thy carcass rot,
"In sickness spurned, in death forgot.
"Allgiving Power! great Source of life!
"O hear the parent! hear the wife!
"That life thou lendest from above
"Though little make it large in love;
"O bid my feeling heart expand
"To every claim on every hand!
"To those from whom my days I drew,
"To these in whom those days renew,
"To all my kin, however wide,
"In cordial warmth as blood allied,
"To friends with steely fetters twined,
"And to the cruel not unkind!
"But chief the lord of my desire,
"My life, myself, my soul, my sire,
"Friends, children, all that wish can claim,
"Chaste passion clasp and rapture name,
"O spare him, spare him, gracious Power!
"O give him to my latest hour!
"Let me my length of life employ
"To give my sole enjoyment joy!
"His love let mutual love excite,
"Turn all my cares to his delight,
"And every needless blessing spare
"Wherein my darling wants a share!
"When he with graceful action wooes,
"And sweetly bills and fondly cooes,
"Ah! deck me to his eyes alone
"With charms attractive as his own,
"And in my circling wings carest
"Give all the lover to my breast;
"Then in our chaste connubial bed,
"My bosom pillow'd for his head,
"His eyes with blissful slumbers close,
"And watch with me my lord's repose,
"Your peace around his temples twine,
"And love him with a love like mine!
"And for I know his generous flame
"Beyond whatever my sex can claim,
"Me too to your protection take,
"And spare me for my husband's sake.
"Let one unrustled calm delight
"The loving and beloved unite,
"One pure desire our bosoms warm,
"One will direct, one wish inform,
"Through life one mutual aid sustain,
"In death one peaceful grave contain."
While swelling with the darling theme
Her accents poured an endless stream,
The wellknown wings a sound impart
That reached her ear and touched her heart;
Quick dropped the music of her tongue,
And forth with eager joy she sprung;
As swift her entering consort flew,
And plumed and kindled at the view;
Their wings their souls embracing meet,
Their hearts with answ'ring measure beat,
Half lost in sacred sweets, and blessed
With raptures felt but never expressed.
Straight to her humble roof she led
The partner of her spotless bed;
Her young, a fluttering pair, arise,
Their welcome sparkling in their eyes;
Transported to their sire they bound,
And hang with speechless action round:
In pleasure wrapped the parents stand,
And see their little wings expand;
The sire his life-sustaining prize
To each expecting bill applies,
There fondly pours the wheaten spoil,
With transport given though won with toil,
While all collected at the sight,
And silent through supreme delight,
The fair high heaven of bliss beguiles,
And on her lord and infants smiles.
The Sparrow, whose attention hung
Upon the Dove's enchanting tongue,
Of all his little sleights disarmed,
And from himself by virtue charmed,
When now he saw what only seemed
A fact so late a fable deemed,
His soul to envy he resigned,
His hours of folly to the wind,
In secret wished a Turtle too,
And sighing to himself withdrew.
FABLE XV. THE FEMALE SEDUCERS.
IT IS said of widow, maid, and wife,
That honor is a woman's life:
Unhappy Sex! who only claim
A being in the breath of Fame,
Which tainted not the quickening gales
That sweep Sabaea's spicy vales
Nor all the healing sweets restore
That breathe along Arabia's shore.
The trav'ller if he chance to stray
May turn uncensur'd to his way;
Polluted streams again are pure,
And deepest wounds admit a cure;
But Woman no redemption knows;
The wounds of honor never close!
Though distant every hand to guide,
Nor skilled on life's tempestuous tide,
If once her feeble bark recede,
Or deviate from the course decreed,
In vain she seeks the friendless shore,
Her swifter folly flies before,
The circling ports against her close,
And shut the wanderer from repose,
Till by conflicting waves oppressed
Her found'ring pinnace sinks to rest.
Are there no offerings to atone
For but a single error? None.
Though Woman is avowed of old
No daughter of celestial mould,
Her temp'ring not without allay,
And formed but of the finer clay,
We challenge from the mortal dame
The strength angelick natures claim;
Nay more; for sacred stories tell
That even immortal angels fell.
Whatever fills the teeming sphere
Of humid earth and ambient air
With varying elements endu'd
Was formed to fall and rise renewed.
The stars no fixed duration know,
Wide oceans ebb again to flow,
The moon repletes her waining face
All beauteous from her late disgrace,
And suns that mourn approaching night
Refulgent rise with newborn light.
In vain may death and time subdue
While Nature mints her race anew,
And holds some vital spark apart,
Like virtue hid in every heart;
It Is hence reviving warmth is seen
To clothe a naked world in green;
No longer barred by winter's cold
Again the gates of life unfold,
Again each insect tries his wing,
And lifts fresh pinions on the spring,
Again from every latent root
The bladed stem and tendril shoot,
Exhaling incense to the skies
Again to perish and to rise.
And must weak Woman then disown
The change to which a world is prone,
In one meridian brightness shine,
And never like evening suns decline,
Resolved and firm alone? -- Is this
What we demand of Woman? -- Yes.
But should the spark of Vestal fire
In some unguarded hour expire,
Or should the nightly thief invade
Hesperia's chaste and sacred shade,
Of all the blooming spoil possessed
The dragon Honor charmed to rest,
Shall virtue's flame no more return,
No more with virgin splendor burn,
No more the ravaged garden blow
With spring's succeeding blossom? -- No:
Pity may mourn but not restore,
And Woman falls to rise no more.
Within this sublunary sphere
A country lies -- no matter where,
The clime may readily be found
By all who tread poetic ground:
A stream called Life across it glides,
And equally the land divides,
And here of Vice the province lies,
And there the hills of Virtue rise.
Upon a mountain's airy stand,
Whose summit looked to either land,
An ancient pair their dwelling chose
As well for prospect as repose;
For mutual faith they long were famed,
And Temperance and Religion named.
A numerous progeny divine
Confessed the honors of their line,
But in a little daughter fair
Was centred more than half their care,
For Heaven to gratulate her birth
Gave signs of future joy to earth:
White was the robe this infant wore,
And Chastity the name she bore.
As now the maid in stature grew,
(A flower just opening to the view)
Often through her native land she strayed,
And wrestling with the lambkins played;
Her looks diffusive sweets bequeathed,
The breeze grew purer as she breathed,
The morn her radiant blush assumed,
The spring with earlier fragrance bloomed,
And Nature yearly took delight
Like her to dress the world in white.
But when her rising form was seen
To reach the crisis of fifteen,
Her parents up the mountain's head
With anxious step their darling led;
By turns they snatched her to their breast,
And thus the fears of age expressed:
"O joyful cause of many a care!
"O Daughter too divinely fair!
"Yon' world on this important day
"Demands thee to a dangerous way;
"A painful journey all must go,
"Whose doubtful period none can know,
"Whose due direction who can find
"Where reason 's mute and sense is blind?
"Ah, what unequal leaders these
"Through such a wide perplexing maze!
"Then mark the warnings of the wise,
"And learn what love and years advise.
"Far to the right thy prospect bend
"Where yonder towering hills ascend;
"Lo! there the arduous paths in view
"Which Virtue and her sons pursue,
"With toil over lessening earth they rise,
"And gain and gain upon the skies:
"Narrow is the way her children tread,
"No walk for pleasure smoothly spread,
"But rough, and difficult, and steep,
"Painful to climb, and hard to keep.
"Fruits immature those lands dispense,
"A food indelicate to sense,
"Of taste unpleasant; yet from those
"Pure health with cheerful vigor ^lows,
"And strength unfeeling of decay
"Throughout the long laborious way.
"Hence as they scale that heavenly road
"Each limb is lightened of its load,
"From earth refining still they go,
"And leave the mortal weight below,
"Then spreads the straight, the doubtful clears,
"And smooth the rugged path appears,
"For custom turns fatigue to ease,
"And taught by Virtue pain can please.
"At length the toilsome journey over,
"And near the bright celestial shore,
"A gulf black, fearful, and profound,
"Appears, of either world the bound,
"Through darkness leading up to light,
"Sense backward shrinks and shuns the sight;
"For there the transitory train
"Of Time, and Form, and Care, and Pain,
"And Matter's gross incumb'ring mass,
"Man's late associates, cannot pass,
"But sinking quit the immortal charge
"And leave the wondering soul at large,
"Lightly she wings her obvious way,
"And mingles with eternal day.
"Thither, O thither wing thy speed
"Though pleasure charm or pain impede!
"To such the all-bounteous Power has given
"For present earth a future heaven,
"For trivial loss unmeasured gain,
"And endless bliss for transient pain.
"Then fear, ah! fear to turn thy sight
"Where yonder flowery fields invite;
"Wide on the left the pathway bends,
"And with pernicious ease descends;
"There sweet to sense and fair to show
"New-planted Edens seem to blow,
"Trees that delicious poison bear,
"For death is vegetable there.
"Hence is the frame of health unbrac'd,
"Each sinew slack'ning at the taste,
"The soul to passion yields her throne,
"And sees with organs not her own,
"While like the slumb'rer in the night,
"Pleased with the shadowy dream of light,
"Before her alienated eyes
"The scenes of Fairyland arise,
"The puppet world's amusing show
"Dipped in the gayly-colour'd bow,
"Sceptres, and wreaths, and glittering things,
"The toys of infants and of kings,
"That tempt along the baneful plain
"The idly wise and lightly vain,
"Till verging on the gulfy shore
"Sudden they sink and rise no more.
But list to what thy Fates declare:
"Though thou art Woman frail as fair
"If once thy sliding foot should stray,
"Once quit yon' heav'n-appointed way,
"For thee, lost Maid! for thee alone
"Nor prayers shall plead nor tears atone;
"Reproach, scorn, infamy, and hate,
"On thy returning steps shall wait,
"Thy form be loathed by every eye,
"And every foot thy presence fly."
Thus armed with words of potent sound,
Like guardian angels placed around,
A charm by truth divinely cast,
Forward our young advent'rer past.
Forth from her sacred eyelids sent,
Like Morn, forerunning radiance went,
While Honor, handmaid late assigned,
Upheld her lucid train behind.
Awestruck the much-admiring crowd
Before the virgin vision bowed,
Gazed with an ever-new delight,
And caught fresh virtues at the sight;
For not of earth's unequal frame
They deemed the heav'n-compounded dame,
If matter sure the most refined,
High wrought and tempered into mind,
Some darling daughter of the Day,
And body'd by her native ray.
Wherever she passes thousands bend,
And thousands where she moves attend;
Her ways observant eyes confess,
Her steps pursuing praises bless,
While to the elevated Maid
Oblations as to Heaven are paid.
'Twas on an ever-blithesome day,
The jovial birth of rosy May,
When genial warmth no more suppressed
New-melts the frost in every breast,
The cheek with secret flusbing dies
And looks kind things from chastest eyes,
The sun with healthier visage glows,
Aside his clouded kerchief throws,
And dances up the ethereal plain
Where late he used to climb with pain,
While Nature as from bonds set free
Springs out, and gives a loose to glee.
And now for momentary rest
The Nymph her traveled step represt,
Just turned to view the stage attained,
And gloried in the height she gained.
Outstretch'd before her wide survey
The realms of sweet perdition lay,
And pity touched her soul with woe
To see a world so lost below,
When straight the breeze began to breathe
Airs gently wasted from beneath
That bore commissioned witchcraft thence
And reached her sympathy of sense;
No sounds of discord, that disclose
A people sunk and lost in woes,
But as of present good possessed,
The very triumph of the blessed:
The Maid in wrapped attention hung
While thus approaching Sirens sung:
"Hither Fairest! hither haste,
"Brightest Beauty! come and taste
"What the powers of bliss unfold,
"Joys too mighty to be told;
"Taste what ecstasies they give,
"Dying raptures taste, and live.
"In thy lap, disdaining measure,
"Nature empties all her treasure,
"Soft desires that sweetly languish,
"Fierce delights that rise to anguish.
"Fairest! do thou yet delay?
"Brightest Beauty! come away.
"List not when the froward chide,
"Sons of Pedantry and Pride,
"Snarlers to whose feeble sense
"April sunshine is offense;
"Age and Envy will advise
"Even against the joy they prize.
"Come, in pleasures balmy bowl
"Slake the thirstings of thy soul,
"Till thy raptured powers are fainting
"With enjoyment past the painting.
"Fairest! do thou yet delay?
"Brightest Beauty! come away."
So sung the Sirens, as of yore
Upon the false Ausonian shore;
And O for that preventing chain
That bound Ulysses on the main!
That so our fair one might withstand
The covert ruin now at hand.
The song her charmed attention drew
When now the tempters stood in view;
Curiosity with prying eyes
And hands of busy bold emprise;
Like Hermes feathered were her feet,
And like forerunning fancy fleet;
By search untaught, by toil untir'd,
To novelty she still aspired,
Tasteless of every good possessed,
And but in expectation blessed.
With her associate Pleasure came,
Gay Pleasure, frolick-loving dame!
Her mien all swimming in delight,
Her beauties half revealed to sight,
Loose flowed her garments from the ground
And caught the kissing winds around:
As erst Medusa's looks were known
To turn beholders into stone,
A dire reversion here they felt,
And in the eye of Pleasure melt:
Her glance with sweet persuasion charmed,
Unnerv'd the strong the steeled disarmed,
No safety even the flying find
Who venurous look but once behind.
Thus was the much-admiring Maid
While distant more than half betrayed.
With smiles and adulation bland
They joined her side and seized her hand:
Their touch envenomed sweets instilled,
Her frame with new pulsations thrilled,
While half consenting half denying,
Reluctant now and now complying,
Amidst a war of hopes and fears,
Of trembling wishes smiling tears,
Still down and down the winning pair
Compelled the struggling yielding fair.
As when some stately vessel, bound
To blessed Arabia's distant ground,
Borne from her courses happily lights
Where Barca's flowery clime invites,
Concealed around whose treacherous land
Lurk the dire rock and dangerous sand,
The pilot warns with sail and oar
To shun the much suspected shore,
In vain; the tide too subtly strong
Still bears the wrestling bark along,
Till sound'ring she resigns to Fate
And sinks overwhelmed with all her freight:
So baffling every bar to sin,
And Heaven's own pilot placed within,
Along the devious smooth descent,
With powers increasing as they went,
The dames accustomed to subdue
As with a rapid current drew,
And over the fatal bounds conveyed
The lost the long-reluctant maid.
Here stop ye Fair Ones! and beware,
Nor send your fond affections there,
Yet, yet your darling, now deplored,
May turn, to you and Heaven restored;
Till then with weeping Honor wait,
The servant of her better fate,
With Honor, left upon the shore,
Her friend and handmaid now no more;
Nor with the guilty world upbraid
The fortunes of a wretch betrayed,
But over her failing cast the veil,
Rememb'ring you yourselves are frail.
And now from all-inquiring light
Fast fled the conscious shades of night;
The Damsel from a short repose
Confounded at her plight arose.
As when with slumb'rous weight oppressed
Some wealthy miser sinks to rest
Where felons eye the glittering prey
And steal his hoard of joys away,
He borne where golden Indus streams
Of pearl and quarry'd diamond dreams,
Like Midas turns the glebe to oar,
And stands all wrapped amidst his store,
But wakens naked and despoiled
Of that for which his years had toiled:
So fared the Nymph, her treasure flown,
And turned like Niobe to stone;
Within, without, obscure and void,
She felt all ravaged all destroyed:
And, "O thou cursed insidious coast!
"Are these the blessings thou can boast?
"These Virtue! these the joys they find
"Who leave thy heav'n-topt hills behind?
"Shade me ye Pines! ye Caverns! hide,
"Ye Mountains! cover me," she cried.
Her trumpet Slander raised on high
And told the tidings to the sky,
Contempt discharged a living dart,
A sidelong viper, to her heart,
Reproach breathed poisons over her face,
And soiled and blasted every grace,
Officious Shame, her handmaid new,
Still turned the mirror to her view,
While those in crimes the deepest died
Approached to whiten at her side,
And every lewd insulting dame
Upon her folly rose to fame.
What should she do? attempt once more
To gain the late-deserted shore?
So trusting, back the mourner flew,
As fast the train of fiends pursue.
Again the farther shore's attained,
Again the land of Virtue gained,
But Echo gathers in the wind
And shows her instant foes behind.
Amazed, with headlong speed she tends
Where late she left a host of friends;
Alas! those shrinking friends decline,
Nor longer own that form divine,
With fear they mark the following cry,
And from the lonely trembler fly,
Or backward drive her on the coast
Where Peace was wrecked and Honor lost.
From earth thus hoping aid in vain,
To Heaven not daring to complain,
No truce by hostile Clamor given,
And from the face of Friendship driven,
The Nymph sunk prostrate on the ground
With all her weight of woes around.
Enthroned within a circling sky
Upon a mount over mountains high
All radiant sat as in a shrine
Virtue, first effluence divine,
Far, far above the scenes of woe
That shut this cloud-wrapt world below;
Superior goddess, essence bright,
Beauty of uncreated light!
Whom should Mortality survey,
As doomed upon a certain day,
The breath of Frailty must expire,
The world dissolve in living fire,
The gems of heaven and solar flame
Be quenched by her eternal beam,
And Nature quickening in her eye
To rise a newborn phoenix die.
Hence unreveal'd to mortal view
A veil around her form she threw
Which three sad sisters of the shade,
Pain, Care, and Melancholy, made.
Through this her all-inquiring eye
Attentive from her station high
Beheld abandoned to despair
The ruins of her favorite Fair,
And with a voice whose awful sound
Appalled the guilty world around
Bid the tumultuous winds be still;
To numbers bowed each listening hill,
Uncurl'd the surging of the main,
And smoothed the thorny bed of pain,
The golden harp of heaven she strung,
And thus the tuneful goddess sung:
"Lovely Penitent! arise,
"Come and claim thy kindred skies;
"Come, thy sister angels say
"Thou have wept thy stains away.
"Let experience now decide
"'Twixt the good and evil tried:
"In the smooth enchanted ground
"Say, unfold the treasures found.
"Structures raised by morning dreams,
"Sands that trip the flitting streams,
"Down that anchors on the air,
"Clouds that paint their changes there;
"Seas that smoothly dimpling lie
"While the storm impends on high,
"Showing in an obvious glass
"Joys that in possession pass:
"Transient, fickle, light, and gay,
"Flattering only to betray,
"What alas! can life contain?
"Life like all its circles vain!
"Will the stork intending rest
"On the billow build her nest?
"Will the be demand his store
"From the bleak and bladeless shore?
"Man alone intent to stray
"Ever turns from Wisdom's way,
"Lays up wealth in foreign land,
"Sows the sea and ploughs the sand.
"Soon this elemental mass,
"Soon the incumb'ring world, shall pass,
"Form be wrapped in wasting fire,
"Time be spent and life expire.
"Then ye boasted Works of men!
"Where is your asylum then?
"Sons of Pleasure, sons of Care,
"Tell me Mortals! tell me where?
"Gone like traces on the deep,
"Like a scepter grasped in sleep,
"Dews exhaled from morning glades,
"Melting snows and gliding shades.
"Pass the world and what 's behind?
"Virtue 's gold by fire refined,
"From an universe depraved,
"From the wreck of Nature, saved;
"Like the life-supporting grain,
"Fruit of patience and of pain,
"On the swain's autumnal day
"Winnow'd from the chaff away.
"Little Trembler! fear no more,
"Thou have plenteous crops in store,
"Seed by genial sorrows sown,
"More than all thy scorners own.
"What though hostile earth despise?
"Heaven beholds with gentler eyes;
"Heaven thy friendless steps shall guide,
"Cheer thy hours and guard thy side.
"When the fatal trump shall sound,
"When the immortals pour around,
"Heaven shall thy return attest,
"Hailed by myriads of the blessed.
"Little native of the skies,
"Lovely Penitent! arise;
"Calm thy bosom clear thy brow,
"Virtue is thy sister now.
"More delightful are my woes
"Than the rapture pleasure knows,
"Richer far the weeds I bring
"Than the robes that grace a king.
"On my wars of shortest date
"Crowns of endless triumphs wait,
"On my cares a period blessed,
"On my toils eternal rest.
"Come, with Virtue at thy side;
"Come, be every bar desy'd
"Till we gain our native shore:
"Sister come, and turn no more."
FABLE XVI. LOVE AND VANITY.
THE breezy morning breathed perfume,
The wak'ning flowers unveiled their bloom,
Up with the sun from short repose
Gay Health and lusty Labor rose,
The milkmaid caroll'd at her pail,
And shepherds whistled over the dale,
When Love, who led a rural life
Remote from bustle, state, and strife,
Forth from his thatch'd-roof cottage strayed,
And stroll'd along the dewy glade.
A nymph who lightly tripp'd it by
To quick attention turned his eye;
He marked the gesture of the fair,
Her selfsufficient grace and air,
Her steps that mincing meant to please,
Her studied negligence and ease,
And curious to inquire what meant
This thing of prettiness and paint,
Approaching spoke, and bowed observant;
The lady slightly, Sir, your servant.
"Such beauty in so rude a place!
"Fair one, you do the country grace!
"At court no doubt the public care;
"But Love has small acquaintance there."
"Yes, Sir," replied the fluttering dame,
"This form confesses whence it came;
"But dear variety you know
"Can make us pride and pomp forego.
"My name is Vanity; I sway
"The utmost islands of the sea;
"Within my court all honor centers;
"I raise the meanest soul that enters,
"Endow with latent gifts and graces,
"And model fools for posts and places.
"As Vanity appoints at pleasure
"The world receives its weight and measure;
"Hence all the grand concerns of life,
"Joys, cares, plagues, passions, peace, and strife.
"Reflect how far my power prevails
"When I step in where nature fails,
"And every breach of sense repairing
"Am bounteous stiil where Heaven is sparing.
"But chief in all their arts and airs,
"Their playing, painting, pouts, and prayers,
"Their various habits and complexions,
"Fits, frolicks, foibles, and perfections,
"Their robing, curling, and adorning,
"From noon to night from night to morning,
"From six to sixty, sick or sound,
"I rule the female world around."
"Hold there a moment," Cupid cried,
"Nor boast dominion quite so wide;
"Was there no province to invade
"But that by Love and Meekness swayed?
"All other empire I resign,
"But be the sphere of Beauty mine:
"For in the downy lawn of rest
"That opens on a woman's breast,
"Attended by my peaceful train,
"I choose to live and choose to reign.
"Farsighted Faith I bring along,
"And Truth, above an army strong,
"And Chastity, of icy mould,
"Within the burning tropicks cold,
"And Lowliness, to whose mild brow
"The power and pride of nations bow,
"And Modesty, with downcast eye,
"That lends the Morn her virgin dye,
"And Innocence, arrayed in light,
"And Honor, as a tower upright,
"With sweetly winning Graces more
"Than poets ever dreamt of yore,
"In unaffected conduct free,
"All smiling sisters three times three,
"And rosy Peace, the cherub blessed,
"That nightly sings us all to rest.
"Hence from the bud of Nature's prime,
"From the first step of infant Time,
"Woman, the world's appointed light,
"Has skirted every shade with white,
"Has stood for imitation high
"To every heart and every eye,
"From ancient deeds of fair renown
"Has brought her bright memorials down,
"To Time affixed perpetual youth,
"And formed each tale of love and truth.
"Upon a new Promethean plan
"She moulds the essence of a man,
"Tempers his mass, his genius fires,
"And as a better soul inspires.
"The rude she softens, warms the cold,
"Exalts the meek and checks the bold,
"Calls Sloth from his supine repose,
"Within the coward's bosom glows,
"Of Pride unplumes the lofty crest,
"Bids bashful Merit stand confessed,
"And like coarse metal from the mines
"Collects, irradiates, and refines.
"The gentle science she imparts,
"All manners smooths, informs all hearts;
"From her sweet influence are felt
"Passions that please and thoughts that melt;
"To stormy rage she bids control,
"And sinks serenely on the soul,
"Softens Deucalion's flinty race,
"And tunes the warring world to peace.
"Thus armed to all that 's light and vain,
"And freed from thy fantastic chain,
"She fills the sphere by Heaven assigned,
"And ruled by me o'errules mankind."
He spoke; the nymph impatient stood,
And laughing thus her speech renewed:
"And pray Sir, may I be so bold
"To hope your pretty tale is told?
"And next demand, without a cavil,
"What new Utopia do you travel?
"Upon my word these highflown fancies
"Show depth of learning -- in romances.
"Why, what unfashion'd stuff you tell us
"Of buckram dames and tiptoe fellows!
"Go Child! and when you 're grown maturer
"You 'll shoot your next opinion surer.
"O such a pretty knack at painting!
"And all for softening and for sainting!
"Guess now who can a single feature
"Through the whole piece of female nature!
"Then mark! my looser hand may fit
"The lines too coarse for Love to hit.
"'It Is said that woman, prone to changing,
"Through all the rounds of folly ranging,
"On life's uncertain ocean riding,
"No reason, rule, nor rudder, guiding,
"Is like the comet's wandering light,
"Eccentrick, ominous, and bright,
"Trackless and shifting as the wind,
"A sea whose fathom none can find,
"A moon still changing and revolving,
"A riddle past all human solving,
"A bliss, a plague, a heaven, a hell,
"A -- something which no man can tell.
"Now learn a secret from a friend,
"But keep your counsel, and attend.
"Though in their tempers thought so distant,
"Nor with their sex nor selves consistent,
"'It Is but the difference of a name
"And every woman is the same:
"For as the world, however varied,
"And through unnumber'd changes carried,
"Of elemental modes and forms,
"Clouds, meteors, colors, calms, and storms,
"Though in a thousand suits arrayed,
"Is of one subject matter made;
"So, Sir, a woman's constitution,
"The world's enigma, finds solution,
"And let her form be what you will
"I am the subject essence still.
"With the first spark of female sense
"The speck of being I commence,
"Within the womb make fresh advances,
"And dictate future qualms and fancies,
"Thence in the growing form expand,
"With Childhood travel hand in hand,
"And give a taste to all their joys
"In gewgaws, rattles, pomp, and noise.
"And now familiar and unawed
"I send the fluttering soul abroad;
"Praised for her shape, her face, her mien,
"The little goddess and the queen
"Takes at her infant shrine oblation,
"And drinks sweet draughts of adulation.
"Now blooming, tall, erect, and fair,
"To dress becomes her darling care;
"The realms of beauty then I bound,
"I swell the hoop's enchanted round,
"Shrink in the waist's descending size,
"Heaved in the snowy bosom rise,
"High on the floating lappit sail,
"Or curled in tresses kiss the gale:
"Then to her glass I lead the fair,
"And show the lovely idol there,
"Where, struck as by divine emotion,
"She bows with most sincere devotion,
"And numb'ring every beauty over
"In secret bids the world adore.
"Then all for parking and parading,
"Coquetting, dancing, masquerading,
"For balls, plays, courts, and crowds, what passion!
"And churches sometimes -- if the fashion;
"For woman's sense of right and wrong
"Is ruled by the almighty throng,
"Still turns to each meander tame,
"And swims the straw of every stream;
"Her soul intrinsic worth rejects,
"Accomplished only in defects;
"Such excellence is her ambition,
"Folly her wisest acquisition,
"And even from pity and disdain
"She 'll cull some reason to be vain.
"Thus, Sir, from every form and feature,
"The wealth and wants of female nature,
"And even from vice, which you 'd admire,
"I gather fuel to my fire,
"And on the very base of shame
"Erect my monument of fame.
"Let me another truth attempt
"Of which your godship has not dreamt.
"Those shining virtues which you muster
"Whence think you they derive their luster?
"From native honor and devotion?
"O yes, a mighty likely notion!
"Trust me from titled dames to spinners
"'It Is I make saints whoever make sinners,
"'It Is I instruct them to withdraw,
"And hold presumptuous man in awe;
"For female worth as I inspire
"In just degrees still mounts the higher,
"And virtue so extremely nice
"Demands long toil and mighty price;
"Like Samson's pillars, fixed elate,
"I bear the fex's tottering state;
"Sap these, and in a moment's space
"Down sinks the fabric to its base.
"Alike from titles and from toys
"I spring the fount of female joys,
"In every widow, wife, and miss,
"The sole artificer of bliss:
"For them each tropic I explore,
"I cleave the sand of every shore;
"To them uniting India's sail
"Sabaea breathes her farthest gale;
"For them the bullion I refine,
"Dig sense and virtue from the mine,
"And from the bowels of invention
"Spin out the various arts you mention.
"Nor bliss alone my powers bestow,
"They hold the sovereign balm of woe;
"Beyond the Stoick's boasted art
"I footh the heavings of the heart,
"To pain give splendor and relief,
"And gild the pallid face of Grief.
"Alike the palace and the plain
"Admit the glories of my reign:
"Through every age, in every nation,
"Taste, talents, tempers, state, and station,
"Whatever a woman says I say,
"Whatever a woman spends I pay;
"Alike I fill and empty bags,
"Flutter in finery and rags,
"With light coquettes through folly range,
"And with the prude disdain to change.
"And now you 'd think 'twixt you and I
"That things were ripe for a reply --
"But soft, and while I 'm in the mood
"Kindly permit me to conclude,
"Their utmost mazes to unravel,
"And touch the farthest step they travel.
"When every pleasure 's run aground,
"And Folly tired through many a round,
"The nymph conceiving discontent hence
"May ripen to an hour's repentance,
"And vapors shed in pious moisture
"Dismiss her to a church or cloister;
"Then on I lead her with devotion
"Conspicuous in her dress and motion,
"Inspire the heavenly breathing air,
"Roll up the lucid eye in prayer,
"Soften the voice, and in the face
"Look melting harmony and grace.
"Thus far extends my friendly power,
"Nor quits her in her latest hour;
"The couch of decent pain I spread,
"In form recline her languid head,
"Her thoughts I methodise in death,
"And part not with her parting breath;
"Then do I set in order bright
"A length of funeral pomp to sight,
"The glittering tapers and attire,
"The plumes that whiten over her bier,
"And last presenting to her eye
"Angelick fineries on high,
"To scenes of painted bliss I waft her,
"And form the heaven she hopes hereaster."
"In truth," rejoined Love's gentle god,
"You 'ave gone a tedious length of road,
"And strange, in all the toilsome way
"No house of kind refreshment lay,
"No nymph whose virtues might have tempted
"To hold her from her sex exempted."
"For one we 'll never quarrel man;
"Take her and keep her if you can:
"And pleased I yield to your petition,
"Since every fair by such permission
"Will hold herself the one selected,
"And so my system stands protected."
"O deaf to virtue, deaf to glory,
"To truths divinely vouched in story!"
The godhead in his zeal returned,
And kindling at her malice burned;
Then sweetly raised his voice, and told
Of heavenly nymphs revered of old,
Hypsipile who saved her sire,
And Portia's love approved by fire,
Alike Penelope was quoted,
Nor laureled Daphne passed unnoted,
Nor Laodamia's fatal garter,
Nor famed Lucretia, honor's martyr,
Alceste's voluntary steel,
And Cath'rine smiling on the wheel.
But who can hope to plant conviction
Where cavil grows on contradiction?
Some she evades or disavows,
Demurs to all, and none allows;
A kind of ancient things called fables!
And thus the goddess turned the tables.
Now both in argument grew high,
And choler flashed from either eye;
Nor wonder each refused to yield
The conquest of so fair a field.
When happily arrived in view
A goddess whom our grandams knew,
Of aspect grave and sober gait,
Majestic, awful, and sedate,
As heaven's autumnal eve serene
When not a cloud o'ercasts the scene,
Once Prudence called, a matron famed,
And in old Rome Cornelia named.
Quick at a venture both agree
To leave their strife to her decree.
And now by each the facts were stated
In form and manner as related:
The case was short: they craved opinion
Which held over females chief dominion?
When thus the goddess answ'ring mild,
First shook her gracious head and smiled:
"Alas! how willing to comply,
"Yet how unfit a judge am I!
"In times of golden date it is true
"I shared the fickle sex with you,
"But from their presence long precluded,
"Or held as one whose form intruded,
"Full fifty annual suns can tell
"Prudence has bid the sex farewell."
In this dilemma what to do,
Or who to think of, neither knew;
For both, still biased in opinion,
And arrogant of sole dominion,
Were forced to hold the case compounded,
Or leave the quarrel where they found it.
When in the nick a rural fair
Of inexperienc'd gait and air,
Who never had crossed the neighboring lake,
Nor seen the world beyond a wake,
With cambrick coif and kerchief clean
Tript lightly by them over the green.
"Now, now!" cried Love's triumphant child,
And at approaching conquest smiled,
"If Vanity will once be guided
"Our difference may be soon decided:
"Behold yon' wench, a fit occasion
"To try your force of gay persuasion:
"Go you while I retire aloof,
"Go, put those boasted powers to proof,
"And if your prevalence of art
"Transcends my yet unerring dart
"I give the favorite contest over,
"And never will boast my empire more."
At once so said and so consented,
And well our goddess seemed contented,
Nor pausing made a moment's stand,
But tript, and took the girl in hand.
Meanwhile the godhead unalarm'd,
As one to each occasion armed,
Forth from his quiver culled a dart
That erst had wounded many a heart,
Then bending drew it to the head;
The bowstring twang'd, the arrow fled,
And to her secret soul addressed
Transfixed the whiteness of her breast.
But here the dame, whose guardian care
Had to a moment watched the fair,
At once her pocket mirror drew,
And held the wonder full in view;
As quickly ranged in order bright
A thousand beauties rush to sight,
A world of charms till now unknown,
A world revealed to her alone,
Enraptured stands the lovesick maid
Suspended over the darling shade,
Here only fixes to admire,
And centres every fond desire.
ODES.
THE DISCOVERY, AN ODE.
TO THE RIGHT HON. HENRY PELHAM.
-- "Vir bonus est quis?"
HOR.
I.
TAKE wing my Muse! from shore to shore
Fly, and that happy place explore
Where Virtue deigns to dwell;
If yet she treads on British ground
Where can the fugitive be found,
In city, court, or cell?
II.
Not there where wine and srantick mirth
Unite the sensual sons of earth
In Pleasure's thoughtless train,
Nor yet where sanctity 's a show,
Where souls nor joy nor pity know
For human bliss or pain.
III.
Her social heart alike disowns
The race who shunning crowds and thrones
In shades sequestered doze,
Whose sloth no generous care can wake,
Who rot like weeds on Lethe's lake
In senseless vile repose.
IV.
With these she shuns the factious tribe
Who spurn the yet unoffer'd bribe
And at Corruption lower,
Waiting till Discord Havoc cries,
In hopes like Catiline to rise
On anarchy to power!
V.
Ye Wits! who boast from ancient times
A right divine to scourge our crimes,
Is it with you she rests?
No; interest, slander, are your views,
And Virtue now with every Muse
Flies your unhallowed breasts.
VI.
There was a time, I heard her say,
Ere females were seduced by play,
When Beauty was her throne;
But now where dwelt the Soft Desires
The Furies light forbidden fires
To Love and her unknown.
VII.
From these the indignant goddess flies,
And where the spires of Science rise
A while suspends her wing,
But pedant Pride and Rage are there,
And Faction tainting all the air
And pois'ning every spring.
VIII.
Long through the sky's wide pathless way
The Muse observed the wanderer stray
And marked her last retreat;
Over Surry's barren heaths she flew,
Descending like the silent dew
On Esher's peaceful seat.
IX.
There she beholds the gentle Mole
His pensive waters calmly roll
Amidst Elysian ground;
There through the windings of the grove
She leads her family of Love,
And strews her sweets around.
X.
I hear her bid the daughters fair
Often to yon' gloomy grot repair
Her secret steps to meet;
"Nor thou," she cries, "these shades forsake,
"But come, loved Consort! come and make
"The husband's bliss complete."
XI.
Yet not too much the soothing ease
Of rural indolence shall please
My Pelham's ardent breast:
The man whom Virtue calls her own
Must stand the pillar of a throne
And make a nation blessed.
XII.
Pelham! it is thine with temperate zeal
To guard Britannia's public weal,
Attacked on every part:
Her fatal discords to compose,
Unite her friends, disarm her foes,
Demands thy head and heart.
XIII.
When bold Rebellion shook the land,
Ere yet from William's dauntless hand
Her barbarous army fled;
When Valor drooped and Wisdom feared
Thy voice expiring Credit heard,
And raised her languid head.
XIV.
Now by thy strong assisting hand
Fixed on a rock I see her stand,
Against whose solid feet
In vain through every future age
The loudest most tempestuous rage
Of angry War shall beat.
XV.
And grieve not if the sons of strife
Attempt to cloud thy spotless life
And shade its brightest scenes;
Wretches! by kindness unsubdu'd,
Who see who share the common good,
Yet cavil at the means.
XVI.
Like these the metaphysick crew,
Proud to be singular and new,
Think all they see deceit,
Are warmed and cherished by the day,
Feel and enjoy the heavenly ray,
Yet doubt of light and heat.
ODE, TO GARRICK, UPON THE TALK OF THE TOWN.
When I said I would die a bachelor I did not think I should live till I were
married.
MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING.
I.
NO, no; the left hand box in blue:
There! do n't you see her? -- "See her! Who?"
Nay hang me if I tell.
There Is Garrick in the musick-box!
Watch but his eyes: see there! -- "O pox!
"Your servant, Ma'moiselle."
II.
But tell me David, is it true?
Lord help us! what will some solks do?
How will they curse this stranger!
What! fairly taken in for life!
A sober, serious, wedded wife!
O fie upon you Ranger!
III.
The clergy too have joined the chat:
"A Papist! -- Has he thought of that?
"Or means he to convert her?"
Troth Boy! unless your zeal be stout
The nymph may turn your faith about
By arguments experter.
IV.
The ladies, pale and out of breath,
Wild as the witches in Macbeth,
Ask if the deed be done?
O David! listen to my lay,
I 'll prophesy the things they 'll say;
For tongues you know will run.
V.
"And pray what other newsd' ye hear?
"Married! -- But do n't you think my Dear!
"He 's growing out of fashion?
"People may fancy what they will,
"But Quin 's the only actor still
"To touch the tender passion.
VI.
"Nay, Madam, did you mind last night
"His Archer? not a line on 't right!
"I thought I heard some hisses.
"Good God! if Billy Mills thought I,
"Or Billy Havard, would but try
"They 'd beat him all to pieces.
VII.
"'It Was prudent though to drop his Bays --
"And (enter nous) the Laureate says
"He hopes he 'll give up Richard:
"But then it tickles me to see
"In Hastings such a shrimp as he
"Attempt to ravish Pritchard.
VIII.
"The fellow pleased me well enough
"In -- what d' ye call it? Hoadley's stuff;
"There 's something there like nature:
"Just so in life he runs about,
"Plays at bopeep, now in now out,
"But hurts no mortal creature.
IX.
"And then there 's Belmont to be sure --
"O ho! my gentle Neddy Moore!
"How does my good Lord Mayor?
"And have you left Cheapside my Dear!
"And will you write again next year
"To show your favorite player?
X.
"But Merope we own is fine;
"Eumenes charms in every line;
"How prettily he vapors!
"So gay his dress, so young his look,
"One would have sworn 't was Mr. Cook,
"Or Mathews cutting capers."
XI.
Thus, David, will the ladies flout,
And councils hold at every rout
To alter all your plays;
Yates shall be Benedict next year,
Macklin be Richard, Taswell Lear,
And Kitty Clive be Bays.
XII.
Two parts they readily allow
Are yours, but not one more they vow,
And thus they close their spite:
You will be Sir John Brute they say,
A very Sir John Brute all day
And Fribble all the night.
XIII.
But tell me Fair Ones! is it so?
You all did love him once Julius Caesar.
we know;
What then provokes your gall?
Forbear to rail -- I 'll tell you why;
Quarrels may come or Madam die,
And then there 's hope for all.
XIV.
And now a word or two remains
Sweet Davy! and I close my strains.
Think well ere you engage;
Vapors and ague-fits may come,
And matrimonial claims at home
Unnerve you for the stage.
XV.
But if you find your spirits right,
Your mind at ease and body tight,
Take her; you cannot do better:
A pox upon the tattling Town!
The fops that join to cry her down
Would give their ears to get her.
XVI.
Then if her heart be good and kind,
(And sure that face bespeaks a mind
As soft as woman's can be)
You 'll grow as constant as a dove,
And taste the purer sweets of love
Unvisited by Ranby.
MISCELLANIES.
THE TRIAL OF SELIM THE PERSIAN, FOR DIVERSE HIGH CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS.
THE court was met, the prisoner brought,
The council with instructions fraught,
And evidence prepared at large
On oath to vindicate the charge.
But first it is meet where form denies
Poetic helps of fancied lies,
Gay metaphors and figures fine,
And similies to deck the line,
It Is meet (as we before have said)
To call description to our aid.
Begin we then (as first it is fitting)
With the three Chiefs in judgment sitting.
Above the rest, and in the chair,
Sat Faction with dissembled air;
Her tongue was skilled in specious lies
And murmurs, whence dissensions rise,
A smiling mask her features veiled,
Her form the patriot's robe concealed,
With studied blandishments she bowed,
And drew the captivated crowd.
The next in place, and on the right,
Sat Envy, hideous to the sight!
Her snaky locks, her hollow eyes
And haggard form forbad disguise;
Pale discontent and sullen hate
Upon her wrinkled forehead sat,
Her left hand clench'd her cheek sustained,
Her right (with many a murder stained)
A dagger clutch'd, in act to strike
With starts of rage and aim oblique.
Last on the left was Clamor seen,
Of stature vast and horrid mien;
With bloated cheeks and frantic eyes
She sent her yellings to the skies,
Prepared with trumpet in her hand
To blow sedition over the land.
With these four more of lesser fame
And humbler rank attendant came,
Hypocrisy with smiling grace,
And Impudence with brazen face,
Contention bold with iron lungs,
And Slander with her hundred tongues.
The walls in sculptured tale were rich,
And statues proud (in many a nich)
Of chiefs who fought in Faction's cause,
And perished for contempt of laws:
The roof in varied light and shade
The seat of Anarchy displayed:
Triumphant over a falling throne
(By emblematick figures known)
Confusion raged and Lust obscene,
And Riot with distempered mien,
And Outrage bold and Mischief dire,
And Devastation clad in fire:
Prone on the ground a martial maid
Expiring lay and groaned for aid,
Her shield with many a stab was pierced,
Her laurels torn, her spear reversed,
And near her crouch'd amidst the spoils
A lion panted in the toils.
With look composed the prisoner stood
And modest pride: by turns he viewed
The court, the council, and the crowd,
And with submissive reverence bowed.
Proceed we now in humbler strains
And lighter rhymes with what remains.
The indictment grievously set forth
That Selim, lost to patriot worth,
(In company with one Will P -- tt,
And many more not taken yet)
In Forty-five the royal palace
Did enter, and to shame grown callous
Did then and there his faith forsake,
And did accept, receive, and take,
With mischievous intent and base,
Value unknown, a certain place.
He was a second time indicted
For that, by evil zeal excited,
With learning more than layman's share
(Which parsons want and he might spare)
In Letter to one Gilbert West
He the said Selim did attest,
Maintain, support, and make assertion,
Of certain points from Paul's Conversion,
By means whereof the said apostle
Did many an unbeliever jostle,
Starting unfashionable fancies,
And building truths on known romances.
A third charge ran, that knowing well
Wits only eat as pamphlets sell,
He the said Selim notwithstanding
Did fall to answ'ring, shaming, branding,
Three curious Letters to the Whigs,
Making no reader care three figs
For any facts contained therein,
By which uncharitable sin
An author modest and deserving
Was destined to contempt and starving,
Against the king, his crown and peace,
And all the statutes in that case.
The pleader rose with brief full charged,
And on the pris'ner's crimes enlarged --
But not to damp the Muse's fire
With rhet'rick such as courts require,
We'll try to keep the reader warm,
And sift the matter from the form.
Virtue and social love he said,
And honor, from the land were fled;
That patriots now like other folks
Were made the butt of vulgar jokes,
While Opposition dropped her crest,
And courted power for wealth and rest;
Why some folks laughed and some folks railed,
Why some submitted some assailed,
Angry or pleased -- all solved the doubt
With who were in and who were out;
The sons of Clamor grew so sickly
They looked for dissolution quickly;
Their Weekly Journals, finely written,
Were sunk in privies all besh -- n,
Old England and the London Evening
Hardly a soul was found believing in,
And Caleb, once so bold and strong,
Was stupid now and always wrong.
Ask ye whence rose this soul disgrace?
Why Selim has received a place,
And thereby brought the cause to shame,
Proving that people void of blame
Might serve their country and their king
By making both the selfsame thing,
By which the credulous believed
And others (by strange arts deceived)
That ministers were sometimes right,
And meant not to destroy us quite.
That bart'ring thus in state affairs
He next must deal in sacred wares,
The clergy's rights divine invade,
And smuggle in the gospel trade;
And all this zeal to reinstate
Exploded notions out of date,
Sending old rakes to church in shoals,
Like children sniv'ling for their souls,
And ladies gay from smut and libels
To learn beliefs and read their Bibles,
Erecting conscience for a tutor,
To damn the present by the future,
As if to evils known and real
'Twas needful to annex ideal,
When all of human life we know
Is care, and bitterness, and woe,
With short transitions of delight
To set the shattered spirits right;
Then why such mighty pains and care
To make us humbler than we are?
Forbidding shortliv'd mirth and laughter
By fears of what may come hereafter;
Better in ignorance to dwell;
None fear but who believe a hell;
And if there should be one, no doubt
Men of themselves would find it out.
But Selim's crimes he said went further,
And barely stopped on this side murder;
One yet remained to close the charge
To which (with leave) he would speak at large.
And first 't was needful to premise
That though so long (for reasons wise)
The press inviolate had stood,
Productive of the public good,
Yet still too modest to abuse
It railed at vice but told not whose;
That great improvements of late days
Were made to many an author's praise,
Who not so scrupulously nice
Proclaimed the person with the vice,
Or gave, where vices might be wanted,
The name, and took the rest for granted.
Upon this plan a champion Author of the Letters to the Whigs.
rose
Unrighteous greatness to oppose,
Proving the man inventus non est
Who trades in power and still is honest;
And (God be praised!) he did it roundly,
Flogging a certain junto soundly;
But chief his anger was directed
Where people least of all suspected,
And Selim not so strong as tall
Beneath his grasp appeared to fall,
But Innocence (as people say)
Stood by and saved him in the fray:
By her assisted and one Truth,
A busy, prating, forward, youth,
He rallied all his strength anew,
And at the foe a Letter threw;
His weakest part the weapon found,
And brought him senseless to the ground;
Hence Opposition fled the field
And Ignorance with her sev'nfold shield;
And well they might, (for things weighed fully)
The prisoner with his whore and bully
Must prove for every foe too hard
Who never fought with such a guard.
But Truth and Innocence he said
Would stand him here in little stead,
For they had evidence on oath
That would appear too hard for both.
Of witnesses a fearful train
Came next the indictments to sustain,
Detraction, Hatred, and Distrust,
And Party, of all foes the worst,
Malice, Revenge, and Unbelief,
And Disappointment, worn with grief,
Dishonor foul, unawed by shame,
And every fiend that vice can name:
All these in ample form deposed
Each fact the triple charge disclosed
With taunts and gibes of bitter sort,
And asking vengeance from the court.
The prisoner said in his defense
That he indeed had small pretense
To soften facts so deeply sworn,
But would for his offenses mourn;
Yet more, he hoped than bare repentance
Might still be urged to ward the sentence.
That he had held a place some years
He owned with penitence and tears,
But took it not from motives base,
The indictment there mistook the case;
And though he had betrayed his trust
In being to his country just,
Neglecting Faction and her friends,
He did it not for wicked ends,
But that complaints and feuds might cease,
And jarring parties mix in peace.
That what he wrote to Gilbert West
Bore hard against him he confessed;
Yet there they wronged him, for the fact is
He reasoned for belief not practice,
And people might believe he thought,
Though practice might be deemed a fault.
He either dreamed it or was told
Religion was revered of old,
That it gave breeding no offense,
And was no foe to wit and sense;
But whether this was truth or whim
He would not say; the doubt with him
(And no great harm he hoped) was how
The enlightened world would take it now;
If they admitted it 'twas well,
If not he never talked of hell,
Nor even hoped to change men's measnres
Or frighten ladies from their pleasures.
One accusation he confessed
Had touched him more than all the rest,
Three Patriot Letters high in same
By him overthrown and brought to shame:
And though it was a rule in vogue
If one man called another rogue
The party injured might reply
And on his so retort the lie,
Yet what accru'd from all his labor
But foul dishonor to his neighbor?
And he 's a most unchristian elf
Who others damns to save himself.
Besides, as all men knew, he said
Those Letters only railed for bread,
And hunger was a known excuse
For prostitution and abuse;
A guinea properly applied
Had made the writer change his side:
He wished he had not cut and carved him,
And owned he should have bought not starved him.
The court he said knew all the rest,
And must proceed as they thought best,
Only he hoped such resignation
Would plead some little mitigation;
And if his character was clear
From other faults, (and friends were near
Who would when called upon attest it)
He did in humblest form request it
To be from punishment exempt,
And only suffer their contempt.
The pris'ner's friends their claim preferred,
In turn demanding to be heard.
Integrity and Honor swore,
Benevolence, and twenty more,
That he was always of their party,
And that they knew him firm and hearty;
Religion, sober dame! attended,
And as she could his cause befriended;
She said 't was since he came from college
She knew him, introduced by Knowledge;
The man was modest and sincere,
Nor farther could she interfere.
The Muses begged to interpose,
But Envy with loud hissings rose,
And called them women of ill fame,
Liars, and prostitutes to shame,
And said to all the world 't was known
Selim had had them every one.
The prisoner blushed, the Muses frowned,
When silence was proclaimed around,
And Faction, rising with the rest,
In form the prisoner thus addressed:
"You Selim thrice have been indicted,
"First that by wicked pride excited,
"And bent your country to disgrace,
"You have received and held a place;
"Next, infidelity to wound,
"You 'ave dared with arguments profound
"To drive freethinking to a stand,
"And with religion vex the land;
"And lastly, in contempt of right,
"With horrid and unnat'ral spite
"You have an author's fame overthrown,
"Thereby to build and fence your own.
"These crimes successive on your trial
"Have met with proofs beyond denial,
"To which yourself with shame conceded,
"And but in mitigation pleaded;
"Yet that the justice of the court
"May suffer not in men's report,
"Judgment a moment I suspend
"To reason as from friend to friend.
"And first, that you of all mankind
"With kings and courts should stain your mind,
"You! who were Opposition's lord,
"Her nerves, her sinews, and her sword!
"That you at last for servile ends
"Should wound the bowels of her friends! --
"Is aggravation of offense
"That leaves for mercy no pretense.
"Yet more -- for you to urge your hate,
"And back the church to aid the state,
"For you to publish such a Letter,
"You! who have known religion better,
"For you I say to introduce
"The fraud again! -- there 's no excuse:
"And last of all, to crown your shame,
"Was it for you to load with blame
"The writings of a patriot youth,
"And summon Innocence and Truth
"To prop your cause! -- Was this for you! --
"But justice does your crimes pursue,
"And sentence now alone remains,
"Which thus by me the court ordains:
"That you return from whence you came,
"There to be stripped of all your fame
"By vulgar hands; that once a week
"Old England pinch you till you squeak;
"That ribald Pamphlets do pursue you,
"And Lies and Murmurs, to undo you,
"With every foe that Worth procures,
"And only Virtue's friends be yours."
THE TRIAL OF SARAH ****, ALIAS SLIM SAL, FOR PRIVATELY STEALING.
THE prisoner was at large indicted,
For that by thirst of gain excited,
One day in July last at tea,
And in the house of Mrs. P.
From the left breast of E. M. Gent.
With base felonious intent,
Did then and there a heart with strings,
Rest, quiet, peace, and other things,
Steal, rob, and plunder, and all them
The chattels of the said E. M.
The prosecutor swore last May
(The month he knew but not the day)
He left his friends in Town, and went
Upon a visit down in Kent;
That staying there a month or two
He spent his time, as others do,
In riding, walking, fishing, swimming,
But being much inclined to women,
And young and wild, and no great reas'ner,
He got acquainted with the prisoner.
He owned 't was rumored in those parts
That she 'd a trick of stealing hearts,
And from fifteen to twenty-two
Had made the devil-and-all to do:
But Mr. W. the Vicar
(And no man brews you better liquor)
Spoke of her thefts as tricks of youth,
The frolicks of a girl forsooth;
Things now were on another score
He said, for she was twenty-four.
However, to make matters short,
And not to trespass on the court,
The lady was discovered soon,
And thus it was. One afternoon,
The ninth of July last, or near it,
(As to the day he could not swear it)
In company at Mrs. P's,
Where folks say any thing they please,
Dean L. and Lady Mary by,
And Fanny waiting on Miss Y.
(He owned he was inclined to think
Both were a little in their drink)
The prisoner asked, and called him Cousin,
How many kisses made a dozen?
That being as he owned in liquor
The question made his blood run quicker,
And sense and reason in eclipse
He vowed he 'd score them on her lips:
That rising up to keep his word
He got as far as kiss the third,
And would have counted the other nine,
And so all present did opine,
But that he felt a sudden dizziness
That quite undid him for the business;
His speech he said began to falter,
His eyes to stare, his mouth to water,
His breast to thump without cessation,
And all within one conflagration.
"Bless me!" says Fanny, "what 's the matter?"
And Lady Mary looked hard at her,
And stamped and wished the prisoner further,
And cried out, "Part them, or there 's murder!"
That still he held the prisoner fast,
And would have stood it to the last,
But struggling to go through the rest
He felt a pain across his breast,
A sort of sudden twinge he said,
That seemed almost to strike him dead,
And after that such cruel smarting
He thought the soul and body parting:
That then he let the prisoner go,
And staggered off a step or so,
And thinking that his heart was ill
He begged of Miss Y 's maid to feel:
That Fanny stepped before the rest
And laid her hand upon his breast,
But mercy on us! what a stare
The creature gave! no heart was there:
Souse went her fingers in the hole,
Whence heart and strings and all were stole:
That Fanny turned and told the prisoner
She was a thief, and so she 'd christen her,
And that it was a burning shame,
And brought the house an evil name,
And if she did not put the heart in
The man would pine and die for certain.
The prisoner then was in her airs,
And bid her mind her own affairs,
And told his Reverence and the rest of 'em
She was as honest as the best of 'em:
That lady Mary and dean L.
Rose up and said 't was mighty well;
But that in general terms they said it,
A heart was gone and some one had it;
Words would not do, for search they must,
And search they would, and her the first:
That then the prisoner dropped her anger,
And said she hoped they would not hang her;
That all she did was meant in jest,
And there the heart was and the rest:
That then the dean cried out O fie!
And sent in haste for justice I.
Who though he knew her friends and pitied her
Called her hard names, and so committed her.
The parties present swore the same,
And Fanny said the pris'ner's name
Had frightened all the country round,
And glad she was the bill was found:
She knew a man who knew another,
Who knew the very party's brother
Who lost his heart by mere surprise
One morning looking at her eyes;
And others had been known to squeak
Who only chanced to hear her speak;
For she had words of such a sort
That though she knew no reason for 't
Would make a man of sense run mad,
And rifle him of all he had;
And that she 'd rob the whole community
If ever she had opportunity.
The prisoner now first silence broke,
And curtsy'd round her as she spoke.
She owned she said it much incensed her
To hear such matters sworn against her,
But that she hoped to keep her temper,
And prove herself eadem semper:
That what the prosecutor swore
Was some part true and some part more:
She owned she had been often seen with him,
And laughed and chatted on the green with him;
The fellow seemed to have humanity,
And told her tales that soothed her vanity,
Pretending that he loved her vastly,
And that all women else looked ghastly:
But then she hoped the court would think
She never was inclined to drink,
Or suffer hands like his to daub her,
Or encourage men to kiss and slobber her:
She 'd have folks know she did not love it,
Or if she did she was above it:
But this she said was sworn of course
To prove her giddy and then worse,
As she whose conduct was thought levis
Might very well be reckoned thievish.
She hoped she said the court's discerning
Would pay some honor to her learning,
For every day from four to past six
She went up stairs and read the classicks.
Thus having cleared herself of levity,
The rest she said would come with brevity.
And first it injured not her honor
To own the heart was found upon her,
For she could prove, and did aver,
The paltry thing belonged to her.
The fact was thus. This prince of knaves
Was once the humblest of her slaves,
And often had confessed the dart
Her eyes had lodged within his heart:
That she, as 't was her constant fashion,
Made great diversion of his passion,
Which set his blood in such a ferment
As seemed to threaten his interment:
That then she was afraid of losing him,
And so desisted from abusing him,
And often came and felt his pulse,
And bid him write to Doctor Hulse.
The prosecutor thanked her kindly,
And sighed, and said she looked divinely;
But told her that his heart was bursting,
And doctors he had little trust in;
He therefore begged her to accept it,
And hoped 't would mend if once she kept it:
That having no aversion to it,
She said with all her soul she 'd do it;
But then she begged him to remember
If he should need it in December
(For winter months would make folks shiver
Who wanted either heart or liver)
It never could return; and added
'Twas here is for life if once she had it.
The prosecutor said Amen,
And that he wished it not again,
And took it from his breast and gave her,
And how'd and thanked her for the favor,
But begged the thing might not be spoke of,
As heartless men were made a joke of:
That next day whispering him about it,
And asking how he felt without it?
He sighed, and cried, "Alack! alack!"
And begged and prayed to have it back,
Or that she 'd give him here is instead on 't,
But she conceived there was no need on 't,
And said and bid him make no pother,
He should have neither one nor the other:
That then he raved and stormed like Fury,
And said that one was his de jure,
And rather than he 'd leave pursuing her
He 'd swear a robbery and ruin her.
That this was truth she did aver
Whatever hap betided her;
Only that Mrs. P. she said,
Miss Y. and her deluded maid,
And Lady Mary, and his Reverence,
Were folks to whom she paid some deference,
And that she verily believed
They were not perjured but deceived.
Then Doctor D. begged leave to speak,
And sighed as if his heart would break.
He said that he was Madam's surgeon,
Or rather, as in Greek, surgeon,
From chier, manus, ergon, opus,
(As scope is from the Latin scopus:)
That he he said had known the prisoner
From the first sun that ever rise on her,
And grieved he was to see her there,
But took upon himself to swear
There was not to be found in nature
A sweeter or a better creature;
And if the king (God bless him!) knew her
He 'd leave St. James's to get to her;
But then as to the fact in question
He knew no more on 't than Hephaestion;
It might he false and might be true,
And this he said was all he knew.
The judge proceeded to the charge,
And gave the evidence at large,
But often cast a sheep's eye at her,
And strove to mitigate the matter,
Pretending facts were not so clear,
And mercy ought to interfere.
The jury then withdrew a moment
As if on weighty points to comment,
And right or wrong resolved to save her
They gave a verdict in her favor.
But why or wherefore things were so
It matters not for us to know.
The culprit by escape grown bold
Pilfers alike from young and old,
The country all around her teases,
And robs or murders whom she pleases.
ENVY AND FORTUNE, A TALE.
TO MRS. GARRICK.
SAYS Envy to Fortune, "Soft, soft, Madam Flirt!
"Not so fast with your wheel, you 'll be down in the dirt.
"Well, and how does your David? Indeed my dear creature!
"You 'ave shown him a wonderful deal of good nature;
"His bags are so full and such praises his due
"That the like was never known -- and allowing to you:
"But why will not you make him quite happy for life,
"And to all you have done add the gift of a wife?"
Says Fortune, and smiled, "Madam Envy, God save ye!
"But why always sneering at me and poor Davy?
"I own that sometimes in contempt of all rules
"I lavish my favors on blockheads and sools;
"But the case is quite different here I aver it,
"For David never knew me till brought me by Merit.
"And yet to convince you -- Nay, Madam, no hisses --
"Good manners at least -- Such behavior as this is!" --
(For mention but Merit and Envy flies out
With a hiss and a yell that would silence a rout.
But Fortune went on) -- "To convince you I say
"That I honor your scheme I 'll about it today.
"The man shall be married, so pray now be easy,
"And Garrick for once shall do something to please ye."
So saying she rattled her wheel out of sight,
While Envy walked after and grinn'd with delight.
It seems it was a trick that she long had been brewing
To marry poor David and so be his ruin;
For Slander had told her the creature loved pelf,
And cared not a fig for a soul but himself;
From thence she was sure had the devil a daughter
He Would snap at the girl so it was Fortune that brought her;
And then should her temper be sullen or haughty,
Her flesh too be frail, and incline to be naughty,
'Twould fret the poor fellow so out of his reason
That Barry and Quin would set fashions next season.
But Fortune, who saw what the Fury designed,
Resolved to get David a wife to his mind,
Yet afraid of herself in a matter so nice
She visited Prudence and begged her advice.
The nymph shook her head when the business she knew,
And said that her female acquaintance were few;
That excepting Miss R*** -- O yes! there was one,
A friend of that lady's, she visited none;
But the first was too great and the last was too good,
And as for the rest she might get whom she could.
Away hurried Fortune, perplexed and half mad,
But her promise was passed, and a wife must be had:
She traversed the Town from one corner to the other,
Now knocking at one door and then at another.
The girls curtsy'd low as she looked in their faces,
And bridled and primm'd with abundance of graces;
But this was conquettish and that was a prude,
One stupid and dull, the other noisy and rude;
A third was affected, quite careless a fourth,
With prate without meaning and pride without worth;
A fifth, and a sixth, and a seventh, were such
As either knew nothing or something too much. --
In short as they passed she to all had objections,
The gay wanted thought, the good-humored affections,
The prudent were ugly, the sensible dirty,
And all of them flirts from fifteen up to thirty.
When Fortune saw this she began to look silly,
Yet still she went on till she reached Piccadilly,
But vexed and fatigued, and the night growing late,
She rested her wheel within Burlington gate.
My lady rose up as she saw her come in,
"O ho! Madam Genius! pray where have you been?"
(For her ladyship thought from so serious an air
'Twas Genius come home, for it seems she lived there;)
But Fortune not minding her ladyship's blunder,
And wiping her forehead, cried "Well may you wonder
"To see me thus flurry'd" -- then told her the case, lady,
And sighed till her ladyship laughed in her face.
"Mighty civil indeed!" -- "Come, a truce," says my
"A truce with complaints, and perhaps I may aid ye,
"I Will show you a girl that -- Here, Martin, go tell --
"But she is gone to undress; by and by is as well --
"I 'll show you a sight that you 'll fancy uncommon,
"Wit, beauty, and goodness, all met in a woman;
"A heart to no folly or mischief inclined,
"A body all grace and all sweetness a mind."
"O pray let me see her," says Fortune, and smiled;
"Do but give her to me and I 'll make her my child.
"But who my Dear! who? -- for you have not told yet" --
"Who indeed," says my lady, "if not Violette?"
The words were scarce spoke when she entered the room;
A blush at the stranger still heightened her bloom:
So humble her looks were, so mild was her air,
That Fortune astonished sat mute in her chair.
My lady rose up, and with countenance bland,
"This is Fortune my Dear!" and presented her hand:
The goddess embraced her and called her her own,
And compliments over her errand made known.
But how the sweet girl colored, fluttered, and trembled,
How often she said No, and how ill she dissembled,
Or how little David rejoiced at the news,
And swore from all others it was her he would choose,
What methods he tried and what arts to prevail,
All these were they told would but burden my tale --
In short all affairs were so happily carried
That hardly six weeks passed away till they married.
But Envy grew sick when the story she heard,
Violette was the girl that of all she most feared;
She knew her good humor, her beauty and sweetness,
Her ease and compliance, her taste and her neatness;
From these she was sure that her man could not roam,
And must rise on the stage from contentment at home:
So on she went hissing, and inwardly cursed her,
And Garrick next season will certainly burst her.
TO THE RIGHT HON. HENRY PELHAM, The Humble Petition of the Worshipful Company
of POETS AND NEWSWRITERS.
SHOWS,
THAT your Honor's petitioners (dealers in rhymes,
And writers of scandal for mending the times)
By losses in business and England's well doing
Are sunk in their credit and verging on ruin.
That these their misfortunes they humbly conceive
Arise not from dullness, as some folks believe,
But from rubs in their way which your Honor has laid,
And want of materials to carry on trade.
That they always had formed high conceits of their use,
And meant their last breath should go out in abuse;
But now (and they speak it with sorrow and tears)
Since your Honor has sat at the helm of affairs
No party will join them, no faction invite,
To heed what they say or to read what they write;
Sedition, and Tumult, and Discord, are fled,
And Slander scarce ventures to lift up her head --
In short, public business is so carried on
That their country is saved and the patriots undone.
To perplex them still more, and sure famine to bring,
(Now satire has lost both its truth and its sting)
If in spite of their natures they bungle at praise
Your Honor regards not, and nobody pays.
Your petitioners therefore most humbly entreat
(As the times will allow and your Honor thinks meet)
That measures be changed, and some cause of complaint
Be immediately furnished to end their restraint,
Their credit thereby and their trade to retrieve,
That again they may rail and the nation believe.
Or else (if your wisdom shall deem it all one)
Now the Parliament 's rising and business is done,
That your Honor would please at this dangerous crisis
To take to your bosom a few private vices,
By which your petitioners happily might thrive,
And keep both themselves and contention alive.
In compassion, good Sir! give them something to say,
And your Honor's petitioners ever shall pray.
THE LOVER AND THE FRIEND.
O Thou for whom my lyre I string,
Of whom I speak, and think, and sing,
Thou constant object of my joys,
Whose sweetness every wish employs,
Thou dearest of thy sex! attend,
And hear the Lover and the Friend.
Fear not the poet's flattering strain,
No idle praise my verse shall stain;
The lowly numbers shall impart
The faithful dictates of my heart,
Nor humble modesty offend,
And part the Lover from the Friend.
Not distant is the cruel day
That tears me from my hopes away;
Then frown not Fairest! if I try
To steal the moisture from your eye,
Or force your heart a sigh to send
To mourn the Lover and the Friend.
No perfect joy my life ever knew
But what arose from love and you,
Nor can I fear another pain
Than your unkindness or disdain;
Then let your looks their pity lend
To cheer the Lover and the Friend.
Whole years I strove against the flame,
And suffered ills that want a name,
Yet still the painful secret kept,
And to myself in silence wept,
Till now unable to contend
I owned the Lover and the Friend.
I saw you still: your generous heart
In all my sorrows bore a part,
Yet while your eyes with pity glowed
No words of hope your tongue bestowed,
But mildly bid me cease to blend
The name of Lover with the Friend.
Sick with desire and mad with pain
I seek for happiness in vain:
Thou lovely Maid! to thee I cry;
Heal me with kindness or I die!
From sad despair my soul defend,
And fix the Lover and the Friend.
Cursed be all wealth that can destroy
My utmost hope of earthly joy!
Thy gifts O Fortune I resign,
Let her and Poverty be mine!
And every year that life shall lend
Shall bless the Lover and the Friend.
In vain alas! in vain I strive
To keep a dying hope alive:
The last sad remedy remains;
It Is absence that must heal my pains,
Thy image from my bosom rend,
And force the Lover from the Friend.
Vain thought! though seas between us roll
Thy love is rooted in my soul;
The vital blood that warms my heart
With thy idea must depart,
And Death's decisive stroke must end
At once the Lover and the Friend.
THE NUN, A CANTATA.
RECITATIVE.
OF Constance holy legends tell,
The softest sister of the cell;
None sent to heaven so sweet a cry,
Or rolled at mass so bright an eye.
No wanton taint her bosom knew,
Her hours in heavenly vision flew,
Her knees were worn with midnight prayers,
And thus she breathed divinest airs.
AIR.
"In hallowed walks and awful cells,
"Secluded from the light and vain,
"The chaste-ey'd maid with Virtue dwells,
"And solitude and silence reign.
"The wanton's voice is heard not here;
"To Heaven the sacred pile belongs;
"Each wall returns the whispered prayer,
"And echoes but to holy songs."
RECITATIVE.
Alas! that pampered monks should dare
Intrude where sainted Vestals are!
Ah Francis, Francis! well I weet
Those holy looks are all deceit.
With shame the Muse prolongs her tale,
The priest was young, the Nun was frail,
Devotion falter'd on her tongue,
Love tuned her voice, and thus she sung:
AIR.
"Alas! how deluded was I
"To fancy delights as I did,
"With maidens at midnight to sigh,
"And love the sweet passion forbid!
"O Father! my follies forgive,
"And still to absolve me be nigh;
"Your lessons have taught me to live,
"Come teach me, O teach me! to die.
To her arms in a rapture he sprung,
Her bosom half naked met his,
Transported in silence she hung,
And melted away at each kiss.
"Ah Father! expiring she cried,
"With rapture I yield up my breath!"
"Ah Daughter! he fondly replied,
"The righteous find comfort in death."
SOLOMON, A SERENATA, IN THREE PARTS.
SET TO MUSIC BY DR. BOYCE.
PART I.
CHORUS.
"BEHOLD Jerusalem! thy king,
"Whose praises all the nations sing.
"To Solomon the Lord has given
"All arts and wisdom under heaven:
"For him the tuneful virgin throng
"Of Zion's daughters swell the song,
"While young and old their voices raise,
"And wake the echoes with his praise."
RECITATIVE.
SHE. From the mountains lo! he comes,
Breathing from his lips perfumes,
While zephirs on his garments play,
And sweets through all the air convey.
AIR.
SHE. "Tell me, lovely Shepherd! where
"Thou feed'st at noon thy fleecy care?
"Direct me to the sweet retreat
"That guards thee from the midday heat,
"Le^t by the flocks I lonely stray
"Without a guide and lose my way:
"Where rest at noon thy bleating care,
"Gentle Shepherd! tell me where?"
AIR.
HE. "Fairest of the virgin throng!
"Do thou seek thy swain's abode?
"See yon' fertile vale along
"The new-worn path the flocks have trod;
"Pursue the prints their feet have made
"And they shall guide thee to the shade."
RECITATIVE.
SHE. As the rich apple, on whose boughs
Ripe fruit with streaky beauty glows,
Excels the trees that shade the grove,
So shines among his sex my love.
AIR.
"Beneath his ample shade I lay
"Defended from the sultry day,
"His cooling fruit my thirst assuag'd,
"And quenched the fires that in me raged,
"Till sated with the luscious taste
"I rose and blessed the sweet repast."
RECITATIVE.
HE. Who quits the lily's fleecy white
To fix on meaner flowers the sight?
Or leaves the rose's stem untorn
To crop the blossom from the thorn?
Unrivaled thus thy beauties are;
So shines my love among the fair.
AIR.
"Balmy sweetness ever flowing
"From her dropping lips distills,
"Flowers on her cheeks are blowing,
"And her voice with music thrills.
"Zephirs over the spices flying,
"Wasting sweets from every tree,
"Sickening sense with odours cloying,
"Breath not half so sweet as she."
RECITATIVE.
SHE. Let not my prince his slave despise,
Or pass me with unheeding eyes,
Because the sun's discoloring rays
Have chased the lily from my face:
My envious sisters saw my bloom
And drove me from my mother's home;
Unshelter'd all the scorching day
They made me in their vineyard stay.
AIR.
"Ah simple me! my own more dear,
"My own alas! was not my care;
"Invading Love the senses broke
"And tore the clusters from the stock,
"With eager grasp the fruit destroyed,
"Nor rested till the ravage cloyed."
AIR.
HE. "Fair and comely is my love,
"And softer than the blueey'd dove;
"Down her neck the wanton locks
"Bound like the kids on Gilead's rocks;
"Her teeth like flocks in beauty seem
"New shorn, and dropping from the stream;
"Her glowing lips by far outvie
"The plaited threads of scarlet dye;
"Whenever she speaks the accents wound,
"And music floats upon the sound."
RECITATIVE.
SHE. Forbear, O charming Swain! forbear,
Thy voice enchants my listening ear,
And while I gaze my bosom glows,
My fluttering heart with love overflows,
The shades of night hang over my eyes,
And every sense within me dies.
AIR.
"O fill with cooling juice the bowl,
"Assuage the fever in my soul!
"With copious draughts my thirst remove,
"And sooth the heart that is sick of love."
PART II.
RECITATIVE.
HE. THE cheerful spring begins today,
Arise my Fair One! come away.
RECITATIVE.
SHE. Sweet music steals along the air --
Hark! -- my beloved's voice I hear.
AIR.
HE. "Arise my Fair! and come away,
"The cheerful spring begins today;
"Bleak Winter's gone with all his train
"Of chilling frosts and dropping rain:
"Amidst the verdure of the mead
"The primrose lifts her velvet head,
"The warbling birds the woods among
"Salute the season with a song,
"The cooing turtle in the grove
"Renews his tender tale of love,
"The vines their infant tendrils shoot,
"The figtree bends with early fruit;
"All welcome in the genial ray:
"Arise my Fair! and come away.
CHORUS.
"All welcome in the genial ray:
"Arise O Fair One! come away.
DUET.
"Together let us range the fields
"Impearled with the morning dew,
"Or view the fruits the vineyard yields,
"Or the apple's clust'ring bough;
"There in close-embower'd shades,
"Impervious to the noontide ray,
"By tinkling rills on rosy beds
"We 'll love the sultry hours away."
RECITATIVE.
HE. How lovely art thou to the sight,
For pleasure formed and sweet delight!
Tall as the palmtree is thy shape,
Thy breasts are like the clust'ring grape.
AIR.
"Let me, Love! thy bole ascending,
"On the swelling clusters feed,
"With my grasp the vinetree bending
"In my close embrace shall bleed.
"Stay me with delicious kisses
"From thy honey-dropping mouth,
"Sweeter than the summer breezes
"Blowing from the genial South."
RECITATIVE.
SHE. O that a sister's specious name
Concealed from prying eyes my flame!
Uncensur'd then I 'd own my love,
And chastest virgins should approve;
Then fearless to my mother's bed
My seeming brother would I lead,
Soft transports should the hours employ,
And the deceit should crown the joy.
AIR.
"Soft! I adjure you by the fawns
"That bound across the flowery lawns,
"Ye Virgins! that ye lightly move,
"Nor with your whispers wake my love."
RECITATIVE.
HE. My fair 's a garden of delight
Enclosed and hid from vulgar sight,
Where streams from bubbling fountains stray
And roses deck the verdant way.
AIR.
"Softly arise, O Southern Breeze!
"And kindly fan the blooming trees,
"Upon my spicy garden blow,
"That sweets from every part may flow."
CHORUS.
"Ye Southern Breezes! gently blow,
"That sweets from every part may flow."
PART III.
AIR.
HE. "ARISE my Fair! the doors unfold,
"Receive me shivering with the cold."
RECITATIVE.
SHE. My heart amidst my slumbers wakes
And tells me my beloved speaks.
AIR.
HE. "Arise my Fair! the doors unfold,
"Receive me shivering with the cold;
"The chill drops hang upon my head,
"And night's cold dews my cheeks overspread:
"Receive me dropping to thy breast,
"And lull me in thy arms to rest."
RECITATIVE.
SHE. Obedient to thy voice I hie,
The willing doors wide open fly.
AIR.
"Ah! whither, whither art thou gone?
"Where is my lovely wanderer flown?
"Ye blooming Virgins! as you rove
"If chance you meet my straying love
"I charge you tell him how I mourn
"And pant and die for his return."
CHORUS OF VIRGINS.
"Who is thy love O charming Maid!
"That from thy arms so late has strayed?
"Say what distinguished charms adorn
"And finish out his radiant form?"
AIR.
SHE. "On his face the vernal rose
"Blended with the lily glows;
"His locks are as the raven black,
"In ringlets waving down his back;
"His eyes with milder beauties beam
"Than billing doves beside the stream;
"His youthful cheeks are beds of flowers
"Enripen'd by refreshing showers;
"His lips are of the rose's hue,
"Dropping with a fragrant dew;
"Tall as the cedar he appears,
"And as erect his form he bears.
"This, O ye Virgins! is the swain
"Whose absence causes all my pain."
RECITATIVE.
HE. Sweet Nymph! whom ruddier charms adorn
Than open with the rosy morn,
Fair as the moon's unclouded light,
And as the sun in splendor bright,
Thy beauties dazzle from afar
Like glittering arms that gild the war.
RECITATIVE.
SHE. O take me, stamp me on thy breast,
Deep let the image be impressed!
For Love like armed Death is strong,
Rudely he drags his slaves along:
If once to jealousy he turns
With never-dying rage he burns.
DUET.
"Thou soft invader of the soul,
"O Love! who shall thy power control?
"To quench thy fires whole rivers drain
"Thy burning heat shall still remain.
"In vain we trace the globe to try
"If powerful gold thy joys can buy:
"The treasures of the world will prove
"Too poor a bribe to purchase Love.
CHORUS.
"In vain we trace the globe to try
"If powerful gold thy joys can buy:
"The treasures of the world will prove
"Too poor a bribe to purchase Love."
A HYMN TO POVERTY.
O Poverty! thou source of human art,
Thou great inspirer of the poet's song!
In vain Apollo dictates, and the Nine
Attend in vain, unless thy mighty hand
Direct the tuneful lyre. Without thy aid
The canvass breathes no longer. Musick's charms
Uninfluenc'd by thee forget to please:
Thou giv'st the organ sound; by thee the flute
Breathes harmony; the tuneful viol owns
Thy powerful touch. The warbling voice is thine;
Thou gav'st to Nicolini every grace,
And every charm to Farinelli's song.
By thee the lawyer pleads. The soldier's arm
Is nerv'd by thee. Thy power the gownman feels,
And urged by thee unfolds Heaven's mystic truths.
The haughty fair that swells with proud disdain,
And smiles at mischiefs which her eyes have made,
Thou humblest to submit and bless mankind.
Hail, Power Omnipotent! me uninvok'd
Thou deign'st to visit, far alas! unfit
To bear thy awful presence. O retire!
At distance let me view thee, lest too nigh
I sink beneath the terrors of thy face.
PROLOGUE
SPOKEN BY MR. WOODWARD, In the Character of a Critic with a Catcal in his
Hand.
ARE you all ready? here 's your music, here Blowing his catcal.
.
Author! sneak off; we 'll tickle you my dear.
The fellow stopped me in a hellish fright --
"Pray Sir," says he, "must I be damned tonight?"
"Damned! surely friend. Do n't hope for our compliance;
"Zounds Sir! a second play 's downright defiance.
"Though once poor Rogue! we pitied your condition,
"Here 's the true recipe for repetition."
"Well Sir," says he, "even as you please; so then
"I 'll never trouble you with plays again."
"But hark ye Poet! -- Will Not you tho,'" says I?
"'Pon honor" -- Then we 'll damn you, let me die."
Sha' n't we my Bucks? let 's take him at his word;
Damn him, or by my soul he 'll write a third.
The man wants money I suppose -- but mind ye --
Tell him you 'ave left your charity behind ye.
A pretty plea, his wants to our regard!
As if we Bloods had bowels for a bard!
Besides, what men of spirit nowadays
Come to give sober judgments of new plays?
It argues some good nature to be quiet --
Good nature! -- ay -- but then we lose a riot.
The scribbling fool may beg and make a fuss;
It Is death to him -- what then? -- it is sport to us.
Do n't mind me though -- for all my fun and jokes
The bard may find us Bloods good natured folks,
No crabbed critics, foes to rising merit:
Write but with fire and we 'll applaud with spirit.
Our Author aims at no dishonest ends;
He knows no enemies and boasts some friends:
He takes no methods down your throats to cram it,
So if you like it save it, if not -- damn it.
AN ELEGY,
Written among the Ruins of a Nobleman's Seat in Cornwall.
AMIDST these venerable drear remains
Of ancient grandeur musing sad I stray,
Around a melancholy silence reigns
That prompts me to indulge the plaintive lay.
Here lived Eugenio, born of noble race:
Aloft his mansion rose, around were seen
Extensive gardens decked with every grace,
Ponds, walks, and groves, through all the seasons green.
Ah! where is now its boasted beauty fled?
Proud turrets that once glittered in the sky
And broken columns in confusion spread
A rude misshapen heap of ruins lie.
Of splendid rooms no traces here are found:
How are these tottering walls by time defaced,
Shagg'd with vile thorn, with twining ivy bound,
Once hung with tapestry, with paintings graced!
In ancient times perhaps where now I tread
Licentious Riot crowned the midnight bowl,
Her dainties Luxury poured, and Beauty spread
Her artful snares to captivate the soul.
Or here attended by a chosen train
Of innocent delight true Grandeur dwelt,
Diffusing blessings over the distant plain,
Health, joy, and happiness, by thousands felt.
Around now Solitude unjoyous reigns,
No gay gilt chariot hither marks the way,
No more with cheerful hopes the needy swains
At the once bounteous gate their visits pay.
Where too is now the garden's beauty fled
Which every clime was ransacked to supply?
Over the drear spot see desolation spread,
And the dismantled walls in ruins lie!
Dead are the trees that once with nicest care
Arrang'd from opening blossoms shed perfume,
And thick with fruitage stood the pendent pear,
The ruddy colored peach and glossy plum.
Extinct is all the family of flowers;
In vain I seek the arbour's cool retreat,
Where ancient friends in converse passed the hours,
Defended from the raging Dogstar's heat.
Along the terrace walks are straggling seen
The prickly bramble and the noisome weed,
Beneath whose covert crawls the toad obscene,
And snakes and adders unmolested breed.
The groves where Pleasure walked her rounds decay,
The mead untilled a barren aspect wears,
And where the sprightly fawn was wont to play
O'ergrown with heath a dreary waste appears.
In yonder wide-extended vale below
Where osiers spread a pond capacious stood,
From far by art the stream was taught to flow
Whose liquid stores supplied the unfailing flood.
Often here the silent angler took his place,
Intent to captivate the scaly fry --
But perished now are all the numerous race,
Dumb is the fountain and the channel dry.
Here then, ye Great! behold the uncertain state
Of earthly grandeur -- Beauty, strength, and power,
Alike are subject to the stroke of Fate,
And flourish but the glory of an hour.
Virtue alone no dissolution fears,
Still permanent though ages roll away:
Who builds on her immortal basis rears
A superstructure time can never decay.
SONGS.
SONG I.
I.
THUS I said to my heart in a pet the other day,
"I had rather be hanged than go moping this way;
"No throbbings no wishes your moments employ,
"But you sleep in my breast without motion or joy.
II.
"When Cloe perplexed me 't was sweeter by half,
"And at Thais's wiles I could oftentimes laugh;
"Your burnings and akings I strove not to cure
"Though one was a jilt and the other a whore.
III.
"When I walked up the Mall or stroll'd thro'the street
"Not a petticoat brushed me but then you could beat,
"Or if bang went the hoop against corner or post
"In the magical round you were sure to be lost.
IV.
"But now if a nymph goes as naked as Eve,
"Like Adam unfallen you never perceive,
"Or the seat of delight if the tippet should hide
"You tempt not my fingers to draw it aside.
V.
"Is it caution or dread or the frost of old age
"That inclines you with beauty no more to engage?
"Tell me quickly the cause, for it makes me quite mad
"In the summer's gay season to see you so sad."
VI.
"Have a care," quoth my Heart, "how you tempt me to stray;
"He that hunts down a woman must run a d -- d way;
"Like a hare she can wind, or hold out with the fox,
"And secure in the chase her pursuers she mocks.
VII.
"For Cloe I burnt with an innocent flame,
"And beat to the music that breathed out her name;
"Three summers flew over the castles I built,
"And beheld me a fool and my goddess a jilt.
VIII
"Next Thais the wanton my wishes employed,
"And the kind one repaired what the cruel destroyed;
"Like Shadrach I lived in a furnace of fire,
"But unlike him was scorched and compelled to retire.
IX.
"Recruited once more I forgot all my pain,
"And was jilted, and burnt, and bedevil'd again;
"Not a petticoat fringed or the heel of a shoe
"Ever passed you by daylight but at it I flew.
X.
"Thus jilted, and wounded, and burnt to a coal,
"For rest I retreated again to be whole,
"But your eyes ever open to lead me astray
"Have beheld a new face and command me away.
XI.
"But remember in whatever flames I may burn
"'Twill be solly to ask for or wish my return;
"Neither Thais nor Cloe again shall inflame,
"But a nymph more provoking than all you can name."
XII.
This said with a bound from my bosom he flew;
O Phillis! these eyes saw him posting to you:
Enslaved by your wit he grows fond of his chain,
And vows I shall never possess him again.
SONG II.
COLIN. BE still O ye Winds! and attentive ye Swains!
It Is Phebe invites and replies to my strains;
The sun never rose on, search all the world through,
A shepherd so blessed or a fair one so true.
PHEB. Glide softly ye Streams! O ye Nymphs round me throng!
It Is Colin commands and attends to my song;
Search all the world over you never can find
A maiden so blessed or a shepherd so kind.
BOTH. It Is love like the sun that gives light to the year,
The sweetest of blessings that life can endear,
Our pleasures it brightens, drives sorrow away,
Gives joy to the night and enlivens the day.
COL. With Phebe beside me the seasons how gay!
Then winter's bleak months seem as pleasant as May;
The summer's gay verdure springs still as she treads,
And linnets and nightingales sing through the meads.
PHEB. When Colin is absent 't is winter all round,
How faint is the sunshine, how barren the ground!
Instead of the linnet and nightingale's song
I hear the hoarse raven croak all the day long.
BOTH. It Is love like the sun, etc.
COL. Over hill, dale, and valley, my Phebe and I
Together will wander, and Love shall be by;
Her Colin shall guard her safe all the long day,
And Phebe at night all his pains shall repay.
PHEB. By moonlight when shadows glide over the plain
His kisses shall cheer me, his arm shall sustain;
The dark haunted grove I can trace without fear,
Or sleep in a churchyard, if Colin is near.
BOTH. It Is love like the sun, etc.
COL. Ye Shepherds that wanton it over the plain
How fleeting your transports, how lasting your pain!
Inconstancy shun, and reward the kind she,
And learn to be happy of Phebe and me.
PHEB. Ye Nymphs! who the pleasures of love never tried,
Attend to my strains and take me for your guide;
Your hearts keep from pride and inconstancy free,
And learn to be happy of Colin and me.
BOTH. It Is love like the sun that gives light to the year,
The sweetest of blessings that life can endear,
Our pleasures it brightens, drives sorrow away,
Gives joy to the night and enlivens the day.
SONG III.
I.
AS Phillis the gay at the break of the day
Went forth to the meadows a Maying,
A clown lay asleep by a river so deep
That round in meanders was straying.
II.
His bosom was bare, and for whiteness so rare,
Her heart it was gone without warning,
With cheeks of such hue that the rose wet with dew
Never looked half so fresh in a morning.
III.
She culled the new hay and down by him she lay,
Her wishes too warm for disguising;
She played with his eyes till he waked in surprise,
And blushed like the sun at his rising.
IV.
She sung him a song as he leaned on his prong,
And rested her arm on his shoulder;
She pressed his coy cheek to her bosom so sleek,
And taught his two arms to infold her.
V.
The rustic grown kind, by a kiss told his mind,
And called her his Dear and his Blessing;
Together they strayed, and sung, frolick'd, and played,
And what they did more there 's no guessing.
SONG IV.
HE. LET rakes for pleasure range the Town,
Or misers dote on golden guineas,
Let Plenty smile or Fortune frown
The sweets of love are mine and Jenny's.
SHE. Let wanton maids indulge desire,
How soon the fleeting pleasure gone is!
The joys of virtue never tire,
And such shall still be mine and Johnny's.
BOTH. Together let us sport and play,
And live in pleasure where no sin is;
The priest shall tie the knot today,
And wedlock's bands make Johnny Jenny's.
HE. Let roving swains young hearts invade,
The pleasure ends in shame and solly;
So Willy wooed, and then betrayed
The poor believing simple Molly.
SHE. So Lucy loved, and lightly toy'd,
And laughed at harmless maids who marry,
But now she finds her shepherd cloyed,
And chides too late her faithless Harry.
BOTH. But we 'll together, etc.
HE. By cooling streams our flocks we 'll feed,
And leave deceit to knaves and ninnies,
Or fondly stray where Love shall lead,
And every joy be mine and Jenny's.
SHE. Let guilt the faithless bosom fright,
The constant heart is always bonny;
Content, and Peace, and sweet Delight,
And Love, shall live with me and Johnny.
BOTH. Together still we 'll sport and play,
And live in pleasure where no sin is;
The priest shall tie the knot today,
And wedlock's bands make Johnny Jenny's.
SONG V.
I.
STAND round my brave Boys! with heart and with voice,
And all in full chorus agree;
We 'll fight for our king, and as loyally sing,
And let the world know we 'll be free.
CHORUS.
The rebels shall fly as with shouts we draw nigh,
And Echo shall victory ring,
Then safe from alarms we 'll rest on our arms
And chorus it Long live the King!
II.
Then commerce once more shall bring wealth to our shore,
And plenty and peace bless the isle;
The peasant shall quaff off his bowl with a laugh
And reap the sweet fruits of his toil.
CHORUS.
The rebels, etc.
III.
Kind love shall repay the fatigues of the day
And melt us to softer alarms;
Coy Phillis shall burn at her soldier's return
And bless the brave youth in her arms.
CHORUS.
The rebels shall fly as with shouts we draw nigh,
And Echo shall victory ring,
Then safe from alarms we 'll rest on our arms
And chorus it Long live the King!
SONG VI.
I.
TO make the wife kind and to keep the house still
You must be of her mind let her say what she will;
In all that she does you must give her her way,
For tell her she 's wrong and you lead her astray.
CHORUS.
Then Husbands! take care, of suspicion beware,
Your wives may be true if you fancy they are;
With confidence trust them, and be not such elves
As to make by your jealousy horns for yourselves.
II.
Abroad all the day if she chooses to roam
Seem pleased with her absence, she 'll sigh to come home;
The man she likes best and longs most to get at
Be sure to commend, and she 'll hate him for that.
CHORUS.
Then Husbands! etc.
III.
What virtues she has you may safely oppose;
Whatever her follies are praise her for those:
Applaud all her schemes that she lays for a man,
For accuse her of vice and she 'll sin if she can.
CHORUS.
Then Husbands! take care, of suspicion beware,
Your wives may be true if you fancy they are;
With confidence trust them, and be not such elves
As to make by your jealousy horns for yourselves.
SONG VII.
DAMON. HARK, hark! over the plains how the merry bells ring
Asleep while my charmer is laid;
The village is up and the day on the wing,
And Phillis may yet die a maid.
PHIL. It Is hardly yet day and I cannot away;
O Damon! I am young and afraid:
Tomorrow my Dear! I 'll to church without fear,
But let me tonight lie a maid.
DAM. The bridemaids are met, and mamma 's on the fret;
All, all my coy Phillis upbraid:
Come open the door, and deny me no more,
Nor cry to live longer a maid.
PHIL. Dear Shepherd! forbear, and tomorrow I swear,
Tomorrow I 'll not be afraid;
I 'll open the door, and deny you no more,
Nor cry to live longer a maid.
DAM. No, no, Phillis; no; on that bosom of snow
Tonight shall your shepherd be laid:
By morning my dear shall be eased of her fear,
Nor grieve she 's no longer a maid.
PHIL. Then open the door, 't was unbolted before;
His bliss silly Damon delayed:
To church let us go, and if there I say No,
O then let me die an old maid.
SONG VIII.
I.
THAT Jenny's my friend, my delight, and my pride,
I always have boasted, and seek not to hide;
I dwell on her praises wherever I go:
They say I 'm in love, but I answer No, no.
II.
At evening oft'times with what pleasure I see
A note from her hand, "I 'll be with you at tea!"
My heart how it bounds when I hear her below!
But say not 't is love, for I answer No, no.
III.
She sings me a song and I echo each strain,
Again I cry Jenny, sweet Jenny! again
I kiss her soft lips as if there I could grow,
And fear I 'm in love though I answer No, no.
IV.
She tells me her faults as she sits on my knee;
I chide her, and swear she 's an angel to me:
My shoulder she taps, and still bids me think so.
Who knows but she loves though she tells me No, no?
V.
Yet such is my temper, so dull am I grown,
I ask not her heart but would conquer my own:
Her bosom's soft peace shall I seek to o'erthrow,
And wish to persuade while I answer No, no?
VI.
From beauty, and wit, and good humor, ah! why
Should Prudence advise and compel me to fly?
Thy bounties O Fortune! make haste to bestow,
And let me deserve her or still I say No.
SONG IX.
I.
YOU tell me I 'm handsome, I know not how true,
And easy, and chatty, and good humored, too,
That my lips are as red as the rosebud in June,
And my voice like the nightingale's sweetly in tune:
All this has been told me by twenty before,
But he that would win me must flatter me more.
II.
If beauty from virtue receive no supply,
Or prattle from prudence, how wanting am I!
My ease and good humor short raptures will bring,
And my voice like the nightingale's know but a spring:
For charms such as these then your praises give over;
To love me for life you must love me for more.
III.
Then talk to me not of a shape or an air,
For Cloe the wanton can rival me there:
It Is virtue alone that makes beauty look gay,
And brightens good humor as sunshine the day;
For that if you love me your flame shall be true,
And I in my turn may be taught to love too.
SONG X.
I.
HOW blessed has my time been, whatdays have I known,
Since wedlock's soft bondage made Jesse my own!
So joyful my heart is, so easy my chain,
That freedom is tasteless and roving a pain.
II.
Through walks grown with woodbines as often we stray
Around us our boys and girls frolic and play;
How pleasing their sport is the wanton ones see,
And borrow their looks from my Jesse and me.
III.
To try her sweet temper sometimes am I seen
In revels all day with the nymphs on the green;
Though painful my absence my doubts she beguiles,
And meets me at night with compliance and smiles.
IV.
What though on her cheek the rose loses its hue,
Her ease and good humor bloom all the year through;
Time still as he flies brings increase to her truth,
And gives to her mind what he steals from her youth.
V.
Ye Shepherds so gay! who make love to ensnare,
And cheat with false vows the too credulous fair,
In search of true pleasure how vainly you roam!
To hold it for life you must find it at home.
SONG XI.
I.
HARK, hark! 't is a voice from the tomb;
"Come Lucy," it cries, "come away;
"The grave of thy Colin has room
"To rest thee beside his cold clay."
"I come my dear Shepherd! I come;
"Ye Friends and Companions! adieu;
"I haste to my Colin's dark home,
"To die on his bosom so true."
II.
All mournful the midnight bell rung
When Lucy, sad Lucy, arose,
And forth to the green turf she sprung
Where Colin's pale ashes repose:
All wet with the night's chilling dew
Her bosom embraced the cold ground,
While stormy winds over her blew
And night ravens croak'd all around.
III.
"How long my loved Colin!" she cried,
"How long must thy Lucy complain?
"How long shall the grave my love hide?
"How long ere it join us again?
"For thee thy fond shepherdess lived,
"With thee over the world would she fly;
"For thee has she sorrow'd and grieved,
"For thee would she lie down and die.
IV.
"Alas! what avails it how dear
"Thy Lucy was once to her swain,
"Her face like the lily so fair,
"And eyes that gave light to the plain!
"The shepherd that loved her is gone,
"That face and those eyes charm no more,
"And Lucy forgot and alone
"To death shall her Colin deplore."
V.
While thus she lay sunk in despair,
And mourned to the echoes around,
Inflamed all at once grew the air,
And thunder shook dreadful the ground.
"I hear the kind call and obey;
"Oh Colin! receive me," she cried;
Then breathing a groan over his clay,
She hung on his tombstone and died.
SONG XII.
I.
FOR a shape, and a bloom, and an air, and a mien,
Myrtilla was brightest of all the gay green,
But artfully wild and affectedly coy,
Those her beauties invited her pride would destroy.
II.
By the flocks as she strayed with the nymphs of the vale
Not a shepherd but wooed her to hear his soft tale;
Though fatal the passion she laugli'd at the swain,
And returned with neglect what she heard with disdain.
III.
But beauty has wings and too hastily flies,
And love unrewarded soon sickens and dies;
The nymph cured by time of her folly and pride
Now sighs in her turn for the bliss she denied.
IV.
No longer she frolicks it wide over the plain
To kill with her coyness the languishing swain;
So humbled her pride is, so softened her mind,
That though courted by none she to all would be kind.
SONG XIII.
I.
WHEN Damon languish'd at my feet,
And I believed him true,
The moments of delight how sweet!
But ah! how swift they flew!
The sunny hill, the flowery vale,
The garden and the grove,
Have echoed to his ardent tale,
And vows of endless love.
II.
The conquest gained he left his prize,
He left her to complain,
To talk of joy with weeping eyes,
And measure time by pain.
But Heaven will take the mourner's part
In pity to despair,
And the last sigh that rends the heart
Shall wast the spirit there.
CONTENTS.
The Life of the Author, Page 5 Preface, 9 Dedication, 11 FABLES FOR THE
LADIES. Fable I. 13 -- II. 16 -- III. 21 -- IV. 22 -- V. 25 -- VI. 28 -- VII.
32 -- VIII. 35 -- IX. 40 -- X. 43 -- XI. 46 -- XII. 49 -- XIII. 52 -- XIV. 56
-- XV. 70 -- XVI. 89
ODES. The Discovery, an Ode, 103 Ode, to Garrick, 108
MISCELLANIES. The Trial of Selim the Persian, 113 The Trial of Sarah ***,
alias Slim Sal, 126 Envy and Fortune, a Tale, 135 To the Right Hon. Henry
Pelham, the Petition of the Company of Poets and Newswriters, Page 139 The
Lover and the Friend, 141 The Nun, a Cantata, 143 Solomon, a Serenata, in three
Parts, Part I. 145 -- Part II. 149 -- Part III. 152 A Hymn to Poverty, 154
Prologue to Gil Blas, 155 Elegy written among the Ruins of a Nobleman's Seat in
Cornwall, 157
SONGS. Song I. "Thus I said to my heart," etc. 160 Song II. "Be still O ye
Winds!" etc. 162 Song III. "As Phillis the gay," etc. 164 Song IV. "Let rakes
for pleasure range," etc. 165 Song V. "Stand round my brave Boys!" etc. 166
Song VI. "To make the wife kind," etc. 167 Song VII. "Hark, hark! over the
plains," etc. 168 Song VIII. "That Jenny 's my friend," etc. 169 Song IX. "You
tell me I am handsome," etc. 170 Song X. "How blessed has my time been," etc. 171
Song XI. "Hark, hark! 't is a voice," etc. 172 Song XII. "For a shape, and a
bloom," etc. 174 Song XIII. "When Damon languish'd," etc. 175

From the APOLLO PRESS, by the MARTINS, Dec. 15. 1781.

THE END.

