THE DESCRIPTION and USE OF DR. LEAKE's FORCEPS VINDICATED.

[Price One Shilling.]

A VINDICATION OF THE FORCEPS DESCRIBED AND RECOMMENDED By DR. LEAKE; IN WHICH,
The INJUDICIOUS and ILLIBERAL REMARKS on that Subject, signed THOMAS DENMAN,
are examined and refuted.

By a late PUPIL of Dr. Leake's.

LONDON; Printed for J. Hinton, in Paternoster-Row.

M DCC LXXIV.

TO DR. THOMAS DENMAN.
IT is now above three years since Dr. Leake published a description of his New
Forceps with three Blades, together with an elegant Copper-plate Print of that
Instrument. From this Publication, though attended with considerable expense,
he derived no advantage, since it was chiefly intended as a compliment to his
Pupils, and to such other Gentlemen of the Profession as were particularly
engaged in the province of Midwifery. It is true, when his Introductory Lecture
was lately published, his paper on the Forceps was annexed to it, but without
being mentioned in the Advertisement, or making any addition to the price.
Of this I can speak with confidence, as I had at that time the pleasure of
attending the Doctor's Lectures, and was therefore, well acquainted with the
truth of the particulars which I now mention. I was likewise one of the many,
who, from the principles on which it was recommended, thought this a valuable
addition to the Apparatus of Midwifery; nor has my experience of its use in
Practice hitherto failed to confirm this opinion. But the merit of Dr. Leake's
Forceps rests on a much better foundation than any thing I can pretend to
advance in its favor. Many of the best Accoucheurs, both at home and abroad,
have been pleased to commend it as a considerable Improvement; many Commissions
were soon received by the Instrument-Makers, for sending it to different
quarters; and to my certain knowledge, it has been for some time past a
familiar Instrument in the hands of several Practitioners of the first name in
France, Russia, and Holland, as well as Great Britain and Ireland.

With so many and such respectable Suffrages in its favor, I thought the
credit and use of the new Forceps had been universally established, till I was
lately convinced, by perusing your Remarks on that Instrument, that there was
at least one dissenting voice. When, or in what manner, these Remarks were
first ushered into light, I will not take upon me to say; but I am apt to think
they had a clandestine Birth, as I do not remember to have seen them advertised
in the usual way; a circumstance which would not have readily escaped me, as my
fondness for Improvement, especially at so great a distance from Town, makes me
always very attentive to the Article of new Publications. It was by mere
accident therefore, and only very lately, that I had the happy opportunity of
seeing this striking Specimen of your Candor and literary Talents; and as soon
as I had glanced it over, I was determined to employ my first intervals of
leisure, from the duties of my Profession in vindicating Dr. Leake from so
illiberal and injurious an Attack. Together with this motive you may attribute
as much as you please to the vanity of a young man, whom you may suspect,
perhaps, of seeking for an occasion to try his strength in the lists of
Controversy; and indeed, to be perfectly ingenuous with you on this head, I
will frankly own, that so far as it may be natural to take courage from the
weakness of an Adversary, I did think I could never hope for a better
opportunity of making a first Essay with so little hazard to my Reputation.

In censuring Dr. Leake's Forceps, which you are pleased to declare an
ineffectual as well as a dangerous Instrument, you allege the public good as
your sole inducement for undertaking the trouble of your precious Remarks upon
it. This is certainly a good Plea, and worthy of a good Man; but it has been so
often hackneyed and abused, that we are sometimes apt to suspect a counterfeit.
It is a convenient pretense, however, when a man is either ashamed or afraid to
avow his real motives, and in the present case, it would not perhaps be
difficult to assign others. But as this may be a matter of conjecture only, I
shall not insist upon it, as I would not wish to attack even an ungenerous
Adversary, by the sly method of Insinuation.

Allowing you, therefore, the full merit of your pretended zeal for the public
safety; let me ask you, why you did not sound the alarm sooner, when as you say
and would have it believed, there was so much impending danger, and such
dreadful consequences to be apprehended from the use of this Instrument? Let me
still further ask you, why at length, these benevolent remarks of yours were
not exhibited to the world in a public and open manner, instead, as I am
informed, of being privately handed about, among such young and unexperienced
Gentlemen of the Profession as were not competent Judges of the subject? Did
you mean that the poison conveyed in this artful and insidious manner, should
have time to operate and produce it effects before an antidote could be
administered?

As every man has an undoubted right to approve or disapprove of whatever is
presented to public view, I by no means blame you for making Dr. Leake's
Forceps a subject of enquiry, provided you had done it in the way of a candid
examination, founded on the evidence of his own Description: a mode of trial to
which no Author can reasonably object, and to which every one has an undeniable
claim. But how far you have done justice to that Gentleman in your Quotations,
or the conclusions you draw from them, will be left to the following
Strictures, and the Reader's judgment without farther anticipation.

You will please to observe, Sir, that contrary to your method, I shall quote
and examine those your remarks fairly, without perverting your meaning, where
that is to be found, or omitting one part and inserting another, as best suits
my purpose. I must likewise inform you, that in quoting an Author you have no
right either to alter the Diction or transpose the Sentences, especially in
points of Controversy, because from thence may arise an alteration in the
sense, which may wholly misrepresent the original meaning; both which you have
frequently done without ceremony, in your Remarks on Dr. Leake's paper on the
new Forceps. With the skilful and candid, I believe, that paper might very
safely have been left to vindicate itself; but least your Remarks, puerile and
superficial as they are, should chance to mislead the unexperienced, who
sometimes mistake sound for sense, I will proceed to examine and place them in
their proper point of view.

I shall pass over in a general way, the self-conceit, and finical precision,
as well as the childish vanity and formal parade with which you are pleased to
bring forth your elaborate trifle; which examined in all its parts, will appear
to every eye but your own, a shapeless abortion, deformed, unfinished, and sent
before its time.

In the first article of your Remarks, you take the liberty to assert, that Dr.
Leake's Description of the Forceps is not correct; but in what manner you make
good that assertion, the Reader will best be able to judge, from an exact
quotation of his Description, compared with your own.

Dr. Leake's Description of the Forceps is as follows: "The Forceps used in
Midwifery may be considered as an Instrument consisting of two Levers, which
act in contrary Directions from one common Center or Fulcrum, where their
Blades unite and are sustained by each other, consequently, their power on the
Body to be moved will be in Proportion to the length of their Levers or
Handles."

The following in your Description. The Forceps ought to be considered as an
instrument consisting of two Levers, acting alternately from two centres, which
are those parts of the Child's head undergoing the greatest friction.

To speak thus, is to assert that the Forceps, which is the active body, finds
a Fulcrum or resting point upon the Child's head which is wholly passive, being
the very part which is to be extracted. I should be glad to ask, how the
Child's head can be the part from which the Blades act, since it is
demonstratively the part acted upon? A very slender knowledge of Mechanics
might have taught you that every Lever must necessarily act from its center of
motion; but on the contrary, if the Child's head afforded a center of motion to
the Blades of the Forceps, as you assert, then it would follow, that those
Blades, considered as Levers, would not act from, but toward their center of
Motion; a thing so contrary to reason and common sense as to deserve no further
attention. In a word, Sir, you have palpably confounded the idea of the part
acted upon by the Lever, with that of the part from which it acts. But perhaps
you are about to establish some new Principle in Mechanics, which may solve
this Paradox, and prove that an active and a passive body is one and the same
thing.

You say -- It is true, that with respect to themselves, viz. (the Blades) the
Center of Motion will be at that part where they unite; but when in the hands
of the Operator, and containing a body within their Curve, the alternate motion
necessary for the extraction of that body through a small space, changes the
whole circumstance.

It is wholly inconsistent and improper, thus to talk of Motion, or a Center of
Motion in a body (the Forceps) which as above, you are describing totally at
rest; that is unemployed and not in the hands of the Operator.

Again, you say, That when the Blades are really in the hands of the Operator,
then the whole circumstance is changed -- Without doubt the circumstance is
changed, but not at all in the manner you apprehend; for if the blades contain
a body within their Curve, the action for the extraction of that body, must
still be derived from their Junction as a resting Point, otherwise they would
want a Fulcrum, and therefore could not act at all. -- If this is difficult to
be understood, you may, if you please, suppose two Blades without such
junction, to be passed up along the Child's head, and as these Blades could not
possibly then be locked, they would not act on the Child's head, and
consequently it could not be extracted.

Besides, the Blades of the Forceps, considered as two Levers, do not act
alternately as you tell us; for as both of them closely and equally embrace the
Child's head, the one cannot possibly be made to act without the other; their
action therefore is not alternate but simultaneous.

Such frivolous and far-fetched Objections show that you have taken great pains
to find them out, and that you have been at whip and spur in pursuit of Game;
but like an unskilful Huntsman who mistakes the mettle of his Stead, as well as
his own; you have unfortunately quite unhorsed yourself in attempting the five
Bar-gate. Upon the whole, either your knowledge of Mechanics should have been
greater, or your presumption less, in contradicting established and
self-evident principles.

So much for your Accuracy and Skill; I shall next quote your second Article
verbatim, as a curious specimen of your Candor, and the respect due to your
Superiors: -- Reader, please to attend to the following modest Assertion.

Professors have generally misled us in the persuit of practical knowledge,
being too often of that order of men, who are the bane of real improvement.
Inquirunt, says Dr. Harvey, non quomodo res sunt, sed quid alii dicunt.

If such Professors are any where to be found, your preceding Remarks evidently
show that you have no small Title to be included in their number." Nomine
mutato, de te fabula narratur. In a word, if such Reflections in one of real
consequence, whose judgment was ripened by time and experience, would justly
be thought uncommonly presuming, and so replete with arrogance as to have got
the better of both prudence and decency; -- What then shall be said of -- Dr.
Thomas Denman.

Thus you proceed,

I believe there are reasons for suspecting that M. Crantz is but little
qualified for laying down Rules for the use of Instruments in Midwifery, and M.
Levrette is not unexceptionable authority.

You ought to have mentioned those Reasons at large, otherwise an affertion so
rude and injurious, on your own authority only, is claiming more credit than
the Reader may be willing to allow you; for you must know that M. Crantz was an
eminent Professor of Midwifery at Vienna, and that he wrote judiciously on the
Use of Instruments, in his Dissert. de re instrumentaria in art obstetricaria,
a book very necessary for your perusal.

M. Levrette, you say, is not unexceptionable authority -- If none but yours is
opposed to it, I believe it will remain unexceptionable. To tell any other of
the profession but yourself who Levrette was, would be unnecessary; but as you
have spelt his name wrong as often as you have had occasion to mention it, it
appears you have no better acquaintance with him than with the former
Gentleman, whom you have so uncivilly censured. Levret of Paris is sufficiently
known throughout Europe, both by his Writings and public Lectures. In short,
the Merit and Judgment of the two respectable Authors in question are so
universally acknowledged, and their reputation so superior to your
insignificant Cavils, that the present circumstance would be apt to put one in
mind of a Village-cur barking at the Moon.

I shall now proceed to quote the substance of what Dr. Leake has advanced, and
to examine the propriety and validity of your Remarks on the present subject.
-- In his description of the Forceps he speaks thus:

" H. Crantz, professor of Midwifery at Vienna, and Levret of Paris, both
observe, that when the Child's head is wedged within the bones of the Pelvis,
(capite incuneato) it can scarcely ever be extracted by the common Forceps
recommended by Smellie, because of their shortness; and as their Blades are
only curved in one Direction, whenever it happens that the Hind-head is forced
over the Symphysis of the Pubes, it cannot be got hold of within the curve of
the Blades, which being only applied along the Ears in a straight Direction,
are therefore apt to slip downwards over the Face, and to foil the Operator in
the Extraction of the Head: This will the rather happen, because they are made
taper toward their Points, which will diminish their contact on the head and
prevent them from taking a firm hold; -- so that they are the least serviceable
in those very Cases where they are the most wanted, -- that is, where the
Pelvis is narrow; for it must be allowed, of all Difficulties, that which
happens from the above cause, is by far the most insurmountable obstacle to the
birth, since it can only be overcome by very strong Pains, which compress the
head and force it to conform to the bony Passage."

Your remarks on the preceding Paragraph are as follows: -- When the Head is
incuneatum, enclavee, or wedged in the Pelvis, it is a case in which Forceps of
any kind cannot be used with prudence. If we did try them, we should happily
miscarry in the attempt, for if we succeeded, dreadful would be the consequence
to the parts of the Mother, crushed between the Child's head and Forceps on one
hand, and the bones of the Pelvis on the other.

The Reader is here presented with a dish of all sorts, -- a perfect Oleo, but
without a single grain of salt or seasoning, curiously garnished with fresh
rhetorical flowers, but of the exotic kind; such as that of miscarrying
happily; success being attended with dreadful consequences, etc.

You tell us that, The Doctrine of applying Forceps before the bulk of the Head
has passed the superior aperture of the Pelvis, carries great danger and
insurmountable difficulties on the face of it. Those who have endeavored to
reduce it to practice (for it is an old and obsolete Doctrine) have in their
accounts given us Histories of their attempting it, of the difficulties they
met with, of the mischiefs they did, and a retraction of their Errors.

According to your account, this Doctrine wears a very frightful and
gorgon-like countenance. -- Alas poor prostituted word Doctrine! how miserably
art thou profaned and misapplied; I fear thou will next be tacked to the method
of making pease-pottage, or manufacturing mutton-pies. But to be serious; was
it not doing injustice to John Bunyan by the comparison; I should think I had
been reading his description of the Pilgrim's Progress through the Vale of
Tears.

When the greatest bulk of the Head has passed the superior Aperture of the
Pelvis, the greatest difficulty is over, as appears by the following quotation
from Dr. Leake, and therefore the Forceps are seldom ever then necessary,
except floodings or other dangerous symptoms should suddenly exhaust the
Patient's strength.

"The short Forceps may indeed be effectually applied when the Child's head is
low in the Pelvis, but where that is the Case, artificial Assistance is seldom
necessary, the principal Difficulty being then over; and should any still
remain, it will now be removed by the Concurrence of two Causes, viz. the
inferior Parts of the Pelvis will gradually dilate and give way to the Pressure
of the Head, which, at the same time, will be squeezed into a longitudinal
Form, and therefore its transverse Diameter, in respect to the Passage, will
become considerably less and less; both which Circumstances have a manifest
tendency to facilitate the Birth."

Those then, and such like your Remarks, are more than sufficiently answered by
the following quotation from Dr. Leake's Paper, which shows the necessity and
propriety of the practice he recommends, and also that he was not unaware of
Cavil and Criticism.

"I know that the Application of the Forceps is objected to by some, till after
the Head has got below the Brim of the Pelvis, on the Supposition that the
Force applied to bring it down would prove injurious to the Mother; -- but will
not the violent and long continued Compression of the soft Parts, viz. the
Vagina and Neck of the Bladder, etc. when squeezed between the Head and Bones
of the Pelvis, as two solid Bodies, be much more liable to endanger the
Patient? -- Since Instances may be found where a Mortification has been the
Consequence, and where the Child, which always suffers in Proportion, was also
born dead.

In cases, therefore, extremely laborious, when the Head is large, -- the
Pelvis narrow, or both; -- where the Patient's Strength is exhausted by a
Flooding, -- where she is suddenly attacked with Convulsions, Faintings, or
other alarming Symptoms, and consequently, where the labor Pains are
insufficient to bring forth the Child; the long double curved Forceps,
hereafter described, may be used with great safety and advantage, either with
or without the Lever or third blade, as occasion may require. -- Every one who
has had much Experience knows, that it is often improper, as well as difficult
and dangerous to turn the Child, and sometimes even impracticable without
bursting the Uterus, or applying so much Violence as might be fatal to the
Mother; and to open the head of a living infant, before the long Forceps and
every other Expedient had been tried in vain, would surely be deemed rash and
unnatural Practice."

It may be observed, that whatever Dr. Leake recommends he always gives his
reasons for it; but what you advance is only mere matter of assertion, or if
you attempt any thing further, such is your success, that what you endeavor to
prove, still remains to be proved by some other person.

The question is -- What should be done for the safety of the Mother when her
strength is exhausted, and her pains insufficient to bring the Child; so that
she is every moment in danger of dying undelivered. -- Dr. Leake admits, there
is danger in the Operation, but at the same time shows why there is much more,
when it is neglected, and therefore, of two evils, the least is to be chosen;
especially since there is no other alternative, than that one of killing the
Child, by opening its head; for he has shown that Smellie's Forceps are much
too short to reach and extract it thus situated, and that it is by no means
eligible to turn the child: so that all you have been able to advance against
this practice, is mere invective; being nothing but a few formidable Epithets
to excite horror, and to deter the weak and timorous from using the Forceps
recommended by Dr. Leake; and lest his ingenious Invention of combining the
action of the Forceps and Lever, should chance to pluck a feather out of your
wing.

You talk of dreadful consequences, and crushing of heads, as others would talk
of cracking nuts; but if such reasoning as this could prevail; then the use of
the short Forceps, of which you are so fond, should also be rejected, even when
the Child's head is below the brim of the Pelvis; for fear of lacerating the
Perinaeum; and for the very same reason if it could be found to have any
weight, no Surgeon would ever venture to cut for the Stone, lest the patient
should die by the consequence of the Operation.

You say, -- It is supposed that the hind-head is forced over the Symphysis of
the Pubes. Whenever this is the Case it is not possible to apply Forceps of any
kind, with advantage, or without the utmost danger; and I call upon every
Gentleman conversant in practice to confirm the truth of the Assertion.

It is not possible, you say, to apply Forceps of any kind. Dr. Leake being
apprized of the difficulty attending the application of all Forceps in this
particular case, because of their lateral pressure, which increases the
longitudinal diameter of the head, and forces the Occiput still more over the
Pubes, has therefore, invented a third Blade, which combined with the Forceps
acts as a Lever, applied immediately to the resisting point or Occiput; and
that without the least danger of hurting the mother; a circumstance which has
often happened by the use of the common Lever.

Those things premised and duly attended to, I think it will follow that you
may call on Gentlemen conversant in practice a long time before they answer to
the truth of your Assertion, without your appeal is made to those who are as
much averse to improvement as you seem to be yourself, and who choose to grope
in the dark, when they might walk in open day.

The following Abstract from Dr. Leake's description of his Forceps, will still
more fully illustrate and explain the true nature and use of the Lever or third
Blade, and show under what particular circumstances its application becomes
necessary and advantageous.

"When the forehead presents to the Os Sacrum, and the hind-head to the Pubes,
the long axis of the head intersects the short axis of the Pelvis, and
therefore, these Parts may be considered as two Ellipses crossing each other;
-- a Position of the head very unfavourable to the Birth of the Child. --
Whenever this is the Case, a very capital Inconvenience, even in the long
double-curved Forceps will occur, for when they are thus applied on the Sides
of the Head, the more it is there compressed by the Action of the Blades, the
more will the Hind-head be forced over the Pubes, and the Forehead against the
Sacrum, which will still add to the difficulty, and consequently it cannot be
extracted in this manner, without great violence both to the Mother and the
Child: -- This Circumstance has happened to me in Practice several times,
particularly in two laborious Cases, where the repeated Application of the
Blades at the sides proved ineffectual; and dangerous Symptoms appearing, I was
afraid of further delay, and therefore, (the patient being placed on her side)
I introduced them at the Sacrum and Pubes, that is, on the Face and Occiput,
and extracted the head with ease at the first effort.

As this Success was plainly owing to the Compression of the longest part of
the Head, it first suggested to me the Hint of applying a pair of Forceps with
three Blades, one of which may be occasionally used as a Lever, which will act
on the same Principle as that of Roonhuysen's.

But notwithstanding the seeming Simplicity of Roonhuysen's Lever, it may be
attended with the utmost Danger; for, as the Symphysis of the Pubes is the
Center from which it acts, and the Point upon which the whole Stress is laid,
whenever much force is applied to bring down the head, (Action and Re-action
being the same) the Vagina, Neck of the Bladder, and nervous Parts may be so
violently bruised, as to occasion a Mortification, or even the very Symphysis
of the Pubes may happen to give way.

To remedy this Inconvenience, which is the principal Objection to the Lever, I
have, for some Years past, in my Course of Lectures on Midwifery, recommended
an Instrument consisting of three Blades, being, in fact nothing more than a
Pair of long Forceps with a double Curve, and the Addition of a Lever, which
may be applied without the least danger of hurting the Mother; for here the
Fulcrum of the Lever is removed from the Pubes to the Junction of the two
Blades, which not only act as a Pair of Forceps, but at the same time afford a
firm resting Point for the third Blade, by means of a small Pivot or central
Pin, placed on the under Side of one of their Blades.

After the Introduction of the Blades of these Forceps at the Sides of the
Child's-head, this Lever is to be passed up between the Occiput and Pubes, and
as the Pelvis there forms a kind of Arch, and is also extremely shallow; by
inclining the Handle low toward the Perinaeum, it may be introduced without
the least Degree of Violence.

The additional Blade or Lever applied immediately to the resisting Point or
Occiput, where it rests at the Pubes, will not only effectually shorten the
Head, and detach it from the Place of its Obstruction, but will also prevent
the Forceps from slipping; for if they tend down toward the Face, the Lever,
which is fixed at the Hind-head, and sustained at the Junction of the Blades,
must be drawn down with them, and consequently the head also will still be the
more brought into the Center of the Pelvis, and therefore more easily
extracted; which may be better understood by referring to the third Figure in
the Copper-plate.

In short, these two mechanical Powers of the Forceps and Lever thus combined,
will mutually assist each other; -- For, the Lever will not only prevent the
Forceps from slipping, but will also shorten the Head, and bring it down below
the Arch of the Pubes into the Center of the Pelvis, by which means it may be
the more easily extracted; on the other Hand, the Forceps will afford a resting
Point to the Lever, from which it may effectually act without any Sort of
Danger to the Patient, so that we have the Advantages of both Instruments,
without the defects of either."

Dr. Leake does not here vainly magnify the merit of inventing this new
Instrument, but plainly tells us, it was owing to a mere matter of accident
which occurred to him in practice.

You tell us that -- The censure of Dr. Smellie 's Forceps is unprofitable --
You cannot then say, that Dr. Leake is mercenary; but I must inform you that to
censure and to disapprove are very different things: Those who are best
acquainted with Dr. Leake well know that he is less disposed to censure than
commend; and it is apparent he has not treated Dr. Smellie in the disrespectful
manner with which you mention the Names of M. Leveret and H. Crantz.

You next proceed as a panegyrist -- Dr. Smellie was a Man of great candor,
industry, and ingenuity, and we are all indebted to him. I have often heard Dr.
Leake in the course of his Lectures mention his name with great respect, and
cheerfully subscribe to his merit.

You say -- We are all indebted to him. Those who have attended his Lectures, I
presume, will not deny it; for your part, Sir, had you been as grateful to the
Gentleman from whom you received your Instructions in Midwifery, we should not
have seen you engaged with him in a News-paper Billingsgate contest, A. D. 1769.

Again you say -- Dr. Smellie 's Forceps are not taper at the point -- Not so
taper as the point of a Sword; -- but they are taper -- verily they are taper.

You add -- The largeness of the head, and narrowness of the Pelvis are
relative terms, etc. -- This seems to be a new and very notable discovery, and
what makes it the more valuable, it is not more difficult to be demonstrated,
than that two and one make three.

You say -- The case supposed in this Paragraph, I believe, never can happen at
the upper part of the Pelvis.

In what Paragraph? for you do not say, whether in Dr. Leake's, or your own.
Pray Doctor what Professor, except such as you have mentioned in the beginning
of your Remarks, ever talks of a Case happening at the upper part of the
Pelvis; I suppose you mean a case where the Child's head could not happen to be
so placed at the upper part of the Pelvis; if this is not your meaning, the
case you allude to must be a headless case, a case without a head; -- a very
piteous case indeed, and such as probably never happened to any one except Dr.
Thomas Denman.

You proceed -- My reason for preferring the straight Forceps, is a conviction
that this opinion is true, and that under these circumstances the curvilinear
Forceps become inconvenient.

Your reason is a conviction that this Opinion is true: -- A very curious
reason indeed; but I shall say no more on this passage, lest I make a mistake;
for I confess it is far too sublime for my comprehension.

Again, you say -- I know enough of the History of the Vectes, in as able hands
as Roonhuysen's, to convince any reasonable man, that much mischief may, and
has been done by them.

For this very reason Dr. Leake has contrived a Lever or Vectes, which
occasionally combined with the Forceps, will produce all the effects of a Lever
without the least danger of hurting the Mother.

Thus you proceed -- Roonhuysen 's Vectes changes its center of action, and
though it may be fixed against the Symphysis of the Pubes, the Ramus of the
Ischium, near the obtuse process, must become the Fulcrum, or you will not be
able to extract the head.

Here it is presumed you meant to have said ignoramus, and that by some
unaccountable blunder of the Printer's, the word Ramus unluckily slipped in.

You tell us that -- The resisting Point is not particularly where the hind
head presses against the Pubes; but that the head is wedged and presses on many
Points.

You seem here to have forgot what every Practitioner in Midwifery ought
particularly to remember, viz. that the Brim of the Pelvis is an Ellipsis from
side to side, and measured in that direction, is one inch wider than from
Sacrum to Pubes; and consequently the Head thus wedged in the bony passage,
must of course meet with most resistance where the Pelvis is narrowest;
particularly, as the long axis of the Head is now turned to the narrow axis of
the Pelvis, or as Dr. Leake expresses it, where two Ellipses are crossing each
other; and therefore, contrary to your assertion, the resisting point must
necessarily be where the hind-head presses against the Pubes.

You say -- You object to the use of all curvilinear Forceps -- I suppose then
you mean to make use of none at all; for all Forceps are curvilinear, or they
could not be Forceps; but all Forceps have not a twofold curve, which I
presume is the thing you mean.

Thus, Sir, you continue to speak, and lest the elegance of your expressions
should suffer by the least alteration, I shall set them down verbatim. -- The
curve of M. Levrett 's Forceps seems the most convenient, and Mr. Osborn has
contrived a very elegant pair, by diminishing the size of Levrett 's and very
little alteration besides.

Just now you objected to the use of all such Forceps, but now all of a sudden
Levret's are the most convenient; how does this accord?

Besides, as you say that Mr. Osborn's Forceps differs very little from
Levret's, except in size, it is not easy to conceive how a diminution of the
size alone, can properly be considered as a new invention. But here let me ask
you whether this Contrivance of Mr. Osborn's, whatever it may be, was prior or
subsequent to that described by Dr. Leake. A direct answer to this simple
question might probably unfold the mystery, and determine what merit is due to
Mr. Osborn from this very elegant pair of Forceps.

Again you say -- Allowing Dr. Leake the full force of his own reasoning, I
cannot conceive the advantage arising from this complicated Instrument.

Here, like the Satyr in the Fable, you blow hot and cold with the same breath;
for hitherto you have endeavored to controvert his reasoning in the best
manner you were able; but now comes a kind of awkward and indirect assent.

You say -- You cannot conceive the advantage arising from this complicated
Instrument.

The Forceps recommended by Dr. Leake is by no means complicated, for whenever
the Lever is unnecessary, they may always be applied alone with the same ease
and safety, and generally with a better effect than any other, for the reasons
which he has specified.

Thus you proceed -- If we act with the Forceps from handle to handle, the
third Blade can do no service.

The Lever or third Blade will effectually prevent the Forceps from slipping
down over the Child's Face, which is a very capital advantage, especially as it
cannot in the least injure the Mother more than the other two, although we act
with them from handle to handle.

Again you say -- If we act with the Lever, the Forceps are useless or
prejudicial.

You have before allowed that Roonhuysen's Lever is a dangerous Instrument; but
as Dr. Leake has proved to a demonstration, that the Lever combined with the
Forceps, may always be safely and advantageously applied, both your assertions
become evidently groundless. Indeed, throughout the whole of your performance,
from a doting affection for every thing you have said on the subject, you have
never been fortunate enough to distinguish the very great difference between
simple assertions and solid proofs; the first are always ready at every man's
call -- upon the last depends the fair and equitable decision of all points of
controversy whatever.

I have now examined most of your Remarks, yet I confess that some of them are
absolutely unanswerable; -- those, Sir, alone are they which are utterly
unintelligible; and to conclude, if I am not mistaken, as you were, when in
speaking of the Forceps, you mistook the Child's Head for their Center of
Motion, all your Views center in yourself; though even that part of your design
you have executed but very indifferently, for your Style is clumsy, assuming,
and pedantic; your Objections are frivolous and unfairly urged, and your
Assertions, though positive, and highly expressive of self-importance, are
generally unsupported by reasoning and matter of fact. -- To conclude,
considering the air of exultation with which you set out, it may be said with
great justice and truth, that the whole of your performance is most pompously
poor indeed.

You tell us, that you pay great regard to Dr. Leake's Abilities; I wish I
could with a safe conscience say as much for you; for if I was disposed to
compliment you on your abilities, your candor must suffer; and if I had an
opinion of your candor, it must necessarily be at the expense of your
Abilities.

Thus, Sir, you have shot your lilliputian Arrows and wounded nothing but Air;
when you can spare a little more of your precious time to advance any thing
further on this subject for the public good, I shall not be wanting in giving
it due Attention.

FINIS.

