

THE PROGRESS of WIT: A CAVEAT. FOR THE Use of an Eminent Writer.

By a FELLOW of All Souls.

To which is prefixed, An Explanatory Discourse to the READER.

By GAMALIEL GUNSON, Professor of Physic and Astrology.

This Verse be thine, my Friend, nor Thou refuse
This, from no venal, or ungrateful, Muse.
Read these instructive Leaves. --
Pope, to Mr. Jervas. LONDON: Printed for J. WILFORD, at the Crown in
Stationers-Court. M.DCC.XXX.

TO THE READER.
Courteous READER,
I Am, by Profession, no Poet, Yet, having a Son, of my own, at this Time, of
no small Hope, in one of our famous Universities; I cannot, therefore, be
supposed to want Reverence for those Seminaries of the Muses: Upon this Account
partly (for, of Itself, I have no great Opinion of Poetry) but, perceiving, at
the Head of the Manuscript, that it had been written by a Fellow of All Souls;
and chiefly, invited by some encouraging Expressions, in the Beginning,
alluding to a Chariot, that could carry a Man up to the Stars, I bestowed a
serious Perusal on the Verses, which I, herewith, publish; and which I found
one rainy Day, at the Bottom of a Hackney-Coach; where, I suppose, they might
have been dropped, by Somebody, who had been in Possession of that Coach, before
me.

But, I confess, the oftener I perused the Manuscript, the less I was able to
comprehend of its Meaning; I had not, indeed, labored far in the Matter,
before I discovered, that the Author, notwithstanding he has been pleased to
make free with the Stars, is a Novice in our Science; -- so that what he
writes, concerning the Thinness of Heaven's Purlieus; -- surmounting the Stars
in a Chariot of Air, and such like promising Conceptions, ought not (I believe)
to be taken in the strict Sense of the Phrase, but only for a Joke, or a Fancy;
-- However, some of my Profession, to whom I showed it, agreed, that it was a
dark Piece of Work, had more in it, than Satire; and, for any thing They, or I,
knew to the contrary, might be Matter of Danger to the Government, and ought to
be carried to the Secretary's Office.

By a Mind, laudably filled with a Zeal for his Country's Safety, every Hint,
that infers its Danger, should be thought of the utmost Importance; To the
Secretary's Office, therefore, I went with it, and put it into the Hands of
one, who appeared to think Himself more considerable, than any Body, I could
see about him; I begged the Favor, that he would look it over, and give me his
Opinion, whether it was a treasonable Libel: I would not, willingly, do
Injustice to the Characters of Persons, above my Station, (though it is well
known, Physic, and Astrology, are considered with Respect, among Liberal
Sciences.) But, truly, be seemed to me, to peruse it, with less Seriousness,
than, I suppose, with all due Reverence to his Office, became the Trust, that
was lodged in him: For he laughed out, once, or twice; and, lifting his Eyes
from the Paper, took upon him, to remark me, with a Countenance, which I
thought too merry for the Occasion: He was pleased, when he came to the
following Lines, to read them aloud, to a Young Spark, in Red, and asked him,
what He thought of the Matter? -- I confess, I was almost in a Passion, when
this Feather-Brain made answer, that it was the liveliest Satire in the World,
upon a Bawdy House, of his Acquaintance, by the Bank Side, over the Water! -- I
cite the very Verses, for the Reader's more effectual Amazement, at the
Unaccountableness of the Young Fellows of this forward Generation!

Caught, by the gulphy Void, that gloom'd, below,
Crowds, from the Current's fair-descending Flow,
Indrawn, at once, by Darkness swallowed over,
Sunk, from their sunny Scene, and rose no more;
Still gaped th'unclosing Deep, over Millions gone,
Yet, still insatiate, hourly, swallowed on.
I could not forbear telling this Story, with due Gravity, and Resentment, to a
certain Lawyer, of my Acquaintance, whom I met, just landed, at White Hall
Stairs: we walked together, a few Turns, in the Privy-Garden, and he opened the
Manuscript, where it speaks of Shapeless Bodies,

Whose breathing Bulks; to Life, and Motion, blown,
Shot into human Forms, completely grown;
Mixed Rank, and Sex, sprung through the liquid Jett,
But pouring outward, clear Distinction met:
He read it, once and again, and was clear in his Opinion it meant the
Masquerade, in the Hay-market: He owned, indeed, that, under proper Hands, it
might be explained into something more considerable -- But we wave it, cried
he, after reading it a little farther, we will wave the Point of Treason, in
Exchange for Scandalum Magnatum! It follows here, as clear, as Sunshine, upon a
Minister of State, and a Privy-Counsellor: Then he read to me this slanderous
Inuendo, of People, who coming within Reach of a dark, bustling, Power,
obscurely seen,

From the blind Bounty of his hasty Hand,
Buoyant, in Boats, rode over the shining Sand;
Of different Form, these Boats -- A single Oar
Distinguished some -- some winged their Sides with more;
Others, with Oars, and Sails, conjoined, made way,
And mowed the murmuring Surge, with sweepy Sway;
While some slow Pole-men, over their Toil reclined,
Pushed their checked Barks, and, laboring, lagg'd, behind:
Some waded, naked, etc. --
He asked me, whether I did not plainly discern, what great Man, in a certain
Assembly, was pointed at, under this Image of a dark, bustling, Power,
obscurely seen; upon which, recollecting myself, as became me, and pondering
the Words, to the best of my Capacity, I replied, I thought it was the Devil.
-- He shook his Head, and informed me, civilly, that I was, a little, mistaken;
but perceiving me, in some measure abashed, he assured me, it was so natural an
Error, that any Body might have fallen into it, as well as I: Then proceeded to
convince me, that shining Sand was a Cant-Word for Money Bags; that by the
Boats said to be distributed, at Random, by the Bounty of the blind Power, that
was so busy in Darkness, was to be understood, those Gratifications, impudently
called Pensions, by Persons disaffected to the Ministry; That, for Example, the
largest of such pretended Pensions were represented, under the Similitude of
Boats which had Sails, and Oars, together: -- Middling Pensions, were Boats
with many Oars: -- Smaller still, were One-Oar'd Barks: -- The least of all,
were Pole-men: -- And as for the naked Waders, it was, by this Time, become
clear to my own unassisted Capacity, that they could mean nothing, but those
poor Souls, who were neglected by the black Bustler, and had no Pensions at all
to take Boat with.

My ingenious Friend the Lawyer, advised me to write a Letter, to the Great
Man, who had made so light of a good Subject's Information, and put him in Mind
of the Fate of Philotas. -- He added, that the Fears of Statesmen would be more
awake, for their Masters, if less watchful for Themselves: He was sorry, he
was, then, in Haste, but invited me next Morning to his Chambers, where he
assured me, no Assistance, in his Power, should be wanting, to make something
of the Matter, we had been conferring on.

How admirable is the Penetration of some Men's Spirits! and how powerful the
good Influence of their Example! -- I, who, before I had received this Light,
could see no Tendency to such seditious Purpose, in the Manuscript, so
providentially decypher'd, could, now, in every Page of it, discover the
clearest, and most visible, Disaffection: Nay, I have, since that Time, upon
frequent Revisal of the Libel, under Help of better Eyes, than my own, found
Popery in it, as well as Jacobitism. Not to mention, that the Pope's Name,
Itself, in great Letters, stands audaciously written at the End of it.

I sent a Copy, with a Recital of all the foregoing Particulars, to my Boy,
beforementioned, who is, now, of three Years standing, at the College; where,
I fear, his Political Principles have been new-modell'd, since I saw him; for
he seems a little Malepert, in a Letter, he returned me, for Answer: which,
however, in Justice to the good Parts of the Youth, I take Pleasure in
Publishing; not supposing, the Childish Mistake, it turns upon, capable of
making any Impression, upon Readers, who know the World, and are acquainted
with Men and Business.

Honored Sir,
I Am sorry to say, I was ashamed of your Account, concerning the Manuscript,
you demand my Thoughts of; It is no other, than a Satire, written, by One Poet,
on the Misapplication of Another's Genius; -- You apprehended it to mean more,
than the Author designed, by finding it say less, than the Reader expected; But
Scurrility, and Grossness, are so far from being Requisites in Satire, that it
can be no true Satire, in which they are to be met with. The Force of these
Writings consists, in their Smiling; and whenever they grow angry, they bring a
Storm over their own Sunshine; which, like the Frown of incensed Beauty, loses
more, by Abatement of Influence, than is gained, from Accession of Rigor.

The Pope, at the End of the Poem, ought to give you no Jealousy: He is none of
his Holiness, at Rome, but an English, (I had almost said, Protestant) Pope, of
this Nation's own Breeding; He wears, indeed, a Triple Crown, like the other,
but it is of Music, Painting, and Poetry.

Nothing is more easily perceived, than, that this Satire is the Consequence of
some Pieces, lately published, which savor, to say Truth, of a Sensibility,
too like Levity, in a Mind, so rich, as His, who is reputed their Author; But I
cannot, without Pleasure, observe the Influence of acknowledged Merit confining
Satire to his Folly, without allowing it to attack his Wit; which is not
weaker, though less lovely, when it stains itself upon a dirty Subject, than,
when it ornaments Beauty itself, and adds Magnificence to Palaces.

It is an Art to trifle, importantly; and even to trifle, agreeably, has its
Attraction: But to trifle, unseasonably, indecently or improperly, let who will
be the Trifler, must be, either, inhumane, or unguarded -- Either wrong
Judgment, or Ill-breeding.

What Pity, that the warmest of a certain Gentleman's Admirers are, lately,
forced to confess, there are Grossnesses, in some of his Sallies, obscene
enough to blot out any Wit, but their Author's! Insults, low enough to become
the most vulgar-spirited among his Enemies: And Malice, animated enough to be
beautiful, in any of his Friends, but Himself!

It gives, however, a Kind of ill-natured Comfort to us, who are his distant
Cotemporaries, that among Virtues, which we must despair of equalling, we
discover Errors, which we disdain to imitate. -- So, pray, Sir, commit the Poem
to the Press, and let it travel, in Search of its Author, who will, hardly,
look for it in Your Hands, and, by that Means, it may be lost to the Public.


THE PROGRESS of WIT: A CAVEAT.
TUNEFUL ALEXIS, on the Thame's fair Side,
The Ladies Play-thing, and the Muses Pride,
With Merit, popular, with Wit, polite,
Easy, though vain, and elegant, though light:
Desiring, and deserving, others Praise,
Poorly accepts a Fame, he never repays;
Unborn to cherish, sneakingly approves,
And wants the Soul to spread the Worth, he loves:
This to the Juniors of his Tribe gave Pain,
For mean Minds praise, but to be praised again;
Henceforth, renouncing an ungracious BAAL,
His Altars smoke not, and their Offerings fail:
The Heat, his Scorn had raised, his Pride inflamed,
'Till what they worshipped first, they next defamed;
Deposed, at length, from PINDUS' Top, he rolled,
While Insect Witlings, pleased, his Fall behold,
And each cold-croaking Heliconian Frog
Leaps, scornful, and bestrides the unreigning Log.
Far-fall'n ALEXIS, who so ill aspired,
Sick of successless War, from Wounds retired,
Where, while, in Sleep, his Sorrows ebbed away,
And, hushed in Darkness, Indignation lay;
Fancy, fair Mistress of the Poet's Mind,
For ever changing, yet, for ever kind;
Soft, over his Dreams, her formful Radiance shed,
And his rapt Soul through Heaven's thin Purlieus led;
Seated beside the Star-invading Dame,
Whose Steeds, Wind-footed, paw'd the lambent Flame,
High, as a Widowed Lover's Grief can climb,
Her Air-built Chariot rose, and hung sublime.
Unveiling, thence, the World's bleak Wastes, below,
They saw the Stream of Life beneath 'em flow;
Dim, from the sable Sea of Birth it rose,
In a slow, silent, sullen, dread Repose:
For, round th'emerging Source, that glimmer'd pale,
Mountains of Midnight Darkness rolled a Veil:
But, as the evolving Surge swelled into Day,
Quickening, it moved, and roared, and rushed away.
Broad, on the Left, from low Oblivion's Shore,
Quicksands, and Rocks, reached half the Current over:
Lucid, like Truth, the treacherous Water shone,
And, over gay gilded Shoals, ran, tuneful, on;
Pebbles, of Gem-like Hue, with painted Pride,
Glowed through the Wave, and burnt, amid the Tide:
Wantonly kind, the Sun's enlivening Beams
Shower'd, in light Spangles, on the dancing Streams:
While Insect Nations, Gnats, and Wasps, and Flies,
Tinged in the Rainbow's ever-changing Dies,
Sheathing their Stings, and, smiling, like the Fair,
Peopled the Sunshine, and adorned the Air.
Less lively, on the Right, the Stream's deep Flow,
There, no false Colors mixed their varied Glow;
No gaudy Bottom caught the downcast Eye:
Above, no fluttering Insects winged the Sky:
Serenely solemn, All! -- One equal Whole
Flashed not upon the Sense, but touched the Soul:
Instead of Rocks, green Islands flourished, here,
Silent, and fruitful, as the full-grown Year;
In Place of Flies, grave Swans, of Snow-like Hue,
Sweetly majestic, in slow Circles, flew:
But, though these Isles the distant Prospect cheered,
No Bay, no Port, no Landing-Place appeared;
Kind Birds, alone, gave Entrance over the Mound,
Nor, from the Stream, below, was Inlet found.
Then Fancy, thus -- FAME'S future Regions, These,
Where nothing surfeits, yet, where all Things please.
Here, Memory stands fixed, while Time runs on,
And worth blooms fresh, when Life itself is gone;
Danger keeps Distance, softened Spleen grows kind,
Ambition temperate, and Love refined:
Nor Pride, nor Jealousy, can, here, annoy,
Nothing is Ecstacy, though all is Joy:
Peace without Languor, Labor, void of Pain,
Glory unenvied, and unslander'd Gain.
Though differing, thus, the Stream's unsocial Sides,
Yet, one broad Gulf absorbed the double Tides;
From Birth devolving, Death's blind Sea, below,
Boundless, and formless, snatched the mingled Flow;
Both rounding Oceans, backward, seemed to tend,
And vast, beneath, their sable Surges blend:
But far most frightful This! -- whose dark Profound,
A Depth Eternal! Life wants Line to sound:
Unbottom'd Shade rolled loose over swallowed Light --
Fancy grew giddy, nor sustained the Sight:
But, starting into Fear, transposed Remark,
And sought the Source, less dreadful, though as dark.
Thick, on the rising Stream's emitted Tide,
Millions of shapeless Bodies seemed to glide;
Whose breathing Bulks, to Life, and Motion, blown,
Shot into human Forms, completely grown;
Mixed Rank, and Sex, sprung through the liquid Jet,
But, pouring outward, clear Distinction met;
Some, wading, naked, trod the slippery Plain,
Some cut the fluent Wave -- Some, tired with Pain,
Failing to float, or wade, neglected fell,
And sunk, unsnatch'd at, in the troubled Swell:
To others, rising happier, and serene,
Fortune, dark, bustling, Power, obscurely seen,
Reached, with blind Bounty, and with hasty Hand,
Thin Boats -- and buoyed 'em over the shining Sand:
Of different Form, these Boats -- A single Oar
Distinguished some: -- Some winged their Sides with more;
Others, with Oars, and Sails, conjoined, made Way,
And mowed the murmuring Surge, with sweepy Sway:
While some, slow Pole-men, over their Toil reclined,
Pushed their checked Barks, and, laboring, lagg'd behind.
While Some essayed to cross, and veering wide,
Would, with strong Stem, the stubborn Stream divide,
And slowly slanting, sought the silent Side;
Swift, to the shelvy Shore light Galleys flew,
As the fierce Channel's rapid Current drew,
'Twixt Rocks, and Whirlpools, driven, obliquely gay,
And, through the shoaly Sunshine, danced away.
Caught, by the gulphy Void, that gloom'd, below,
These, from the Current's fair-descending Flow,
Indrawn, at once, by Darkness swallowed over,
Sunk, from their Sunny Scene, and rose no more;
Still gaped the unclosing Deep; over Millions gone,
Yet, still insatiate, hourly swallowed on!
Titles, Distinctions, Forms, rush mingled down,
Not Levity itself wants Weight to drown:
Gamesters, Beaux, Casuists, Jinglers, Jesters, Drinkers,
Fox-hunters, Politicians, and Free-thinkers,
Prudes, Devotees, Coquets, Grave, Light, Young, Old,
In one mixed Night the covering Waves infold:
Swept from the Noise they sought, to rest they shunned,
They plunge, for ever, into Death's Profund:
While abler Pilots, who, resolved, stood over,
And, edging broad, gained, slow, the safer Shore;
Snatched, from their sinking Seats, were born to Land,
By watchful Swans, whose Wings the Surface fanned:
There, on green Islands, reigned, escaped from Cares,
Lords of a blooming World, for ever, Theirs,
Wide, over the Scene, ALEXIS winds his Eye,
Swift, as the Progress of the Gliders by;
A strange Confusion rose! -- of all who past,
With earnest Emptyness, and barren Haste,
Few, cross the Flood, repugnant, strove to steer,
Fewer had Strength of Oars to hold them, near!
Tired by the Current's ill-resisted Force,
Or, bulg'd by envious Prows, which crossed their Course,
The boldest Keels, pursuing, or pursued,
Entangling, and perplexed, were lost in Feud:
While others, heedless of their sleeping Oars,
Drove, in light Negligence, nor shunned the Shores;
But, pendent over the Helm, each Shoal explored,
And snatched, in Transport, Shells, and Stones, on board:
Or, leaping wanton, caught the glittering Prey,
That buzzed, and gambol'd, in their sportive Way.
Meanwhile, most mournful, of the motley Scene!
Cherished Effect of Pride, and Food of Spleen!
Boat, over Boat, destructive Passage made,
And weeping Pity mourned defective Aid:
Sailing Presumers, pressing, proudly, on,
Bore down each envied Rower, who, nearest, shone;
The Oar-wing'd Vessel eyed, with dumb Disdain,
The creeping Pole-man's slow-availing Pain;
And, lordly wanton, with invasive Beak,
Sunk the faint Struggler, criminally, weak!
He, too, in Concert with superior Hate,
Loath to exert less Guilt, than matched his State,
Triumphant, in his Turn, sought equal Prey,
And, over the naked Wader, forced his Way:
ALEXIS, pondering in suspended Thought,
What Meaning all these mazy Mixtures taught,
Sudden, a Shout, from every distant Side,
Eddied the Air, and broke the back'ning Tide;
Acclamatory Thousands rose, alarmed,
All Eyes attracted, and each Hearing charmed;
Pointing in Transport, All their Helms forsook,
And, on one Object, hung their lengthening Look.
Down, from the gloomy Source, in sidelong Float,
Proudly descending, moved a glittering Boat;
Her silken Sails a colored Radiance threw,
And tinged the Sunny Beams, through which they flew;
While Oars, of Silver, dashed the watery Spray,
That rained in gemmy Showers, and dazzled Day:
High, on the painted Stern, a Youth appeared,
Who, rather happily, than strongly, steered;
Faint, and unstriking was his anguish'd Mien,
Sadden'd by Sickness, and overcast with Spleen;
Yet, from his Eyes, there beamed a living Light,
Keen, and intent, as a fired Eagle's Sight:
And, from his Voice, (for, as he sailed, he sung)
Such magic Sounds of melting Music sprung,
That the hushed Heaven all downward seemed to bend,
And, against Nature, the charmed Earth ascend.
Careless, he looked, yet, heedful of his Way,
Broke the kind Current's unobstructing Sway,
That kissed his Oars, and hastened to obey:
Scarce was his Course oblique, for each glad Boat,
That, envious, stem'd all other's rival Float,
Fixed, and enchanted, when this Youth drew nigh,
Hung on his passing Notes, and helped him by:
The Muses rowed him, and the Graces' Care
Trimmed his light Sails, and spread them to the Air;
In his Boat's Bottom green-ey'd Envy lay,
And served, as Ballast, while she clogged his way:
Down from her Chariot light-wing'd Fancy flew,
And over him, loose, her Starry Mantle threw;
Pleasure, Praise, Beauty, 'twixt his Shrowds trod gay,
And danced the measured Moments soft away:
Sportful as ZEPHYRS, in his Smiles, they strove,
And the Young Loves forsook their Mother's Grove.
Thus fortunate, thus favored, and thus bright,
Luckily negligent, and aptly light,
He touched no Shoal, safe rounded every Rock,
Despised all Danger, and sustained no Shock;
'Till to that calmer Coast approaching nigh,
And gliding, 'twixt green Islands, safely high,
Circles of hovering Swans, with joyful Note,
Clapped their broad Wings, in Triumph, over his Boat,
Charmed, that, so soon, he reached their solemn Side,
Ere yet one Third of the Stream's Length was tried.
Steering, from Isle to Isle, with joyless Awe,
Thin, over each Height, their white-rob'd Lords he saw,
Pleased, without Transport, bow the Palms, they bore,
To hail his Passage near their silent Shore;
Cold, and uncharm'd, he sought his favorite Crowd,
Immensely distant, now, though, late, so loud:
All was serene, the Air was hushed around,
The Waters calm! -- Lost even His Musick's Sound!
Back to the Left impatient Looks he cast
And longed for every shining Insect past;
Distant he saw them, Wings over Wings, display,
And, in light Chases, thread the colored Ray:
Eager, for these, contending Pilots strove,
And caught them, careless how their Vessels drove;
Then, with their Trophies, dressed each gaudy Sail,
While humming Drones, in Swarms, their Fortune hail:
Record past Leaps, foretell their next Essays,
And buzz, melodious, in the Fly-men's Praise.
Warmed, and misled, by this false Fire of Fame,
His beaming Eyes with Emulation flame;
And have I, Recreant, thus, renounced a Field,
Where baffled Danger can such Glory yield?
Lives there a Catch-Fly, of yon venturous Press,
More brave than I am? -- Or, who fears them less?
Show me the warring Wasp, whose threatening Wing
I dare not strike at, and provoke his Sting!
Swans! give me Way -- your shoreless Islands keep,
Too safe your Clime is, and too calm your Deep;
I choose a rapid Glory, not a slow,
Shoals are sought Harbors, where these Jewels grow:
He said, and rising, pushed, with liquid Sweep,
The inverted Helm, and goar'd the groaning Deep:
Flaming erect, resought the surgy Side,
And bounded, threatening, over the foaming Tide:
Sailing athwart the Swarms, and skipping high,
He snatched, triumphant, every tempting Fly:
Gave his loosed Rudder to the Current's Claim,
And drove, disdainful, through his Rival's Game;
Pressed by invaded Wasp's excited Stings,
He warred, revengeful, on their falling Wings:
Through Dust of slaughtered Gnats he fought, in Shade,
And squeezed them, deathful, on the Wounds, they made:
Fleets of cold Opposites, from all Sides, join,
And, wedged, against this general Foe, combine:
Vainly indignant, they resist his Sway,
Yet block his Passage, and obstruct his Way:
Still, though he stagnates, he the Fight maintains,
While Drones, applausive, with their ductile Strains,
Homage the rising Hero's new Renown,
And Prince of Fly-Catchers the Champion crown.
The Swans, meanwhile, which, from the calmer Side,
Forsaken, saw him trust the fatal Tide;
Mournful, with pendent Wing, his Triumph grieved,
And wished his wasted Vigor less deceived:
Trembling, they marked his Vessel, downward bent,
Hang over the engulphing Ocean's dark Descent,
While he, regardless, still, new Trophies won,
And, bent to conquer, saw not what to shun.
Fancy, still busied, still enamored, staid,
And, still concurring, lent his Rashness Aid;
To Her, far distant, touched ALEXIS cried,
And, with strained Voice, to reach her Notice, tried:
"O! save him, warn him, bid him turn, and think, --
"Let not his Bark in yon black Ocean sink!
"Teach me to call him, by his powerful Name,
"Point out his Danger, quench his devious Flame;
"Rash Spleen of Heart, that could such War advise!
"Blind Rage! to lose Himself, and catch but Flies!
"Oh teach my Tongue his Name" -- Then Fancy hear
And, smiling, at her Chariot's Side appeared:
"Why do thou ask, she cried, what Nations know,
"Even All, whom Wit, or Worth, inspire, below?
"His is a Name, that dwells on every Mind,
"Tunes every Tongue, and sails with every Wind!
"Not surer is that River Life's Extent,
"Or, by those Oceans, Birth, and Death, are meant;
"Not surer Fortune is That dark Power's Name,
"That Left, Oblivion, and That Right Side, Fame,
"Than, that no Son of Wit dares, justly, hope,
"Fame dwells in Folly's Paths, but thou, O POPE!
ALEXIS, starting, heard his own loved Name,
Felt his Pride shrink, and blushed with conscious Shame!
Pitched from the Chariot, lost to Fancy's Call;
And, had not waiting Judgment broke his Fall,
Contempt's cold Vale had caught him, waked, and stunned,
And deep entombed him, in his own PROFUND.
FINIS.

