AN ELEGY ON A PILE OF RUINS.

BY J. CUNNINGHAM.

ASPICE MURORUM MOLES, PRAERUPTAQUE SAXA! LONDON: Printed for H. PAIN and W.
CROPLEY, at Dryden's-Head, in Paternoster Row. M.DCC.LXI.

[Price Sixpence.]

AN ELEGY ON A PILE OF RUINS.
1.
IN the full prospect yonder hill commands,
Over forests, fields, and vernal-coated plains;
The vestige of an ancient abbey stands,
Close by a ruined castle's rude remains.
II.
Half buried, there, lie many a broken bust,
And obelisk, and urn, overthrown by TIME;
And many a cherub, here, descends in dust
From the rent roof, and portico sublime.
III.
The rivulets, often frighted at the sound
Of fragments, tumbling from the towers on high;
Plunge to their source in secret caves profound,
Leaving their banks and pebbly bottoms dry.
IV.
Where reverend shrines in Gothic grandeur stood,
The nettle, or the noxious nightshade, spreads;
And ashlings, wafted from the neighboring wood,
Through the worn turrets wave their trembling heads.
V.
There Contemplation, to the crowd unknown,
Her attitude composed, and aspect sweet!
Sits musing on a monumental stone,
And points to the MEMENTO at her feet.
VI.
Soon as sage evening checked day's sunny pride,
I left the mantling shade, in moral mood;
And seated by the maid's sequestered side,
Thus sighed, the mouldering ruins as I viewed.
VII.
Inexorably calm, with silent pace
Here TIME has passed -- What ruin marks his way!
This pile, now crumbling over its hallowed base,
Turned not his step, nor could his course delay.
VIII.
Religion raised her supplicating eyes
In vain; and Melody, her song sublime:
In vain, Philosophy, with maxims wise,
Would touch the cold unfeeling heart of TIME.
IX.
Yet the hoar tyrant, though not moved to spare,
Relented when he struck its finished pride;
And partly the rude ravage to repair,
The tottering towers with twisted Ivy tied.
X.
How solemn is the cell o'ergrown with moss,
That terminates the view, yon cloistered way!
In the crushed wall, a time-corroded cross,
Religion like, stands mouldering in decay!
XI.
Where the mild sun, through saint-encypher'd glass,
Illum'd with mellow light that brown-brow'd isle;
Many rapt hours might Meditation pass,
Slow moving 'twixt the pillars of the pile!
XII.
And Piety, with mystic-meaning beads,
Bowing to saints on every side inurn'd,
Trod often the solitary path, that leads
Where, now, the sacred altar lies o'erturn'd!
XIII.
Through the gray grove, between those withering trees,
Amongst a rude group of monuments, appears
A marble-imag'd matron on her knees,
Half wasted, like a Niobe in tears:
XIV.
Low levelled in the dust her darling's laid!
Death pitied not the pride of youthful bloom;
Nor could maternal piety dissuade,
Or soften the fell tyrant of the tomb.
XV.
The relics of a mitred saint may rest,
Where, mouldering in the niche, his statue stands;
Now nameless, as the crowd that kissed his vest,
And craved the benediction of his hands.
XVI.
Near the brown arch, redoubling yonder gloom,
The bones of an illustrious Chieftain lie;
As traced upon the time-unletter'd tomb,
The trophies of a broken fame imply.
XVII.
Ah! what avails, that over the vassal plain,
His rights and rich demesnes extended wide!
That honor, and her knights, composed his train,
And chivalry stood marshalled by his side!
XVIII.
Though to the clouds his castle seemed to climb,
And frowned defiance on the desperate foe;
Though deemed invincible, the conqueror, TIME,
Levelled the fabric, as the founder, low.
XIX.
Where the light lyre gave many a softening sound,
Ravens and rooks, the birds of discord, dwell;
And where Society sat sweetly crowned,
Eternal Solitude has fixed her cell.
XX.
The lizard, and the lazy lurking bat,
Inhabit now, perhaps, the painted room,
Where the sage matron and her maidens sat,
Sweet-singing at the silver-working loom.
XXI.
The traveller's bewildered on a waste;
And the rude winds incessant seem to roar,
Where, in his groves with arching arbours graced,
Young lovers often sighed in days of yore.
XXII.
His aqueducts, that led the limpid tide
To pure canals, a crystal cool supply!
In the deep dust their barren beauties hide:
TIME'S thirst, unquenchable, has drained them dry!
XXIII.
Though his rich hours in revelry were spent,
With Comus, and the laughter-loving crew;
And the sweet brow of Beauty, still unbent,
Brightened his fleecy moments as they flew:
XXIV.
Fleet are the fleecy moments! fly they must;
Not to be stayed by masque, or midnight roar!
Nor shall a pulse amongst that mouldering dust,
Beat wanton at the smiles of Beauty more!
XXV.
Can the deep statesman, skilled in great design,
Protract, but for a day, precarious breath?
Or the tuned follower of the sacred Nine,
Sooth, with his melody, insatiate Death?
XXVI.
No -- Though the palace bar her golden gate,
Or monarchs plant ten thousand guards around;
Unerring, and unseen, the shaft of fate
Strikes the devoted victim to the ground!
XXVII.
What then avails Ambition's wide stretched wing,
The Schoolman's page, or pride of Beauty's bloom!
The crape-clad hermit, and the rich-rob'd king,
Levelled lie mixed promiscuous in the tomb.
XXVIII.
The Macedonian monarch, wise and good,
Bade, when the morning's rosy reign began,
Courtiers should call, as round his couch they stood,
"PHILIP! remember, you are no more than man.
XXIX.
"Though glory spread thy name from pole to pole;
"Though thou art merciful, and brave, and just;
"PHILIP, reflect, you are posting to the goal,
"Where mortals mix in undistinguished dust!"
XXX.
So SALADIN, for arts and arms renowned,
(Egypt and Syria's wide domains subdued)
Returning with imperial triumphs crowned,
Sighed, when the perishable pomp he viewed:
XXXI.
And as he rode, high in his regal car,
In all the purple pride of conquest dressed;
Conspicuous, over the trophies gained in war,
Placed, pendent on a spear, his burial vest:
XXXII.
While thus the herald cried -- "This son of power,
"This SALADIN, to whom the nations bowed;
"May, in the space of one revolving hour,
"Boast of no other spoil, but yonder shroud!"
XXXIII.
Search where Ambition raged, with rigor steeled;
Where Slaughter, like the rapid lightning, ran;
And say, while memory weeps the blood-stained field,
Where lies the chief, and where the common man?
XXXIV.
Vain are the pyramids, and motto'd stones,
And monumental trophies raised on high!
For TIME confounds them with the crumbling bones,
That mixed in hasty graves unnotic'd lie.
XXXV.
Rests not, beneath the turf, the peasant's head,
Soft as the lord's, beneath the labored tomb?
Or sleeps one colder, in his close clay bed;
Than the other, in the wide vault's-dreary womb?
XXXVI.
Hither, let LUXURY lead her loose-rob'd train;
Here flutter PRIDE, on purple-painted wings:
And, from the moral prospect, learn -- how vain
The wish, that sighs for sublunary things!
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for H. PAIN and W. CROPLEY, at Dryden's-Head, in
Paternoster Row.
I. ALMORAN and HAMET, an Oriental Tale, in 2 Volumes. Dedicated to the King.
By John Hawkesworth, L. L. D. Price bound 5 s. II. EDGAR and EMMELINE, a Fairy
Tale: In a Dramatic Entertainment of two Acts; as it is performed at the
Theater Royal in Drury Lane. Price 1 s. III. TABLES of INTERRST; designed to
answer, in the most correct and expeditious manner, the common purposes of
business, particularly the business of the Public Funds. By John Pain, of the
Bank of England. Price bound 3 s. IV. THOUGHTS on the Nature of War, and its
Repugnancy to the Christian Life. Price 6 d. V. Two ODES. I. To Obscurity. II.
To Oblivion. Price 1 s. VI. LES ELEMENS de la LANGUE ANGLOISE; or, The Elements
of the English Language, explained in a new, easy, and concise manner, by way
of Dialogue. For the Use of Foreigners. By V. J. Peyton. Price bound 3 s.

