MEMOIRS OF Mrs. Laetitia Pilkington, WIFE TO THE Rev. Mr. Matthew Pilkington.

Written by HERSELF.

Wherein are occasionally interspersed, All Her POEMS; WITH Anecdotes of
several eminent Persons, Living and Dead. Among others, Dean Swift, Alexander
Pope, Esquire etc. etc. etc.

DUBLIN Printed; London Reprinted: and Sold by R. Griffiths, at the Dunciad in
Ludgate Street, and G. Woodfall, at the King's Arms at Charing Cross. 1748.

TO Sir ROBERT KING, Bart.
SIR,
IT IS a very great Pleasure to me, in an Age where Vice is looked on as a Kind
of fashionable Accomplishment, to hear of one young Gentleman, who is not
ashamed of being singularly good; who has a Tear for Pity, and a Hand open as
Day for melting Charity, without any sinister Views; and who has happily united
the Fine Gentleman to the Good Christian.

These, Sir, are unfading Honors! these shall embalm and sanctify your Name on
Earth; and, when this transient Scene is past, be a sweet and acceptable
Sacrifice to God.

That your Virtues may long adorn and bless this World, and receive a full and
glorious Recompense in the next, is the ardent Prayer of,

SIR, Your most obliged, and most obedient Servant, L. PILKINGTON.

PREFACE.
IT is usual with all Authors to write Prefaces, either to beg the Applause of
the Public, or else, By Way of filling,
To raise their Volume's Price a Shilling.
As a most eminent Poet is said to have done.

I own, if the Merit of any Writer is to be judged by the Number of Sheets they
have written, I have very little Pretense to Favor: But as Multum in Parvo,
is an Expression of an ancient Poet, I hope my Readers will excuse me, as I
would rather have them rise from Table with an Appetite, than glut them; a Rule
of Temperance equally conducive to the Health of our Minds as of our Bodies.

I once had the Misfortune of writing for a Printer, who never examined the
Merit of the Work, but used to measure it, and tell me, it would not do at all,
except I could send him half a Dozen Yards more of the same Stuff: And, as Dr.
Young remarks, on large Folios, well gilt and bound, very proper to adorn a
Library, whether the Owner of it can read or write, or not: So Tonson, turned
Upholsterer, sends home
The gilded Leather to adorn the Room.


If I am obliged to send my Work in a blue Paper Covering, let them look on the
Inside, which, I flatter myself, will at least amuse them.

As I wrote these Memoirs in England, the describing particular Places or
Customs peculiar to Ireland, in order to make the Work intelligible to the
English Readers, will, I hope, be excused; for all Countries vary from each
other in many Points.

So neither servilely fearing Censure, nor vainly hoping Applause, I refer my
Readers to the ensuing Pages.

MEMOIRS OF Mrs. PILKINGTON.
ALTHOUGH it has been the common Practice, with Writers of Memoirs, to fill their
Volumes with their own Praises, which, whatever Pleasure they may have afforded
to the Authors, by indulging their Vanity, are seldom found to give any to the
Readers; I am determined to quit this beaten Track; and by a strict Adherence
to Truth, please even my greatest Enemies, by presenting them with a lively
Picture of all my Faults, my Follies, and the Misfortunes, which have been
consequential to them.

And I am the more inclined to proceed, in that I think the Story may be
instructive to the Female Part of my Readers, to teach them that Reputation Is
the immediate Jewel of their Souls,
And that the Loss of it
Will make them poor indeed!
Othello. So that I propose myself, not as an Example, but a Warning to them;
that by my Fall, they may stand the more secure.

However numerous my Mistakes in Life have been, they have still had most
surprising Additions made to them, not only by base and unworthy Minds,
Wretches devoid of Truth and common Honesty, but also by Persons of high Rank,
and such as outwardly profess Christianity; who have fancied it an Act of Piety
to believe and spread of me the most improbable and notorious Falsehoods! nay,
so far has their persecuting Zeal been carried, that they have rendered my
honest Industry ineffectual; and by depriving me of any Means to support Life,
endeavored to make me even such a one, as they represented me to be: That
Clergymen, and Ladies of Honor, should unite, in driving to Extremity, a
Person, who never yet, either in her Conversation, or Writing, offended against
the Laws of Decency or Humanity, is but too apt to make one think, they had
quite forgotten the Christian Grace, Charity, without which we are told, all
other Virtues are of no Avail, and consequently, fall far short of Perfection
themselves.

I therefore hope those who have taken such unbounded Liberties with my
Character, will also allow me to paint out theirs, only with this Difference,
that I shall confine myself to Truth, a Favor I never yet received at their
Hands; since even the priestly Robe, and Mitred Head, have, with Regard to me,
disclaimed it, of which, in the Series of these melancholy Adventures, I shall
be able to produce many surprising Instances.

I was born in the Year 1712; by my Mother's Side descended of an ancient and
honorable Family, who were frequently intermarried with the Nobility. My Great
Grandfather was Earl of Killmallock, whose Daughter married Colonel Meade, by
whom he had twenty-one Children, twelve of whom lived to be married. This
Gentleman, to his Honor be it spoken, though he was a Man of Fortune, and in the
Army, declared on his Deathbed, 'That he never had, either when a Bachelor,
or a married Man, criminal Conversation with a Woman; never was drunk; never
broke his Word; nor ever used Tobacco.'

The late Duke of Ormond, when Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, dining at Colonel
Meade's, offered to confer on him the Honor of Knighthood; but he then being
in an advanced Age, declined it for himself, telling his Grace, 'As he was
going out of the World, and his eldest Son coming into it, he would choose, if
he thought proper, his Grace should bestow it on him:' Which accordingly he did.

This Gentleman, Sir John Meade, was bred to the Law, and deservedly
distinguished, as one of the finest Orators that ever spoke at the Bar: He was
a perfect Master of classical Learning; and a Lover and Judge of the muse-like
Arts; his paternal Estate was about Fifteen Hundred Pounds a Year, which was
augmented by marrying successively two great Heiresses; as well as by the vast
Business he had in his Profession: So that with all those Advantages of Nature,
Education, and Fortune, it was no Wonder he should meet with universal Respect
and Esteem.

He was in this Situation, when Sir Edward Seymor had an Estate of five
Thousand Pounds a Year left to him in Ireland; this was a Matter too
considerable for Sir Edward to hope immediately to possess without Lawsuit or
Difficulty; so that he found his personal Appearance absolutely necessary. It
is to be observed, that Sir Edward Seymor was accounted the proudest Man in
England; and Sir John Meade was as remarkable for the same Fault; neither
indeed did I ever meet with any Person of either of those Names in England or
Ireland, who was not abundantly stocked with it, though without the same
Pretensions to support it.

Sir Edward Seymor landed at Dublin, filled with that natural Contempt for the
whole Country, which those of the English, who have not been resident amongst
them, are but too apt to express on every Occasion: He there found some of his
own Countrymen in Places of Profit and Trust, of whom he enquired, 'Whether
there are any such Things as good Lawyers to be met with in this damned Place?'

They answered, 'Yes, very good; but if he hoped to carry his Cause, he must
see Sir John Meade: Well, said he, let one of my Footmen go for him.'

'Your Footman, Sir Edward! said one of the Gentlemen, who knew Sir John: Why,
it is odds if he will speak to You. I assure you, if he does, it is a Favor few
of his Clients obtain from him.' 'What, a Duce, returned he, do Irish Lawyers
take such State upon them?' 'You are to consider, Sir Edward, he is a Gentleman
of Family, has a noble Fortune, and is so eminent in his Profession, that
should he be employed against you, you may bid Farewell to your Claim.'

This last Argument had such Force with Sir Edward Seymor, that he condescended
to wait on Sir John Meade next Morning: Sir John had been apprized of what the
other had said; and resolving to be as stately as himself, sent him down Word,
'He was very busy, but if he pleased to wait till he was at Leisure, he would
see him.' So Sir Edward was shown into a Parlour, where he remained above an
Hour, fretting himself to Death, at this disrespectful Usage offered to a
Person of his Dignity.

When Sir John thought he had pretty sufficiently mortified him, he sent to let
him know, he should be glad to see him, and received him with a Politeness
natural to him; but when Sir Edward went to open his Case to him, he told him,
'He must leave him his Brief, for he could not spare Time to hear him:' So Sir
Edward laid down his Brief, with a large Purse of Gold on it; and, having got
his Audience of Leave, departed, full of Indignation at meeting with a Man as
proud as himself.

When the Day appointed for the important Trial was come, there were Numbers of
Lawyers engaged on either Side of the Question: Sir John being, I suppose,
resolved to try his Client's Patience to the uttermost, permitted every one of
them to speak before him, without Interruption, and sat drawing Birds with a
Pencil, till Sir Edward was ready to burst with Rage at him, especially as he
found the Cause likely to go against him: At length, when their Pleadings were
ended, and Judgment going to be pronounced against Sir Edward, Sir John Meade
arose, and desired to be heard, which he ever was with Favor and Attention by
the Court, when making a Speech, which took an Hour and a half in Time, he so
fully confuted all Sir Edward's Antagonists, and made his Title to the Estate
so evident, and with such powerful Eloquence, that he had a Decree to be put in
immediate Possession.

Sir Edward was so charmed with Sir John's graceful Elocution, that he could
not forbear several Times crying out in Extacy, An Angel! by Heaven, an Angel!
But when he found the happy Effects of it so much to his own Advantage, he
could no longer contain himself, but cathing Sir John in his Arms, My dear,
dear Friend! says he, permit me to have the Honor of calling you so: I do not
wonder you should be proud, who have more Cause to be so, than any Man living.

The Court not breaking up, till it was late, Sir Edward pressed Sir John to
give him his Company that Evening; Sir John excused himself, telling him, 'He
was every Night engaged to a Club:' 'Well, then, said Sir Edward, if you will
give me Leave, I will accompany you; (provided you think it will be agreeable
to your Friends?)' Sir John answered, 'They would all, he was sure, esteem it
as a very great Honor.' So accordingly Sir Edward met them, and they were
mutually delighted with each other's Conversation, we may presume, by their
staying together till Four the next Morning. Some of Sir Edward's Friends
finding him in Bed at Twelve o'Clock the ensuing Day, he told them, 'He had sat
up all Night:' 'With whom, Sir Edward?' Why, returned he, 'With Homer, Plato,
Socrates, Cicero, and all the ancient Greek and Roman Poets, Philosophers and
Historians.'

From this Time, Sir Edward and Sir John contracted a Friendship, which did not
terminate, but with their Lives.

As this little Piece of History redounds to the mutual Honor of both these
great and eminent Gentlemen; I hope it will not be accounted Vanity in me to
recite it.

One of Sir John Meade's Sisters, being smitten with the good Mien of a Roman
Catholic Officer in King James's Army, stole a Match with him, of which my
Mother was the First Fruits; but her Mother dying in Childbed of her second
Child, and King William entirely subduing Ireland, my Grandfather thought
proper to follow his Royal Master's Fortune to France, leaving my Mother, then
an Infant, to the wide World: However, Providence did not abandon the helpless
Orphan; her Grandmother, the Widow of Colonel Meade beforementioned, took her
Home to her; and while she lived, with true maternal Tenderness, bestowed on
her the best and politest Education: And when the Trustees sat in Ireland, it
being proved she was bred a Protestant, she recovered her Mother's Fortune,
which had been settled on her, and which she had been some Years kept out of,
on Account of her Father's being a forfeiting Person.

He, in the mean time, returned privately to England, and married a Niece of
the celebrated Jesuit Father Hugh Peter's: by this second Venture, he had one
Daughter, who was married to Mr. Fowler of St. Thomas in Staffordshire, the
sole Heiress of whom is the present Lady Faulconbridge, to whom, were it of any
Use to me, I have the Honor of being a first Cousin by the Half-Blood.

My Mother being now in Possession of a handsome Fortune, and by the Death of
her Grandmother entirely at her own Disposal, for her Fathern ever enquired
what became of her, did not, it may be supposed, want Admirers; especially as
she had a very graceful Person, with Abundance of Wit, which was improved by
reading and keeping the best Company: however, none of them made any Impression
on her Heart, till she saw my Father, who was the Son of a Dutch Physician,
that accidentally settled in Ireland, and who had no other Fortune to boast of,
than a liberal Education, and a very amiable Person and Understanding;
Qualities which recommended him to my Mother so powerfully, that she had
Constancy enough to wait for him three Years, while he went to Leyden, where he
studied Physic under the late famous Dr. Boerhaave; and having taken his
Degree, he returned to Ireland, uniting himself in Marriage to his faithful
Mistress. Her Friends were at first much displeased with her; but my Father's
Merit soon reconciled them to her Choice; and there being then but one
Man-Midwife in the Kingdom, my Father made himself Master of that useful Art,
and practiced it with great Success, Reputation, and Humanity.

I was their second Child, and my eldest Brother dying an Infant, for a long
Time their only one; being of a tender weakly Constitution, I was by my Father
greatly indulged; indeed I cannot say, but it was in some Measure necessary he
should, by his Gentleness, qualify my Mother's Severity to me; otherwise it
must have broke my Heart; for she strictly followed Solomon's Advice, in never
sparing the Rod; insomuch that I have frequently been whipped for looking blue of
a frosty Morning; and, whether I deserved it or not, I was sure of Correction
every Day of my Life.

From my earliest Infancy I had a strong Disposition to Letters; but my Eyes
being weak, after the Smallpox, I was not permitted to look at a Book; my
Mother regarding more the Beauty of my Face, than the Improvement of my Mind;
neither was I allowed to learn to read: This Restraint, as it generally
happens, made me but more earnest in the Pursuit of what I imagined must be so
delightful. Twenty times a Day have I been corrected, for asking what such and
such Letters spelt; my Mother used to tell me the Word, accompanying it with a
good Box on the Ear, which, I suppose, imprinted it on my Mind. Had Gulliver
seen her Behavior, I should have imagined, he had borrowed a Hint from it for
his floating Island, where, when a great Man had promised any Favor, the
Suppliant was obliged to give him a Tweak by the Nose, or a Kick on the Rump,
to quicken his Memory. However, I do assure you, it had this Effect on me,
insomuch, that I never forgot what was once told me; and quickly arrived at my
desired Happiness, being able to read before she thought I knew all my Letters;
but this Pleasure I was obliged to enjoy by Stealth with Fear and Trembling.

I was at this Time about five Years of Age; and my Mother being one Day
abroad, I had happily laid hold on Alexander's Feast, and found something in it
so charming, that I read it aloud; -- but how like a condemned Criminal did I
look, when my Father, softly opening his Studydoor, took me in the very Fact; I
dropped my Book, and burst into Tears, begging Pardon, and promising never to do
so again: But my Sorrow was soon dispelled, when he bade me not be frightened,
but read to him, which, to his great Surprise, I did very distinctly, and
without hurting the Beauty of the Numbers. Instead of the whipping, of which I
stood in dread, he took me up in his Arms, and kissed me, giving me a whole
Shilling, as a Reward, and told me, 'He would give me another, as soon as I got
a Poem by Heart,' which he put into my Hand, and proved to be Mr. Pope's sacred
Eclogue; which Task I performed before my Mother returned Home. They were both
astonished at my Memory, and from that Day forward, I was permitted to read as
much as I pleased; only my Father took care to furnish me with the best, and
politest Authors; and took Delight in explaining to me, whatever, by Reason of
my tender Years, was above my Capacity of Understanding.

But chiefly was I charmed and ravished with the Sweets of Poetry; all my Hours
were dedicated to the Muses; and, from a Reader, I quickly became a Writer; I
may truly say with Mr. Pope, I lisp'd in Numbers, for the Numbers came.


My Performances had the good Fortune to be looked on as extraordinary for my
Years; and the greatest and wisest Men in the Kingdom did not disdain to hear
the Prattle of the little Muse, as they called me, even in my childish Days.
But as I approached toward Womanhood there was a new Scene opened to me; and
by the Time I had looked on thirteen Years, I had almost as many Lovers; not
that I ever was handsome, farther than being very fair. But I was well-drest,
sprightly, and remarkably well-tempered, unapt to give or take Offense;
insomuch that my Company was generally coveted; and no doubt but I should have
been happily disposed of in Marriage, but that my Mother's capricious Temper
made her reject every advantageous Proposal offered, and at last condemn me to
the Arms of one of the greatest V -- s, with Reverence to the Priesthood. be it
spoken, that ever was wrapped up in Crape.

And here I cannot forbear observing, how very few who wear that S -- d H -- t
are adorned with any real Sanctity of Manners: What Ambition, Avarice, Lust,
and Cruelty reigns among them; they are generally the first Seducers of
Innocence (as the Holiness of their Office gives them free Admittance into
every Family) and as soon as they have made a Breach in the tender Mind for
Ruin's wasteful Entrance, (provided they can but slip their own Necks out of
the Halter and remain unexposed) they shall be the first to persecute with
Ecclesiastical Courts, and Spiritual Authority, that very Person, whom they
themselves first taught the Way to sin. Let none presume to censure this as
Spite,
I suffer for their Crimes of whom I write,
And it is ever allowed that the Losers may have leave to speak.

I would not, by this Reflection, be thought to strike at Religion, or the
valuable Part of the Clergy: Those who are possessed of Christian Charity, and
make the Sincerity of their Faith appear in the Righteousness of their Life,
are truly worthy of Reverence and Honor; but alas! their Number is so few,
that the Ears of Corn are scarce discernable among the Tares, of whom no doubt
Satan will reap a plentiful Harvest.

But to return. Amongst all those who addressed me, my Heart retained its
Freedom; and if their Flattery pleased me, it was only as it fed my Vanity;
that Passion, which, like Pride, is so universal: I had no particular
Engagement, was entirely submissive to my Parents, punctual to all the Duties
of Religion, unaffectedly innocent, and much more pleased with my Female
Friends, than with the Company of Men.

There were two young Ladies, in particular, for whom, from my Childhood, I had
a very tender Affection, and whom, as often as I could, I visited; as their
Brother was a Clergyman, many of the Gown frequented their House, and amongst
the rest, the Reader of our Parish Church, Mr. P -- n. He had a good Face, and
many agreeable Accomplishments; as a tolerable Taste in Music, and a poetical
Turn, which greatly entertained me; but being a Man of obscure Birth, and low
Fortune, I had no farther Thoughts of him, than merely as an Acquaintance:
However, it was my Misfortune to be liked by him, when I least imagined it; as
he played very well on the Organ, he gave us an Invitation to Church,
promising, after Evening-Prayer, to sing an Anthem for us. I, who always
delighted in Church-Music, begged my Mother's Permission to go, which, with
some Difficulty, I obtained. After the Music he invited us into the
Vestry-Room, where he had prepared a little Collation of Fruit, Wine, etc. and
singling me out, he began to address me in a very passionate Style, and
earnestly begged Leave to visit me: I told him, 'I was to go into the Country
next Day, to stay all the Summer, and were I not, I had no Male Visitants, but
such as my Parents approved of; and consequently it was out of my Power to
grant his Request.' My Mother sending for me, prevented any farther
Conversation for that Time; and early the next Morning we set out on our
intended Journey.

During my Stay in the Country, he wrote me a great many poetical Compliments,
and subscribed himself Amyntas: As they were really very elegant, my Mother,
who always examined my Letters, expressed great Curiosity to know the Writer;
saying, 'I ought to return a Letter of Thanks to him:' But as I took this only
for a Trap, I told her, which was true, I knew not who it was; lest I should be
denied the Pleasure of visiting the young Ladies, where I first saw him, if I
should have given her the smallest Hint, that I guessed at the Person.

I had, by this Time, a Brother of about nine Years of Age, of whom my Father
and Mother were fond even to Extravagance; whenever I went abroad, he used to
cry to go with me, and was constantly indulged in it.

A few Days after our Return to Town, I went to wait on the young Ladies
beforementioned, and took my Brother with me; I was scarce seated when Mr. P --
n came in; and after saluting me, began to reproach me with Cruelty, in never
having favored him with an Answer to any of his Letters. I told him, 'I was
much obliged to him, for the agreeable Entertainment they had afforded me; but
that, excepting my Father, I had never wrote to any Man, neither was I Mistress
of Wit enough to correspond with him.' A good many civil Things were said on
either Hand, during Tea Time; after which my Brother growing urgent with me to
return Home, I happened to say he was so great a Favorite, I durst not
contradict him; upon which, Mr. P -- n made his Application to him, and gave
him an Invitation to his Lodgings; where he entertained him so kindly, that the
Child returned in Raptures with him; and laden with Toys and Sweetmeats. Upon
this Civility to my Brother, my Father sent and invited Mr. P -- n to Dinner;
(and you may be sure he did not refuse him) but quickly found the Art of making
himself so agreeable to my Parents, that they were even uneasy whenever he was
absent; which seldom happened, except when his Duty required his Attendance. He
now began openly to court me; and, to my great Surprise, neither of them feemod
averse to it; but allowed him as much Liberty of conversing with me, as a
reasonable Man could desire; and for my own Part, he gained so large a Share in
my Esteem, that as they seemed to approve of him, I was very well satisfied.

One Year past on in this Manner, during which Time, Mr. P -- n never omitted
any Thing to convince me of the Sincerity of his Passion; and though he saw me
every Day, and all the Day; yet every Day was still but as the first: So eager
was he still to see me more.


The ensuing Spring, my Mother took a Lodging, about a Mile from Dublin, by the
Seaside, for the Benefit of bathing, where my Father and Mr. P -- n came every
Afternoon together to visit us; but my Father's Business seldom permitting him
to stay above half an Hour, he generally left Mr. P -- n with us: Who, one
Night happening to stay later than ordinary, left a Gold Watch, and a handsome
Diamond Ring in my Possession; lest, as he said, he should be robbed of them
going Home. My Father and he coming to us the next Day, (according to Custom) I
brought to Mr. P -- n his Ring and Watch; but he would by no Means accept of
either, but insisted on my keeping them as a Present; my Father and Mother were
both by; and neither of them showing any Dislike to it, I was, with great
Reluctance, obliged by him to take them.

I mention these Particulars, trifling as they are, because I have been accused
of Disobedience to my Parents, in marrying without their Consent or Knowledge;
whereas they were acquainted with the Affair from Beginning to End; neither was
I any more than passive in it; never having allowed myself to have any Will but
theirs.

My Father was at this Time so eminent in his Profession, and lived after so
elegant a manner, that every body concluded, he was able to give me a very good
Fortune; and few People could believe he countenanced Mr. P -- n's Addresses to
me; he neither having any Preferment in the Church, nor any other Fortune: And
whatever Merit an Irish Clergyman may possess, he has little Hope of
Advancement by it, unless he has some Relation in the House of Commons, who, by
betraying the Interest of his Country, can procure for him, The Leavings of a
Church distressed,
A hungry Vicarage at best;
Or some remote inferior Post,
With forty Pounds a Year at most.
Swift. And in this, the present State of poor Ireland nearly resembles that of
England, under the Reign of Queen Mary, when, as soon as a Bishopric became
vacant, an Italian was immediately nominated to it. Ireland groans under the
same Calamity: An English V -- y, English Judges, English Bishops, with their
long Train of Relations and Dependants, lay their hard Hands on all
Preferments; while her learned Sons languish out Life, in hopeless Poverty and
Dejection of Spirit.

I have frequently observed it, as a Want of Policy in the English Government,
to permit the People of Ireland to have an University: Learning naturally
inspires Men with the Love of Liberty; the Principles of which ought to be
discouraged in the Minds of those, whom their Masters are pleased to condemn to
Slavery, Want and Oppression; unless, perhaps it may be done with a cruel
Intent, of making their Yoke the more galling to them.

Ireland, while free, was remarkable for producing brave and valiant Men. Ever
witness for her, Her matchless Sons! whose Valor still remains
On French Records for twenty long Campaigns;
Yet from an Empress, now a Captive grown;
She saved Britannia's Right, and lost her own.
Swift.

I hope I shall be pardoned by all true Patriots for this Digression; if not, I
can only make Use of Falstaff's Apology, That Rebellion lay in my Way, and I
found it.

But to resume my Thread. All my Friends and Relations attacked my Father
warmly on this Head; who solemnly declared, 'He knew nothing of any amorous
Correspondence between Mr. P -- n and his Daughter, that the Gentleman came to
visit us, as being Parishioners:' But withal declared: 'Since such a Report was
spread, he would civilly forbid him the House;' which accordingly he ordered my
Mother to do. Mr. P -- n came as usual, and my Mother delivered her dreadful
Commission to him. No sooner was the fatal Sentence pronounced, but my
astonished Lover fell pale and speechless to the Floor; and to say the Truth,
my Case was little better than his: I raised him in my Arms, and senseless as
he seemed, he grasped me close, and leaned his drooping Head upon my Bosom;
whilst my Mother applied Remedies to him till he revived: When he came to
himself, he blamed us for our Care: saying, 'Since I was lost, he could not,
would not live.'

As I was naturally of a soft compassionate Temper, the Condition I saw him in
pierced my very Soul; but I was too much in Awe of my Mother to venture to say
so at that Time. So he left me with Sorrow deeply imprinted in his Countenance,
and, as I believed, in his Heart.

About two Years before this, a young Woman of about eighteen Years of Age, was
brought to my Father, by a Stationer, to be by him instructed in Midwifery: She
was Mistress of Hebrew, Greek, Latin and French, understood the Mathematics,
as well as most Men: And what made these extraordinary Talents yet more
surprising, was, that her Parents were poor illiterate Country People; so that
her Learning appeared like the Gift poured out on the Apostles, of speaking all
Languages, without the Pains of Study; or, like the intuitive Knowledge of
Angels: Yet in as much as the Power of Miracles is ceased; we must allow she
used human Means for such great and excellent Acquirements: And yet in a long
Friendship and Familiarity with her, I could never obtain a satisfactory
Account from her on this Head; only she said, 'she had received some little
Instruction from the Minister of the Parish, when she could spare Time from her
Needlework, to which she was closely kept by her Mother.' She wrote elegantly
both in Verse and Prose; and some of the most delightful Hours I ever past,
were in the Conversation of this female Philosopher.

My Father readily consented to accept of her as a Pupil; and gave her a
general Invitation to his Table, so that she and I were seldom asunder. My
Parents were well pleased with our Intimacy, as her Piety was not inferior to
her Learning. Whether it was owing to her own Desire, or the Envy of those who
survived her, I know not; but of her various and beautiful Writings, except one
Poem of here is in Mrs. Barber's Works, I have never seen any published; it is
true, as her Turn was chiefly to philosophical or divine Subjects, they might
not be agreeable to the present Taste; yet could her heavenly Muse descend from
its sublime Height to the easy epistolary Style, and suit itself to my then gay
Disposition; as may appear by the two following Poems: To make them
intelligible, my Reader must observe, that I being in a Country Town at the
Assizes Time, had writ her an Account to Dublin of the principal Entertainments
I met with there and in the rest of the Country. I must also beg Pardon for
publishing the Compliments paid to me in them, which I really would omit were
it possible. Her Answer to my first Letter was this. To Miss LAETITIA VAN LEWEN.
THE fleeting Birds may soon in Ocean swim,
And Northern Whales through liquid Azure skim:
The Dublin Ladies their Intrigues forsake;
To Dress and Scandal an Aversion take;
When you can in the lonely Forest walk,
And with some serious Matron gravely talk,
Of Possets, Poultices, and Waters stilled,
And monstrous Casks with Mead and Cider filled;
How many Hives of Bees she has in Store,
And how much Fruit her Trees this Summer bore;
Or Home returning in the Yard can stand,
And feed the Chickens from your bounteous Hand:
Of each one's Top-knot tell, and hatching pry,
Like Tully waiting for an Augury.
When Night approaches, down to Table sit
With a great Crowd, choice Meat, and little Wit,
What Horse won the last Race, how mighty Tray
At the last famous Hunting, caught the Prey;
Surely, you cannot but such Discourse despise,
Methinks, I see Displeasure in your Eyes:
O my Laetitia, stay no longer there,
You Will soon forget, that you yourself are fair;
Why will you keep from us, from all that is gay,
There in a lonely Solitude to stay?
Where not a Mortal through the Year you view,
But bob-wigg'd Hunters, who their Game pursue
With so much Ardor, they would a Cock or Hare,
To thee in all thy blooming Charms prefer.
You write of Belles and Beaux that there appear,
And gilded Coaches, such as glitter here;
For gilded Coaches, each estated Clown
That gravely slumbers on the Bench has one;
But Beaux! they are young Attorneys! sure you mean!
Who thus appear to your romantic Brain.
Alas! no Mortal there can talk to you,
That Love or Wit, or Softness ever knew:
All they can speak of's Capias and Law,
And Writs to keep the Country Fools in Awe.
And, if to Wit, or Courtship they pretend,
It Is the same Way that they a Cause defend;
In which they give of Lungs a vast Expense,
But little Passion, Thought or Eloquence:
Bad as they are, they will soon abandon you,
And Gain, and Clamor, in the Town pursue.
So haste to Town, if even such Fools you prize;
O haste to Town! and bless the longing Eyes
Of your CONSTANTIA.



The Second was as follows: IF my Laetitia still persists to love
The Country Village, and the shady Grove,
The murmuring Riv'let and the Turtles Moan,
Despising all the Grandeur of a Town;
Where Beauty triumphs, and where Pleasure reigns,
And Rounds of Mirth relieve our daily Pains;
Where George's mighty Substitute appears,
And every Face with blooming Pleasure chears;
Grafton! whom never fair one saw unmoved,
Whom even great Churchill's beauteous Offspring loved.
For him whatever over all our Kingdom's fine,
They in this happy Place together join;
With him each warlike glittering Soldier goes,
With him the tender Race of whining Beaux;
In short, we have here all that may hope t'engage,
One of your Wit, your Beauty, and your Age.
If all these powerful Arguments should fail,
I Will in the tenderest Part your Heart assail;
The lovely Damon languishes and dies,
Nor can revive, but by your charming Eyes;
But I forgot -- Mamma these Lines must see,
So you shall hear no more of him from me.


As this Lady was perfectly well acquainted with Mr. P -- n's Regard for me, he
applied to her to entreat a Meeting at her Lodgings, where I frequently went.

She had too much Compassion for a despairing honorable Lover to refuse his
Request; and accordingly she gave him Notice the next Visit that I made to her,
after having asked my Consent to it. Our Interview was very melancholy, and his
Sighs and Tears prevailed so much on my young soft Heart, that, at last, I
faithfully promised to be his; but added, 'We were both so young, that it would
be prudent to wait till he had some Preferment, or till my Parents came into
better Temper; and that, in the mean time, I would see him, or write to him, as
often as I conveniently could.'

I forgot to mention, that I had sent him his Watch and Ring some Days before;
he would fain have prevailed on me to take them again, but I absolutely refused
them.

The next Morning, my Father told me, I must prepare to go and stay a Year with
my Grandfather, who lived a hundred Miles distant from Dublin, and that I must
set out in two Days. I made no Answer, but thought proper to give Mr. P -- n
Notice of my Departure, and easily prevailed on my Brother to give him a
Letter; but Heavens! how was I frighted when he, returning in a few Moments,
told me, Mr. P -- n had stabbed himself with his Penknife: I ran all in Tears
to my Mother, entreating her Permission to go and see him. She appeared much
concerned, and sent for him to come to us, which pleasing Summons he readily
obeyed. But I could scarce forbear laughing at my own Credulity, when my
wounded Swain came to us in perfect Health. He had indeed given himself a
Scratch, on Purpose to terrify us, and had just such a desperate Wound as I
have frequently received from the Point of a Pin, without complaining.

However, by this Artifice he once more gained Admission to us, and had an
Opportunity of assuring my Mother, 'That if she sent me to the West Indies, he
would follow me;' and added also, 'That he was next Heir to a good Estate;'
which was the most prevailing Argument he could make use of to her; and took
such an Effect, that she not only kept him to Supper, but so far indulged him,
as to give him a Key to the Garden which opened into a little Stable Lane, by
which means he could come in and go out as often as he pleased unnoticed. As
soon as he left us, my Mother spoke to me in this Manner: 'Child, said she, I
believe that young Man loves you sincerely, neither have your Father or I any
Objection to him; but in the Light we appear in to the World, it would seem
strange to accept of him as a Son-in law. Your Father is not, at present, able
to give you a Fortune; and I know most of those who address you, hope for one
with you; and he chooses rather to reject them, than let them into his real
Circumstances: What I would therefore advise you to is this: If you love this
Man, marry him; we shall at first seem displeased, and then forgive it, and do
for you every thing within our Power; as he is an ingenious, sober Man, your
Father's Interest may soon get him a Living, and till then ye shall both live
with us.'

This Discourse strangely surprised me, and left me doubtful how to act; to
take to myself the Reproach of Disobedience, in the Eyes of the World, appeared
very shocking to me; and though I was resolved to marry Mr. P -- n some Time or
other, yet I was startled at the Thought of doing it immediately, and told my
Mother my Objections: However they appeared but trifling to her. The next
Morning she called me pretty early to Breakfast, and, to my great Surprise, I
found Mr. P -- n with my Father, his Harpsichord placed in the Parlour, which,
with a Cat and an Owl, were all his worldly Goods.

He told me with great Rapture, that he was going for a Ring and a License to
be married in the Evening. As for my Part, I thought he only jested, till my
Father confirmed it, by telling me I must either resolve to marry immediately,
or break off with Mr. P -- n entirely, leaving it to my Choice which to do. I
was too much confounded to make any other Return than to give my Hand to Mr. P
-- n, who kissed it with great Extacy; and my unfortunate Nuptials being thus
concluded, we were married privately in the Evening by the Vicar General,
having no other Witnesses but my Father and Mother, and his Father, and we
resolved to keep it secret for a few Days to avoid the Hurry and Expense of
Matrimony. We went into the Country to my Uncle Brigadier Meade's Seat for a
Fortnight; where my new espoused Husband staying from me a whole Day, in
Pursuit of his Game (for he delighted in Fowling) at his Return, I presented
him with the following Lines, my first Attempt in Poetry that was not quite
childish: The Petition of the BIRDS.
AH Shepherd, gentle Shepherd! spare
Us plumed Inhabitants of Air,
That hop, and inoffensive rove
From Tree to Tree, from Grove to Grove;
What Phrenzy has possessed your Mind?
To be destructive of your Kind?
Admire not if we Kindred claim,
Our separate Natures are the same;
To each of us thou ow'st a Part,
To grace thy Person, Head or Heart;
The chaste, the fond, the tender Dove,
Inspires thy Breast with purest Love;
The towering Eagle claims a Part
In thy courageous, generous Heart;
On thee the Finch bestowed a Voice,
To bid the raptured Soul rejoice;
The Hawk has given thee Eyes so bright,
They kindle Love and soft Delight;
Thy snowy Hue and graceful Mien,
May in the stately Swan be seen;
The Robin's Plumes afford the Red,
Which thy soft Lips and Cheeks bespread;
Thy filial Piety and Truth,
The Stork bestowed to crown thy Youth.
Did we these several Gifts bestow?
To give Perfection to a Foe?
Did we so many Virtues give,
To thee too fierce to let us live?
Suspend your Rage, and every Grove
Shall echo Songs of grateful Love.
Let Pity sooth and sway your Mind,
And be the Phoenix of Mankind.


This little poetical Essay met with more Applause than it really merited, on
Account of my Youth, and was extremely acceptable to Mr. P -- n, who, with the
Raptures of an enamoured Bridegroom, read it to every Person whom he thought
possessed of Taste or Genius.

On our Return to Town, we received the Visits and Compliments of all our
Acquaintance; every one of whom my Mother assured, I had married without their
Consent; but this was not all, for she said it so often, that at length she
persuaded herself it was so; and made it a Pretense for giving me all
imaginable ill Treatment, both in public and private, which, having no Remedy,
I was obliged to bear as patiently as I could; for if I quitted her House, I
had no Place to go to, as Mr. P -- n's whole Income would scarce have paid the
Rent of a tolerable ready furnished Lodging. However I had some Consolation in
Mr. P -- n's Tenderness, which seemed daily to increase for me, and in the
Conversation of a very agreeable Set of Friends, some of whom it may not be
amiss to give a particular Description of.

In the first Place, I had the Honor of being well received by Mrs. Percival,
who is married to the Brother of the Earl of Egmont, to whose Virtues I cannot
refuse doing Justice, (although her Censures of me have not been over-charitable)
a Lady of most universal Genius, there being no one Accomplishment, that adorns
the Woman of Quality but what she possessed; and her Station gave her an
Opportunity of showing them to Advantage; she was also extremely happy in her
Family; her Husband was a most worthy Gentleman; both her Sons Men of Sense and
Honor, and one of her Daughters very agreeable. It may easily be supposed this
Belle Assembly engaged the Company of all the learned and polite World; every
Night was a Drawing Room, and the ingenious and curious of both Sexes went Home
delighted and improved. As my Father was Physician to Mrs. Percival, and her
eldest Son married to a near Relation of mine, I had at all Times free Access,
and so found a frequent pleasing Relief from my Vexations.

I had also the much envied Honor of being known to Dr. Swift, whose Genius,
excellent as it was, surpassed not his Humanity in the most judicious and
useful Charities; although often hid under a rough Appearance, till he was
perfectly convinced both of the Honesty and Distress of those he bestowed it
on: He was a perpetual Friend to Merit and Learning; and utterly incapable of
Envy. Indeed why should he not? who, in true genuine Wit, could fear no Rival.

Yet as I have frequently observed in Life, that where great Talents are
bestowed, there the strongest Passions are likewise given: This truly great Man
did but too often let them have Dominion over him, and that on the most
trifling Occasions. During Meal-times he was evermore in a Storm; the Meat was
always too much or too little done, or the Servants had offended in some Point,
imperceptible to the rest of the Company; however, when the Cloth was taken
away, he made his Guests rich Amends for the Pain he had given them by the
former Part of his Behavior. For Then was truly mingled in the friendly Bowl
The Feast of Reason and the Flow of Soul.
Pope. Yet strict Temperance preserved; for the Doctor never drank above half a
Pint of Wine, in every Glass of which he mixed Water and Sugar; yet, if he
liked his Company, would sit many Hours over it, unlocking all the Springs of
Policy, Learning, true Humor and inimitable Wit.

It is a very great Loss to the World, that this admirable Gentleman never
could be prevailed on to give us the Particulars of his own Life; because, as
it is the Fate of all eminent Persons to have various Characters given of them,
so it was more remarkably his: One Reason for this may justly be assigned; that
as at his first setting out Party ran high, those who on either Side had any
Talents for Writing, spared not to throw the blackest Aspersions on the other;
so that, if we give them both Credit, we must conclude, there was neither
Honor nor Virtue among them; but that all who were out, Tories and Whigs,
Whigs and Tories, were equally corrupt: Indeed Ambition is a grand Deceiver,
and apt to undermine Integrity itself; and this the Doctor himself was so
sensible of, that I have frequently heard him declare, 'He thought it a great
Blessing that all his Hopes of Preferment were at once cut off; insomuch that
he had nothing to tempt or mislead him from a Patriotism, in which his grateful
Country found their Happiness and Security.'

This leads me to a Story, I remember to have heard him tell, and therefore, I
hope, cannot be impertinent:

A Clergyman, whose Character greatly resembled that I have heard Bishop
Berkley give to Bishop Atterbury; namely, a most learned fine Gentleman, who
under the softest and politest Appearance concealed the most turbulent
Ambition: This Clergyman having made his Merit, as a Preacher, too eminent to
be overlooked, had it early rewarded with a Mitre; his Friend Dr. Swift went to
congratulate him on it; but at the same Time told him, 'He hoped, as his
Lordship was a Native of Ireland, and had now a Seat in the House of Peers, he
would employ his powerful Elocution in the Service of his distressed Country.'
The Prelate told him, 'The Bishopric was but a very small one, and he could
not hope for a better, if he did not oblige the Court.' 'Very well, says Swift,
then it is to be hoped, when you have a better, you will become an honest Man.'
'Ay, that I will, Mr. Dean, says he, till then, my Lord, farewell.' This pious
Prelate was twice translated to richer Sees; and, on every Translation, Dr.
Swift waited on him to remind him of his Promise, but to no Purpose; there was
now an Archbishopric in View, and till that was obtained, nothing could be
done: This in a short Time he likewise possessed; he then sent for the Dean,
and told him, 'I am now at the Top of my Preferment, for I well know no
Irishman will ever be made Primate, therefore as I can rise no higher in
Fortune or Station, I will zealously promote the good of my Country.' (A fine
Reason truly!) And so he commenced a most outrageous Patriot, from those very
laudable Motives, and continued so till his Death, which happened within these
few Years.

I hope my Readers will indulge me in the frequent Mention I shall make of Dr.
Swift; for though his Works are universally esteemed; yet few Persons now living,
have had so many Opportunities of seeing him in private Life; as my being a
Person sans Consequence afforded me, which Happiness I obtained by the
following Means:

The learned Nymph beforementioned, whom Curiosity engaged every Person to
see, had shown many of my Scribbles to Dr. Delany, known sufficiently by his
own incomparable Life and Writings: As she was one of the first to congratulate
me on my Marriage; she was a Witness how severely both Mr. P -- n and I were
used, or rather abused by my Mother; she told Dr. Delany of it, and made such
favorable mention of the poor young Couple, that he generously imagined his
countenancing Mr. P -- n might be a Means of procuring us better Treatment. He
had been Class-fellow with my Father in the College, and though they did not
visit, yet they had that mutual Esteem for each other, which good Men feel for
good Men; and were pleased whenever Accident threw them into each other's
Company. The Doctor, preaching at our Parish Church immediately after our
Marriage, was so kind as to join us coming out, and accompany us Home, to wish
the young Couple Joy, a Favor we were all extremely proud of; at parting he
gave us all an Invitation to to dine at his beautiful Villa, about a small Mile
distant from Dublin; what Opinion I conceived of him and his Improvements, may
be seen in the following Lines, composed in one of his lovely Arbours: --
Delville the Seat of the Rev. Dr. DELANY.
HAIL, happy Delville! blissful Seat!
The Muse's best beloved Retreat!
With Prospects large and unconfined;
Blessed Emblem of their Master's Mind!
Where fragrant Gardens, painted Meads,
Wide opening Walks, and twilight Shades,
Inspiring Scenes! elate the Heart!
Nature improved, and raised by Art;
So Paradise delightful smiled,
Blooming, and beautifully wild.
Thrice happy Sage, who safe retired,
By Heaven and by the Muse inspired;
In polished Arts, or Lays sublime,
Or God-like Acts employ your Time.
Here Nature's Beauties you explore,
And searching her mysterious Store,
Through all her Operations find
The Image of the Sovereign Mind,
And in each Insect, Plant and Flower,
Contemplate the creating Power:
Nor is thy Love of him alone
In fruitless Speculation shown;
Through Life you happily exert,
The Christian Virtues of your Heart;
To give new Schemes of Culture Birth,
And bless and beautify the Earth;
To raise the Afflicted from Despair,
And make the friendless Wretch thy Care:
To thee the highest Bliss is given,
A Soul to praise, and copy Heaven.


Whether it was owing to my Youth, or any real Merit in the Verses, I know not,
but, weak as they were, from the Candor of the Company they met with great
Applause, and the worthy Gentleman to whom they were directed, praised the
Poetry extremely, only modestly wished I had a better Subject to employ my fine
Genius, as he was pleased to call it.

I hope, if I should live to publish these Writings, none of the honorable
Persons mentioned in them, as having been once my Friends, will be offended at
it; since whatever Misfortunes have since befallen me, I was not then quite
unworthy of the Regard they showed me, and still retain a grateful Sense of
their Favor; only lamenting that by one fatal Folly it is irrecoverably lost.

And now I must confess, as I have talked of Ambition, I had a strong one to be
known to Dr. Swift: As Dr. Delany had recommended and introduced Mr. P -- n to
him, and the learned Lady beforementioned, I thought it a little hard to be
excluded from the Delight and Instruction I might possibly receive from such
Conversation; and having often remonstrated on this Head, to no Purpose, I at
last told them, (for to give me my due I was pretty pert) 'that truly they were
envious, and would not let me see the Dean, knowing how much I surpassed them
all.' As I spoke this but half serious, I set them all a laughing, and as they
were to meet the next Day at the Deanery-House to keep the Anniversary of his
Birthday, I enclosed to Dr. Delany the following Lines: To the Rev. Dr. SWIFT,
on his Birthday.
WHILE I the God-like Men of Old,
In Admiration wrapped behold!
Revered Antiquity explore,
And turn the long-lived Volumes over,
Where Cato, Plutarch, Flaccus shine
In every Excellence divine;
I grieve that our degenerate Days,
Produce no mighty Souls like these;
Patriot, Philosopher and Bard,
Are Names unknown, and seldom heard.
Spare your Reflection, Phoebus cries,
It Is as ungrateful as unwise;
Can you complain this sacred Day,
That Virtues, or that Arts decay?
Behold in SWIFT revived appears
The Virtues of unnumber'd Years;
Behold in him with new Delight,
The Patriot, Bard and Sage unite;
And know, Ierne in that Name
Shall rival Greece and Rome in Fame.


Dr. Delany presented these Lines to the Dean, and at the same time told him my
saucy Speech abovementioned. The Dean kindly accepted of my Compliment, and
said, 'He would see me whenever I pleased.' A most welcome Message to me!

A few Days after, the Dean sent the Doctor Word, he would dine with him at
Delville, and desired to meet Mr. and Mrs. P -- n there: You may be assured I
obeyed this welcome Summons, and a Gentlewoman was so kind as to call on me to
go with her; when we arrived, Dr. Delany's Servant told us, his Master, the
Dean, and Mr. P -- n were walking in the Garden; we met them on a noble
Terrass, whose Summit was crowned with a magnificent Portico, where Painting
and Sculpture displayed their utmost Charms: The Lady presented me to the Dean,
who saluted me, and surprised me, by asking her, 'If I was her Daughter?' She
smiled and said, 'I was Mrs. P -- n.' 'What, says he, this poor little Child
married! God help her, she is early engaged in Trouble.' We passed the Day in a
most elegant and delightful Manner; and the Dean, engaging Mr. P -- n to preach
for him at the Cathedral the Sunday following, gave me also with the rest of
the Company an Invitation to Dinner. As the Communion is administered every
Sunday in this antique Church, dedicated to St. Patrick, the first Prelate who
taught the Gospel in Ireland, I was charmed to see with what a becoming Piety
the Dean performed that solemn Service; which he had so much at Heart, that he
wanted not the Assistance of the Liturgy, but went quite through it without ever
looking in the Prayer Book. Indeed another Part of his Behavior on this
Occasion was censured by some as savouring of Popery, which was, that he bowed
to the Holy-Table; however this Circumstance may vindicate him from the wicked
Aspersion of being deemed an Unbeliever, since it is plain he had the utmost
Reverence for the Eucharist. Service being over, we met the Dean at the
Church-Door, surrounded by a Crowd of Poor, to all of whom he gave Charity,
excepting one old Woman, who held out a very dirty Hand to him; he told her
very gravely, 'That though she was a Beggar, Water was not so scarce but she
might have washed her Hands:' And so we marched with the Silver Verge before us
to the Deanery-House. When we came into the Parlour, the Dean kindly saluted
me, and without allowing me Time to sit down, bade me come and see his Study;
Mr. P -- n was for following us, but the Dean told him merrily, He did not
desire his Company; and so he ventured to trust me with him into the Library:
'Well, says he, I have brought you here to show you all the Money I got when I
was in the Ministry, but do not steal any of it.' 'I will not indeed, Sir, says
I;' so he opened a Cabinet, and showed me a whole Parcel of empty Drawers;
'Bless me, say he, the Money is flown;' he then opened his Bureau, wherein he
had a great Number of curious Trinkets of various Kinds, some of which he told
me, 'Were presented to him by the Earl and Countess of Oxford; some by Lady
Masham, and some by Lady Betty Germain;' at last, coming to a Drawer filled
with Medals, he bade me choose two for myself; but he could not help smiling,
when I began to poize them in my Hands, choosing them by Weight rather than
Antiquity, of which indeed I was not then a Judge.

The Dean amused me in this Manner till we were summoned to Dinner, where his
Behavior was so humorous, that I cannot avoid relating some Part of it: He
placed himself at the Head of his Table opposite to a great Pier-Glass, under
which was a Marble Side-board, so that he could see in the Glass whatever the
Servants did at it: He was served entirely in Plate, and with great Elegance;
but the Beef being overroasted put us all in Confusion, the Dean called for the
Cook-maid, and ordered her to take it down Stairs, and do it less; the Maid
answered, very innocently, 'That she could not:' 'Why, what Sort of a Creature
are you, says he, to commit a Fault which cannot be amended?' And turning to me
he said very gravely, 'That he hoped, as the Cook was a Woman of Genius, he
should, by this Manner of arguing, be able in about a Year's Time to convince
her she had better send up the Meat too little than too much done;' charging
the Men Servants, 'Whenever they imagined the Meat was ready, they should take
it Spit and all, and bring it up by Force, promising to aid them, in case the
Cook resisted.' The Dean then turning his Eye on the Looking-glass espied the
Butler opening a Bottle of Ale, and helping himself to the first Glass; he very
kindly jumbled the rest together, that his Master and Guests might all fare
alike. 'Ha! Friend, says the Dean, Sharp's the Word, I find you drank my Ale,
for which I stop two Shillings of your Board-Wages this Week, for I scorn to be
outdone in any thing, even in cheating.' Dinner at last was over to my great
Joy; for now I had Hope of a more agreeable Entertainment than what the
squabbling with the Servants had afforded us.

The Dean thanked Mr. P -- n for his Sermon: 'I never, says he, preached but
twice in my Life, and then they were not Sermons, but Pamphlets.' I asked him,
'What might be the Subject of them;' he told me, 'They were against Wood's
Halfpence.' 'Pray, Madam, says he, do you smoke;' 'No indeed, Sir, says I;'
'Nor your Husband;' 'Neither, Sir:' 'It is a Sign, said he, you were neither of
you bred in the University of Oxford; for drinking and smoking are the first
Rudiments of Learning taught there; and in those two Arts no University in
Europe can outdo them.' 'Pray Mrs. P -- n tell me your Faults;' 'Indeed, Sir,
I must beg to be excused, for if I can help it, you shall never find them out;'
'No, says he, then Mr. P -- n shall tell me;' 'I will, Sir, says he, when I
have discovered them.' 'Pray Mr. Dean, says Dr. Delany, why will you be so
unpolite, as to suppose Mrs. P -- n has any Faults?' 'Why, I will tell you,
replied the Dean; whenever I see a Number of agreeable Qualities in any Person,
I am always sure, they have bad ones sufficient to poize the Scale.' I bowed,
and told the Dean, 'He did me great Honor:' And in this I copied Bishop
Berkley, whom I have frequently heard declare, 'That when any Speech was made
to him, which might be construed either into a Compliment, or an Affront, or
(that to make use of his own Word) had two Handles; he was so meek and so mild,
that he always took hold of the best.'

The Dean then asked me, 'If I was a Queen, what I should choose to have after
Dinner?' I answered, 'His Conversation;' 'Phooh! says he, I mean what Regale?'
'A Dish of Coffee, Sir;' 'Why then I will so far make you as happy as a Queen,
you shall have some in Perfection; for when I was Chaplain to the Earl of
Berkley, who was in the Government here, I was so poor, I was obliged to keep a
Coffee-house, and all the Nobility resorted to it to talk Treason:' I could not
help smiling at this Oddity, but I really had such an Awe on me, that I could
not venture to ask him, as I longed to do, what it meant? The Bottle and
Glasses being taken away, the Dean set about making the Coffee; but the Fire
scorching his Hand, he called to me to reach him his Glove, and changing the
Coffee-pot to his Left Hand, held out his Right one, ordered me to put the
Glove on it, which accordingly I did; when taking up Part of his Gown to fan
himself with, and acting in Character of a prudish Lady, he said, 'Well, I do
not know what to think; Women may be honest that do such Things, but, for my
Part, I never could bear to touch any Man's Flesh -- except my Husband's, whom
perhaps, says he, she wished at the Devil.

'Mr. P -- n, says he, you would not tell me your Wife's Faults; but I have
found her out to be a d -- ned, insolent, proud, unmannerly Slut:' I looked
confounded, not knowing what Offense I had committed. -- Says Mr. P -- n, 'Ay,
Sir, I must confess she is a little saucy to me sometimes, but -- what has she
done now?' 'Done! why nothing, but sat there quietly, and never once offered to
interrupt me in making the Coffee, whereas had I had a Lady of modern good
Breeding here, she would have struggled with me for the Coffee-pot till she had
made me scald myself and her, and made me throw the Coffee in the Fire; or
perhaps at her Head, rather than permit me to take so much trouble for her.'

This raised my Spirits and as I found the Dean always prefaced a Compliment
with an Affront, I never afterward was startled at the latter, (as too many
have been, not entering into his peculiarly ironical Strain) but was modestly
contented with the former, which was more than I deserved, and which the
Surprise rendered doubly pleasing.

By this Time, the Bell rang for Church; and Dr. Delany and Mr. P -- n, who
with myself were now all the Company, (for the rest departed before the Coffee
was out) were obliged to attend the Summons: But as there is no Service in the
Cathedral, but Evening-Prayer at Six o'Clock, I chose rather to attend the Dean
there, than go to hear another Sermon; by this means I had him all to myself
for near three Hours, during which Time he made me read to him the Annals of
the four last Years of the Reign of Queen Anne, written by himself; the
Intentions of which seemed to be a Vindication of the then Ministry and
himself, from having any Design of placing the Pretender on the Throne of
Great Britain: It began with a solemn Adjuration, that all the Facts therein
contained were Truth, and then proceeded in the Manner of Lord Clarendon, with
giving the particular Characters of every Person whom he should have occasion
to mention; amongst whom, I remember, he compared Lord Bollingbroke to
Petronius, one who agreeably mingled Business with Pleasure. At the Conclusion
of every Period, he demanded of me, 'Whether I understood it? For I would, says
he, have it intelligent to the meanest Capacity, and if you compreprehend it,
it is possible every Body may.' 'I bowed, and assured him I did.' And indeed it
was written with such Perspecuity and Elegance of Style, that I must have had
no Capacity at all, if I did not taste what was so exquisitely beautiful.

Mr. P -- n, when he was Chaplain to Alderman Barber, in the Year of his
Mayoralty, mentioned those Annals to Mr. Pope, who said he had dissuaded the
Dean from publishing them; as the Facts contained in them were notoriously
false. I was greatly astonished when Mr. P -- n told me this, nor could I tell
what to determine: It seemed strange to me, that a Person of the Dean's good
Sense and Veracity, should in the most solemn manner invocate the Almighty to
bear Testimony to Falsehoods, publicly known to be such. And yet as Mr. Pope was
in Prose a Man of unquestioned Probity, and united to the Dean in the strictest
Bonds of Friendship, and consequently, without doubt, well acquainted with the
Transactions of those Times, we can hardly suppose he would speak in the manner
he did, without just Grounds for so doing; and his Evidence seems strengthened
by his being of the Romish Religion, which must certainly incline him to wish
well to a Prince of the same Faith. However, upon the whole, I am inclined to
judge charitably of the Dean; and to believe, that though the Ministers
frequently employed him as a Writer, and entertained him as a Companion; yet
they had not let him into the Depth of their Designs, the Mystery of Iniquity!
So that what he relates in his Annals of the inviolable Attachment of those in
Power to the Hanover Succession and the Protestant Faith, might be by him
believed to be Truth: For who so wise but may be deceived? And perhaps Mr.
Pope's long and intimate Correspondence with Lord Bollingbroke gave him a
better Knowledge of what was really intended at that critical Juncture. Pardon
this Digression.

The Bell rang for Evening-Prayer, to which I accompanied the Dean. There is a
fine Organ in this Church, which, with its antique Magnificence and so
harmonious a Choir, brought Milton's Lines into my Mind: And let my due Feet
never fail
To walk the studious Cloisters pale,
And love the high embowed Roof,
With antique Pillars, massy Proof,
And story'd Windows richly dight,
Shedding a dim religious Light;
There let the pealing Organ blow
To the full-voic'd Choir below;
In Service high! and Anthem clear,
Which may with Pleasure through mine Ear,
Dissolve me into Ecstasies,
And bring all Heaven before my Eyes.


On our Return to the Deanery-house, we found there waiting our coming Dr.
Delany and Mr. Rochford, to whose Wife, A Letter of Advice to a new-married
Lady, (published since in the Dean's Works) was written, and which by the bye,
the Lady did not take as a Compliment, either to her or the Sex, Mr. P -- n,
Dr. Sheridan, Author of the Art of Punning, with two or three other Clergymen,
(who usually passed Sunday Evening with the Dean) Mr. P -- n and I were for
going Home, but the Dean told us, 'He gave us leave to stay to Supper;' which
from him was a sufficient Invitation. The Dean then pulled out of his Pocket, a
little Gold Runlet, in which was a Bottle-Screw, and opening a Bottle of Wine,
he decanted it off; the last Glass being muddy, he called to Mr. P -- n to
drink it: 'For, says he, I always keep some poor Parson to drink the foul Wine
for me:' Mr. P -- n, entering into his Humor, thanked him, and told him, 'He
did not know the Difference, but was glad to get a Glass at any rate:' 'Why
then, says the Dean, you shall not, for I Will drink it myself: Why, P -- x take
you, you are wiser than a paultry Curate, whom I asked to dine with me a few
Days ago; for upon my making the same Speech to him, he told me he did not
understand such Usage, and so walked off without his Dinner. By the same Token,
I told the Gentleman who recommended him to me, That the Fellow was a
Blockhead, and I had done with him.'

The Dean then missing his Golden Bottle-Screw, told me, very sternly, 'He was
sure I had stolen it:' I affirmed, very seriously, 'I had not:' Upon which he
looked for it, and found it where he himself had laid it; ''Tis well for you,
says he, that I have got it, or I would have charged you with Theft:' 'Why,
pray, Sir, should I be suspected more than any other Person in the Company?'
'For a very good Reason, says he, because you are the poorest.'

There now came in, to sup with the Dean, one of the oddest little Mortals I
ever met with: He formerly wrote the Gazetteer; and upon the Strength of being
an Author, and of having traveled, took upon him not only to dictate to the
Company, but to contradict whatever any other Person advanced Right or Wrong,
till he had entirely silenced them all: And then having the whole Talk to
himself, (for, to my great Surprise, the Dean neither interrupted nor showed
any Dislike of him) he told us a whole String of Improbabilities, such as,
'That each Pillar of St. Peter's at Rome took up more Ground than a Convent
which was near it, wherein were twelve Monks, with their Chapel, Garden, and
Infirmary.' By this Account, every Pillar must take up, at least, half an Acre,
and, considering the Number of them, we must conclude the Edifice to be some
Miles in Circumference. No one present had ever been at Rome, except himself,
so that he might tell us just what he thought proper.

I took notice, that before this dogmatical Gentleman the Dean was most
remarkably complaisant to Mr. P -- n and me, and at our going away, the Dean
would hand me down all the Steps to the Coach, thanking us for the Honor of
our Company, at the same time sliding into my Hand as much Money as Mr. P -- n
and I had given at the Offering in the Morning, and Coach-hire also, which I
durst not refuse, lest I should have been deemed as great a Blockhead as the
Parson, who refused the thick Wine.

It has been a Matter of Dispute amongst the Learned, whether England or
Ireland had the Honor of giving to the World this admirable Person; it is
probable Posterity may contend this Point, as warmly as the seven Cities of
Greece did the Birthplace of Homer: And though in reality, it is of no great
Importance where a Man is born; yet as the Irish are the eternal Ridicule of
the English for their Ignorance, I am proud Hibernia had the Happiness of
producing this brilliant Wit, to redeem the Credit of the Country; and to
convince the World, a Man may draw his first Breath there, and yet be learned,
wise, generous, religious, witty, social and polite.

The Account I have frequently heard the Dean give of himself, was, that he was
born in Hoey's-Alley, in Warburgh's Parish, Dublin; his Father was a Lawyer,
and returning from the Circuit, he unfortunately brought home the Itch with
him, which he had got by lying in some foul Bed on the Road. Somebody advised
him to use Mercury to cure it, which Prescription cost him his Life in a very
few Days after his Return. The Dean was a posthumous Son to this Gentleman,
but, as he said, came Time enough to save his Mother's Credit. He was given to
an Irish Woman to nurse, whose Husband being in England, and writing to her to
come to him; as she could not bear the Thoughts of parting with the Child, she
very fairly took him with her, unknown to his Mother, or any of his Relations,
who could learn no Tidings either of him or her for three Years; at the End of
which Time, she returned to Ireland, and restored the Child to his Mother, from
whom she easily obtained a Pardon, both on account of the Joy she conceived at
seeing her only Son again, when she had in a manner lost all Hope of it; as
also, that it was plain, the Nurse had no other Motive for stealing him, but
pure Affection, which the Women of I^land generally have in as eminent Degree,
for the Children they nurse, as for their own Offspring.

I believe the Dean's early Youth did not promise that bright Day of Wit which
has since enlightened the learned World. Whilst he was at the University of
Dublin, he was so far from being distinguished for any Superiority of Parts or
Learning, that he was stopped of his Degree as a Dunce. When I heard the Dean
relate this Circumstance, for I set down nothing but what I had from his own
Mouth, I told him, I supposed he had been idle; but he affirmed to the
contrary; assuring me, he was really dull, which, if true, is very surprising.

I have often been led to look on the World as a Garden, and the human Minds as
so many Plants, set by the Hand of the great Creator for Utility and Ornament.
Thus, some we see, early produce beautiful Blossoms, and as soon fade away;
others, whose Gems are more slow in unfolding, but more permanent, when blown;
and others again, who though longer in arriving at Perfection, not only bless us
then with Shade and Odor, but also with delicious wholesome Fruit. To go on
with the Allegory, we often hear from Children very bright Sallies of Wit, and
Reflections above their Years: From these hopeful Beginnings we are apt to
expect something very extraordinary in their Maturity, but how often are we
disappointed? How often do we see these sparkling Children dwindle gradually
into the most humdrum Men and Women, as if, to make use of the Florists Phrase,
the Blow was quite over; and some, whose Childhood has given no Presages of
great Talents, have improved every Year, till they have brought forth the
beautiful Flowers of Poetry and Rhetoric, and the rich Fruits of Wisdom and
Virtue.

Whether this Comparison will hold, I submit to the Judgment of those who are
better acquainted with the secret Workings of Nature, than I can presume to be.
I am afraid of going out of my Depth, and yet I have a great Inclination to say
a little more on this Subject.

I have known a Person, who in his Youth was an extraordinary Adept in Music,
and performed on several Instruments extremely well. I saw the same Person some
Years after; and lo! his musical Talent was entirely lost, and he was then a
very good Painter. Now I could not help forming a Notion in my own Mind, that
as our Ideas depend on the Fibers of the Brain, it was possible we might by the
continual Use of some particular one, weaken it so as to make it perish; and at
the same time, another might exert from that very Cause itself with double
Strength. Thus, I suppose, when this Gentleman's musical Fibers perished, his
painting ones shot forth with Vigor. If there be any Truth in this Whim of
mine, which, I own, I am fond of believing myself, we may easily account for
the various Dispositions which we meet with, even in the same Person at
different Periods of Life.

But to return. Although it is not in my Power to give a succinct Account of the
Dean's Life, neither have I any intention to attempt it, yet I believe I am
better qualified to do it, than most of those who have undertaken it, as they
were absolute Strangers to him, and relate Things upon Hearsay. The Dean, for
the latter Part of his Life, contracting his Acquaintance into a very narrow
Compass, for as he was frequently deaf, he thought this Infirmity made him
troublesome, and therefore kept no Company but such as he could be so free
with, as to bid them speak loud, or repeat what they had said; it was owing to
this, that Mr. P -- n and I frequently passed whole Days with him, while
Numbers of our betters were excluded; and as he was like another Nestor, full
of Days and Wisdom, so like him, he was pretty much upon the Narrative, than
which nothing could be more delightful to me, as Pleasure and Instruction
flowed from his Lips: His Words Drew Audience, and Attention still as Night
Or Summer's Noontide Air.
MIL.

I remember in one of these periodica^ Fits of Deafness, for they returned on
certain Seasons on him, he sent for me earl^ in the Morning; he told me when I
came he had found Employment for me; so he brought to me out of his Study a
large Book, very finely bound in Turkey Leather, and handsomely gilt; this,
says he, is a Translation of the Epistles of Horace, a Present to me from the
Author, it is a special good Cover! But I have a Mind there should be something
valuable within side of it; so taking out his Penknife, he cut out all the
Leaves close to the inner Margin. Now, says he, I will give these what they
greatly want, and put them all into the Fire. He then brought out two Drawers
filled with Letters: Your Task, Madam, is to paste in these Letters, in this
Cover, in the Order I shall give them to you; I intended to do it myself, but
that I thought it might be a pretty Amusement for a Child, so I sent for you. I
told him, I was extremely proud to be honored with his Commands: But, Sir, may
I presume to make a Request to you, yes, says he, but ten to one I shall deny
it. I hope not, Sir, it is this; may I have leave to read the Letters as I go
on? Why, provided you will acknowledge yourself amply rewarded for your
Trouble, I do not much care if I indulge you so far; but are you sure you can
read? I do not know, Sir, I will try. Well then begin with this: It was a
Letter from Lord Bolingbroke, dated six o'Clock in the Morning; it began with a
Remark, how differently that Hour appeared to him now rising cool, serene, and
temperate, to contemplate the Beauties of Nature, to what it had done in some
former Parts of his Life, when he was either in the midst of Excesses, or
returning Home sated with them; so he proceeded to describe the numberless
Advantages with which Temperance and Virtue bless their Votaries, and the
Miseries which attend a contrary Course. The Epistle was pretty long, and the
most refined Piece of moral Philosophy I ever met with, as indeed every one of
his were, and I had the unspeakable Delight of reading several of them.

Nor can I be at all surprised, that Mr. Pope should so often celebrate a
Genius, who, for Sublimity of Thought, and Elegance of Style, had few Equals.
The rest of the Dean's Correspondents were, the Lady Masham, the Earl of
Oxford, Dr. Atterbury, Bishop Burnet, Lord Bathurst, Mr. Addison, Archdeacon
Parnell, Mr. Congreve, Mr. Pultney, Mr. Pope, Mr. Gay, Dr. Arbuthnot; a noble
and a learned Set! So my Readers may judge what a Banquet I had. I could not
avoid remarking to the Dean, that notwithstanding the Friendship Mr. Pope
professed for Mr. Gay, he could not forbear a great many satirical, or, if I
may be allowed to say so, envious Remarks on the Success of the Beggar's Opera.
The Dean very frankly owned, he did not think Mr. Pope was so candid to the
Merits of other Writers, as he ought to be. I then ventured to ask the Dean,
whether he thought the Lines Mr. Pope addresses him with, in the Beginning of
the Dunciad, were any Compliment to him? viz. O thou! whatever Title please
thine Ear.
Dunciad.

'I believe, says he, they were meant as such; but they are very stiff;' --
'Indeed, Sir, said I, he is so perfectly a Master of harmonious Number, that
had his Heart been in the least affected with his Subject, he must have writ
better;' 'How cold, how forced, are his Lines to you, compared with yours to
him:' See Swift's Libel on Lord Carteret.
Hail happy Pope, whose generous Mind.


Here we see the masterly Poet, and the warm, sincere, generous Friend; while
he, according to the Character he gives of Mr. Addison, damns with faint
Praise. -- 'Well, replied the Dean, I will show you a late Letter of his to
me;' he did so; and I own I was surprised to find it filled with low and
ungentleman-like Reflections both on Mr. Gay and the two noble Persons who
honored him with their Patronage after his Disappointment at Court. 'Well,
Madam, said the Dean, what do you think of that Letter? (seeing I had gone
quite through it:) -- 'Indeed, Sir, returned I, I am sorry I have read it; for
it gives me Reason to think there is no such thing as a sincere Friend to be
met with in the World.' 'Why, replied he, Authors are as jealous of their
Prerogative as Kings, and can no more bear a Rival in the Empire of Wit, than a
Monarch could in his Dominions.' 'But, Sir, said I, here is a Latin Sentence
writ in Italics, which, I suppose, means something particular; will you be so
kind to explain it?' 'No, replied he, smiling, -- I will leave that for your
Husband to do; -- I will send for him to come and dine with us, and in the mean
time we will go and take a Walk in Naboth's Vineyard:' 'Where may that be,
pray, Sir?' -- 'Why a Garden -- I cheated one of my Neighbors out of.' -- When
we entered the Garden, or rather the Field, which was square, and enclosed with
a Stone Wall, the Dean asked me how I liked it? 'Why pray, said I, where is the
Garden?' 'Look behind you,' said he; I did so, and observed the South Wall was
lined with Brick, and a great Number of Fruit Trees planted against it, which
being then in Blossom, looked very beautiful. 'What are you so intent on, said
the Dean?' 'The opening Blooms, Sir, which brought Waller's Lines to my
Remembrance: -- Hope waits upon the flowery Prime.


'Oh! replied he, you are in a poetical Vein; I thought you had been taking
Notice of my Wall, it is the best in Ireland; when the Masons were building it,
(as most Tradesmen are Rogues) I watched them very close, and as often as they
could, they put in a rotten Stone, of which however, I took no Notice, till
they had built three or four Perches beyond it; now as I am an absolute Monarch
in the Liberties Liberties belonging to the Dean.
, and King of the Mob, my Way with them, was to have the Wall thrown down to
the Place where I observed the rotten Stone, and by doing so five or six Times,
the Workmen were at last convinced it was their Interest to be honest;' or
else, Sir, said I, your Wall 'would have been as tedious a Piece of Work as
Penelope's Web, if all that was done in the Day was to be undone at Night:'
'Well, answered he, I find you have Poetry for every Occasion; but as you
cannot keep Pace with me in walking; (for indeed I was not quite so light then,
as I had been some Months before) I would have you sit down on that little
Bank, till you are rested or I tired, to put us more upon a Par.'

I seated myself, and away the Dean walked, or rather trolled, as hard as ever
he could drive. I could not help smiling at his odd Gait, for I thought to
myself, he had written to so much in Praise of Horses, that he was resolved to
imitate them as nearly as he could: As I was indulging this Fancy, the Dean
returned to me, and gave me a strong Confirmation of his Partiality to those
Animals; 'I have been considering, Madam, as I walked, said he, what a Fool Mr.
P -- n was to marry you, for he could have afforded to keep a Horse for less
Money than you cost him, and that, you must confess, would have given him
better Exercise and more Pleasure than a Wife: -- Why you laugh, and do not
answer me -- is not it Truth?' 'I must answer you, Sir, with another Question;
Pray how can a Bachelor judge of this Matter?' 'I find, said he, you are vain
enough to give yourself the Preference:' 'I do, Sir, to that Species here, a
Huyoniam, I would, as becomes me, give Place to: But, Sir, it is going to
rain;' -- 'I hope not, said he, for that will cost me Sixpence for a Coach for
you, (this Garden being at some Distance from his House) come, haste: O how the
Tester trembles in my Pocket!' I obeyed, and we got in a Doors just Time enough
to escape a heavy Shower. 'Thank God, said the Dean, I have saved my Money;
here, you Fellow, (to his Servant) carry this Sixpence to the lame old Man
that sells Gingerbread at the Corner, because he tries to do something, and
does not beg.'

The Dean showed me into a little Street-Parlour, (where sat his Housekeeper, a
matron-like Gentlewoman at Work) 'Here, says he, Mrs. Brent, take Care of this
Child, meaning me) and see she does no Mischief, while I take my Walk out
within Doors:' The Deanery-House has I know not how many Pair of Back-Stairs in
it; the preceding Dean who built it being, it seems, extremely fearful of Fire,
was resolved there should be many Ways to escape in case of Danger.

The Dean then ran up the Great-Stairs, down one Pair of Back-Stairs, up
another, in so violent a Manner, that I could not help expressing my Uneasiness
to the good Gentlewoman, lest he should fall, and be hurted; she said, 'It was
a customary Exercise with him, when the Weather did not permit him to walk
abroad.'

I told Mrs. Brent, 'I believed the Dean was extremely charitable;' 'Indeed,
Madam, replied she, No body can be more so; his Income is not above six hundred
Pounds a Year, and every Year he gives above the Half of it in private Pensions
to decayed Families; besides this, he keeps five hundred Pounds in the constant
Service of the industrious Poor: This he lends out in five Pounds at a Time,
and takes the Payment back at twelve Pence a Week; this does them more Service,
than if he gave it to them entirely, as it obliges them to work, and at the
same Time keeps up this charitable Fund for the Assistance of many. You cannot
imagine what Numbers of poor Tradesmen, who have even wanted proper Tools to
carry on their Work, have by this small Loan, been put into a prosperous Way,
and brought up their Families in Credit. The Dean, added she, has found out a
new Method of being charitable, in which however, I believe, he will have but
few Followers; which is, to debar himself of what he calls the Superfluities of
Life, in order to administer to the Necessities of the Distressed; you just now
saw an Instance of it, the Money a Coach would have cost him, he gave to a poor
Man, unable to walk; when he dines alone, he drinks a Pint of Beer, and gives
away the Price of a Pint of Wine; and thus he acts in numberless Instances.'

My Reader will, I hope, do me the Justice to believe I was quite charmed with
this Account of the Dean's beneficent Spirit; and I no longer wondered so many
of the Clergy endeavored to depreciate him; for, as it is well known, there
are not, in the general, a more voluptuous Set of Men living, this Doctrine of
Self-denial. was enough to make them pour out all their Anathema's on him, and
brand him with the Name of Atheist, Unbeliever, and such like Terms, as they in
their Christian Zeal thought proper to bestow.

I before admired the Dean as a Person of distinguished Genius, but now I
learned to revere him as the Angel of Ireland. The Dean running into the
Parlour, threw a whole Packet of Manuscript Poems into my Lap, and so he did
for five or six Times successively, till I had an Apron full of Wit and
Novelty, (for they were all of his own Writing,) and such as had not then been
made public, and many of them, I believe, never will. Mr. P -- n coming,
according to the Dean's Desire, to Dinner, found me deeply engaged, and sat
down to partake of my Entertainment, till we were summoned to Table, to a less
noble Part. 'Well, Mr. P -- n, said the Dean, I hope you are jealous; I have
had your Wife a good many Hours, and as she is a likely Girl, and I a very
young Man, ( Note, he was upwards of Threescore) you do not know what may have
happened: Though I must tell you, you are very partial to her; for here I have
not been acquainted with her above six Months, and I have already discovered
two intolerable Faults in her; it is true, I looked sharp, or perhaps they might
have escaped my Notice: Nay, Madam, do not look surprised, I am resolved to
tell your Husband, that he may break you of them.' 'Indeed, Sir, returned I, my
Surprise is, that you have not found out two and fifty in half that time; but
let me know them, and I will mend of them, if I can.' 'Well put in, says he,
for I believe you cannot; but eat your Dinner, however, for they are not
capital.' I obeyed, yet was very impatient to know my particular Errors; he
told me, 'I should hear of them Time enough.'

The Things being taken away; 'Now, good Sir, said I, tell me what I do amiss,
that I may reform;' 'No, returned he; but I Will tell your Husband before your
Face to shame you the more: -- In the first Place, Mr. P -- n, she had the
insolence this Morning, not only to desire to read the Writings of the most
celebrated Genius's of the Age, in which I indulged her; but she must also,
forsooth, pretend to praise or censure them,' as if she knew something of the
Matter; indeed her Remarks were not much amiss, considering they were
Guess-Work; but this Letter here of Mr. Pope's she has absolutely condemned;
read it, (he did so;) take notice of it, said the Dean; she would also have had
me explain that Latin Sentence to her, but I had some Modesty, though she had
none you see.' 'Why, Sir, said I, sure Mr. Pope would not (especially to you)
write any thing which even a Virgin might not read.' Now, Mr. P -- n, 'said the
Dean, is her Curiosity at work; I Will be hanged if she lets you sleep tonight
till you have satisfied it. But this is not all; she had the Vanity to affirm,
that she thought herself preferable to a Horse, and more capable of giving you
pleasure: Nay, she laughed in my Face for being of a different Opinion; and
asked me how a Bachelor should know any thing of the Matter? If you don't take
down her Pride, there will be no bearing her.'

'Indeed, Sir, said Mr. P -- n, it is your Fault that she is so conceited; she
was always disposed to be saucy, but since you have done her the honor to take
notice of her, and make her your Companion, there is no such thing as
mortifying her.' 'Very fine, said the Dean, I have got much by complaining to
you, to have all your Wife's Faults laid at my Door.' 'Well, Sir, said I; all
these Misdemeanors may be included under the Article of Pride: Now, let me know
my other Crime:' 'Why, said he, you cannot walk fast; but at present, I excuse
you.' 'Well, Sir, if I cannot mend my Pride, I Will try to mend my Pace.' Mr. P --
n, said he, I 'have a mind to clip your Wife's Wit.' 'Indeed, Sir, said I,
that is Death by Law, for it is Sterling.' 'Shut up your Mouth, for all Day,
Letty, said Mr. P -- n, for that Answer is real Wit.' Nay, 'said the Dean, I
believe we had better shut up our own, for at this rate she will be too many for
us.' I am sure, if I was not proud before, this was enough to make me so.

The Dean guessed right, when he said, I would not let Mr. P -- n sleep till he
had explained to me the Latin Sentence in Mr. Pope's Letter; which, at my
Request, he did. And, indeed, none but such a wicked Wit could have contrived
to turn the Words of our blessed Savior, so as to make them convey a very
impure, as well as a most uncharitable, Idea to the Mind.

Feuds ran so high between my Mother and Mr. P -- n, that my Life became very
unhappy. So we determined to quit my Father's House for a little one of our
own, which my Husband's Father made us a Present of; and which, by the Bounty
of our Friends, who came a Housewarming to us, was soon elegantly furnished;
there was a large Garden to it, which Mr. P -- n laid out in a most beautiful
Taste, and built a delightful Summer House in it, fit indeed for a Nobleman;
here we usually entertained our Friends; here also we both invoked the Muse.
Mr. P -- n coming in Curate, (by the Removal of Dr. Owens to a Living, of whose
Behavior to me in my Misfortunes, I shall have occasion to speak) and by
having the Honor of being Chaplain to Lady Charlemont, with an annual
Allowance I had from my Father, our Income was about one hundred Pounds a Year;
so that having no Rent to pay, and having my Father's Coach and Table always at
our Command, we could, in so cheap a Country as Ireland, live in a very decent
Manner; as Dr. Swift mentions our doing in a Letter of his to Mr. Pope, now
published amongst others.

The Dean came to dine with us in our Lilliputian Palace, as he called it, and
who could have thought it? He just looked into the Parlour, and ran up into the
Garret, then into my Bedchamber and Library, and from thence down to the
Kitchen; and well it was for me that the House was very clean; for he
complimented me on it, and told me, 'That was his Custom; and that 'twas from
the Cleanliness of the Garret and Kitchen he judged of the good Housewifery of
the Mistress of the House; for no doubt, but a Slut would have the Rooms clean,
where the Guests were to be entertained.'

He really was sometimes very rude, even to his Superiors, of which the
following Story, related to me by himself, may serve as one Instance amongst a
thousand others.

The last time he was in London, he went to dine with the Earl of Burlington,
who was then but newly married. My Lord being willing, I suppose, to have some
Diversion, did not introduce him to his Lady, nor mention his Name: It Is to be
observed, his Gown was generally very rusty, and his Person no way
extraordinary. -- After Dinner, said the Dean, 'Lady Burlington, I hear you can
sing; sing me a Song.' The Lady looked on this unceremonious manner of asking a
Favor with Distaste, and positively refused him. He said, she should sing, or
he would make her. 'Why, Madam, I suppose you take me for one of your poor
paultry English Hedge Parsons; sing, when I bid you.' As the Earl did nothing
but laugh at this Freedom, the Lady was so vexed that she burst into Tears, and
retired.

His first Compliment to her, when he saw her again, was, 'Pray, Madam, are you
as proud and as ill-natured now, as when I saw you last?' To which she answered
with great good Humor, -- 'No, Mr. Dean; I Will sing for you, if you please.' --
From which time he conceived great Esteem for her. But who that knew him would
take offense at his Bluntness? It seems Queen Caroline did not, if we may
credit his own Lines, wherein he declares, That he With Princes kept a due
Decorum,
But never stood in Awe before 'em;
And to the present Queen, God bless her,
Would speak as free as to her Dresser;
She thought it his peculiar Whim,
Nor took it ill -- as come from him.
SWIFT, on his own Death.

I cannot recollect that ever I saw the Dean laugh; perhaps he thought it
beneath him; for when any Pleasantry passed, which might have excited it, he
used to suck in his Cheeks, as Folks do when they have a Plug of Tobacco in
their Mouths, to avoid Risibility. He frequently put me in mind of Shakespeare's
Description of Cassius: He is a great Discerner, and he looks
Quite through the Deeds of Men --
Seldom he smiles, and smiles in such a sort
As if he mocked himself, and scorned his Spirit,
That could be moved to smile at any thing.
JULIUS CAESAR.

As the Dean, and, after his Example, Mr. P -- n, were eternally satyrizing and
ridiculing the Female Sex; I had a very great inclination to be even with them,
and expose the Inconstancy of Men; and borrowing a Hint from a Story in the
Peruvian Tales, I formed from it the following Poem; and I hope it will be
acceptable to my fair Readers, as it is peculiarly addressed to them. The
STATUES: Or, the Trial of CONSTANCY. A TALE.
For the LADIES.
IN a fair Island in the Southern Main,
Blessed with indulgent Skies and kindly Rain;
A Princess lived, of Origin divine,
Of Bloom celestial, and Imperial Line.
In that sweet Season, when the mounting Sun
Prepares with Joy his radiant Course to run;
Led by the Graces, and the dancing Hours,
And wakes to Life the various Race of Flowers;
The lovely Queen forsook her shining Court,
For rural Scenes, and healthful sylvan Sport.
It so befell, that as in cheerful Talk,
Her Nymphs and she pursued their Evening Walk;
On the green Margin of the oozy Deep,
They found a graceful Youth dissolved in Sleep,
Whose Charms the Queen surveyed with fond Delight,
And hung enamored over the pleasing Sight:
By her Command, the Youth was strait conveyed,
And, sleeping, softly in her Palace laid.
Now ruddy Morning purpled over the Skies,
And beamy Light unsealed the Stranger's Eyes,
Who cried aloud, Ye Gods, unfold this Scene!
Where am I! What can all these Wonders mean?
Scarce had he spoke, when with officious Care,
Attendant Nymphs a fragrant Bath prepare;
He rose, he bathed, and on his lovely Head
Ambrosial Sweets, and precious Oil they shed:
To deck his polished Limbs, a Robe they brought,
In all the various Dies of Beauty wrought.
Then led him to the Queen, who on a Throne
Of burnished Gold, and beamy Diamonds shone:
But oh! what Wonder seized her beauteous Guest!
What Love, what Ecstasy, his Soul possessed!
Entranced he stood, and on his falt'ring Tongue
Imperfect Words, and half-form'd Accents hung:
Nor less the Queen the blooming Youth admired,
Nor less Delight and Love her Soul inspired.
O Stranger! said the Queen, if hither driven,
By adverse Winds, or sent a Guest from Heaven,
To me the wretched never sue in vain,
This fruitful Isle acknowledges my Reign,
Then speak thy Wishes, and thy Wants declare,
And no Denial shall attend your Prayer;
She paused and blushed, -- the Youth his Silence broke,
And kneeling thus the charming Queen bespoke:
O Goddess! for a Form so bright as thine,
Speaks thee descended of celestial Line;
Low at your Feet a prostrate King behold,
Whose faithless Subjects sold his Life for Gold;
I fly a cruel Tyrant's lawless Hand,
And Shipwreck drove my Vessel on your Strand.
But why do I complain of Fortune's Frowns?
Or what are Titles, Honors, Scepters, Crowns
To this sweet Moment? While in fond Amaze
On such transporting Excellence I gaze!
Such Symmetry of Shape! so fair a Face!
Such finished Excellence, such perfect Grace!
Hear then my only Wish, and oh! approve
The ardent Prayer which supplicates thy Love.
From Neptune know, O Prince, my Birth I claim,
Replies the Queen, and Lucida's my Name;
This Island, these attendant Nymphs he gave,
The fair-hair'd Daughters of the azure Wave!
But he whose Fortune gains me for a Bride
Must have his Constancy severely tried.
One Day each Moon am I compelled to go
To my great Father's watery Realms below,
Where coral Groves celestial red display,
And blazing Di'monds emulate the Day;
In this short Absence if your Love endures,
My Heart and Empire are for ever yours;
And hoary Neptune, to reward your Truth,
Shall crown you with immortal Bloom and Youth;
But instant Death will on your Falsehood wait,
Nor can my Tenderness prevent your Fate.
Twice twenty Times in Wedlock's sacred Band,
My royal Father joined my plighted Hand;
Twice twenty noble Youths, alas! are dead,
Who in my Absence stained the Nuptial Bed;
Your Virtues, Prince, may claim a nobler Throne,
But mine is yielded on these Terms alone.
Delightful Terms! replied the raptured Youth,
Accept my Constancy, my endless Truth,
Perfidious faithless Men! enraged, he cried,
They merited the Fate by which they died;
Accept a Heart incapable of Change,
Thy Beauty shall forbid Desire to range;
No other Form shall to mine Eye seem fair,
No other Voice attract my listening Ear,
No Charms but thine shall ever my Soul approve,
So aid thy Vot'ry, potent God of Love!
Now loud Applauses through the Palace ring,
The duteous Subjects hail their God-like King:
To feastful Mirth they dedicate the Day,
While tuneful Voices chant the nuptial Lay.
Love ditty'd Airs, hymn'd by the vocal Quire,
Sweetly attemper'd to the warbling Lyre;
But when the Sun descending sought the Main,
And low-brow'd Night assumed her silent Reign;
They to the Marriage Bed conveyed the Bride,
And laid the raptured Bridegroom by her Side.
Now rose the Sun, and with auspicious Ray,
Dispelled the dewy Mists, and gave the Day;
When Lucida, with anxious Care oppressed,
Thus waked her sleeping Lord from downy Rest:
Soul of my Soul, and Monarch of my Heart,
This Day, she cried, this fatal Day we part;
Yet if your Love uninjur'd you retain,
We soon shall meet in Happiness again,
To part no more; but rolling Years employ'
In circling Bliss, and never fading Joy:
Alas! my boding Soul is lost in Woe,
And from mine Eyes the Tears unbidden flow.
Joy of my Life, dismiss those needless Fears,
Replied the King, and stay those precious Tears;
Should lovely Venus leave her native Sky,
And at my Feet, imploring Fondness, lie,
Even she, the radiant Queen of soft Desires,
Should, disappointed, burn with hopeless Fires.
The Heart of Man the Queen's Experience knew
Perjured and false, yet wished to find him true:
She sighed retiring, and in Regal State,
The King conducts her to the Palace Gate;
Where sacred Neptune's crystal Chariot stands,
The wondrous Work of his celestial Hands:
Six harnessed Swans the bright Machine convey
Swift through the Air, or pathless watery Way;
The Birds with eagle-speed, the Air divide,
And plunge the Goddess in the sounding Tide.
Slow to the Court the pensive King returns,
And sighs in secret, and in Silence mourns;
So in the Grove sad Philomel complains
In mournful Accents, and melodious Strains:
Her plaintive Woes fill the resounding Lawn,
From starry Vesper to the rosy Dawn.
The King, to mitigate his tender Pain,
Seeks the Apartment of the Virgin Train,
With sportive Mirth sad Absence to beguile,
And bid the melancholy Moments smile;
But there deserted lonely Rooms he found,
And solitary Silence reigned around.
He called aloud, when, lo! a Hag appears,
Bending beneath Deformity and Years,
Who said, my Liege, explain your sacred Will,
With Joy your Sovereign Purpose I fulfill.
My Will! detested Wretch! avoid my Sight,
And hide that hideous Shape in endless Night.
What! does thy Queen, o'er-run with rude Distrust,
Resolve by Force to keep a Husband just?
You wrong, replied the Hag, your royal Wife,
Whose Care is Love, and Love to guard your Life.
The Race of Mortals are by Nature frail,
And strong Temptations with the Best prevail.
Be that my Care, he said, be thine to send
The Virgin Train, let them my Will attend.
The Beldam fled -- The cheerful Nymphs advance,
And tread to measured Airs the mazy Dance;
The raptured Prince with greedy Eye surveys
The bloomy Maids, and covets still to gaze;
No more recals the Image of his Spouse,
How false is Man! nor recollects his Vows;
With wild Inconstancy for all he burns,
And every Nymph subdues his Heart by turns.
At length a Maid superior to the rest,
Arrayed in Smiles, in Virgin Beauty dressed,
Received his Passion, and returned his Love,
And softly wooed him to the silent Grove.
Enclosed in deepest Shades of fullgrown Wood,
Within the Grove a spacious Grotto stood,
Where forty Youths, in Marble, seemed to mourn,
Each Youth reclining on a funeral Urn:
Thither the Nymph directs the Monarch's Way,
He treads her Footsteps, joyful to obey.
There, fired with Passion, clasped her to his Breast,
And thus the Transport of his Soul confessed.
Delightful Beauty! decked with every Charm
High Fancy paints! or glowing Love can form!
I sigh, I gaze, I tremble, I adore!
Such lovely Looks never blessed my Sight before!
Here, under covert of the imbow'ring Shade,
For Love's Delights and tender Transports made,
No busy Eye our Raptures to detect,
No envious Tongue to censure or direct;
Here yield to Love, and tenderly employ
The silent Season in extatic Joy.
With Arms enclosed, his Treasure to retain,
He sighed and wooed, but wooed and sighed in vain:
She rushed indignant from his fond Embrace,
While Rage with Blushes paints her Virgin Face;
Yet still he sues with suppliant Hands and Eyes,
While she to Magic Charms for Vengeance flies.
A limpid Fountain murmured through the Cave;
She filled her Palm with the translucent Wave,
And sprinkling cried, Receive false Man, in Time,
The just Reward of thy detested Crime.
Thy changeful Sex in Perfidy delight,
Despise Perfection, and fair Virtue slight,
False, fickle, base, tyrannic, and unkind,
Whose Hearts, nor Vows can chain, nor Honor bind:
Mad to possess, by Passion blindly led;
And then as mad to stain the nuptial Bed:
Whose roving Souls no Excellence, no Age,
No Form, no Rank, no Beauty, can engage;
Slaves to the Bad, to the Deserving worst,
Sick of your twentieth Love, as of your first.
The Statues, which this hallowed Grot adorn,
Like thee were Lovers, and like thee forsworn;
Whose faithless Hearts no Kindness could secure,
Nor for a Day preserve their Passion pure;
Whom neither Love, nor Beauty could restrain,
Nor Fear of endless Infamy and Pain.
In me behold thy Queen; for know with Ease
We Deities assume each Form we please;
Nor can the feeble Ken of mortal Eyes
Perceive the Goddess through the dark Disguise.
Now feel the Force of Heaven's avenging Hand,
And here inanimate for ever stand.
She spoke -- Amazed the listening Monarch stood,
And icy Horror froze his ebbing Blood;
Thick Shades of Death upon his Eyelids creep,
And closed them fast in everlasting Sleep;
No Sense of Life, no Motion he retains,
But fixed, a dreadful Monument remains;
A STATUE now, and if revived once more,
Would prove, no doubt, as perjured as before.


I doubt not but the World will expect to hear from me some of the Dean's
Amors, as he has not quite escaped Censure, on account of his Gallantries; but
here I am not able to oblige my Reader, he being too far advanced in Years,
when I first had the honor of being known to him, for Amusements of that kind.
I make no doubt but he has often been the Object of Love, and his Cadenus and
Vanessa seem to assure us, that he was the Favorite of one Lady; but to speak
my Sentiments, I really believe it was a Passion he was wholly unacquainted
with, and which he would have thought it beneath the Dignity of his Wisdom to
entertain. Not that I ever imagined he was an Enemy to the Fair; for when he
found them docile, he took great pleasure to instruct them: And if I have any
Merit, as a Writer, I must gratefully acknowledge it due to the pains he took
to teach me to think and speak with Propriety; though, to tell the Truth, he was
a very rough sort of a Tutor for one of my Years and Sex; for whenever I made
use of an inelegant Phrase, I was sure of a deadly Pinch, and frequently
received Chastisement before I knew my Crime. However I am convinced, had he
thought me incorrigibly dull, I should have escaped without Correction; and the
black and blue Favors I received at his Hands, were meant for Merit, though
bestowed on me. Yet though, to my Shame I own it, I was fond of Admiration to a
Fault, and a little too much upon the Coquette, for a married Woman, I would at
any Time give up any Pleasure or Gaity, for the more rationaln Etertainment of
the Dean's Conversation.

Five Years rolled insensibly away in a Kind of tolerable Happiness, as Lady
Townly terms it; but that it seems, I was not much longer to enjoy: However,
before I begin to speak of Offense and Trouble, I shall endeavor to enliven my
Narration with all the little amusing Incidents I can possibly recollect.

The following Trifle, as it was productive of a handsome Letter to me from the
Dean, and of more Honor than I could possibly expect from it, my Vanity will
not let me omit. My Brother teized me one Evening to write some Verse as a
School Exercise for him, I asked him what I should write upon; Why, said he
pertly, what should you write upon but the Paper? So taking it for my Subject,
I wrote the following Lines. O spotless Paper, fair and white!
On whom, by Force, constrained I write,
How cruel am I to destroy,
Thy Purity, to please a Boy?
Ungrateful I, thus to abuse
The fairest Servant of the Muse.
Dear Friend, to whom I often impart,
The choicest Secrets of my Heart;
Ah, what Atonement can be made
For spotless Innocence betrayed?
How fair, how lovely did thou show,
Like lilly'd Banks, or falling Snow!
But now, alas, become my Prey,
No Floods can wash thy Stains away.
Yet this small Comfort I can give,
That which destroyed, shall make thee live.


As the Lines did not suit my Brother's Purpose, they lay carelessly on the
Table, when a Lady of Distinction, who was going to England, came to take her
leave of us: She would examine what I had been scribbling, and seemed so well
pleased with my Rhymes, that she did them the Honor to put them in her
Pocketbook, and I never thought more of them.

About four Years after this, making a Visit to Baron Wainwright's Lady, she
told me, she had got a very pretty Poem from London, wrote by the Lord
Chancellor Talbot's Daughter, a young Lady of but twelve Years of Age, and
desired I would read them for the Good of the Company; but how great was my
Surprise, to find they were the above Lines! however, I went through my Task,
and Mrs. Wainwright asked my Opinion of them, and seemed impatient at my
Silence. I told her, the young Lady must have wrote them at least four Years
before, because I had seen them so long ago. Upon which the Baron said, that he
also remembered them, and that he was told by the Person he saw them with, that
they were writ by a very young Girl, who was married to a Clergyman in Ireland.
My smiling made them guess at the Person, and at the same Time excused me for
being not over forward to praise them. When I returned home, I found a Letter
from Mr. P -- n, who was in London, with a News Paper enclosed, wherein the
above Poem was printed. I related this to the Dean, who ordered me to send the
Lines to him. The next Morning a Lady came to visit me, who told me, it being
the Dean's Birthday, he had received a Book very richly bound and clasped with
Gold, from the Earl of Orrery, with a handsome Poem, wrote by himself to the
Dean, in the first Page, the rest being blank; and that Dr. Delany had sent him
a silver Standish, with a complimentary Poem. 'Why then, said I, as the Dean is
furnished with Paper and Ink, it is the least I can do to send him a Pen;' so
having a fine Eagle's Quill, I wrapped it into the following Lines, and sent it
to the Dean, and also the Bit of a News Paper, wherein the Lines on PAPER were
printed in London. Sent with a QUILL to Dr. SWIFT, upon hearing he had received
a BOOK and a STANDISH.
SHALL then my Kindred all my Glory claim,
And boldly rob me of eternal Fame?
To every Art my generous Aid I lend,
To Music, Painting, Poetry, a Friend.
It Is I celestial Harmony inspire,
Quills of the Harpsichord.
When fixed to strike the sweetly warbling Wire;
I to the faithful Canvas have consigned,
Each bright Idea of the Painter's Mind;
Behold from Raphael's sky-dipt Pencils rise,
Such heavenly Scenes as charm the Gazers Eyes.
O let me now aspire to higher Praise!
Ambitious to transcribe your deathless Lays;
Nor thou, immortal Bard, my Aid refuse,
Accept me as the Servant of your Muse;
Then shall the World my wondrous Worth declare,
And all Mankind your matchless Pen revere.


On New-Year's-Day I received from the Dean the following Letter.
Deanery-House, Jan. 1. 1733-4. Madam,
I Send you your Bit of a News-paper with the Verses, than which I never saw
better in their Kind; I have the same Opinion of those you were pleased to
write upon me, as have also some particular Friends of Genius and Taste, to
whom I ventured to communicate them, who universally agree with me. But as I
cannot with Decency show them except to a very few, I hope, for both our Sakes,
others will do it for me. I can only assure you I value your Present, as much
as either of the others, only you must permit it to be turned into a Pen, which
Office I will perform with my own Hand, and never permit any other to use it. I
heartily wish you many happy New Years, and am with true Esteem,

Madam, Your most obliged Friend and Servant, J. SWIFT,




But as I have mentioned Mr. P -- n's being in London, I ought also to inform
my Reader what Inducement he had to quit his Family for a whole Year, which was
as follows. Dr. Swift had, in Queen Anne's Reign, been the first Promoter of
Alderman Barber, who afterward by many lucky Accidents rose to be Lord Mayor
of London, which Station he filled with distinguished Abilities, and retained
so grateful a Sense of the Dean's Fa^ur to him, that he made him the Compliment
of nominating a Chaplain to him; the Dean offered this Honor to Mr. P -- n,
who gladly accepted of it, and came home in high Spirits to acquaint me with
his Preferment; but whatever Joy it brought to him, I was quite sunk in Sorrow
at the Thoughts of parting for so long a Time with one I so dearly loved. All
his Friends were against his going; and the late Primate Dr. Hoadly, then
Archbishop of Dublin, remonstrated to him, that serving under a Person so
remarkably disaffected as the Alderman, might very probably prejudice him in
the Eyes of the Government; but all in vain. Mr. P -- n was ever rash,
obstinate, and self-willed; and should I add treacherous, cruel, and
ungrateful, I should not wrong the Truth; but however unwilling I am to speak
harshly of the Husband of my Youth, and the Father of my Children, I must draw
his Character, wherein I will -- Nothing extenuate,
Nor set down aught in Malice.
Othello.

That he is both a Scholar, and a Man of Genius, all who know him must allow;
but like Mr. Pope he is so plagued with Envy, that he even hated me because I
could write, and took an invincible Aversion to Counselor Smith, because he
excelled him on the Harpsichord. It happened one Evening that this Gentleman
sung and played to us the Oratorio of Queen Esther; unfortunately for me I was
so charmed with it, that at the Conclusion of the Music I wrote the following
Lines. To JOHN SMITH, Esquire
MUSIC once more her ancient Power displays,
Resistless now, as in Timotheus' Days;
Our varied Passions change at thy Command
Our correspondent Hearts obey thy Hand.
Who can untouched attend the awful Sound?
When swelling Notes proclaim Jehovah crowned.
Borne on the hallowed Strains our Souls arise,
Till Heaven seems present to our ravished Eyes.
When to its Source thy Soul shall wing its Flight,
And with eternal Harmony unite,
Thy skilful Hand shall heavenly Joys improve,
And add new Rapture to the Bliss above.


As the Lines were wrote off-hand, as, to say the Truth, every Thing of mine
is, for I am too volatile to revise or correct any thing I write, Mr. Smith
complimented Mr. P -- n on having a Wife who could write better than himself,
he supposing Mr. P -- n to be so much the Lover, that he would be delighted
with my Praise, and join in it. But, lack-a-day! he little knew what I was to
suffer for the Superiority of Genius he was pleased to ascribe to me. I then
was continually told with a contemptuous jibing Air, O my Dear! a Lady of your
Accomplishments! why Mr. Smith says you write better than I; and to be sure he
is a great Judge! But another unlucky Accident likewise happened: How fatal to
me has Praise been! We supped at the Dean's, and I had been reading out, by his
Command, some of his prosaic Work; he was pleased to say I acquitted myself so
well, that I should have a Glass of his best Wine, and sent Mr. P -- n to the
Cellar for it. The Dean in the mean Time said to me, 'I would have every Man
write his own English.' 'To be sure, Sir, said I, that would be best.' 'Ay, to
be sure, Sir; you give me an Answer, and P -- x take you, I am sure you do not
understand my Meaning.' 'Very possible, Sir; but I certainly understand my own,
when I have any.' 'Well then, what do you understand by writing one's own
English?' 'Why really, Sir, not to confine one's self to a Set of Phrases, as
some of our ancient English Historians, Camden in particular, seems to have
done, but to make use of such Words as naturally occur on the Subject.' 'Hush!
says he, your Husband is coming; I will put the same Question to him.' He did
so; and Mr. P -- n answered, 'To be sure a Man ought to write good English.'
'Nay, but his own English; I say his own; what do you understand by that?'
'Why, Sir, said he, what should I understand?' 'P -- x on you for a Dunce, said
he; were your Wife and you to sit for a Fellowship, I would give her one sooner
than admit you a Sizar.'

And now my Business was completely done. Mr. P -- n viewed me with scornful,
yet with jealous Eyes. And though I never presumed to vye with him for
Preeminence, well knowing he not only surpassed me in natural Talents, but also
had the Advantage of having those Talents improved by Learning; and was
sensible the Compliments I received were rather paid to me as a Woman, in whom
any thing a Degree above Ignorance appears surprising, than to any Merit I
really possessed; he thought proper to insult me every Moment. Indeed he did
not beat me, which some of the good-natured Ladies have brought as an Argument
that he was an excellent Husband; but how a Clergyman should strike a Wife, who
never contradicted him, and who was the most remarkably gentle, even of her own
soft Sex, I know not. Besides, I had then a dear and honored Father to protect
me. I am sure I may say with Ophelia, My Violets all withered when he died.
Then was I left defenseless to all the Injuries my Husband's subtle Cruelty
could devise against open unsuspecting Innocence.

Another trivial Accident also offended my Husband. He was one Winter's Evening
reading Horace, and said he would engage to write an Ode exactly in his Manner;
so he directly set about it. The Fancy came into my Head to write one also,
though I understood not a Word of Latin, nor knew no more of the Poet than from
the English Translations. My Lines were as follow: An ODE.
I Envy not the Proud their Wealth,
Their Equipage and State;
Give me but Innocence and Health,
I ask not to be great.
I in this sweet Retirement find
A Joy unknown to Kings,
For Scepters to a virtuous Mind,
Seem vain and empty Things.
Great Cincinnatus at his Plough,
With brighter Luster shone,
Than guilty Caesar ever could show,
Though seated on a Throne.
Tumultuous Days, and restless Nights,
Ambition ever knows,
A Stranger to the calm Delights
Of Study and Repose.
Then free from Envy, Care, and Strife,
Keep me, ye Powers divine;
And pleased, when ye demand my Life,
May I that Life resign.


As I had finished my Task first, I showed it to Mr. P -- n, who, contrary to
my Expectation, (for I imagined he would be pleased) was very angry, and told
me the Dean had made me mad, that the Lines were Nonsense, and that a Needle
became a Woman's Hand better than a Pen and Ink. So to bring him into Temper I
praised his Ode highly, and threw my own into the Fire. And here let me
seriously advise every Lady, who has the Misfortune to be poetically turned,
never to marry a Poet, but remember Swift's Lines: What Poet would not grieve
to see
His Friends could write as well as he;
And rather than be thus outdone,
He Would hang them every Mother's Son.
Her End when Emulation misses,
She turns to Envy, Stings and Hisses;
The strongest Friendship yields to Pride,
Unless the Odds be on our Side.


And if a Man cannot bear his Friend should write, much less can he endure it
in his Wife; it seems to set them too much upon a Level with their Lords and
Masters; and this I take to be the true Reason why even Men of Sense
discountenance Learning in Women, and commonly choose for Mates the most
illiterate and stupid of the Sex; and then bless their Stars their Wife is not
a Wit.

But if a Remark be true, which I have somewhere read, that a foolish Woman
never brought forth a wise Son, I think the Gentlemen should have some Regard
to the Intellects of those they espouse.

But to return from this long though necessary Digression, and take things a
little more in their Order. Mr. P -- n, contrary to every body's Advice, who
had any Regard for him, went for England. I was very desirous of going with
him; but he told me plainly he did not want such an Encumbrance as a Wife, and
that he did not intend to pass there for a married Man; and that in short he
could not taste any Pleasure where I was. As this was a Secret I did not know
before, I received it with Astonishment; for amidst all his wayward Moods, I
ever imagined till then that he loved me, and that the many ill natured
Speeches he made me were rather the Effect of a bad Temper, than any settled
Aversion he had taken against me; especially as I observed he treated every
body with Contempt, even Persons every Way superior to him (the Dean alone
excepted, to whom he paid even a servile Complaisance.) And though he now fairly
plucked off the Mask, and let me see my Mistake, I could hardly give him
Credit; so unwilling are we to believe Truth, when it runs counter to our
Wishes.

The next Day he went on board the Yacht in Company with Mr. Edward Walpole, to
whom he was recommended by a Man of Quality since dead, and left me and my
three Children almost without an Adieu: So eagerly did he seek his own
Destruction.

I am hardly able to describe the various Emotions with which my Heart was
agitated on his Departure. Love, Grief, and Resentment for his last Speech, by
Turns possessed it. However, I received a very kind Letter from him from
Chester, which made me a little easy; and as my Friends seldom permitted me to
be alone, I did not give much way to Melancholy.

I believe it will be expected from the general Reflections I have thrown out
against the Clergy, that I should descend to Particulars, and expose by Name
the Guilty; but this invidious Task I must decline: Besides, as Angelo says in
Measure for Measure, when he is tempting a Virgin, and she threatens to expose
him; Who will believe thee, Isabel?
My unsoil'd Name, the Austereness of my Life,
My Interest in the State, may vouch against you,
That you shall stifle in your own Report,
And smell of Calumny.
Besides, I should arm a formidable Body against me, who would not fail, sooner
or later, to take ample Vengeance. As unforgiving as a Churchman, is become
proverbial; so, as I am a Sort of a Priestess, I will, like a faithful
Mother-Confessor, keep the Secrets of my ghostly Brethren.

I have another Inducement to Silence, not I must own quite so good-natured,
which is, that I have a malignant Pleasure in keeping those in Awe, who awe all
the World beside, which I should lose the Moment I had done my worst. I
remember a certain Gentleman, who happening to be guilty of a venial
Transgression with a mean Woman, it unluckily manifested itself: The Gentleman
was young, and had a very severe Father, who gave him but a scanty Allowance,
all of which did not satisfy the mercenary Wretch of a Woman, who hoping to
gain more, went and told her Story to his Father; the Consequence of which was,
that she never afterward had a Shilling from either. The dullest Genius cannot
fail,
To take the Moral of the Tale.
So let the stricken Deer go weep,
The Heart ungall'd go play.


The Innocent cannot take Offense, and for the Guilty, I will for the present
with the charitable Ghost in Hamlet, Leave them to Heaven,
And to the Thorn that in their Bosoms lodge,
To prick and goad them there.


But once more to gather up my Clue. I received so passionately tender a Letter
from London from Mr. P -- n, that I quite forgot all his Unkindness; and
sitting down to answer it, without the least Intention of Rhyming, the
following Lines flowed from my Pen: These Lines, dear Partner of my Life,
Come from a tender faithful Wife;
Happy, when you her Thoughts approve,
Supremely happy in your Love:
O may the blissful Flame endure!
Uninjur'd, lasting, bright, and pure.
Thus far in Verse, but can the Muse
Descend so low as telling News?
Or can I easily in Rhyme
Inform you how I pass my Time?
To sooth my Woe, and banish Care,
I to the Theater repair,
Where, charmed with Shakespeare's lofty Scenes,
And pure inimitable Strains,
My Rapture raised so high appears,
It seeks to hide itself in Tears.
On Tuesday last all Day I strayed
In Delville's sweet inspiring Shade;
There all was easy, gay, polite,
The Weather and the Guests were bright:
My loved Constantia there appeared,
And Southern long for Wit revered,
Who like the hoary Pylian Sage,
Excels in Wisdom, as in Age
It Is thus your Absence I beguile,
And try to make Misfortune smile;
But never can my constant Mind
A real Pleasure hope or find,
Till Heaven indulgently once more
My Colin to my Eyes restore.
P. S.
Permit me here ever I conclude
To pay a Debt of Gratitude;
To Worsdale, your ingenious Friend,
My Praises, and my Thanks commend;
Yet all are far beneath his Due,
Who sends me My Husband's Picture.
what resembles you.


The Dean had given Mr. P -- n Letters of Recommendation to several eminent
Persons in England, and amongst the rest, one to Mr. Pope; who, no sooner
received it, but he invited Mr. P -- n to pass a Fortnight with him at
Twickenham, he not being yet entered on his Office of Chaplain. I received from
him from thence a Letter filled with Mr. Pope's Praises, and the extraordinary
Regard he showed him, introducing him to several Noblemen, and even oppressing
him with Civilities, which he modestly attributed to Mr. Pope's Respect for the
Dean, and handsomely acknowledged the Obligation. As I thought this a very
proper Letter to communicate, I went directly with it to the Deanery. The Dean
read it over with a fixed Attention, and returning it to me, he told me, he
had, by the same Packet, received a Letter from Mr. Pope, which, with somewhat
of a stern Brow, he put into my Hand, and walked out into the Garden. I was so
startled at his Austerity, that I was for some Minutes unable to open it, and
when I did, the Contents greatly astonished me. The Substance of it was, that
he had, in pure Complaisance to the Dean, entertained Mr. P -- n; but that he
was surprised he should be so mistaken, to recommend him as a modest ingenious
Man, who was a most forward, shallow, conceited Fellow: That in the Hope of
having an agreeable Companion, he had invited him to pass a Fortnight with him,
which he heartily repented, being sick of his Impertinence, before the End of
the third Day; and a great deal more, much to the same Purpose. By the time I
had read it through, the Dean returned, and asked me, what I thought of it? I
told him, I was sure Mr. P -- n did not deserve the Character Mr. Pope had
given of him; and that he was highly ungenerous to caress and abuse him at the
same time. Upon this the Dean lost all Patience, and flew into such a Rage,
that he quite terrified me; he asked me, Why I did not swear that my Husband
was six Foot high? And, Did I think myself a better Judge than Mr. Pope? or,
Did I presume to give him the Lie? and a thousand other Extravagancies. As I
durst not venture to speak a Word more, my Heart swelled so that I burst into
Tears, which, he attributing to Pride and Resentment, made him, if possible,
ten times more angry, and I am not sure he would not have beat me; but that,
fortunately for me, a Gentleman came to visit him. As I was in a violent
Passion of Tears, the Dean did not bring him into the Room where I was, but
went to receive him in another, and I gladly laid hold of that opportunity of
making my escape from his Wrath.

The next Morning early I wrote him a Letter, expressive of the Anxiety I was
under, lest I had any way offended him; and assured him, which was Truth, my
Tears did not flow from Pride, but from the Apprehension I had, that Mr. Pope
might influence him to withdraw his Favor from us. I added on my own Part,
that even if I was partial to Mr. P -- n, I hoped it was the most pardonable
Error a Wife could be guilty of; and concluded with begging, if he had any
Regard for my Peace, he would honor me with an Answer. By the Return of the
Messenger I received the following Lines: Madam,
YOU must shake off the Leavings of your Sex. If you cannot keep a Secret, and
take a Chiding, you will quickly be out of my Sphere. Corrigible People are to
be chid; those who are otherwise, may be very safe from any Lectures of mine: I
should rather choose to indulge them in their Follies, than attempt to set them
right. I desire you may not inform your Husband of what has passed, for a
Reason I shall give you when I see you, which may be this Evening, if you will,
I am very sincerely,

Your Friend, J. SWIFT.




Accordingly I waited on the Dean about five o'Clock in the Evening, an Hour I
knew he would be free from Company. He received me with great Kindness, and
told me, he would write a Letter of Advice to Mr. P -- n; 'But, said he, should
you acquaint him with this Letter of Pope's, he might, perhaps, resent it to
him, and make him an Enemy.' How kind! how considerate was this! The Dean then
showed me the Poem he wrote on his own Death; when I came to that Part of it,
Behold the fatal Day arrive!
How is the Dean? He Is just alive.
I was so sensibly affected, that my Eyes filled with Tears: The Dean observing
it, said, 'Phoo, I am not dead yet -- but you shall not read any more now.' I
then earnestly requested he would let me take it home with me, which he did on
certain Conditions, which were, that I should neither show it to any body, nor
copy it, and that I should send it to him by Eight o'Clock the next Morning;
all which I punctually performed.

But the Dean did not know what sort of a Memory I had, when he entrusted me
with his Verse: I had no occasion for any other Copy, than what I had registered
in the Book and Volume of my Brain: I could repeat the whole Poem, and could
not forbear delighting some particular Friends with a Rehearsal of it. This
reached the Dean's Ear, who imagined I played him false, and sent for me to come
to him. When I entered, he told me, I had broke my Word with him, and
consequently forfeited all the good Opinion he had ever conceived of me. I
looked, as I think he generally made me do, like a Fool; I asked what I had
done? He told me, I had copied his Poem, and shown it round the Town. I assured
him, I had not. He said I lied, and produced a Poem something like it,
published in London, and told me, from reading it about, that odd Burlesque on
it had taken rise. He bade me read it, aloud. I did so, and could not forbear
laughing, as I plainly perceived, though he had endeavored to disguise his
Style, that the Dean had burlesqued himself; and made no manner of scruple to
tell him so. He pretended to be very angry, asked me, did I ever know him write
Triplets? and told me, I had neither Taste nor Judgment, and knew no more of
Poetry than a Horse. I told him I would confess it, provided he would seriously
give me his Word, he did not write that Poem. He said, P -- x take me for a
Dunce. I then assured him, I did not copy his Poem; but added, when I read any
thing peculiarly charming, I never forgot it; and that I could repeat not only
all his Works, but all Shakespeare's, which I put to this Trial; I desired him
to open any Part of it, and read a Line, and I would engage to go on with the
whole Speech; as we were in his Library, he directly made the Experiment: The
Line he first gave me, he had purposely picked out for its singular Oddness:
But rancours in the Vessel of my Peace.
Macbeth. I readily went on with the whole Speech, and did so several times,
that he tried me with different Plays. The Dean then took down Hudibras, and
ordered me to examine him in it, as he had done me in Shakespeare; and, to my
great Surprise, I found he remembered every Line, from Beginning to End of it.
I say, it surprised me, because I had been misled by Mr. Pope's Remark, That
where Beams of warm Imagination play,
The Memory's soft Figures melt away.
Essay on Criticism. To think Wit and Memory incompatible things. I told the
Dean he had convinced me the old Proverb was false; and, indeed, I know not how
any Person can be witty without a good Memory. When I returned home, I found I
had not been mistaken in the Opinion I had conceived, that the Dean had
burlesqued his own Poem. I had a Confirmation of it in a Letter from Mr. P --
n, to whom he had sent it, to have it printed in London.

My Evening's Chat with the Dean furnished me with Matter of Speculation on
that most amazing Faculty of the human Mind, Memory; which, according to my
usual Custom, I threw into Rhyme, and hope it will not be displeasing to my
Reader. MEMORY, a POEM.
IN what Recesses of the Brain,
Does this amazing Power remain,
By which all Knowledge we attain?
What art thou, Memory? What Tongue can tell,
What curious Artist trace thy hidden Cell,
Wherein ten thousand different Objects dwell?
Surprising Storehouse! in whose narrow Womb,
All Things, the past, the present, and to come,
Find ample Space, and large and mighty Room.
O falsely deemed the Foe of sacred Wit!
Thou, who the Nurse and Guardian art of it,
Laying it up till Season due and fit.
Then proud the wondrous Treasure to produce,
As Understanding points it, to conduce
Either to Entertainment, or to Use.
Nor Love, nor holy Friendship, without thee,
Could ever of the least Duration be;
Nor Gratitude, nor Truth, nor Piety.
Where thou art not, the chearless human Mind
Is one vast Void, all darksome, sad and blind;
No Trace of any thing remains behind.
The sacred Stores of Learning all are thine;
It Is only thou record'st the faithful Line;
It Is thou make Human-kind almost divine.
And when at length we quit this mortal Scene,
Thou still shall with our tender Friends remain,
And Time and Death shall strike at thee in vain.
Lord, let me so this wondrous Gift employ;
It may a Fountain be of endless Joy,
Which Time, nor Accident, may never destroy.
Still let my faithful Memory impart,
And deep engrave it on my grateful Heart,
How just, and good, and excellent thou art.


My Reader may now plainly perceive, I was most incorrigibly devoted to
Versifying, and all my Spouse's wholesome Admonitions had no manner of Effect
on me: In short, I believe this scribbling Itch is an incurable Disease; for
though Horace says See his Art of Poetry.
, taking some Physic in the Spring rid him of it, yet, as he even relates this
in flowing Numbers, we have no Cause to give him Credit. He also declares, all
Poets are visibly possessed, and mad. Shakespeare seems to be of the same
opinion, though he describes it with greater Elegance than even Horace has done,
at least in the Translation. The Poet's Eye, in a fine Frenzy rolling,
Does glance from Heaven to Earth, from Earth to Heaven;
And as Imagination bodies forth
The Forms of Things unknown, the Poet's Pen
Turns them to Shapes, and gives to airy Nothing
A local Habitation and a Name.
The Truth of which he has fully verified, giving us in his divine Works a new
Creation of his own, with a new Language also peculiar to the different Species
and Orders of Beings he introduces to us. Milton had, studied him with Care,
and, like the Be, committed many sweet Thefts on his immortal Blooms. Whoever
reads the Part of the Fairies in the Midsummer Night's Dream, may easily
perceive how many beautiful Images Milton has borrowed thence to adorn his
Masque of Comus. And really, I think, as Shakespeare had plundered all Art and
Nature, the visible and invisible World, it was but just to make Reprizals, and
steal from his rich Store.

I hope my Reader will pardon me for so often running away from myself; I
cannot say, I am Egotist enough to be much enamoured of such an unhappy Theme,
and have often wished I could do it in reality; for I have been plunged in such
Calamity, that I have even thought it impossible to be true, and vainly hoped
to wake, as from some hideous Dream, to find a better Fate.

And as one traveling in a barren Waste, could not be displeased to be
sometimes led out of the direct Road to view a more agreeable Prospect, I deal
thus with my Readers, and turn them from the gloomy Vale of my Life, to relieve
them with something more pleasing.

To amuse myself, ^d indeed with no other View, I wrote, in my Husband's
Absence, all the following Poems; which, if they should not happen also to
amuse my Readers, they are at their own Liberty, and may turn them over. Advice
to the People of Dublin in their Choice of a RECORDER.
IS there a Man, whose fixed and steady Soul
No Flattery can seduce, no Fear control;
Constant to Virtue, resolutely just,
True to his Friend, his Country, and his Trust:
Like Tully, Guardian of the Roman State,
Is Patriot, Lawyer, Orator complete;
If such there be, O! let your noble Zeal
Advance him to defend the Public Weal.
Painters and Poets are in this alike,
Mean Artists often a strong Resemblance strike;
And who can this unfinished Picture see,
But owns, O STANNARD! it was drawn for thee.
VERSES wrote in a LIBRARY.
SEAT for Contemplation fit,
Sacred Nursery of Wit!
Let me here enwrap'd in Pleasure,
Taste the Sweets of learned Leisure:
Vain, deceitful World, adieu;
I more solid Bliss pursue.
Faithful Friends, surround me here,
Wise, delightful, and sincere;
Friends, who never yet betrayed
Those who trusted in their Aid;
Friends, who never were known to shun
Those by adverse Fate undone.
Calm Philosophy and Truth
Crowned with undecaying Youth,
Glowing with celestial Charms,
Fondly woo me to their Arms.
Here immortal Bards dispense
Polished Numbers, nervous Sense;
While the just Historian's Page
Back recals the distant Age;
In whose Paintings we behold
All the wondrous Men of old;
Heroes fill each finished Piece,
Once the Pride of Rome and Greece.
Nor shall Greece and Rome alone,
Boast the Virtues all their own;
Thou, Ierne, too shall claim
Sons amongst the Heirs of Fame;
Patriots who undaunted stood,
To defend the public good;
Foremost in the sacred Line,
Ever shall the DRAPER shine:
Next be virtuous STANNARD placed,
With unfading Honors graced;
Godlike Men! accept my Praise,
Guard, and elevate, my Lays.
Learning can the Soul refine,
Raise from human to divine.
Come then, all ye sacred Dead,
Who for Virtue wrote or bled;
On my Mind intensely beam,
Touch it with your hallowed Flame.
And thou chaste and lovely Muse,
Who did once thy Dwelling choose
In Orinda's spotless Breast,
Condescend to be my Guest;
Bring with thee the bloomy Pair,
Young-ey'd Health, and Virtue fair;
Here your purest Rays impart,
So direct and guard my Heart,
That it may a Temple be
Worthy Heaven, and worthy thee.
FLAVIA's Birthday, May the 16th.
To Miss HOADLY.
WHILST thy fond Friends their annual Tribute pay,
And hail thee Daughter of the fragrant May;
Whilst they behold, with Rapture and Surprise,
New Charms enrich thy Soul, and point thine Eyes.
Ah! let the Muse her secret Joy declare;
Attend her Transports, and her Words revere:
She looks on Time, and with prophetic Eyes,
Sees him, for thee, strew Blessings as he flies;
And, whilst all other Beauties he impairs,
Add new Perfection to thy ripened Years;
Till every Year, improved with every Grace,
You shine unrivaled both in Mind and Face.
So the same Sun, with unresisted Power,
Burns the wide Lawn, and animates the Flower;
Bids it unfold its Beauties, and delight
With Sweets the Sense, with sunny Dies the Sight;
Bids it, like you, each Hour new Grace assume,
And smile, unmatched, in Loveliness and Bloom.
An Invitation to a Gentleman.
A Female, moderately fair,
Pleased with your Spirit, Wit and Air,
To me assigns the pleasing Task,
Your Company tonight to ask:
She has prepared a Feast refined,
A sacred Banquet for the Mind;
And you shall sup in solemn State,
Whilst round the tuneful Sisters wait;
Who, if you wish for Drink, shall bring
You Water from Pieria's Spring;
More elevating than Champaigne,
And far more apt to heat the Brain.
Pindar, who wrote in ancient Days,
Has celebrated Water's Praise;
But if, with Flaccus, you incline,
To like the Product of the Vine,
And choose a more substantial Feast,
She Will do her best to hit your Taste.
SOLITUDE.
THE Sun had sunk his glittering Head
In the fair Ocean's watery Bed,
And Evening came, that soothed the Pain
Of every toil-enduring Swain,
When faint from Noon's excessive Heat,
I sought a peaceful cool Retreat;
A deep impenetrable Shade,
Where not a Sunbeam ever strayed.
O sacred Solitude, said I,
To thy calm Bosom let me fly;
O bless with thy seraphic Joys,
A Soul averse to Pomp and Noise;
Wisdom with Contemplation dwells,
In twilight Groves, and lonely Cells;
She flies the Proud, she shuns the Great,
Unknown to Grandeur, Wealth, and State.
Hail, Heaven-born Virgin! deign to bless,
This sacred, silent, sweet Recess;
Give me, celestial Maid, to know
The Joys that from thy Presence flow;
Do thou instruct my Voice to sing
That God, from whom thou first did spring,
That God, at whose Almighty Call
From Nothing rose this beauteous All.
Then when the Morning Stars proclaim,
The Glory of Jehovah's Name,
When Praises every Tongue employ,
And Men and Angels shout for Joy,
Assist me with thy Aid divine,
In those blessed Hymns my Voice to join.
To STREPHON, written for a Lady to her Lover.
BEHOLD the Spring in fresh Attire,
Gay blooming Season of Desire,
With fragrant Breath salutes the Grove,
Awaking Nature, Joy and Love;
The Woods in verdant Beauty dressed,
Have her enlivening Power confessed,
What means this Coldness in your Breast?
Not all the kindly Warmth in mine,
Can thaw that frozen Heart of thine.
Go then, Inconstant, go, and rove,
Forget thy Vows, neglect thy Love;
Some senseless, tasteless, Girl pursue,
Bought Smiles befit such Swains as you;
While for the worst I see you change,
You give me a complete Revenge.
A SONG.
STREPHON, your Breach of Faith and Trust
Affords me no Surprise;
A Man who grateful was or just,
Might make my Wonder rise.
That Heart to you so fondly tied
With Pleasure wore its Chain,
But from your cold neglectful Pride,
Found Liberty again.
For this no Wrath inflames my Mind,
My Thanks are due to thee;
Such Thanks as generous Victors find,
Who set their Captives free.
To a very young Lady.
THY Genius, Beauty, Innocence command
This humble Tribute from the Muse's Hand;
A faithful Muse, who hears with secret Joy,
Thy early Virtues every Tongue employ.
O still thy Parents godlike Steps pursue,
Still keep their mutual Excellence in View;
So shall the wondering World with Transport see
All Virtue, all Perfection live in thee.
Queen MAB to POLLIO.
THE Queen of the Fairies this Summons does send,
To Pollio, her Counselor, Cousin, and Friend;
We order you here to attend us tonight,
We revel by Moonlight with Pomp and Delight!
Our Grove we illuminate, glorious to see,
With glittering Glowworms begemming each Tree;
We'll drink up the Dew that impearls the Flowers,
And in circling Joys spend our circling Hours.
If you fail in Attendance, by my Scepter I swear,
My Fairies shall bring you by Force through the Air.


But however reluctantly I do it, I must return.

The following Ode of Horace bearing some Similitude to my then present
Circumstances, I took the Liberty of paraphrasing, and sent it to my Husband,
notwithstanding his former Lectures. The Seventh Ode of the Third Book of
HORACE paraphrased.
Quid fles, Asterie?
ASTERIA, why will you consume
In Sighs and Tears your rosy Bloom?
No more your youthful Husband mourn,
He soon shall to your Arms return:
Propitious Winds shall waft him over,
Enriched from Britain's fruitful Shore.
In vain the Nymphs display their Charms,
To win him to their longing Arms:
Though strong Temptations court the Youth,
Doubt not his Constancy and Truth;
They fixed as Rocks unmoved remain,
While Winds and Waves assault in vain.
You only teach his Soul to know
The secret Pang, the tender Woe;
For you he feels a thousand Fears,
And often bedews his Couch with Tears.
Ah! then in kind Return beware,
Lest tempting Words your Heart ensnare;
Avoid the Dusk and silent Shade,
Nor heed the plaintive Serenade:
Let Prudence, that unerring Guide,
Over every Thought and Act preside;
So shall your Faith and Virtue prove
Worthy his matchless Truth and Love.


Mr. P -- n, who loved me best at a Distance, wrote me a very kind Letter,
wherein he told me my Verses were like myself, full of Elegance and Beauty;
that Mr. Pope and others, whom he had shown them to, longed to see the Writer;
and that he heartily wished me in London. And this put the Fancy into my Head
of going there; and as some of my Acquaintance intended for it, with whom I
thought I could agreeably travel, I soon resolved to accompany them.

Mr. P -- n had been absent nine Months; a tedious Time in a Lover's Reckoning.
In three Months Time his Office expired; for every new Lord Mayor of London has
a new Chaplain; so I thought I should have the Pleasure of passing the Winter
in London, and then, if nothing better offered, we should return home together.
London has very attractive Charms for most People, as our Irish Nobility and
Gentry sufficiently evidence, by spending the greatest Part of their Time and
Fortune there; and can it be wondered at, that a young lively Woman should be
fond of taking the only Opportunity she might ever have of seeing its
Magnificence in Perfection. Well! but how to execute my Project; for I was
apprehensive if either my own Parents or Mr. P -- n's were acquainted with it,
they would prevent me; so I resolved to make but one Confidante, which was a
very faithful Servant, who in the Evening put my Portmanteau aboard the Yacht.
Next Morning, the Wind being fair, I went, under Pretense of seeing my Friends
safe aboard, down the River with them, and into the Ship as it were out of
Curiosity; but being then out of Danger of Pursuit, I told them my Intention,
which some approved of, and some blamed^ However, as I did not question a kind
Reception from my Husband, and knew my Children would be well taken care of by
m^ Parents, I was very cheerful and easy, and little regarded what was thought
of my Frolic; neither could I divine that any evil Construction would be put
upon it.

We had a very safe Passage, and a pleasant Journey. I wrote to Mr. P -- n from
Parkgate, and he and Mr. W -- e met me about four Miles Distance from London.
So I took leave of my Fellow-Travellers for the present, and went into the
Coach to them, which drove to Mr. W -- le's. Mr. P -- n received me very
obligingly, and called me his little Fugitive and Runaway; but a Stranger
would have thought Mr. W -- le was my Husband, he welcomed me so kindly, and
paid me so many Compliments. As I had been up at three o'Clock in the Morning,
I was heartily fatigued, and desired Mr. P -- n to take leave; but he whispered
me to invite Mr. W -- le home to Supper with us, which accordingly I did; and
he was so transported with this Civility, he could not conceal his Joy;
whatever I commended amongst his Paintings, he would force me to accept of; and
putting as many Bottles of Wine into the Coach-Box as it would conveniently
hold, we went to Mr. P -- n's Lodging, which I found very handsome and
convenient. Wine and good Cheer entertained us till Midnight to our mutual
Satisfactions.

When Mr. P -- n and I were alone, he told me, that though he was very glad to
see me, he was afraid I would have but a lonely Time of it in London, he being
obliged to attend on the Lord Mayor, from Nine in the Morning till Six in the
Evening, and from thence he always went to the Play, and afterward to Supper
to Mrs. Heron, one of the Actresses, of no very good Fame. Though I thought
this but an odd Manner of Life for a Clergyman, I did not say so, being
unwilling to offend him. I had heard it whispered, that he liked this Woman,
but I resolved patiently to wait the Event.

The next Day, when he was going out, I put him in Mind that Mr. W -- le said
he would pass the Evening with us; but he laughed at my believing it; and said
he was a Man so uncertain in his Temper, that perhaps I might never see him
again while I lived. Just then a Lady who came over with me, called on us; and
Mr. P -- n and she had some private Chat. When she was gone he told me, she had
brought him a Letter and some Poetry from the Dean, which he had ordered him to
dispose of, and put the Money in his own Pocket; as he could not stay to read
them, he took them with him to the Lord Mayor's.

However, Mr. P -- n was mistaken in imagining Mr. W -- le would fail in his
Appointment; he came and told me Mr. P -- n was at the Play, but would sup with
us. He made use of his Absence to compliment me at an unmerciful Rate, and sung
me all the tenderest Love Songs he could think of in the most pathetic Manner:
In short, he exerted his Talents to entertain me, and behaved himself so much
in the Style of a Lover, that had I not been married, I should have imagined,
he intended to address me. When Mr. P -- n returned, he told him, he was
certainly the happiest Man living, and wondered how he could be a Moment out of
my Company, where he could stay for ever. Mr. P -- n seemed much pleased with
his Gallantry, and said, he hoped I would induce him to see us often. When we
were alone, he told me, he believed his Friend was in love with me. I answered,
if he thought so, I wondered he gave him so warm an Invitation. He said, he was
a very generous Man, and that his liking to me, if well managed, might prove
very profitable; for he valued no Expense where a Lady was in the Case. So, it
seems, I was to be the Bait, wherewith he was to angle for Gold out of a
Rival's Pocket: A Scheme which had a twofold Prospect of Gain annexed to it;
for while a Lover has Hope, he seldom quits the Chase; and will even thank the
Husband, for taking the friendly Freedom of using his Purse; and yet should the
Gallant be detected in taking any friendly Freedoms with the Wife in return,
the Law is all against him, Damages and Imprisonment must ensue. Which
Consideration may serve as a Warning to all Men, not to invade Properties, or
commit wilful Trespass on their Neighbor's Ground.

If my Readers are by this Time the least acquainted with my Spirit, they may
judge, I looked on this Project with the Contempt it deserved; however I
promised Complaisance, which indeed Mr. W -- le's seeming Merits might well
deserve. The next Day I was invited to the Lord Mayor's, who, on account of the
resolute Opposition he had given to the Excise Act, was the Darling of the
People. He was but indifferent as to his Person, or rather homely than
otherwise; but he had an excellent Understanding, and the Liveliness of his
Genius shone in his Eyes, which were very black and sparkling. He always
treated me with great Complaisance, and gave me a general Invitation to his
Table. As the Lord Mayor was a Bachelor, he had a Gentlewoman who managed his
Household Affairs, and who, except on public Days, did the Honors of his Table.
Mr. P -- n told me she was violently in love with him, and was ready to run mad
upon hearing I was come to London. How true this might be I know not; but as
she was very civil to me, and was old enough to be my Mother, I was not the
least disturbed with Jealousy on her own Account; though I cannot help saying, she
gave me a great deal of Uneasiness, by relating to me many Instances of my
Husband's extraordinary Regard for the Player aforementioned: We went together
to the Play on Purpose to see her; and to do her Justice, she was a graceful,
fine Woman; at least she appeared such on the Stage, and had a peculiar Skill
in dressing to Advantage. Mr. P -- n and Mr. W -- le were at the Play; they met
us going out, and Mr. P -- n committed me to the Care of his Friend, who had a
Coach waiting to convey me home; but Mr. P -- n went to his old Rendezvous to
the Actress, to my very great Mortification; because I really preferred his
Conversation to any other in the World: However, he was so complaisant, he used
every Evening to send Mr. W -- le to keep me Company, while he pursued his
Pleasures; and, as I shall answer it to Heaven, he did every thing in his power
to forward and encourage an Amor between his Friend and me.

One Instance, out of an hundred I could produce, I submit to the impartial
Judgment of my Reader. One of the young Ladies, at whose House I first saw Mr.
P -- n, happening to be in London, and but in low Circumstances, came to visit
me; she insisted on my passing the next Evening with her, and just as I was
going Mr. W -- le came in, and offered to accompany me, to which I gladly
consented, hoping as he was then a Man of Interest, he might recommend her to
some good Family, as a Governess to Children, or a Lady's Woman, when he knew
how well qualified she was for either Place. As her Spirit was far above her
Ability, I was concerned to see what Expense she had put herself to for my
Reception, having provided a very genteel Supper, to which she would oblige us
to stay. While she was giving Orders for it, I informed Mr. W -- le of her
Distress, who immediately gave me a Guinea for her, but entreated I would give
it to her as Present from my self, which, as I knew it was the only Method to
make her accept of it, I did.

When I came home, I related to Mr. P -- n Mr. W -- le's obliging and generous
Behavior; but little was he pleased with the Recital: What could I think of
him, when he told me, I did very ill to introduce a new Woman to him, i. e. Mr.
W -- le; and that he hoped I would lose him; and that henceforth he would
bestow his Favors on her? A Speech more proper for the Mouth of one of those
abandoned Wretches, who live by the Sale of the Innocent, than for a Husband, a
Gentleman, and one who ought to be a Christian. But I believe he was of Opinion
that Let the malicious World say what it please,
The fair Wife makes her Husband live at ease.
And, provided he sold me well, and put Money in his Purse, little regarded
either my temporal or eternal Happiness.

Another Instance either of his extraordinary Confidence in my Fidelity to him,
or rather Indifference about it, was, that he obliged me to go alone with his
Friend to Windsor, though, as it was Winter, there was no Possibility of going
there and returning the same Day, it being twenty Miles distant from London; so
that we had not only two Days, but a Night also, to pass together. Could any
Husband be more obliging to his Rival, than to give him such an Opportunity to
accomplish his Wishes? Had mine but concurred, I had then been undone; for
truly the Gentleman tried every Argument to win me to them, but in vain. My
Husband's Misconduct in exposing me to such Temptation, stung me to the Quick;
nay, I could not help believing they were both in a Plot to betray me to Ruin;
and as we were at the top Inn in the Town, I started at every Noise of Horsemen
who stopped there; and concluded, though falsely I believe, that Mr. W -- le had
given Mr. P -- n a Direction where to find us; and as this Imaginatlion wholly
possessed me, I little regarded either the Elegance of our Entertainment, or
the Tenderness and Passion the Gentleman expressed in every Word and Look: His
soft Endearments were all lost on one who regarded him as an Enemy. I was
obstinately sullen, and pretended Weariness, on purpose to quit his Company;
but I lost all Patience, when calling to the Maid to show me to my Chamber, I
found there was but one, nay, and but one Bed too, provided for two Guests;
for, it seems, my Gentleman had so ordered it, hoping, no doubt, to supply my
Husband's Place.

I was now in a manner convinced, there was Treachery intended against me, and
reproached my desiring Swain in such bitter Terms, that he had no Way to prove
his Innocence, but by retiring, though very reluctantly, to another Apartment;
and I took special Care to barricade my own, not only double-locking it, but
also placing all the Chairs and Tables against the Door to prevent a
Possibility of being surprised.

I rose very early next Morning to take a Survey of what Curiosities Windsor
afforded, as it was too late the Night before to see any thing; but found
nothing worth Observation, except the Castle, whose eminent Situation and
Gothic Grandeur, might very well, some Ages ago, make it esteemed a
Non-pareil: But as it has frequently been described and celebrated, I shall
only say, that considering it as the Palace of the Edwards and Henrys, I was
touched with something like a religious Veneration for it, which no modern
Building could inspire me with.

Mr. W -- le attended me with great Respect, and excepting that he tenderly
reproached me with what he called my Cruelty the Night before, gave me no
farther Cause of Displeasure, but brought me safely home in his Chaise to Mr. P
-- n.

But pray, gentle Reader, suppose it had happened otherwise; that
Night-Solitude, an agreeable and importunate Lover, should have prevailed on
human, yielding Frailty, whom could my Husband so properly have blamed for it
as himself? He who best knew our Frames, bids us avoid Temptation, as the
surest Method, nay and perhaps the only one of avoiding Sin; for who so firm
that may not be seduced? Why then should he, Mr. P -- n, drive me into the
Toils, unless he meant to have me made a Prey of?

I fairly confess this Action greatly sunk him in my Esteem; nay, it even did
the same in Mr. W -- le's, especially as he reaped no Satisfaction by it. I
could scarcely after regard Mr. P -- n as a Husband; but rather as a Man whose
Property I was, and who would gladly dispose of me to the best Bidder. Shocking
Thought!

And yet this Scheme was so artfully managed, as indeed all his against me have
ever been, that I could not well reproach him for it; for he would have
alleged, it was a Party of Pleasure intended by him for my Health and
Recreation; and to have mentioned Mr. W -- le's Attempt, why, to say the Truth,
I looked upon it as a Thing which any Man in the same Circumstances might
naturally be guilty of, even though he had no previous liking to, or Thought of
the Woman. So, as there was no Harm done, I judged it most prudent to be
silent. Besides, no Faults are so easily pardoned by our Sex, as those we
believe to be occasioned by our own Charms, the eager Lover's constant Excuse,
and which our Vanity is but too apt to admit as a reasonable one.

Of all Things in Nature, I most wonder why Men should be severe in their
Censures on our Sex, for a Failure in Point of Chastity: Is it not monstrous,
that our Seducers should be our Accusers? Will they not employ Fraud, nay,
often Force to gain us? What various Arts, what Stratagems, what Wiles will
they use for our Destruction? but that once accomplished, every opprobrious
Term with which our Language so plentifully abounds, shall be bestowed on us,
even by the very Villains who have wronged us. O Heaven that such Companions
thou would unfold!
And put a Whip in every honest Hand,
To lash such Rascals, naked through the World,
Even from the East to the West. --
I am sure the whole Female Sex will join with me in a hearty Amen.

Mr. P -- n's Year of Chaplainship being near expired, I hoped that he would
return to I^eland; but he had entertained a Belief that Mr. Walpole would
provide for him, and therefore determined to stay in London, so I was forced to
return single; for as Mr. P -- n's Income ceased with his Office, he chose to
accept of an Offer from Mr. W -- le to lodge in his House. For several Reasons
I thought it most proper to revisit my native Country; the first and chief was
the Affection I bore to my dear little ones; the next, to avoid both the
Temptation and Scandal I must have suffered, by going into the House of a
Person, who, with regard to Women, had an avowedly dissolute Character.

But however cautiously and prudently I acted in this Affair, it was not my
good Fortune to escape Calumny; so far from it, that I was both traduced for
going to London, and for returning from it; and the Wife of a certain B --, who
invited me to dine with her a Day or two after my Return to Dublin, when we
retired to our Tea, abused me in Language I should have scorned, in respect to
my own Gentility, to have given to the meanest Servant I was ever Mistress of:
And because my Husband had made me a Present of a few little Trinkets, all of
which in the Expense amounted but to a Trifle, told me she was sure some
Gallant had given them to me. But, as I have since been informed, she was
ragingly jealous of me, although without any Reason, I can the more readily
pardon her inhuman Treatment of me.

But as I did not choose to bear Reproaches I did not deserve, I sent for a
Chair, and, bursting into Tears, left the Room. In the Hall I met the B --, who
was coming to drink Tea with the Ladies: He was surprised to see me so
disordered, and tenderly laying hold of me, enquired the Cause. I desired he
would ask his Lady, who had invited me, to use me ill: Which he said, he hoped
she would not do, even in Regard to my Condition (being then pregnant). But,
Heaven knows! had he but considered how cruel all barren Creatures naturally
are, insomuch that I have seen a barren Ewe attempt to kill a young Lamb; he
would rationally have judged what might have, even in Law, been my Protection,
was the very Cause of her Hatred and Displeasure to me.

However, as this Lady was the first to attack my Character, I can do no less
than return her these my public and grateful Acknowledgments; for though
perhaps half the World cannot tell whom I mean; yet as it is more than probable
the Person concerned may read over these Memoirs, she at least will know her
own Portrait.

It Is really a sad Misfortune, that the honest Liberty of the Press is so
suppressed in Ireland: But, however, I promise all my Subscribe^s to oblige
them with a Key to whatever Secrets I have been obliged to lock up; and many I
have been obliged to strike out of my Work, otherwise I could never have had a
single Line printed.

Vice in Power will command at least an outward Homage; and helpless Poverty
dare not either oppose or expose it.

A few Days after my Return to Ireland, Sir Daniel Molineux said in French to
my Brother in St. Ann's Church, that he was surprised to see me look so
cheerful, considering my Husband was in the Bastile. My Bro^her told it to me;
but for my Life I could not guess what the Gentleman meant.

But too soon I was informed by the Newspapers, that Mr. P -- n, Mr. Motte,
and Mr. Gilliver, were all taken up on account of some treasonable Poetry,
which Mr. P -- n had given to the two latter to print; I then recollected the
Papers aforementioned, delivered to him by one of my Female Fellow-Travellers.

Who was the Informer I know not, both Parties having violently accused each
other; but in my Soul I believe Mr. P -- n was innocent, and I am sure I have
no Reason to be partial to him. But certain it is, his Character suffered so
much that it almost broke my Heart, as it deprived me of any Hopes even of his
having Bread for his Family. The Notion of his having betrayed Dr. Swift
incensed the whole Kingdom of Ireland against him; and as I did not for many
Weeks receive a Letter from him, I knew not how to justify him; and when called
upon by the late Primate (Dr. Hoadly) to give him an Account of the Affair, I
could only answer him with Tears, which, as both he and his Lady were
exceedingly humane, pleaded his Cause as powerfully as the most moving
Eloquence could have done; his Grace bade me be comforted, and write to my
Husband to come over and mind his Duty, and he would still be a Friend to him;
and generously added, that as many Persons busied themselves in bringing
Stories to him to Mr. P -- n's Disadvantage, I should be welcome to his Table
every Day, which would discountenance those who endeavored to prejudice him,
when they saw it did not make him or his Spouse withdraw their Regard from me.

His Grace's Goodness affected me so much, that my Tears of Sorrow were
converted to those of Gratitude; nor could I forbear falling on my Knees to pay
my Acknowledgments to him and his friendly Lady, for the Relief their Kindness
had given to a Heart overcome with Anguish.

At length I received a Letter from Mr. P -- n, which he was obliged to enclose
to a Gentleman for me, otherwise it would have been carried to the Castle, and
there examined; so great Notice was taken of these Poems. He wrote me word he
had been ill of the Rheumatism, and in great Trouble; that he would directly
return to Ireland, but that he had not Money to bear his Expenses. I made an
Application to my Father for him, who bade me let the Fellow go to the
West Indies, and he would take care of me and the Children. But, unfortunately
for me, I had too much Goodnature to take this wholesome Advice; so far from
it, that I never ceased importuning him, but followed him from Morning till
Night, like Niobe all Tears, till he give me a Bill of twenty Pounds to send to
him, with which he came over to Ireland; but so pale and dejected, that he
looked like the Ghost of his former self; and the Disregard he met with from
every body went very near his Heart. Every Day there was a new Abuse published
on him; my Father battled for him, and I did every thing in my power to cheer
and comfort his Spirits. Compassion wrought now the same Effects on me, as Love
had done heretofore; and as he frequently wept, I could not forbear mingling my
Tears with his; and, by way of Consolation, wrote to him the following Lines.
NO more, loved Partner of my Soul,
At Disappointments grieve,
Can flowing Tears our Fate control,
Or Sighs our Woes relieve?
Adversity is Virtue's School
To those who right discern;
Let us observe each painful Rule,
And each hard Lesson learn.
When wintry Clouds obscure the Sky,
And Heaven and Earth deform,
If fixed the strong Foundations lie,
The Castle braves the Storm.
Thus fixed on Faith's unfailing Rock,
Let us endure a while
Misfortune's rude, impetuous Shock,
And glory in our Toil.
Ill Fortune cannot always last,
Or though it should remain,
Yet we each painful Moment haste
A better World to gain:
Where Calumny no more shall wound,
Nor faithless Friends destroy,
Where Innocence and Truth are crowned
With never-fading Joy.


I should not have dwelt so long on every trivial Circumstance had I not been
strangely traduced about this Affair, which, as I shall answer it to God, I
have related with the utmost Truth and Exactness. I never had any Breach with
Mr. P -- n till our final Separation; and I am sure if my Father had suspected
me of any Dishonor, he would sooner have joined with my Husband to prosecute
me, than have given him a single Shilling to make up Matters between us.

Neither can I really imagine what I had done to merit all the cruel and
scandalous Aspersions thrown on me, especially by the Ladies: It would be
infinite Vanity to suppose Envy had any Share in their gentle Breasts; or that
the Praises I received from the other Sex, on Account of my Writings, awaked
their Displeasure against me: For though They had no Title to aspire;
Yet, when I sunk, they rose the high'r.


But what I think most surprising, is, that Women, who have suffered in their
own Reputations, are generally most cruel in their Censures on others. I could
mention a Lady, who was so fond of a certain Colonel, that when he died, she
was almost mad, though he was a married Man; and yet she was heedful of the
main Chance, in prevailing on him to leave her his Estate from his Wife, whose
Brother's Estate she had before secured to herself, he being married to her. I
remember this Lady the whole Town-talk of Dublin, and yet, by having a large
illgot Fortune, she procured a second Husband, commenced Prude, though not till
Youth and Beauty were fled, and is, if she yet lives, one of the bitterest
Eenmies to any Woman, who has ever committed even an Act of Indiscretion, that
can be found in the World, as I have proved many Years ago by woeful Experience.
So Flavia, full of inward Guilt,
Calls Florimel an arrant Jilt.
But enough of this. When Mr. P -- n was once more settled in his Cure, I being
very much inclined to a Decay, my Father said, nothing would more effectually
restore my Health than the Country; so having often been invited to his
Brother's at Cork, I resolved on going there for a few Months, where I was very
kindly received. We took the Diversions of the Season at Mallow, where nothing
remarkable happened to me, except that one Gentleman there took it into his
Head to do, what they there call black-guard me incessantly. It was the
reigning Humor of the Place, amongst the young Folks, to call Names, sell
Bargains, and sometimes talk indecently, all of which I abhorred, and therefore
this Gentleman singled me out as a Mark for this Sort of Wit; and the more he
found it vexed me, the more he persisted in it. At last, I very seriously
demanded of him, what I had done to provoke him to teize me in the manner he
did? He said, he heard I was a Wit; and wished I would write a Satire on him.
So, to oblige him, I sent him the following Lines, which obtained me a Truce
from his anti-sublime Conceits. The MIRROR.
STREPHON, since my Skill you task,
And so often your Picture ask;
Lest my Colors prove too faint,
Such a various Mind to paint,
I, who never descend to flatter,
And abhor to deal in Satire,
Have at length contrived a Way
Your Resemblance to display.
I have brought Truth's polished Mirror,
Which shall show you every Error;
And, as faithful Glasses do,
Shall reflect your Graces too.
Barren Minds, like barren Soils,
Mock the Cultivator's Toils;
Though he sows the choicest Seeds,
The Produce is Chaff and Weeds;
Thine, with wild luxuriant Growth,
Yields us Corn and Thistles both.
Every Virtue to it is Side
Has a Neighbor Vice allied;
These, though sprung from different Roots,
So immix and blend their Shoots,
That we know not what to call
Products so equivocal.
All who know you, would admire
Your true Courage, Sense, and Fire;
Did not often the Rude and Rash,
With these nobler Talents clash.
Bounteous Nature framed your Mind
Fit for Sense and Taste refined:
You her choicest Gifts refuse,
And the meanest Manner choose;
If from thence you Merit claim,
Every Shoe-boy has the same.
How can you to Fame ascend,
If your Course you downward bend;
You, indeed, may hope in Time,
To atchieve the low Sublime:
And suppose the Bottom gained,
What but Filth could be obtained?
If my Freedom here offend you,
Think it kindly meant to mend you.
In your Mind are Seeds of Worth,
Call their latent Virtues forth:
Nor need you far from Wisdom roam,
Your best Examples are at home His Father Colonel Murray, and his second Wife
Lady Blaney.
.


And here, gentle Reader, I must bid you take leave of the Hope of any farther
cheerful Amusement; here commences the mournfullest Tale which ever yet was
either told or read.

The Winter's Return brought me to Dublin. My Husband met me about a Mile from
Town, and took me and my Aunt Van Lewen's Sister, who came to Town with me, out
of the Stage-Coach into a Hackney one. He entertained me with an Account of a
violent Quarrel he had with my Father; and said, he hoped, if I had any Regard
for him, I would never go with inside his Doors. This was a strange Command,
and as strange did it appear to me, that he should quarrel with the best
natured Gentleman in the World; his Father in Effect, as he treated him as his
Son! I told him, I hoped he would excuse my once disobeying him; for I owed, if
possible, a superior Duty to my Father, than a Husband could claim. Mr. P -- n
was very angry. This was on Thursday Night: The next Morning, at all Hazards, I
went to wait on my Father, who received me with a Coldness, which struck me to
the Heart. I asked him, if I had any way offended him? He said, Mr. P -- n had
used him so ill, he did not desire to see his Wife. 'Dear Sir (said I) am I not
your Daughter?' 'Yes, (said he) and had you taken my Advice in letting the
Villain go to the West Indies, I should have regarded you as such; but, make
much of him; and remember, the Hour will come, when you will wish you had
followed your Father's Counsel.' My Aunt's Sister was with me, to whom he never
once spoke, but walked to and fro in a sort of a distracted Manner, and looked
so ill, that, imagining my Presence disturbed him, I asked him where my Mother
was? He said, she was gone to take the Air; and that he had Company to dine
with him, so that he could not ask me to stay. I took the Hint, and departed
from him, in such inconceivable Sorrow, as I never in my Life experienced
before, because I really loved him more than any thing in the World.

I passed the Remainder of the Day in Tears, for my Husband never came home
till Twelve o'Clock at Night; so that I had full Liberty to indulge my Sorrow.
I sent my Compliments on Friday and Saturday Morning to my Parents; they
answered, they were very well; but they neither asked me to come to them, nor
came to me.

On Sunday I was invited to Dinner to Mr. Dubourg's. I found myself so ill,
that I could not go to Church; however, about Two o'Clock, I went to dine with
my Friends, who looked on me with as much Surprise as if they had seen an
Apparition. They had no sooner seated me, but they both went out of the Room,
and held a long Consultation at the Door: Little did I think how deeply I was
concerned in it. At length Mrs. Dubourg came in: I tenderly reproached her with
her Coldness to me: She said, she was not well; and asked me, had I heard from
Molesworth-street that Day? I told her, I had not. She asked me, if Mr. P -- n
would come to Dinner? I told her, he was engaged to preach at St. Peter's
Church in the Afternoon, and therefore went to Mrs. Warren's, where they dined
early. A little while after, Counselor Smith came in; but they called him out,
and held a long Conference with him. In short, every body behaved themselves so
oddly to me, that I knew not what to make of it.

Just as Dinner was served up, Mr. P -- n came in: 'My Dear (said I) you are
better than Promise.' 'Why (says he) I am not come to dine, but to tell you
your Father is stabbed.' Had he plunged a Dagger in my Heart, it could not have
given me a deeper Wound.

It seems, this Accident, for such my Father declared it to be, happened at
Nine o'Clock in the Morning; and so unkind were my Mother and Sister, they
never sent me the least Notice of it. The Company I went to, had known of it
some Hours before; and consequently were surprised to find me ignorant of what
so nearly concerned me, and what, by that Time, all Dublin knew. None of them
could find in their Hearts to tell me of it; and this was the Occasion of the
many Consultations they held, which had appeared so strange to me. It would be
tedious to my Readers, to relate every Difficulty I had even to see my Father.
In respect to the Ashes of my Mother, I do not choose to tell how ill I was used
upon this Occasion; but as I owe no sort of Respect or Ceremony to my Sister,
(if I may call her one, who by no means deserves that Title) I must proceed. I
rose from the Table, had a Chair called, and went to my Father's: Three of the
Servants sat in the Hall, and my Sister, excessively dirty, walked to and fro
in it. She would willingly have kept me out; but however, the Servant knowing
me, opened the Door. The first Noise which struck my Ear, upon my Entrance, was
the deep and piercing Groans of my dear Father. When I attempted to go up
Stairs to offer my Duty to him, my Sister by Violence pulled me down; but the
Agony I was in for my Father, and the Resentment I conceived at her gross Usage
of me, supplied me with Strength to get up in despite of her. When I opened
the Dining Room Door, the Floor was all besmeared with Blood; my Mother, in an
arbitrary Voice, asked me, what Business I had there? I told her, I had a
Child's Right to pay my Duty to my Father. She said, if I spoke to him it would
kill him. Upon which, for the first, and indeed the only Time that ever I gave
her an impertinent Answer; I said, that if every Person about my Father had
loved him with half my Tenderness, he would not have been reduced to the
Condition I was then too sure he was in. Upon this, I offered to go into the
Bedchamber, but was not only forcibly withstood, but even beaten by my Mother,
and again asked, if I intended to kill my Father? I made her no Reply but sat
down, and assured her, that the first Person who opened that Door I would go
in. In about three Minutes time Dr. Cope, Dr. Helsham, Mr. Nicholls, and in all
seven Physicians and three Surgeons (as my Father was universally esteemed)
came of their own Accord to visit him; when I heard them on the Stairs, I took
that Opportunity to open the Bedchamber Door, in which neither my Mother nor
my Sister could well oppose me, as the Gentlemen were come into the
Dining Room, before they were apprised of my Intention; but, Heavens! how shall
I describe the Agony that seized me, when I beheld my dear Father pale as
Death, and unable to utter any thing but Groans? those only who have loved a
Father as well as I did mine, can judge of my Condition: I kneeled down by the
Bedside: Weak as he was he kindly reached out his Hand to me: He asbed me if
this was not an unhappy Accident. I begged he would not speak, because Mr.
Nicholls had told me, his Lungs were wounded, and that every Word was
detrimental to him; but as I had not ever knowingly offended him, I begged he
would give me leave to pay my Duty to him, and that he would signify it, by
laying his Hand on my Head, which he not only did, but desired I would not
leave him. But here my Father gave me an impossible Task; for no sooner were
the Gentlemen departed, but my Mother said she must speak with me; and whether
she was really mad, or counterfeited to be so, I know not; but she insisted on
my going to Bed with her, alleging that my Sister was younger and stronger
than I, and better able to bear the Fatigue of sitting up. This seemed to carry
the Appearance of Love and Tenderness; but Heaven knows it was far otherwise,
as I afterward found out; for the three following Days my Mother never
permitted me to leave her; if I ever attempted it, she tore her Hair, and
screamed like a Lunatic. The fourth Night I heard my Father ring a Bell, my
Mother was asleep, and as my Thoughts were ever on him, I ran down Stairs to
him undrest as I was. He seemed surprised to see me, having been told that I
was in my own House, and would not undertake the Trouble of attending him. I
found him in a very cold Sweat; it suddenly came into my Head, that if I could
change that into a hot one, it might, perhaps, relieve him. So after assuring
him, that I had not quitted him, nor had ever been out of the House, but was
prevented by my Mother and Sister from attending on him, he said he was very
dry, and asked me, what the Physicians had ordered for him to drink. As they
all concluded he would not outlive that Night, they had ordered nothing, but
left him to take what he pleased, as, in spite of all Precautions to the
contrary, I had overheard. Upon this, I resolved so far to turn Physician
myself as to tell him, they ordered him to drink some Hock and Sack made warm.
Weak as he was he could not forbear smiling, and saying, he never heard of such
another Prescription; 'Ten Gentlemen meet to order me some Hock and Sack mixed!
said he; well, give it me: it must certainly be a Cure for a pleuretick Fever.'
I did so; nay, I not only gave it to him that Time, but plied him with it every
Time he called for Drink all Night, till it produced the Effect I desired, and
threw him into a fine breathing Sweat, and a deep Sleep. It may now be
demanded, where my Sister was all this Time? why, as she had not, if I may
speak my Mind, half the Regard for my Father that I had, she was fast asleep in
the Arm-Chair, nor could he awake her.

When the Physicians came in the Morning, they were agreeably surprised to find
my Father's Fever quite gone, and his Eyes look very lively; he told them,
their merry Prescription had done him gre^ ^rvice. I winked at them not to
undeceive him; they understood me, and Dr. Helsham called me aside, under
Pretense of giving me some Directions, but in reality, to enquire of me what I
had administered. I told him, and he could not forbear smiling. He called the
Gentlemen into the next Room to a Consultation, to which presently after I was
summoned. As both Dr. Helsham and Dr. Cope were Men of Wit and Pleasantry, they
rallied me agreeably on presuming to practice Physic, having never taken my
Degrees; and assured me I should be called before the College of Physicians,
and be prosecuted as an Empyrick.

I rose up, and making a low Courtesy, I told them, as the best Part of the
College of Physicians were then present, they would, I hoped, have Candor
enough to permit me to make my own Defense; to which they all assented by a
gracious Nod, and bade me proceed; I then, making another Reverence, told them,
that as to my Right of practicing Physic, I held it extra judice, and smiling
said, I supposed they all understood Latin -- but as their proper Business was
to destroy Life, I hoped they would not take it amiss, if I for once, in a Case
which so nearly and deeply concerned me, had, to the utmost of my power,
frustrated their Designs; neither had I presumed to interfere, till they
themselves had assured me all Hope of my Father's Life was gone, and that he
could not live till Morning. But, said I, making another Courtesy, I, with all
respect to this honorable Board, humbly presume to believe, They had rather
choose that he should die,
Than their Prediction prove a Lie.
Nothing, except my Father's being so very weak, and so very near to us, could
have prevented the Gentlemen's laughing heartily at my fine Harangue. However,
I was dismissed with Honor; and as my Father seemed now to want nothing but
Restoratives, I was directed to make him some Viper Broth, Hartshorn Jelly,
Chocolate, and other nourishing Aliments.

From this Time we entertained Hopes of my Father's Recovery. In a few Days he
was so strong as to be able to sit up from Morning till Night. The whole Town
seemed to participate in our Joy; and many who had never visited him before,
came now to congratulate him and his Family on this happy Change. Whether it
was owing to his having seen too much Company, or to his own over-Neatness in
insisting on having his Chamber cleaned, I know not; but I received a Message
from Mr. P -- n, that he was taken very ill, and desired to see me. As I had
flattered myself my Father was out of Danger, I obeyed the Commands of my
Husband, and prevailed on Mr. Nicholls to come to visit him. He had got a Cold,
and was a little feverish; Mr. Nicholls thought proper to take a little Blood
from him, and I staid with him that Night and Part of the ensuing Day. Mr. P --
n being much relieved, gave me leave in the Evening to go to my Father's, where
I found all Things in Confusion, and he so ill that there was now not the least
Hope of his Recovery: He coughed incessantly, was seized with what they call a
galloping Consumption, and in a very few Days after expired, leaving me in
inconceivable Sorrow. About an Hour before he departed, I left the Room being
unable to see his last Agonies, and went up to my Mother, who was as fast
locked up in Sleep as guiltless Labor. Some time after I heard the Windows
thrown up, by which I knew his mortal Cares were ended.

We had that Evening engaged a Nurse Keeper, but did not dare to let her into
my Father's Presence, lest he should say, as he once did, on proposing such a
thing, that we were tired of him; but now her Assistance was absolutely
necessary, though my Sister told me, she herself helped to wash and lay my Father
out. I am sure I could have died sooner; but some Persons have uncommon
Courage, or rather, as Swift observes, Indiff'rence clad in Wisdom's Guise,
All Fortitude of Mind supplies.


About three o'Clock in the Morning, on New-Year's-Day, my Sister came into the
Room, and desired me to come and help her to take my Father up, that he wanted
to rise. Though I was certain he was dead, as I had not taken off my Clothes, I
went with her, and sent in the Maid to sit by my Mother. I asked my Sister on
the Stairs, was my Father alive? She answered, No. So with a heavy Heart I went
into the Dining Room; but by no means could I summon up sufficient Spirits, to
look upon the clay-cold Figure of him, who, under God, was the Author of my
Being. My Heart fluttered; my Tongue refused it is Office; neither had I the
poor Relief of Tears -- no Wonder, when the very Spring and Fountain of my Life
was stopped -- the very Source of it was stopped, if the Streams thereon
dependant, were for a while froze up and dead.

While I was lost in melancholy-musing, my Sister was very industrious in
making the Tea-Kettle boil. I do not say this by way of Reflection on her; for
though I was less assiduous about it, my own Mouth was perfectly parched with
Thirst, and I was very glad of something to moisten it.

When the Tea was ready, unluckily we had no Sugar, nor was there any in the
House, but what was in the Tea-Chest, the Key of which was in my Mother's
Pocket under her Head. My Sister went up and waked her, telling her, my Father
wanted a little burned Wine. She readily gave it, and prayed devoutly that it
might do him good. My Sister came down laughing, to think how she had imposed
on her. If any thing could have added Weight to the intolerable Burden of my
Sorrows, I now felt it, by considering how terrible my Mother's Surprise and
Disappointment must be!

About six o'Clock, I thought is was proper to send the Chest of Plate into
Dean Madden's, and to lock up whatever was valuable; a prudent Precaution, as
it too soon appeared. After this I went into my Mother's Chamber; she asked me
how my Father was. I told her he had been very ill in the Beginning of the
Night, but was now very quiet. She said, she hoped Sleep would do him good. I
answered, I trusted in God it had. So she arose, and would not put on her Shoes
lest she should disturb him: Nay, so strong was the Force of her Imagination,
that she even said, she heard him cough as we passed by his Chamber Door: But a
sad Counterfeit was I; for when we came into his Dressing Room, which opened to
the Garden, as it was now Daylight, my Mother easily perceived the Concern in
my Countenance; she shrieked when she looked at me, and with great Impatience
asked me, what ailed me: 'O Lord! cried she, cannot you give me one Word of
Comfort?' I answered very faintly, I wished it was in my Power: But alas! her
worst Fears were but too true; all was over. I really thought she would now
have run quite mad; scarcely could I prevent her going into his Chamber. I sent
in for Dean Madden, who by Prayers and spiritual Advice, a little calmed her;
but one Woe trod upon the other's Heels: Mr. Nicholls, who for the particular
Regard he had for my Father, was his first Visitor, and whose Humanity during
the whole Time of his Sickness, deserves a grateful Acknowledgment; which, if
the surviving Part of his Family refuse, I think it incumbent on me to pay, so
far at least as Words can do it, came into the Dining Room; he guessed our Loss
'ere we could speak it, and seemed to bear a Part in our Sorrows. He asked me
what Hour he should come to open my Father. I told him, he had left his Curse
on any Person who attempted it. He said he was very glad of it; for as this
dismal Operation must have fallen to his Share, it would, I am certain, greatly
have shocked his Humanity. I would have had him go up to see my Mother: He said
it would but renew her Trouble, and that when she was a little more calm he
would make her a Visit.

I now thought it highly necessary to persuade my poor Mother to take, at
least, a Dish of Tea, which I could not do, but by assuring her I was ready to
faint. Just as it was prepared, a Servant, looking like a Ghost, opened the
Door, and beckoned me to follow him; I did so, and upon coming down Stairs,
found the House filled with Sheriff's Officers: One of them, whose Name was
Williams, was most remarkably insolent, and abused me very grossly. I once more
sent in for Dean Madden; I believe the worthy Gentleman thought his Words might
prevail, but the Scoundrel Williams bade him, go talk in his Pulpit. However, I
had Presence of Mind sufficient to write a Line to Counselor Smith; he
happened not to be at home; so I begged of the Dean to go to my Mother, least
those licensed Robbers should plunder the House. About seven in the Evening Mr.
Smith came; he found the Wretches very busy in taking an Inventory of the
Furniture. They were full as rude to him, as they had been to the Dean; and at
last carried it so far, as to insist upon arresting my Father's Body, just then
laid in a Coffin. I, almost wild with Grief, ran after them; the Coffin was
open, and I raised my dear Father in my Arms, and, as if he could have heard
me, asked him, Would he not protect his Family? Mr. Smith had, in the mean
Time, sent for the High Sheriff; he was a young, good-natured Gentleman; and,
after heartily reprimanding the Fellows, nay, and even making Williams beg
pardon on his Knees, dismissed them all, except one, whom he ordered, not only
to be civil, but also to do the Work of a Servant; assuring us, he would take
an Inventory of the Things himself, as soon as the Funeral was over.

The next Day, being Sunday, we determined to have my dear Father buried,
according to his own Directions, privately, at Twelve o'Clock at Night; and I
easily prevailed on Mr. Smith, and his present Lady, to give their Company to
my Mother, during the Time of this last sad solemn Ceremony. As my Mother wept
incessantly, it made her sleepy; but the Noise made in carrying down my
Father's Corpse, awaked her; and as she had only slumber'd in her Chair, she
started up, crying out, they were carrying her dear Husband to the Grave, and
that she would go and be buried with him. We were obliged by Violence to
restrain her; nay, and also to assure her he had been interred some Hours, and
that the Noise she heard was only that of the Servants, who were setting Things
in Order. Mr. Smith and his Lady, who, according to their Promise, came and
passed the Evening with my Mother, said every thing that Reason, Christianity,
or Humanity could dictate, to mitigate her Afflictions. Gratitude for their
Kindness made her endeavor to supress the Anguish of her Soul; nay, out of
Complaisance to them, she drank a Glass or two of Wine, which, as she had not
done for some Weeks before, produced the Effect I desired, of making her sleep.
Mr. P -- n attended the Funeral Obsequies, which was the only Proof of Respect
or Kindness he ever showed to the Family.

Early the next Morning, I rose; and if, in the melancholy Situation of my
Soul, any thing could have made me smile, the Cookmaid's Simplicity would
certainly have done it; for, finding her Fire made, her Dishes washed, and
every thing set in good Order, so well did the Bailiff, who was left in the
House, obey the High Sheriff's Orders, in doing the Work of a Servant; and he
having walked into the Garden; the Maid not recollecting there was any such
Person in the House, stood crossing herself, and praying to the Blessed Virgin,
and all the Saints in Heaven. I asked her, What was the matter? 'O my dear
Madam! (says she) my Master was always neat; and see, for all he is dead, how
he made the Fire, and cleaned up the Kitchen for me.'

I left the poor Girl in her Mistake, and went up to my Mother. It grieved me
to awake her; yet knowing the High Sheriff would be early with us, and that the
Inventory of what was in her Chamber must be taken, I thought it was most
decent for her to be up, as her unhappy Situation could not authorize her
taking on the State of a Lady of Quality, to lie in Bed a Month for
Fashion's-sake.

She was not long up before the Gentleman came: From him I learned, that this
Execution was laid at the Suit of the Widow Ford, who being Executrix to her
Children, had asked my Father, where she could lay out their Money to
Advantage. As Mr. Monck wanted Money, my Father immediately thought of him; but
as his Estate was not liable to his Debts, my Father became Surety for him.
This was enough for me; I immediately wrote to Mr. Monck; who, on Receipt of
the Letter, came to Town, and, with great Honor, not only discharged his own
Debt, but also paid the Sheriff's Fees, which in three Days amounted to Twenty
Pounds.

This Gentleman was the late Henry Stanly Monck, of St. Stephen's Green.

My Sister, like all provident Persons, made the best of her Way to her
Husband's Mother; who being assured, by Dean Madden, that he himself had
married my Sister to her Son, which had been questioned, on Account of his
abrupt Departure from her, soon after he had made her a Mother, was so kindly
received by her new Parent, that for three Weeks after, she never either sent,
or came, to know what was become of the old one.

As my Father had positively prohibited us from writing any Account to my
Brother, then at Paris, of the Misfortune that had befallen him, I thought it
not proper to disobey him; yet, at the same time, judged it highly necessary he
should be apprized of the melancholy Situation of his Affairs at home; I
therefore engaged a young Gentleman, an intimate Friend of my Brother's, to
undertake the mournful Task, and advise him immediately to return to Ireland:
But his best Speed could not overtake his Father's Life, who had been three
Weeks buried e're he arrived. When he saw us in deep Mourning, and missed the
dear Parent, who used ever to receive him with the Love of a Father, and the
Freedom of a Companion, all his Resolution could scarce support it: and though he
endeavored to comfort us, 'twas but too visible he wanted it himself. My Heart
bled for him; so disappointed in all his Hopes, which, as they had been high
raised, were now the more depressed. In short, we were all mere Outside, each
endeavoring, by a forced Cheerfulness, to conceal their inward Anguish from
each other.

As my Brother, soon after, sold off the Goods by Auction, and placed my
Mother, who was left entirely dependant on him, to board at a Clergyman's House
in the Country, after which I never saw her more; I returned to my own House.

Mr. P -- n, having now no Expectation of a Fortune by me, he threw off all
Disguise, and showed himself in his proper Colors; he had, it seems, while I
was in the Country, in a bad State of Health, got in League with the Widow W --
rr -- n, whom he intended, if I had died, as was expected, should supply my
Place. However, he was resolved to gid rid of me at any rate; and as nothing
but my Death, or a Divorce, could accomplish his Desires, the latter seemed the
safer Method. To this End, he set all his Engines to work. His first Scheme I
shall here relate.

One Morning pretty early, he sent for me to come to him to Breakfast in the
Summer House; as I thought he was alone, I ran to him quite undrest; but was
confounded at the Sight of a Gentleman, whom I had never seen before, and who
was dressed out with the utmost Magnificence and Curiosity, rather in the Habit
of a Birth-Night Beau, than a Morning Visitor. I was for retiring, but Mr. P --
n obliged me to come in, and introduced him to me. I sat down with the best
Grace I could; and made the Tea: Before it was half over Mr. P -- n said, he
was obliged to go visit a sick Person; but that he should return in half an
Hour, engaging me not to let the Gentleman go till then; at the same time
assuring him, I was very well qualified to entertain him agreeably. The
Gentleman did not express the least Reluctance at complying with his Request;
so far from it, that as soon as he was gone, he said, he was much indebted to
Mr. P -- n's Complaisance, for the favorable Opportunity he had afforded him
of speaking his Wishes; and, laying hold of my Hand, he began to address me in
a most bombastic Style, with Fustian from exploded Plays. For my part, I
thought he was mad, and growing angry at what I deemed a great Incivility to a
married Woman, I assured him, if he persisted in such Impertinence, I would
quit the Place. He then begged Pardon most humbly indeed, for he threw himself
on the Carpet at my Feet, swearing he would never rise till I had forgiven him;
which, not to be plagued with his farther Impertinence, I was forced to say, I
did. He then wanted me to confirm it by a Kiss, but that I would by no means
grant. In short, his Company was so tiresome, that I most impatiently longed
for a Release; which, however, Mr. P -- n was resolved not to give me: So
finding the Gentleman was determined to prosecute me, I told him I was engaged
to dine abroad, and hoped he would excuse my leaving him, as I expected a Lady
to call upon me, which laid me under a Necessity of going to dress.

Upon this civil Dismiss, to my great Satisfaction he took his Leave, promising
me, he would do himself the Honor of waiting on me again very speedily, to
which I made no Reply.

I believe he went to Mr. P -- n to give him an Account of what had past, who
some time after returned, and seemed much offended, that I had suffered his
Friend, as he called him, to go away; adding, that he was related to the Duke
of Dorset, and might, by his Interest, get him a good Living. I answered, Let
him be ever so well related, he was a very troublesome Coxcomb, and if he liked
such Company, I did not.

A few Days after my youngest Child died, and that I might avoid seeing the
Funeral, I retired to the Summer House, where I sat weeping; when suddently
this same fine Spark opened the Door. He told me, Mr. P -- n had sent him to
desire I would have some Coffee ready, and that he would be at home
immediately. I desired the Gentleman to go with me to the Dwelling House, not
choosing to stay alone with him at so great a Distance from every Body. The
Coffee was prepared, but no Mr. P -- n came, so we drank it without him, and
the Gentleman fell into his old Vagaries again. I then, All smarting with my
Griefs, being vexed
To be so pestered by a Popinjay,
Shakespeare. Burst into Tears, and demanded of him, what he meant by such
Insolence? He looked v^y much confounded, and asked me, was I in earnest? I
assured him I was, and that I would acquaint Mr. P -- n with his Rudeness. He
smiled at that Threat, and to my great Surprise, made me the following Speech.
'Madam, I am convinced by your Behavior, that you are a Woman of Honor, and
am very sorry I should be so unfortunate as to provoke your Tears: The best
Recompense I can make you, is, to entrust you with a Secret; and I doubt not
but you will have Discretion enough to make a proper use of it. Mr. P -- n
described you to me, as a Lady very liberal of your Favors, and begged I would
be so kind as to make him a Cuckold, so that he might be able to prove it, in
order to a Separation from you; promising to give me Time and Opportunity for
it: He assured me, it would be no difficult Task; that I need but throw myself
at your Feet, whine out some Tragedy, and you would quickly yield. But I am now
convinced, that he is a very great V -- n, and very unworthy of you.'

I leave my Reason to judge of my Astonishment. I could scarce give the
Gentleman Credit; and yet it was but too evident that he spoke Truth, as it was
now nine o'Clock at Night, and Mr. P -- n not come home to his invited Guest.

When I had recovered Power to speak, I told him, I supposed Mr. P -- n knew
him to be a Person destitute of all Honor and Humanity, when he proposed such
a Scheme to him as that of betraying any Woman. 'Faith, Madam, returned he, I
never intended it; for had you made me happy, I would, like a Gentleman, have
forsworn it, and also have given you a proper Caution: But I would not pay you
so ill a Compliment, as not to assure you, the Bait was very illuring. I
believe there are very few young Fellows who would have refused him the Favor
he desired of me.' I then begged he would be so kind to leave me, which,
accordingly, taking his Leave very respectfully, he did.

I went to Bed full of Disquietude; but the bitter Anguish of my Soul quite
banished Sleep. I considered the Snares were laid for me, and that he who ought
to be the Guardian and Protector of my Innocence, was the very first Person who
sought to destroy it. I wept abundantly, and prayed heartily to God, to deliver
me out of my Trouble; at length I fell into a Slumber, when methought my
Father, just as I had seen him in his Coffin, drew open the Curtain, and
muttered something to me very low and indistinct; but the Words Trouble, Sorrow
and Shame, I very plainly heard. I started up, and turned the Head Curtain
back; but seeing nothing, concluded the Trouble of my Mind produced such
terrifying Dreams, and recommending myself to Heaven, once more addressed
myself to Sleep; when suddenly, methought, I was in the midst of a Parcel of
Ruffians who were fighting, and that I, though I knew not why, was the Occasion
of their Quarrel. At last I thought one of them gave me a severe Blow over the
Head, at which I screamed out, and Mr. P -- n, who was now in the Chamber,
waked me, and asked me, what was the matter? I told him, I had a very shocking
Dream. 'Why, says he, you grieve so much after your Father, and your Brat, and
take no Sustenance, that it is no Wonder you should be in the Vapors.' I
desired he would be so kind as give me a little Water; for I was in a faint
cold Sweat; but as he always kept some Cherry-Brandy in his Study, he made me
take a little of it, which greatly revived me. I then told him Mr. H -- d had
been to see him. He asked me, how long he stayed? I answered, till I was weary
of him. 'Why, did he offend you?' 'Indeed (returned I) he did.' 'How?' said he.
'By a great deal of Impertinence, not worth relating. I suppose (said he) the
Coxcomb was repeating his Poetry to you.' 'No (returned I) he spoke nothing of
his own; he had a proper Authority, I believe, for whatever he said.' I looked
earnestly in Mr. P -- n's Face, and could easily perceive he was in great
Confusion; so he put out the Candle, and came to Bed without asking me any
farther Questions.

Early the next Morning he went out of Town, without either leaving a Shilling
to provide for his Family, which consisted of a Maid, a Footman, two Children,
and myself, or any Person to serve his Cure; neither did I, for the Space of
two Months, hear from him, or receive any Supply; till at last, by Accident, I
learned he was with the Widow W -- rr -- n. For the Truth of this, the Reverend
Dr. Bradford can bear Witness; I mean, so far as his going away without either
asking his Permission, or substituting any Person to do his Duty. But when a
Lady's in the Case,
All other Business must give Place.
Gay's Fables. Even in Religion itself.

I now beg leave to demand of every Person, who has been severe in their
Censures of me, what Duty, Love, or Respect was due to such a Husband? When an
honest Man is linked to a pe^sidious Woman, his Misfortun^s claim Compassion;
b^ ^ure a voluntary Cuckold is the meanest Wretch in Human Nature, and deserves
nothing from the World, but the utmost Contempt.

In the mean time the Parish was quite in an Uproar; nobody to visit the Sick,
or read Six o'Clock Prayers. I related this Part of my Distress to my Brother,
who prevailed on a young Gentleman, who had been his School-fellow and
Companion, then newly ordained, to do Mr. P -- n's Duty.

As for my two Children, I sent them to School, and they dined every Day with
Mr. P -- n's Father; the Servants were forced to run in Debt for Provision;
and, for my own part, I quartered myself on my next Door Neighbors, Mr.
Lindsay and his Spouse, where I always met a cheerful and friendly Reception.

I must here observe, that because I loved reading, Mr. P -- n took with him
the Key of his Study, into which he had removed all my Books, Presents to me
from my Friends before I was married. He also locked up the Garden, rather
choosing it should be overgrown with Weeds, and the Plants and Flowers die for
Want of Water, than that either I or the Children should have the Pleasure of
amusing ourselves in it. The Tea-chest was also secured; so I was left like a
tame Cat, with the Liberty of walking about through two or three empty Rooms.

When I had learned where Mr. P -- n was, I wrote to him; but received no
Answer. At length, one Saturday, about Twelve o'Clock at Noon, his Horse was
brought home and a mangy Dog, of which I was ordered to take a particular care,
which I did; and now expected the Master. But as his buxom old Widow (and old
enough she was to be my Mother, and big enough to make four of me) came to Town
with him, he stayed with her till Twelve o'Clock at Night. His first Question
when he entered was, where was his Dog? with which having played about half an
Hour, hugging, kissing, and calling it an Angel, he at last vouchsafed to come
up Stairs. I sat in my Closet in a very pensive Posture; his first Salutation
to me was, to ask me, how I had the Impudence to write to him about my Family
Affairs? I asked him to whom else should I write? 'Very fine! (returned he)
suppose Mrs. W -- rr -- n had opened my Letter!' 'I could not suppose that,
Sir, because it is a Liberty I never took with you.' 'You took with me! why
should you? 'Nay then (said I) why should she? 'I have (said he) great
Patience, that I do not turn you out of Doors.' 'As soon as you please, Sir; I
know my Way to St. Sepulchers, and late as it is, I dare say they will give me
Admission.'

I believe he thought he had now gone too far, and was more than half afraid I
would publish all his Villainies; so he fell into his old Trade of
Dissimulation, in which he is a perfect Master; and taking me by the Hand, told
me, he did not think so gentle a Temper as mine could be disturbed at any
Thing; and that it was very unkind in me to be disobliged at his taking a
little Recreation in the Country; adding, that he often wished for me there. I
asked him why he did not take me with him? He said, he had proposed it to Mrs.
W -- rr -- n; but that she had objected against it, telling him, I was a Woman
of so bad a Reputation, that she would not for all the World countenance me. I
must beg leave to ask my Readers, what Sort of Terms this Couple must be on,
when she took the Liberty of traducing his Wife to him? She may be very chaste,
for aught I know; but I verily believe many an unhappy Creature, who has even
prostituted herself for Bread, would not have been guilty of her Crime.

Cursed be he that parts Man and Wife is Part of our Ash Wednesday Service,
to which I say Amen, with all my Heart and Soul.

But to return: I told Mr. P -- n, I was extremely obliged to the Lady; that
most Men, even if they hated their Wives, would resent any Injury offered to
them as being Part of themselves; but he was too good a Christian for that. So
I arose, and was for leaving the Room. He asked me, where I was going? I
answered, 'To sleep with my Children; for why should I, Sir, go to bed to a
Man, in whose Person, Mind, or Fortune, I have no longer a Share; and who has
actually divorced himself from me, as the Law can do!'

However he insisted on my staying with him, which accordingly I did. We both
rose pretty early; and the Children coming in to ask his Blessing, he whipped his
Daughter severely, because, as he said, she resembled my Mother; though indeed
she was infinitely more like his own: And, to show his Impartiality, he whipped
the poor little Boy, for being like himself.

When this Scene was over, the Children were turned down to the Kitchen, and
the mangy Dog, which it seems was given him by Mrs. W -- rr -- n, invited to a
good Plate of Toast and Butter and half a Pint of Cream for his Breakfast; so
well did he fulfill the old Proverb, Love me, love my Dog.

After these Holy Exercises, he went to the Communion; which indeed I had
intended to do, but as he had really vexed me past my Patience, I could not
compose myself sufficiently for the worthily receiving those sublime Mysteries.

Thus we may see it is in the power of a bad Man, not only to destroy our
temporal, but also our eternal Happiness.

I saw no more of him till Midnight; buxom Joan engaging him till then, or in
other Words, the Widow W -- rr -- n.

Mr. P -- n's Father hearing he was in Town, came the next Morning to see him,
and demanded of him the Money he had paid for his Childrens Tuition; upon which
he turned to me, with an Air of great Contempt, and told me, he thought when he
had married so accomplished a Lady, she might have taught her Children to read,
write, work, etc. and at least have saved him the Expense of their Education. I
told him, and indeed it was Truth, that I should never desire a more delightful
Employment than that of cultivating their Minds; but that he ought to consider,
he left no Support for our Bodies, and consequently I was obliged to go abroad
every Day to seek for Food, and could not encumber such Company, as I might be
welcome to, with my Children. Here Mr. P -- n's Father interrupted me, by
saying, I might always have been welcome to him. Indeed I doubt it not, for he
was a good-natured Man; but as he kept an Alehouse, it was no very agreeable
Place for me to pass my Time in.

Next Morning buxom Joan came in her own Coach for her Chaplain; a Right which
most Widows of Fortune claim. I looked at her, and she hid her Face. Mr. P -- n
soon waited on her, and away they went together, leaving me just as desolate as
I was before.

Mr. P -- n has often alleged, in order to prove me an Adultress, as I was
with Child when we parted, that he had no manner of matrimonial Commerce with
me for four Years. I was but just four and twenty Years of Age when we were
separated; and, as my Reader may observe, he would not permit me to have a
separate Bed, whether what he not only said, but swore, was true or false, I do
not see how he could gain any Honor by it.

For as the Spanish Friar says, when old Gomez boasts that his Wife was a
spotless Virgin for him; A fine Commendation truly!
The Church did not put you together for that.


And here, gentle Reader, give me leave to drop the Curtain. To avouch mine own
Innocence in a Point, where Appearances were strong against me, would perhaps
little avail me: The supreme Judge of Hearts alone will at the last great Day
clear or condemn me; to whose unerring Justice and boundless Goodness I submit
my Cause.

When Snares and Limed-Twigs are spread for a poor Bird, it cannot well escape.
Yet I may say with the condemned Duke of Buckingham, in Shakespeare's Henry the
Eighth, We both fell by our Servants;
Therefore, this receive as certain:
Where you are liberal of your Loves and Counsels,
Be sure you are not loose; for those you make Friends,
And give your Hearts to, when they perceive
The least Rub in your Fortune, fall away
Like Water from ye, never found again,
But where they mean to sink ye
A proper Caution to both Sexes, to be duly on their Guard against Confidants.

I could reckon up numberless Instances of Mr. P -- n's Aversion to me; one in
particular I cannot pass over. One Day, at Dinner, the Pin in the Robing of my
Gown, pricked my Breast; as there was no body but my Husband and Children
present, I made no Scruple of uncovering my Bosom, to examine what had hurt me;
upon which Mr. P -- n rose from Table, and said I had turned his Stomach. As I
really had a fine Skin, and was then a most remarkably neat Person, I thought
he only jested; and merrily told him, he should kiss my Breast and make it
well: But alas! it was not like Prior's Lover's Anger, where when the Lady
complains, that An ugly hard Rose-bud has fallen in my Neck,
It has vexed me, and plagued me to such a Degree!
Look here now; you will never believe one, pray see,
IN the Left Side of my Breast what a Mark it has made!
So saying, her Bosom she careless displayed:
That Seat of Delight I with Wonder surveyed,
And forgot every Word I designed to have said.
For he told me, he was sure he should faint if I came near him; and either
pretended to throw up his Dinner, or did it in reality. After which polite
Compliment, he drank a large Glass of Cherry-brandy, to settle his Stomach; and
repaired to his usual Haunt, i. e. to buxom Joan.

About Twelve at Night, he returned, and awaked me out of a sweet Sleep, by
telling me, I was a most expensive extravagant Woman. I asked him in what? He
said, in putting on clean Linen every Day; whereas Mrs. W -- rr -- n, who had a
Thousand Pounds a Year, assured him, she never shifted herself but once a Week,
and showed him Half-sleeves, which she wore, to save the Expense of washing. I
answered him very carelessly, that I supposed that was what charmed him; and
therefore, Dirt to Dirt.

I beg leave here to remark, that my Husband's Complaints were very different
from those of most married Men; their general Excuse for going astray is, that
their Wives are dirty, slothful, ignorant, etc. the very Reverse of which
swinish Qualities made my good Man hate me. Well, grant me guilty, which never
yet was proved;
Yet I do think, if Wives do fall, it is their Husbands Fault.
Say, that they slack their Duty, and pour our Treasure into foreign Laps,
Or else break out in peevish Jealousy,
Throwing Restraint on us: Or say, they strike us;
Or scant our former Having, in Despite.
Why, we have Galls; and though we have some Grace,
Yet we have some Revenge. Let Husbands know,
Their Wives have Sense like them: They see and smell,
And have their Palates both for sweet and sour,
As Husbands have. What is it that they do,
When they change us for others? Is it Sport?
I think it is. And does Affection breed it?
I think it does. Is It Frailty that thus errs?
It is so too. And have not we Affections?
Desire for Sport? and Frailty, as Men have?
Then let them use us well; or let them know,
The Ills we do, their Ills instruct us to.
Shakespeare.

And in one of the Sermons on Social Duties, published lately by a real Divine,
he makes this Observation, That he believes, very few Women have either been so
weak, or so wicked, to wrong the Marriage Bed, but when they have been provoked
to it, either by the ill Treatment they received from their Husbands, or in
Revenge to their prior Falsehoods.

If I have not delivered the most worthy Author's Sentiments with his own
Elegance of Style, I am sure he will pardon me, as I only quote from Memory,
not being Mistress of his admirable Works.

I do assure my Reader, I do not, by those Quotations, mean to countenance
Vice, Or to arm my Pen
Against the Sun-clad Power of Chastity.
Milton. So far from it, that in my Opinion, Nothing can excuse the Breach of
it; and a Female Should strip herself to Death, as to a Bed,
Which, longing, she would been sick for,
Rather than yield her Body up to Shame.
All I intend is this; the World has been pleased to say, I had a most
excellent Husband; and therefore have thought proper, not thinking their Bill
of Accusation large enough, to add Ingratitude to every other Vice and Folly
they are pleased to attribute to me.

But so many Yards of Prunella and a Bit of clear Cambrick, properly placed
under the Chin, it seems make a Holy Man. Yet, let us write Good Angel, on the
Devil's Horn,
It Is not the Devil's Crest.
And so an outward Sainted Priest, may
In all his Dressings, Titles, Caracts, Forms,
Be an Arch-villain; and his Filth being cast,
Appear a Pond as deep as Hell.
Shakespeare.

I hope Mr. P -- n will return his Acknowledgments to me, for making him
publicly known; for, as I hear, his Poems have suffered the Fate of all Things
mortal; and, to use his own Lines, Since he and his Writings so soon are
forgotten,
Ever his Carcass become, like his Principles, rotten;
My Muse shall forbid it, transmitting his Merits,
As the Curious, for Show, preserve Monsters in Spirits.
P -- n's Elegy on the Rev. Mr. Graffan, written many Years before the
Gentleman's Death. And so if my Quondam Husband arrives at Fame, or ever goes
to Heaven, either of which I very much doubt, I think he must still rest my
Debtor. For Fame has but two Doors, a white and a black one,
The worst you say, he is stole in at the back one.
And that Cuckolds go to Heaven, no body ever yet disputed. Were he one, he
ought to thank me that helped to send him thither. If I have bestowed on him
Fame in this World, and Salvation in the next, what could a reasonable Man
desire more from his Wife? But some Folks are never to be satisfied! -- But
whether he is entitled to the Horn or not, must always be a Secret: I hope some
curious Commentator will hereafter endeavor to find out the Truth of it; for
my Mind gives me, That I, like the Classics, shall be read
When Time, and all the World are dead.
And if a Scotch Barber, one Allan Ramsay, promises himself so much, in a Sort
of Burlesque on Horace, why may I not be indulged in equal Vanity, the ruling
and darling Passion of our Sex? Though I shall never carry it to such an
unnatural Height, as Dr. Young makes a Lady do, when she is dying, Odious, in
Woollen! 'twould a Saint provoke!
Were the last Words that dying Flavia spoke!
No, let a charming Chintz, and Flander's Lace,
Shade my pale Corse, and deck my lifeless Face.
One would not sure, look ugly when one's dead;
And -- Betty, give my Cheeks a little red.


I must beg my Reader's Pardon for these numerous Quotations; but, as Swift
says, 'those anticipating Rascals the Ancients, have left nothing for us poor
Moderns to say:' But still to show my Vanity, let it stand as some sort of
Praise, that I have stolen wisely.

At length the fatal Hour arrived, when Mr. P -- n's Machinations wrought the
Effect he so long desired, namely, my Destruction; and, as he never did Things
by Halves, that of his own Children also; to whom his Barbarity has exceeded
any thing I ever either heard or read of; but that in due Place.

I own myself very indiscreet in permitting any Man to be at an unseasonable
Hour in my Bedchamber; but Lovers of Learning will, I am sure, pardon me, as I
solemnly declare, it was the attractive Charms of a new Book, which the
Gentleman would not lend me, but consented to stay till I read it through, that
was the sole Motive of my detaining him. But the Servants, being bribed by
their Master, let in twelve Watchmen at the Kitchen Window, who, though they
might have opened the Chamber Door, chose rather to break it to pieces, and
took the Gentleman and myself Prisoners.

For my own Part, I thought they had been House-breakers, and would willingly
have compounded for Life, when entered Mr. P -- n, with a Cambric Handkerchief
tied about his Neck, after the Fashion of Mr. Fribble, and with the Temper of a
Stoic, bid the authorized Ruffians not hurt me: But his Christian Care came too
late; for one of them had given me a violent Blow on the Temple, and another
had dragged two of my Fingers out of Joint. The Gentleman, at the Sight of Mr.
P -- n, threw down his Sword, which he observing, made two of the Watchmen hold
him, while he most courageously broke his Head.

After this heroic Action, he told me, who stood quite stupefied between
Surprise and Pain, that I must turn out of Doors; but observing that I was
fainting, he brought up a Bottle of Wine, and kindly drank both our Healths. He
would fain have prevailed on us to pledge him; but we were not in a Temper to
return Civility. Upon which he took my Hand, and very generously made a Present
of me to the Gentleman, who could not in Honor refuse to take me, especially
as his own Liberty was not to be procured on any other Terms. Mr. P -- n kindly
dismissed our Guards, and assured us, as soon as ever he had obtained a
Divorce, he would with great Pleasure, join us together in holy Matrimony. At
the Door the Gentleman's Sword was delivered to him. Mr. P -- n offered to kiss
me at parting, which mean Piece of Dissimulation, so much in the Style of Jack
Ketch, gave me the utmost Contempt for the V -- n.

It was by this time two o'Clock in the Morning, and we knew not where to steer
our Course: However, the Gentleman's Servant always sat up for him, and
therefore he judged it more advisable to go to his own Lodging, than to search
for any other, and, truly, I little cared where I went.

And here, I sincerely assure my Reader, that neither of us even entertained a
Thought of any thing like Love, but sat like Statues till Daybreak; when
recollecting that I had nothing to change me with, I wrote a Letter to Mr. P --
n to desire he would send me my wearing Apparel, or at least some clean Linen.

He complied with my Request, and wrote me a long Letter, wherein he seemingly
expressed an infinite Concern for my Loss, but as I had most strenuously
recommended our Children to his Care, he gave it then under his Hand that he
was perfectly convinced they were his own, and that I might depend on his
Tenderness to them; but at the same time, as he was determined to be legally
divorced, he expected I would not give him any Opposition in it.

Before I received this Letter, I had taken a Lodging in Abbey-street up two
pair of Stairs, where my Clothes were brought to me, together with it; but not
a single Shilling to assist me, my Watch, my Books, and even what few Jewels I
possessed before Marriage, were detained from me, which threw me quite
dependant on the Courtesy of the Person I was accused with.

But Mr. P -- n was so highly provoked at our not cohabiting together, as he
wished, that he forced the Gentleman to fly, who having Notice that there was
an Action taken out against him, made the best of his way to London, leaving a
Letter with five Guineas enclosed in it for me, in the Hands of a Dissenting
Minister, who very faithfully discharged his Trust.

Curiosity made me go to the Gentleman's Lodging to enquire of his Landlady
what she knew relating to him; the Gentlewoman was very obliging, but could
give me no Satisfaction or Light into the Affair: However, she made me drink
Tea with her, and we sat together till near nine o'Clock at Night.

At my return to my own Lodging, the Maid told me my Room was Let; I said that
was odd, as it was taken by the Week, and one not then expired, to Let it
without giving me Warning to provide myself, which, at that Hour, in a Winter's
Night, it was impossible for me to do.

The Maid, to whose care this House was entrusted, for I know not who was
Landlord, told me, I might if I pleased lie in the first Floor, as the Family
were not come to Town, and there were only their Servants in the House, whom
she could dispose of into worse Beds; but, to my great Surprise, I found the
Lock had been taken off the Bedchamber Door, which I will remembered had been
on it in the Morning, as I had some Difficulty to open it to take thence some
China.

I asked her the meaning of it? She insisted positively that there never had
been a Lock on it, which knowing to be a Falsehood, I began to be apprehensive
some foul play was intended, nor was I mistaken.

I then asked her for a young Woman, whom she had told me was a Servant out of
Place, that lodged in the back Parlour; she said she was a Bed in the Garret,
and that my Trunk was there also; this gave me a sufficient Excuse, as there
was no Lock on the Trunk, to go up to her; and as she had been a Lady's Woman,
and very well knew who I was, I told her all my Apprehensions, and she readily
consented to quit her own Bed and come to mine.

We brought down the Trunk between us, and placed it against the Chamber Door;
as the Maid was busied with her new Guests, she took it for granted I was
alone, and therefore resolved to provide me with a Male Bedfellow, as a proper
Consolation for a Person in my unhappy Situation.

About seven o'Clock in the Morning, not then clear Day, she very furiously
pushed open the Chamber Door, and told me, one Mr. B -- k desired to breakfast
with me, who was a Member of P -- t, and a Man of Fortune, and the Person who
had taken the House. I told her I never wished to see any human Creature, and
should be glad I could hide myself even from myself; but she, supposing me to
be alone, directly introduced a Man, full six Feet high, and of the most
disagreeable Aspect I ever beheld -- Perhaps it was my Terror that painted him
so to my Imagination.

I started up and threw my Gown about me, but I was not quite so quick in
putting on my Clothes as the Gentleman was, in taking his off, resolving,
without the least Ceremony to come to Bed to me, I pulled my Companion, who
asked him what he meant; why, who the D -- l are you, you old B -- ch said he:
This Lady, meaning me, is publicly known through all the Coffee-houses in
Dublin. Had the Gentleman been studying how to disappoint his own Intentions,
he could not more effectually have done it, as he brought all the Horror of my
Condition full upon my Mind. And as I had no Protector, no Friend, no Guardian,
I burst into Tears, and told him, if he was a Gentleman, he would not insult
Misery. 'Do I occasion Tears, Madam?' 'You do, Sir, and and therefore I desire
you will depart.' 'Well, Madam, said he, I beg pardon, I had a full History of
you from the Maid of the House, who said, she believed a Companion would not be
disagreeable to you, especially as she was apprehensive you had no Money.'
'Sir, said I, she is mistaken, I have at least enough to discharge my Lodging,
which I will immediately do; and once more I desire you to withdraw, which
accordingly he did.'

I then prevailed on the young Woman who was with me to take a Lodging for me,
and in about half an Hour I went to it. But now came the general Slander Charge
Which some invent, the rest enlarge.
So from my Heart, I wrote the following Lines. SORROW.
WHILE sunk in deepest Solitude and Woe,
My streaming Eyes with ceaseless Sorrow flow,
While Anguish wears the sleepless Night away,
And fresher Grief awaits returning Day;
Encompassed round with Ruin, Want and Shame,
Undone in Fortune, blasted in my Fame;
Lost to the soft endearing Ties of Life,
And tender Names of Daughter, Mother, Wife;
Can no Recess from Calumny be found?
And yet can Fate inflict a deeper Wound!
As one who in a dreadful Tempest tossed,
If thrown by Chance upon some desert Coast,
Calmly a while surveys the fatal Shore,
And hopes that Fortune can inflict no more;
Till some fell Serpent makes the Wretch his Prey,
Who escaped in vain the Dangers of the Sea;
So I who hardly 'scap'd Domestic Rage,
Born with eternal Sorrows to engage,
Now feel the poisonous Force of sland'rous Tongues,
Who daily wound me with envenomed Wrongs.
Shed then a Ray Divine, all Gracious Heaven,
Pardon the Soul that sues to be forgiven,
Though cruel Humankind relentless prove
And least resemble thee in Acts of Love;
Though Friends who should administer Relief,
Add Pain to Woe, and Misery to Grief,
And often! too often! with Hypocritic Air,
Condemn those Faults in which they deeply shaer.
Yet thou who do our various Frailties know,
And see each Spring from whence our Actions flow,
Shall, while for Mercy to thy Throne I fly,
Regard the lifted Hand and streaming Eye.
Thou did the jarring Elements compose,
Whence this harmonious Universe arose;
O speak the Tempest of the Soul to Peace,
Bid the tumultuous War of Passion cease;
Receive me to thy kind Paternal Care,
And guard me from the Horrors of Despair.
And since no more I boast a Mother's Name,
Nor in my Children can a Portion claim,
The helpless Babes to thy Protection take,
Nor punish for their hapless Mother's sake:
Thus the poor Bird when frighted from her Nest
With agonizing Love, and Grief distressed,
Still fondly hovers over the much loved Place,
Though strengthless, to protect her tender Race;
In piercing Notes she movingly complains,
And tells the unattending Woods her Pains.
Mem. My Husband, who was then suing for a Divorce.
And thou once my Soul's fondest dearest Part,
Who schem'd my Ruin with such cruel Art,
From human Laws no longer seek to find,
A Power to loose that Knot which God has joined,
The Props of Life are rudely pulled away,
And the frail Building falling to Decay,
My Death shall give thee thy desired Release,
And lay me down in everlasting Peace.


I believe Mr. P -- n would say with old Sir Paul Plyant, when he finds a Love:
Letter from a Gentleman to his Wife, signed, your dying Ned Careless, 'Ads bud,
I wish it were true!' But, My kind Companion never fear,
For though you may mistake a Year,
Though your Prognostics run too fast
They Will certainly prove true at last.
Swift. But I had a Fellow-Lodger, one Mr. Donnellan, an Ensign, who it seems
knew me so well, that he thought proper to bring the late Earl of R -- sse, of
facetious Memory, and several other Persons of Distinction, to break open my
Lodging. On hearing them coming up Stairs, I ran into the Dining Room, and
locked myself in. When those worthy P -- rs could not find me, they threatened
to kick the Landlady; and one of them putting his Mouth to the Keyhole of the
Dining Room, cried, 'Do, my Dear, open the Door; by Heaven! it is nobody but I,
D -- g, the Fiddler.' I made no Reply; so being disappointed, they were forced
to decamp, cursing and vowing Revenge against the Woman of the House.

This Accident so terribly alarmed me, that I resolved to quit this Lodging the
next Day; but Mr. D -- n was determined not to permit me to depart in Peace;
for, being a military Man, he stood Sentinel at the Door of my Chamber all
Night, frequently entreating me to let him in; but truly had I been amorously
inclined, the Sight of the various Medicines in his Apartment would have Damped
all Passion sympathetic.
For, as I had a back Room, when this Gentleman was abroad, I frequently, for
Variety, went into his, which looked into the Street.

However, at last he went to Bed; and early next Morning he told the Landlady
that I had kept him awake all Night, and that I was a most notorious common S
-- t.

'Arah, by my Shoul (said the old Dame) you would make her one, if you could:
What Business had you, and all those Lords with her? One of them bid the Devil
to break my own Neck; but I hope he will be hanged first.'

While my Landlady, to whom I had never told my Name, related this to me, I
heard somebody enquire for Mrs. Pilkington, so I desired to know who it was,
and up came a very well dressed matron like Female of about Fifty; she expressed
great Concern for my Misfortunes; said, my dear Father had saved her Life, and
that she was at present Housekeeper to the Earl of A -- m, who was extremely
troubled for his Rudeness to me, and hoped I would give him an Opportunity of
begging my Pardon. I told her, as I did not know whom to blame, I wanted no
Apology; it was my wretched Fate to be subject to the Insolence of every Fellow.

She then urged, what I own was a prevailing Argument to one not worth a
Shilling, that my Lord was very generous, and would, she was sure, make me a
handsome Present, in Recompense of the Terror he had put me into. As I looked
on my present Circumstances to be quite desperate, being near Lying-in, and
having nothing to assist me, I agreed to see him any where, except at my own
Lodging. Upon which the artful old Crone told me of a House in the
Neighborhood, a very reputable one according to her Account, where my Lord
would meet me in the Evening.

Accordingly I went; but let any one judge of my Surprise, when instead of the
Earl, I met a Gentleman whom I had never seen before: So I instantly departing
left him to his Contemplations. And in Process of Time it came to light, that
the venerable Housekeeper of the Earl, was neither better or worse than the
celebrated Mother Brown: And indeed I received many Visits from Ladies of her
sublime Calling.

And what most surprised me, was, that they were generally employed by sober
married Men, and such as to my own Knowledge, lived very well with their Wives;
but these Ladies assured me, their Husbands hated them, and would rather have
any other Woman. So I found I was not alone in my Misfortune. And if every
married Man, who has ever attacked me, does not subscribe to my Memoirs, I
will, without the least Ceremony, insert their Names, be their Rank ever so
high, or their Profession ever so holy. I Will dash the proud Gamester from his
gilded Car;
Bare the mean Heart, that lurks beneath a Star.
And the more formal Villains, who, in the Robes of Sanctity, commit worse
Frauds then Highwaymen, surely ought not to remain unexposed. For me, while
Heaven affords me vital Breath,
Let them behold me, as their Scourge, till Death;
Them, through their Serpent Mazes, I Will pursue,
And bring each latent Vice to public View:
And, what their Cunning studies to conceal,
Shall be my constant Pleasure to reveal;
Till warned Mankind shall from their Mischiefs fly,
And hate them more, if possible, than I.
Ay, my little good Lord Cardinal!
I Will scare you worse than did the Midnight Bell,
When the brown Wench lay kissing in your Arms Mem. My Maid on the Carpet.
.


I once was acquainted with a Prelate, who had certain stated Prices for all
his Sins; as thus: l. s. d. For Adultery 1 7 0 For Simple Fornication 0 10 6
For Venial Transgressions 0 5 0 each And, Yet he was a B -- p, and he wore a
Mitre,
Which, in all in good Time, may be Surrounded with Jewels of Sulphur and Nitre.
How nearly this B -- p my B -- p resembles!
But his has the Odds, who believes and who trembles.


What I thought most cruel in him was that he never gave a Farthing to the poor
Women themselves. But to make up Matters with Heaven, he took up ten Bastards
every Year; fed, clothed, and apprenticed them; hoping, no doubt, as his
Dealings were pretty promiscuous, some one of them might belong to him. So How
could his Charity be better shown,
Or whom should he provide for, but his own?


As I do not choose to be guilty of Scandalum magnatum, if nobody can guess who
I mean, I will fairly acknowledge myself to be as arrant a Dunce as any B -- p
or Parson in the World, and really that is speaking largely; Considering what
Dullness reigns
Amongst our P -- s, Priests and Deans.


And as Milton observes on the Devil's breaking into Paradise: So since into
God's Fold
Climb Thieves, and Ruffians, and lewd hireling Slaves,
Turning the Sanctuary of the Almighty
Into a Den.


And it were to be wished that our Blessed Savior would once more come, and
drive those Money Changers out of the Temple.

I was again once more obliged to change my Lodging, and knew not how to
provide for the approaching Calamity: I wrote to Mr. P -- n, who generously
sent me Sixpence by my eldest Son, to put me above the Temptations to which
Want exposes our helpless Sex; for so he expressed himself in a long Epistle he
wrote with it.

But when things are at the worst they generally mend; for who should arrive
from London but Mr. W -- le. He no sooner heard of my Misfortune, but he came
to visit me, and as he had a strange Ambition to be thought a Poet, he assured
me, if I would devote my Genius to his Service he would liberally reward me; to
which I gladly consented, as an easy and honorable Method of getting a
Subsistence.

I really would not be so ungenerous to strip the Jack-Daw of his borrowed
Plumes, but that his Usage of me in London was so inhuman, that it merits a
worse Punishment from me, than merely exposing his Vanity, and the World may
conclude, That of all the fine Things which he keeps in the Dark,
There Is scarce one in ten, but what has my Mark.
Though Mr. P -- n and Harry C -- ry were his two Subalterns, or under
Strappers in poetical Stock-jobbing. As Mr. W -- le was a musical Man, my first
Task was to write a Song for him, which I performed in the following manner.
STELLA, Darling of the Muses,
Fairer than the blooming Spring;
Sweetest Theme the Poet chooses,
When of thee he strives to sing.
While my Soul with Wonder traces
All thy Charms of Face and Mind,
All the Beauties, all the Graces,
Of the Sex in thee I find.
Love, and Joy, and Admiration,
In my Breast alternate rise;
Words no more can paint my Passion,
Than the Pencil could thine Eyes.
Lavish Nature thee adorning,
Over thy Lips and Cheeks has spread,
Colors that might shame the Morning,
Smiling with celestial Red.
Would the Gods, in blessed Condition,
Our Requests indulgent view,
Sure each Mortal's first Petition
Would be to resemble you.


Mr. W -- le showed this Ballad to Mr. P -- n, who thought proper to alter the
last Verse, giving it this profane and nonsensical Turn; Could the Gods, in
blessed Condition,
Aught on Earth with Envy view,
Lovely Stella, their Ambition
Would be to resemble you.
As for the Gods envying Mortals, and wishing to be like them, it has neither
Sense, English, nor even Novelty to recommend it; nor is it agreeable to the
Dictates of Reason or Religion; for even a Heathen Author stands condemned for
setting Cato in a Light superior to the Gods; but a Christian Divine may say
any thing, and so much for an old Song.

I thought my Circumstances might have secured me from any farther Attacks from
the Male World; but it seems I was to have no more Rest than the Patriarch's
Dove had; for I had a furious Onset from A Tinsel Babbler Blunderbuss of Law.
Newburgh's Hiena. One C -- n, a Person not otherwise known, than by his being
acquainted with all the Tricks and Roguery of the Courts; who, because I
treated him with the Contempt he deserved, railed at me wherever he went,
insomuch that I was obliged to compliment him with the following Lines. To
Counselor C -- N.
WHY C -- n with cruel Aim?
Seek you to hurt a wounded Fame?
Or how have I provoked your Rage,
To bring me thus upon the Stage?
It Is true, indeed, I could not love you;
But why should that so greatly move you?
Are you not used to plead in vain,
And practiced to endure Disdain?
You tamely bear the Scorn of Men,
Why vexed at it from Women then?
When you approached me in Disguise,
And swore to fifty thousand Lies;
And more your self to recommend,
Basely traduced your absent Friend?
When you invoked each Power, to prove
The Truth and Ardour of your Love,
I looked through all the vile Deceit,
Saw C -- n, and knew the CHEAT.
Thy Wife, with Hide of well tanned Oak,
May sure to rove her Spouse provoke;
And you from Cuckoldom be safe,
Either from D -- cy, or from T -- ffe.
And Jealousy must be a Jest,
For her whom all Mankind detest.
Take then some culinary Fair,
Nor seek a Star beyond your Sphere.
How could you hope to meet Success,
Unskilled in Breeding or Address?
Unblessed with Eloquence to move
The melting Soul to mutual Love?
Your Lodgings, Gold, and Wine three Doz'n,
I scorned, and eke to call you Cousin;
And could thou, dull Impostor, think
To purchase me with Gold or Drink?
Yet still, in Principles, it is known,
We judge of others by our own;
And I excuse the fordid Thought,
In thee, whose Soul is to be bought.
Thy licensed Tongue the Law may murder;
But, prithee, mangle me no further:
For though my Colors are too faint,
Such glaring Crimes as thine to paint;
Yet I sometimes, in Black and White,
Can draw a Knave's Resemblance right.
Thy Envy then, and Rage give over,
Thou worthless, mean, rejected Lover!
Or in a Print, I swear to show you,
So like, that all Mankind shall know you.


This did not happen to silence the Fellow, who now carried his Impudence so
far, as to declare to all the Lawyers at the Rose Club, that I made Love to
him; so, recollecting a Story his Nephew, who was married to my Sister, had
related to me, of a vile Use to which he adapted three large Folio Volumes of
his Uncle's Philosophy, I wrote the following Ballad, and pacquetted Mr. T --
ffe with it, at a Time I knew several Lawyers would be assembled at the Tavern
aforementioned; and threatened Mr. T -- ffe, if he did not read it out for the
Amusement of the Company, he should be my next Subject for Satyr; but no body
so earnestly insisted on seeing the Song as C -- n himself. To oblige him and
entertain the Company, Mr. T -- ffe sung it to the Tune of Chevy Chase. YE Sons
of Science mourn with me
In sad and doleful Strains,
The Loss which fair Philosophy
And Literature sustains.
Three Volumes of enormus Size,
O C -- n had penned,
And lent them, for to make him wise,
To an ingenious Friend;
Who on the puzzling Pages por'd
Three live-long Summer Days;
But could not understand one Word:
For so my Author says.
He, through the palpable obscure,
Grop'd out his uncouth Way,
Where neither Truth, nor Reason pure,
Had shed one Friendly Ray.
In Newton, Bacon, Lock, and Boil,
He found celestial Light;
Whose sacred Beams o'er-paid his Toil;
But here reigned deepest Night.
In famed Laputa's floating Isle,
As Gulliver has taught,
They swallow Learning like a Pill,
Without Expense of Thought.
This Way he tried, but all in vain,
Those Writings never ascend;
They Gravitation's Laws maintain,
And to the Center tend.
Enraged to find all Methods fail,
These Works, he surely said,
May be adapted to the Tail,
Though never to the Head.
These Sybil Leaves, Oh Spite and Shame!
In Pieces torn he takes,
And wiped a Part not fit to name,
And plunged them in a Jakes.
Wake C -- n thy noble Heart,
Explore that hoary Deep;
Nor suffer thine immortal Part
In Silence there to sleep.
Or on the Orifice all Day
Thy nether End expose,
By whose inspiring Fumes you may
New Systems yet compose.
Henceforth be scorned great Maro's Tomb,
And eke the Delphic Shrine;
For that famed Privy-House, whose Womb
Contains thy Works divine.


I have been credibly informed that this Song made C -- n blush, which was more
than any thing had ever done before. However he took a Copy of it, which he
promised to publish; but finding he has not been as good as his Word, I must
even be at the Expense of doing it my self.

But to return: Mr. W -- le came to me, and told me, he had been so unfortunate
to disoblige a Lady of Distinction; for not being apprized that she understood
French, and being asked in that Language, how he liked her? he said, she was an
indifferent Picture of her Sister: But he easily perceived, by an Alteration in
her Countenance, that she too well understood him, and that he was out of Hope
of obtaining her Pardon, unless something pretty could be wrote upon the
Subject by way of Apology; so I raised his Spirits in about half an Hour after,
by sending him the following Lines. To Miss PL -- KETT.
A Thousand different Arts I tried,
To vary Celia's Face;
And at each Alteration spied
Some new resistless Grace.
Now cheerful Mirth with gay Delight
Shines in her Eyes confessed;
Now Sorrow clouds their beamy Light,
And heaves her snowy Breast.
Each different Turn of Mirth or Spleen
Still gave the Maid new Charms;
Anger alone remained unseen,
Which every Nymph disarms.
Fair one, can you forgive the Art
Which did your Wrath provoke;
Alas! far distant from my Heart
Was that rash Word I spoke.
And know, this Passion only showed
New Graces to my Sight,
Your Cheeks with brighter Beauties glowed,
Your Eyes flashed keener Light.
Like Semele's my daring Aim,
Would on Jove's Lightning gaze,
But sunk amidst the fatal Flame,
And perished in the Blaze.


In the Evening Mr. W -- le returned, and told me, the Lines had made up all
Matters; that the other young Lady said, she wished he had affronted her, so he
had made her such a pretty Apology. 'I must beg of you now, said he, to improve
that Hint, and write me some Lines for her Sister.' I readily writ for him
these. To Miss BETTY PL -- KETT.
WHY, Fair one, should thou wish thy Friend
Thy matchless Sweetness to offend;
Alas! thy Beauty need not use,
This Method to engage his Muse:
Since naught could keep her mute so long,
But Fear thy Loveliness to wrong.
When other Nymphs my Song require,
And bid me strike the sounding Lyre,
To gratify the vainest she,
I tell her, she resembles thee.
But not a Bard since Milton's Days,
However elegant in Praise,
Possessed that Dignity of Thought,
To draw an Angel as he ought.


The Lines had the desired Effect, and both the Ladies were reconciled to the
supposed Author.

My next Task being a charitable one, I could by no means refuse; which was to
write the following Prologue, for the Benefit of a distressed Person in Jail. A
PROLOGUE, spoke at the THEATER in Smock-Alley.
THIS Land for Learning, and Religion famed,
In ancient Times the Isle of Saints was named.
And Heaven-born Charity, prime Grace, once more
Shall this blessed Title to its Sons restore.
A fitter Object Pity never could find,
For this divinest Virtue of the Mind,
Than honest Industry, and Worth distressed,
And suffering Innocence by Fraud oppressed,
By pale-ey'd Want, and sallow Sickness pined,
Within a Prison's dismal Gloom confined,
Where everlasting Sighs and Anguish reign,
And each sad Moment seems an Age of Pain.
It Is yours to raise him from his dreadful Care,
To soften Anguish and remove Despair;
The Great and Pious in the Task combine,
And glorious emulate the Power Divine;
Mercy her white Celestial Wings displays,
And to the Throne of Grace your Zeal conveys;
Whence thick as Dew from Heaven shall Joys descend,
And endless Blessings on your Race attend.


Mr. W -- e now began to make some Figure; and though he kept me pretty fully
employed, he drove an underhand Trade with Mr. P -- n. And as he was not
willing that either of us should believe him incapable of Writing, he used to
show Mr. P -- n's Work to me, and swear it was his own; and in return, he, with
the same modest Assurance, presented mine to him; but we were too well
acquainted with each other's Style to be deceived. At last, Mr. P -- n, not
satisfied with all the Expense he put him to in London, made a Demand on him
for fifty Pounds; but as Mr. P -- n had before made the best Penny of me to him
he possibly could, and W -- le finding what I wrote passed every Jot as well
his, he thought it most convenient, if he did disburse any thing, to give it to
me, as thinking I most wanted it; so I was now full of Poetical Business, by
which my Poverty was relieved, and my Mind amused.

Mr. P -- n was so vexed at losing his Chap, that in Revenge he endeavored to
insinuate that we conversed unlawfully together; but this met no Credit, as I
very seldom saw him, and never alone.

In the mean time he carried on a vigorous Prosecution against me in the
Spiritual Court, in which I gave him no opposition; as he solemnly declared he
would always allow me a Maintenance to the utmost of his Ability; and to live
with him, I by no means desired. For never could true Reconcilement spring
Where Wounds of deadly Hate so deep were fixed.


But no sooner had he obtained a Separation from me, but he retracted every
Word he had said; not only refusing to give me any Assistance, but also abusing
me, in the most unchristian, false, and scandalous manner, and publicly
triumphed in having overreached me. Upon this I was advised to lodge an Appeal
against him, which made him quite mad. He abused his Advocate Proctor, and the
Judge himself, as all doing him Injustice; and though I knew none of them,
insisted on it, they were Confederates with me against him.

But this outrageous manner of Proceeding rather injured himself than me; the
Delegates were appointed; and as every body whom he consulted, assured him, he
would be cast, his haughty Spirit was willing to capitulate; but nobody would
undertake to deliver his Message to me, least he should scandalize them for it;
so at length with great Entreaty he prevailed on W -- le to make a Proposal
from him, to me, of giving me a small Annuity, and thirty Pounds in Money,
which, in regard to my Children, I rather chose to accept of, than ruin their
Father, as I certainly had it in my power to do.

W -- le, who has really a good deal of Humor, came to me one Morning after my
being a Week without seeing him, and in a Theatrical manner delivered the
following Speech: Before I speak the Message of the Priest; first give me leave
to glory in the Title of his Ambassador.

I wondered what odd Whim had now taken W -- le; and begged he would deliver
himself like a Man of this World.

He then related the Proposal aforementioned, on which I desired two Days time
to consider, and then acquiesced, and withdrew the Appeal, like an easy Fool as
I was.

Dearly have I since repented it, as no Articles of the Agreement were kept,
although I thought they were as strongly assured to me, as the Law could make
them; in which there are so many Loop-holes, that even Persons conversant with
it may be deceived; how then should a Female be sufficiently on her Guard,
against the Professors of a kind of unintelligible Jargon, whose Skill is to
puzzle the Cause, or a Science where, Endless Tautologies and Doubts perplex;
Too harsh a Study for our softer Sex!


Of the Thirty Pounds, I never received but Fifteen, and those Mr. W -- le
assured me he advanced out of his own Pocket, and never was paid, as I can
prove under his own Hand.

But Heaven knows, as I had every thing to provide for a Child, and myself, and
Rent also to pay, this Sum lasted not long, especially as I had no Friend near
me. -- No; nor any honest Person; for my Landlady, of whom before I had
conceived a good Opinion, when she found I was in Labor, insisted either on my
paying double the Rent I had engaged for, or quitting her House, which, as it
was then too late for me to do, I was necessitated to comply with her
exorbitant Demand, which made her very complaisant.

Before I had received even this small Relief I wrote to many Ladies, to whom
my Father had been Physician, and who once seemed to be my Friends; but to no
purpose; their constant Answer was, that I deserved nothing; to which general
Rule, I never met with but two Exceptions.

I wrote also to the B -- p of C --, who after long Deliberation, picked out of
his Purse half a Piece, which extraordinary Bounty, he by the Force of
Imagination doubled; and also declared that I had sent to him for it, a Woman
who had been whipped through the Town; who, as she really was a Gentlewoman of good
Character, but of low Fortune, had it not been for my Persuasion to the
contrary, would have sued his L -- p for Defamation.

But as he was so kind to give my Son, who is his God-son, Five Shillings in
small Change in London, which he told the Youth was a Crown Piece, who knowing
there was such a Coin as a Five Shilling Piece of Gold, searched amongst the
Halfpence narrowly to find it, though without Success, I think I must pardon him;
especially, as on my threatening to expose him since I came to Ireland, he, to
bribe me to Secrecy, sent me one Pound, a remarkable and unaccountable Charity
from his Lordship, to any Person of whom he had not Carnal Knowledge.

And though in a Letter of his, he assures me he desires no public Praise for
what he has done, and makes as long and learned a Disquisition between the Law
of our Members and the Law of our Minds, as he once did between Graminervous
and Carniverous, which, as I do not understand Latin, I may very possibly
mispel, though their Signification is, I believe, Grass or Flesh devouring
Animals; of the later of which, I believe his L -- p would make the best Meal.
The ancient Priests were never permitted to burn Flesh, but as a Sacrifice to
the Almighty; but it is reported, that one of them turning a Stake, when it was
a little too hot, burned his Finger, on which he licked it, and found it so
savory, that he devoured that part which was intended for the Gods; and as the
Laity beheld him, to their Opinion, breaking the Law in eating Flesh, he
assured them, that he had an immediate Revelation, that it was lawful for him
to eat the prime Part of the Flesh, and leave the Garbage for the Laity. Thus
we may see how early Priestcraft began; from the very first, they were
Fleshmongers; and Priests of all Religions are the same. Those who want to look
farther into the Deceits of Priesthood, may trace it up even to the Nile, from
whence Superstition and the Crocodile first sprung, both alike destructive to
Mankind.

It is known to every learned Divine, that the Priests engrossed the whole
Country of Egypt, as the eldest Son of every Priest was born a Priest, and was
therefore entitled to a tenth part of the Land; upon which Joseph, who was not
only an admirable Man but an excellent Politician, and had a Divine Revelation
that the Land should suffer Famine ten Years, ordered the Priests to pay in all
their Subsidies to the King, whereby, in those ten Years of Dearth, the King
purchased, at so low a Rate as giving the People a little Corn, all the Lands
in Egypt. These are Remarks of the admirable Lord Shaftsbury, whose inimitable
Style and clear Manner of Reasoning carry Conviction with them.

I never knew any Clergyman who quoted him but to his Prejudice, except Dr.
Turnbull: And yet I cannot see why Morality, or the Preaching of it, should in
any wise be offensive to a Christian; since there is a certain Beauty in
Holiness, which, though it were never to be hereafter rewarded, gives a sincere
Satisfaction and Quietude of Mind in this Life, -- And therefore Virtue does
still, With Scorn the mercenary World regard,
Where sordid Minds do Good, and hope Reward,
Above the worthless Trophies Men can raise
She seeks not Honor, Fame, or empty Praise,
But with herself, herself the Goddess pays.
All I would infer from this rambling Digression is, That Authority, though it
errs like other,
Bears yet a kind of Medicine in itself,
To skin the Sore on the Top.
And that Subtilty and Avarice have been almost inseparable from the Priesthood
ever since the World began.

But to return. Having at length passed the Pain and Peril of Childbirth, by
the Care and Humanity of Dr. Arbuckle, I was in great Distress. It is true, Mr.
P -- n kindly advised me to leave my Child, which was a Female one, upon the
Parish; and as he would willingly have done the same, or worse, to those whose
Legitimacy he never questioned, I had the less Reason to blame him; but such a
Piece of Inhumanity I from Soul abhorred, nor could any thing prevail on me to
put it in practice.

Mr. W -- le went to Mallow, where at his Request I sent to him the following
Poems. The HAPPY PAIR. A BALLAD.
AT dewy Dawn,
As over the Lawn,
Young Roger early strayed,
He chanced to meet
With Jenny sweet,
The blooming Country Maid;
Her Cheeks so red
With Blushes spread,
Showed like the breaking Day,
Her modest Look
The Shepherd took;
She stole his Heart away.
With tender Air,
He wooed the Fair,
And movingly addressed;
For Love divine,
Can Clowns refine,
And warm the coldest Breast;
Her Eyes he praised,
And fondly gazed,
On her enchanting Face,
Where Innocence,
And Health dispense,
Each winning rosy Grace.
Young Jenny's Breast,
Love's Power confessed,
And felt an equal Fire;
Nor had she Art,
To hide her Smart,
Or check the soft Desire.
Hymen unites,
In blissful Rites,
The fair, the matchless two;
And Wedlock never
Could boast a Pair
More lovely or more true.
Ye Rich and Great;
How seldom Fate
Gives you so mild a Doom;
Whose wandering Flames,
And wanton Dames,
A mutual Plague become;
While Coach and Six
Your Passion fix,
You buy your State too dearly;
Ah, courtly Folks!
You're but the Jokes
Of those who love sincerely.
MALLOW WATERS,
Written for Mr. W -- le, who was chosen Poet Laureat to the Honorable Society
of Ladies and Gentlemen erected there.
NOT famed Pieria's hallowed Spring,
Near which the sacred Sisters sing,
Could more deserve the Poet's Lays,
His softest Song, his choicest Praise,
Than Mallow's sweet inspiring Stream,
The Source of Health, the Muse's Theme.
Thy Draughts, Nepenthe like, remove
All Sorrows, but the Pains of Love;
And on thy Banks such Nymphs appear,
That none escape that Passion here.
While Art, in vain, attempts to show
Their Features, and celestial Glow;
Thy smooth, expanded, liquid Glass,
Lively reflects each beauteous Face,
And shows them that transcendent Bloom,
Which from thy Bounty they assume.
If all be true which Poets dream,
There dwells a Nymph in every Stream;
Sweet Naiad that inhabit'st here,
In crisped Brook, or Fountain clear,
O teach me, in exalted Verse,
The matchless Charmers to rehearse,
And as you gently glide along,
To distant Fields convey my Song.
First sing our Queen, sublimely graced,
With Breeding, Elegance, and Taste;
And Blaney, with each Charm replete,
Which decks the Worthy, or the Great;
In Dunscomb's faultless Form and Mind,
A thousand winning Charms we find;
And graceful Bond, whose easy Air
Bespeaks the unaffected Fair.
O Lysaught! such a Form as thine,
In Homer's deathless Lays should shine;
Since he, who Helen's Beauties drew,
Alone can give thy Charms their due:
From thee I turn my dazzl'd Sight,
And lo! where radiant Plunkett bright,
As Noontide Sun in Summer Skies,
Wounds with new Light my aching Eyes.
Ah Mallow! what avail thy Shades?
If tyrant Love their Peace invades;
Not all thy Groves and wooded Hills,
Thy cooling Streams, or healing Rills,
Can guard us from his piercing Rays,
Or give the burning Anguish Ease;
Thy Waters quench each meaner Fire,
But make this Heaven-born Flame mount high'r.
In Jepson's blooming Form we meet
The Gay, the Sprightly, and the Sweet;
While Smith, with Virgin Beauty crowned,
Shall with her Sisters be renowned
Through Time, and leave a deathless Name,
Fair as their virtuous Mothers Fame.
Not Philomel's melodious Throat,
Can equal Brusted's warbled Note;
Soft Siren! whose enchanting Strains,
Fetter the imprisoned Soul in Chains.
With Rapture on the Dance we gaze,
When Purcell swims the harmonious Maze.
How many Charmers yet remain!
Well worthy the sublimest Strain!
What Hearts unnumber'd shall be won,
By Colthurst, Harper, Knap, and Dun!
And thou, agreeable Codroy,
The noblest Poet might employ.
What blooming Beauties smile around!
Thick as the Flowerets paint the Ground,
When warmer Suns and genial Rain
Make them to deck the verdant Plain;
Thick as the Stars their Beams display,
Which join to form the Milky Way.
Ah, fair ones! Language is too faint,
The Graces ye possess to paint;
Happy, if my aspiring Strain
Your judging Ears may entertain:
The Verse, believe me, is well meant,
However short of the Intent:
Smile then on my ambitious Aim,
And give your Poet endless Fame.
A SONG.
LYING is an Occupation,
Used by all who mean to rise;
Politicians owe their Station,
But to well concerted Lies.
These to Lovers give Assistance,
To ensnare the Fair one's Heart;
And the Virgin's best Resistance
Yields to this commanding Art.
Study this superior Science,
Would you rise in Church or State;
Bid to Truth a bold Defiance,
It Is the Practice of the Great.


In Return, he sent me the following Lines, which he assured me were his own.
VERSES to Mrs. P -- n, on seeing a Poem inscribed to her, the Season she was at
Mallow, in the Lines
If Sappho lends a gracious Smile,
Be damned all Critics of our Isle;
The Royal Stamp is on those Lays,
Which second Dacier deigns to praise:
Propitious then attend my Call,
My Muse, my Goddess, and my All.
Mr. W -- le to Mrs. P -- n.
THOU azure Fount, whose crystal Stream
Was once a nobler Poet's Theme,
While, to inspire the tuneful Strain,
Sappho was called; nor called in vain.
Ah! let, the World forgive, if here
I pay the Tribute of a T^r,
In friendly Grief at Sappho's Fate,
The Wonder of thy Banks so late.
So many Virtues were thy Share,
Thou most accomplished, ruined Fair!
One Error, sure, may be forgiven,
And Pardon find from Earth and Heaven!
That sovereign Power, who framed us all,
Suffered the Sons of Light to fall;
And often, to humble human Pride,
From Virtue lets the wisest slide.
Ye Fair, no more her Fault proclaim!
For your own Sakes, conceal her Shame:
Since, if a Nymph so good could fail,
We well may think your Sex are frail.


Who wrote those Lines I know not; but as I am certain the Author need not
blush to acknowledge them, I hope he will not only pardon my Vanity in making
them public, but also subscribe to my Writings.

I can only assure the World, I believe Mr. W -- le never wrote a poetical Line
in his Life; and therefore I am indebted to some humane and ingenuous Person,
who, supposing me guilty, makes an almost divine Apology for me.

But as it was impossible for me to subsist merely on Praise, I made one strong
Effort to deliver myself out of Calamity, which was, to beg Mr. P -- n to send
me some Money, to bear my Expenses to London, assuring him I was weary of
Ireland; which indeed was true: for I am of the same Opinion with the pleasant
Lady Dorchester, that Dublin is a Place of the least Sin, and the most Scandal,
of any City in the World.

Perhaps the Reverse would have better pleased her, as the Lord Chief Justice
says to Falstaff: Ld. Chapter Just. Your Waist, Sir John, is very great, and your
Means very slender.


Falst. Would it were otherwise, my Lord; that my Means were greater, and my
Waist slenderer.


This Text wants no Comment.

But if my learned Husband will oblige me with one, I shall be his very humble
Servant. He has threatened to give a true and impartial Narrative of my
Proceedings to the Public; and I wonder why he, who rides so fast, has not got
the Whip-hand of me: I fear his Appeal comes half an Hour too late: But,
Courage my Spouse; though it cannot be said,
That on^ cloven Tongue ever sat on your Head;
I Will hold you a Groat, and I wish I could see it,
If your Stockings were off, you could show cloven Feet.


I am a sad digressive Writer; by which my Readers may plainly perceive I am no
Methodist.

Mr. P -- n agreed to my Proposal; and as he was fully determined never to give
me any more, sent me nine Pounds, for which, as he said, he sold my Diamond
Ring to Mrs. Dubourg, and the Chain of my Watch, which cost six Guineas, to
Mrs. W -- rr -- n, for the Promise of forty Shillings; for which I suppose Mr.
P -- n and she have since accounted. A good-natured Man will easily be
satisfied with a Lady that will return him a Toy for a Trinket.

Nothing that ever she got vexed me so much as Mr. P -- n's giving her my
Father's Snuff Box, which he borrowed from me, under Pretense, that taking a
little Snuff preserved him from catching Sickness in Places he was obliged to
go to. He declared to me he had lost it; but I afterward saw it with her, as
also several other Things belonging to me.

But he is not the first Man who has plundered his Wife to oblige his --. As
this Lady was, I may say, the principal Cause of a Separation between the
Parson and me, I thought I had a Right to demand a Subscription from her;
which, since my Return to Ireland, I did in very civil Terms. And I think
myself in Duty bound to give my learned Readers a Taste of her excellent Style,
in answer to me. WHOOSOMDEVER you aree, I aboar you and yowr Filthy Idyous; I
submit my Cows to the Devil, and fear nout hiss Enemoys, whileoust I a^ undder
hiss Preteckshon. As to the Parson you metown, it is wile nowne what he^ iss; he
ruinged my Sun by his Ungraitfullnesse. It is not in your Power to defamatonous
my Corector in your wild Memboirs. So I am, wythh harti Prawours for yowr
speedi Deformation,

Yours --




I really took great Pains to find out the Meaning of this elaborate Epistle;
what i^ is, future Critics (who are better skilled i^ broken English) may
decide. But I do assure the Public it is genuine; which, if they doubt, I can
produce it in the Lady's own Scrawl. This Lady sent a Captain of a Ship to me,
when she heard I was going for England, to hurry me out of the Kingdom; which
Circumstance made me stay in it six Months longer than I intended. And having
not yet done with her, I cannot forbear remarking that one L -- ty, a Painter,
a rude Fellow, a few Nights after my Separation from the Parson, took the
Liberty, on not readily finding him in his own House, of breaking open his
Bedchamber Door, to which the Maid pointed, where the Lady and Gentleman were
administering Christian Consolation to each other: Ill-bred as he was, when he
found how Matters were, he begged Pardon for spoiling Sport; 'But Parson, (said
he) I did but follow your own Example.' So he retired without drinking (though
invited) Share of the Punch, of which stood a large Bowl before them; but Gold
can work Miracles, Make Base, Noble; Old, Young; Cowards valiant;
Ha! this, ye Gods! will lug your Priests and Servants from your Sides!
This yellow Slave!
Will knit and break Religions; bless the Accursed;
Make the hoary Leprosy adored!
This it is, that makes the wappen'd Widow wed again;
She, whom the Spital House, and ulcerous Sores,
Would cast the Gorge at, this embalms and spices
To the April Days again.
But I suppose this Widow was willing to have a Taste before Matrimony. And I
am certain Mr. P -- n could not possibly have any other Motive for liking this
Woman, but merely that she was rich.

I still continued scribbling for Mr. W -- le, to whom I sent to Mallow, the
following Poems on several Occasions, as he demanded them. A SONG.
Set to Music by Mr. ARNE.
TO melancholy Thoughts a Prey,
With Love and Grief oppressed;
To Peace a Stranger all the Day,
And all the Night to Rest.
For thee, disdainful Fair, I pine,
And wake the tender Sigh;
By that obdurate Heart of thine,
My balmy Blessings fly.
O look to yon celestial Sphere,
Where Souls in Rapture glow,
And dread to want that Mercy there,
Which you refused below.
A SONG.
SOME for their Forms I have desired,
And others for their Wit admired;
Yet, Fair one, I can truly vow,
I never, never loved till now.
No Language can describe the Pain,
Which in your Absence I sustain;
Or paint the rapturous Delight,
Which swells my Bosom at your Sight.
So when the golden Sun declines,
Sad Heliotrope her Head declines;
But quickens with his vital Ray,
And spreads her Beauties to the Day.
To a LADY who defended the Author's Character.
WHILE other Females trifle Life away,
In Dress and Scandal, Equipage and Play;
Stella, with Sense exalted and refined,
And each superior Grace adorns her Mind
There Friendship, Honor, Truth, and Virtue live,
With all the Charms that Art or Nature give.
O how shall Words my Tenderness impart!
Or speak the Dictates of a grateful Heart!
To thee, fair Patroness! who could descend,
My Character thus nobly to defend.
Who would not wish to have sustained a Wrong,
To have their Cause supported by thy Tongue?
So disappointed Malice drops its Aim,
And what was meant to sink, exalts my Fame.
The WISHES. A Song.
O Love! by thy almighty Power,
Transform me to that new-blown Flower,
Which, framed for Sweetness and Delight,
Attracts my loved Almeria's Sight.
Behold, in vernal Beauty dressed,
It decks the lovely Virgin's Breast;
Whence it superior Grace assumes,
And with unrivaled Beauty blooms.
Why am I not that gentle Air,
Which flutters, fans, and cools the Fair!
Too happy Zephyr! balmy Gale!
That Fragrance from her Breath you steal;
See, while your Pain you softly sigh,
And on her snowy Bosom die;
Thy Goddess, Flora, jealous grows,
And with divine Resentment glows.
Why am I not that Bird, whose Note,
Sweet warbling in his liquid Throat,
Bids every Grove and Vale rejoice;
His tender, soft, melodious Voice,
Nightly with his enchanting Strain,
Does, in the Woods, my Love detain,
Ti^l, listening, she forgets to fear
The Dangers that may threaten there.
When Phoebus darts direct his Beams,
Almeria seeks the cooling Streams;
The River-God with Pride receives
Almeria to his azure Waves;
With murmuring Joy they round her move,
And take her for the Queen of Love.
Ye Gods! were I that happy Stream!
How should my fierce, my rapid Flame --
Pardon, thou bright, thou matchless Fair!
The bold Presumption of my Prayer.
Gladly would I my Being change,
Gladly from Form to Form I Would range;
Might I, in any Shape, delight
Almeria's Sense, or please her Sight;
Or might those Variations prove
The Truth of my unaltered Love.


These and fifty others, of which I have no Copy, did this Gentleman get from
me, almost for nothing.

In the mean time, having received an unexpected Bounty from a Gentleman of
very high Rank and distinguished Honor, I wrote to him the following Lines. To
the Honorable Mr. ****.
ADMIRE not, if the grateful Muse,
With fond Affection, still pursues
Thee, Pride and Glory of a Race,
Whom every Muse and Science grace!
They in thy generous Bosom shine,
And lighten from thy Eyes divine!
Thus raptured, I the Strain essayed,
And begged Apollo's powerful Aid.
The angry God in Rage replied,
Go check thy Insolence and Pride;
Not that I blame thy happy Choice,
But it is too lofty for thy Voice;
Who pine like thee, with Want oppressed,
Forsaken, comfortless, distressed:
In vain attempt sublimer Lays,
The beauteous Work of Minds at Ease.
What though in early Hours of Life,
'Ere yet a Mother or a Wife,
I tuned thy infant Voice to sing,
And placed thee near my hallowed Spring
My favorite Swift thy Numbers praised,
Could mortal Worth be higher raised?
Yet I Will no more thy Wants supply,
Since Fortune leaves you, so will I.
Thy Laurel Chaplet now resign,
Let mournful Yew and Cypress twine
Around thy melancholy Head,
'Till thou art numbered with the Dead:
Nor dare to let thy Female Pen
Profane the first, and best of Men:
As well, when with Meridian Rays
I give the Summer Noontide Blaze,
Might thou expect to add new Light
To Beams intolerably bright,
As hope to heighten ****'s Fame,
Or add new Luster to his Name.
Whatever adorns the Wise and Good,
By him is truly understood;
Nor lives he for himself alone.
But Humankind his Bounty own.
Convinced, abashed, I dropped my Suit;
Wonder and Sorrow held me mute;
Yet though I wake the String no more,
Silent thy Virtues I adore.
O! let thy just superior Sense
Forgive this last, this fond Offense.
Led by Despair, the Hand of Death
Must quickly stop this vital Breath:
His fatal Power alone can part
Thy Image from my grateful Heart.


At the Gentleman's own Request I omit his Name; but when I say he is the elder
Brother of the greatest Man in this Kingdom, he may, perhaps, be guessed at.

This worthy Gentleman soon afterward fell sick, on which I sent him the
following Invocation to HEALTH.
THOU rosy Goddess of the Plains,
Where Innocence, thy Sister, reigns,
If Goodness can deserve thy Care,
To Godlike ****'s Couch repair;
Let him thy matchless Charms enjoy;
What Nymph to **** can be coy?
Nor should thy Favors be denied
To him who spreads thy Empire wide,
When Want and all her gloomy Train,
Pining Disease and racking Pain,
On poor afflicted Mortals prey,
His Bounty drives those Ills away;
Swift as the Shadows wing their Flight,
Before the purple dawning Light.
Come young-ey'd Maid, serenely gay,
With healing Looks and Breath of May;
His Virtues to our Wishes give,
And guard that Life by whom we live.


Mr. W -- le had the Conscience to write to me, to desire I would, by the
Return of the Post, send him a hundred Ballads of my own Composition, as he had
already begun to take in Subscriptions for them; and on the Receipt of them, he
would order a Gentleman to pay me two Guineas. I suppose he thought I could
write as fast as the Poet, whom Horace describes standing on one Leg, while he
wrote a thousand Lines: And because I was unable to comply with this Request,
he sent me the following most strange Epistle. To Mrs. P -- N.
D -- N you! sink you! G -- d fire you! I have beggared myself between your
scoundrel Husband and you, all to support a little dirty Vanity. When I want
any thing from him, his d -- ned Spirits are sunk: Nor has he given me any
think worth a Farthing, for the monstrous Sums he has drawn out of me. I could
write before I ever saw either of your ugly Faces, though not quite so well --
and d -- n me, if I ever write another Line of Verse -- You understand me -- I
shall be in Town, so as to meet the P -- t. The Eyes of all Europe are on me,
and d -- n me, if you do not send me the Ballads, but I will despise, and defy
you for ever.

Yours, J. W.
P. S. By G --, I cannot stir out, for my Landlady has beat me through the Town
with a hot Shoulder of Mutton, which she snatched from the Fire, Spit and all,
only for catching me a little familiar with her Daughter.






I concluded by this Letter, that the poor Man's Head was turned, and
therefore, thought it not worth answering, being now seriously determined to
leave Ireland; for, though I led the Life of a Recluse, I had every Day some
new Story invented of me. If I went out to take a little Air, they said, I had
great Impudence to show my Face; and if I staid at Home, I was then in Keeping
with some Man who confined me; and, in short, I could please nobody: Which gave
rise to the following Lines. EXPOSTULATION.
O God! since all thy Ways are just,
Why does thy heavy Hand
So sore afflict the wretched Dust,
Thou did to Life command?
Thou speak the Word, the senseless Clay
Was quick'ned with thy Breath,
Chearless to view the Beams of Day,
And seek the Shades of Death.
Through every Scene of Life distressed,
As Daughter, Mother, Wife;
When will thou close my Eyes in Rest,
And take my weary Life.
To the past, present, and to come,
Are ever-more the same;
Thou knew'st of all my Woes the Sum,
'Ere I my Thoughts could frame.
'Twas thou gav'st Passion to my Soul,
And Reason also gave,
Why did thou not make Reason rule,
And Passion be its Slave?
O pardon me, thou Power Divine!
That thus I dare presume
At thy Correction to repine,
Or murmur at my Doom.
Lord, give me Penitence sincere
For every Error past,
And though my Trials are severe,
O give me Peace at last.


So these were the last Strains I sung in Ireland; which, ill-used as I was in
it, I could not quit without very great Regret; and as the Coach drove by Mr. P
-- n's Door, I thought my very Heart would split with Sorrow; for there indeed
was all the Treasure of my Soul enclosed; namely, my dear little ones. Many a
Sigh and Tear they cost me; many a Prayer did I offer up to the Almighty for
their Preservation; and had he not been an infinitely more gracious Father to
them, than their earthly one proved, long long ago had they been finally lost!

My Eyes, even after I went on board the Yatch, were evermore turned to the
Shore of Ireland, resting there as on their last Period; till finding myself
observed, and that some of the Passengers, Colonel Dalway in particular, wanted
to see my Face, which I concealed, I pretended to be Sea-sick, and desired the
Steward to show me a Cabin.

He left me for a few Minutes; and returning, told me, all the Beds were
engaged; but however, there was a Gentleman on board, who said, he would sooner
sit up, than a Lady be unprovided for. I returned my Compliments, without ever
so much as enquiring to whom I was obliged.

The Sickness I feigned proved presently true; for no sooner was the Ship under
Sail, but I grew violently Sea-sick; when the Steward once more entered the
Cabin, and told me, the Gentleman, to whom it belonged, desired a Moment's Chat
with me. I begged him to make my Apology, as indeed, what with Sickness and
Sorrow, I was little in Temper to receive any Person.

However, the Gentleman resolved not to be so easily dismissed; for following
the Steward into my Cabin, he told me, he knew me to be Mrs. P -- n; that, he
could not sit up all Night; and therefore, he hoped I would not refuse him the
Liberty of sleeping in his own Bed.

I answered, I would not, provided he would be so kind as to leave me for a few
Moments; on which, weak as I was, I sprung out of Bed, and, as I had not
undressed myself, soon met him upon Deck.

Who this fame Gentleman was, may, in due Season, be revealed: I can only
assure my Readers, that, I believe had I accepted of the Offers he made me,
Poverty would never have approached me, as he was a Man of Honor, or at least
appeared to me as such: A Man of Fortune he certainly is; and I doubt not but
he has enjoyed many a lovely Lady, without promising them any Reward, or
offering them a Settlement for Life, as he really did me.

I dined with him at Parkgate; and I hope Virtue will be rewarded; for though I
had but five Guineas in the World to carry me up to London, I yet possessed
Chastity enough to refuse fifty for a Night's Lodging, and that too from a
handsome well-bred Man, whose Name if I should insert, all the World would
acknowledge I spoke but Truth of him.

I shall scarcely ever forget his Words to me, as they seemed almost prophetic.
'Well, Madam, (said he) you do not know London; you will be undone there.'
'Why, Sir, (said I) I hope you do not imagine I will go into any bad Course of
Life?' 'No, Madam, (said he) but I think you will sit in your Chamber, and
starve;' which, upon my Word, I have been pretty near doing; and, but that the
Almighty raised me one worthy Friend, good old Mr. Cibber, to whose Humanity I
am, under God, indebted both for Liberty and Life, I had been quite lost.

I dare say, nobody will imagine he served me from any carnal Views; since, If
Truth in Spite of Manners must be told,
Why really Seventy-six is something old.


So here I close the First Volume; and as it has been industriously and
maliciously reported, that I had in reality nothing to publish, I hope this
will convince the World, that Mrs. Pilkington was never yet reduced to the
Meanness of Falsehood or Tricking. And if this Volume meets with a favorable
Reception, I can assure my Readers, the next will be infinitely more
entertaining, and is now ready for the Press.

End of the FIRST VOLUME.
In the Press, and speedily will be Published, VOL. II. of this WORK, Which
will conclude the Whole.


