

THE Hospital-Surgeon: OR, A New, Gentle, and Easy Way, to Cure speedily all
Sorts of Wounds, and other Diseases belonging to SURGERY.

ALSO, A Discourse on Discovered Bones; and a Way to Dress, after Trepanning,
with a new Instrument invented by the Author.

In THREE PARTS.

I. The Advantages of this Way, and Mischiefs of a contrary Practice proposed
and confirmed by Reason and Authority. II. Observations of Wounds of all Kinds,
and every Part of the Body, quickly cured by this Method: with Practical
Reflections. III. An Idea of the Author's new Practice in Wounds, and other
Cases; and his easy and effectual Remedies; with some Observations and
Remarks.
By Mr. BELLOSTE, Surgeon-Major to the Hospitals of the French King's Army in
Italy.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Cockerill, at the Three Legs and Bible in the
Poultry; and Ralph Smith, at the Bible under the Royal Exchange in Cornhil,
1701.

TO THE READER.
WE could, possibly, have found out a Patron, had it been thought necessary,
under the protection of whose Name, this Stranger might have come abroad into
our English World: But as we look upon Dedications to be, for the most part,
empty Formalities, as little minded by every one else, as what is said in 'em,
is believed by the Writer; so we doubt not but this Book, will every where meet
with a becoming Reception, seeing it is sent out on such a friendly Errand, as
to heal our Sores, and pour Oil and Wine into our Wounds.

Surgery, in consideration of the Antiquity, the Usefulness, the Necessity, and
Excellency thereof, has ever been in the highest Esteem, among all these other
Arts, that were invented for the Service of Mankind. For the Improvemant of
this noble Profession, the Author of the ensuing Treatise has been at no small
Pains, having these twenty and eight Years labored therein, in some of the
most celebrated Countries of the World, with an unwearied Diligence, and
assiduous Application; the Fruits of whose Care and Fatigues, the Courteous
Reader is here presented with.

Several of the Learned and Ingenious, not only of this, but also of some
former Ages, have been very sensible, that this Art was far from having
attained unto that Perfection, whereof it is capable; yea that Abuses had slipped
into Practice, which were unknown to these renowned Persons, who at first were
famous in this Faculty. It was this Consideration, that produced that learned
and elaborate Treatise of Caesar Magatas, Doctor of Physic, and Professor
thereof in the University of Ferrara, entitled, De rara Vulnerum Tractatione,
and Turundarum Abusu. To the same also, we owe many other Chirurgical
Composures, that from time to time have appeared in the World; some finding
fault with one Thing, and some with another in the ordinary Way: Yea some have
gone so far, as universally to reject it.

It is not fitting, and would be extremely unjust, to say any thing in
Disparagement of the Works of such, as have endeavored to oblige the Public
by their Labors: Only this, we think, may be said, without Offense to any;
that the Book of Caesar Magatus is written in Latin, Rare to be found, and
very Long, and consequently of no use to the English Reader: And as for others,
they have either superficially only, and transiently complained of the
Imperfection of their Art; or then having signified to us in general, the
Defects of the Common Medicines and Method, don't enter into a Detail of the
Reasons, that make them miscarry in particular Cases, or make known unto us
either the Name, Nature or Composition of these other Remedies which we are to
use in the Place of the Former.

The following Treatise, which was altogether designed for the Reformation and
Improvement of Surgery, is without any of these Inconveniences. Herein the
Author, has discovered to us the Disadvantages of the usual Remedies and
Method, in the differing Cases that occur, by particular Reasons, drawn from
the Nature, and Essence of the Things whereof he discourses. He not only
describes to the Life, the Way he would have us to take, but also, as to Wounds
and some other Cases, points it out to us clothed with all the most Minute and
requisite Circumstances, in particular Instances of Cures of all Sorts, done on
all Parts of the Body. He gives us an Account of the Names, Natures, and
Compositions of the Simple and Easy Remedies he uses, and which he has found
attended with constant Success; not confining himself, or others, to one or two
only, but exhibiting, as was convenient, a competent Variety. When he blames
the ordinary Practice, and substitutes a better in the Place of it, he
accompanies his invincible Reasons, with several Authorities of the most
considerable Authors. Moreover, he has taught us how to evite the Exfoliation
of Bones: And has given us a new Way of Dressing, after performance of the
Operation of the Trepan, with an Instrument of his own Inventing.

He seems to have hit upon the Right Way, of carrying the Knowledge of the Art
he professes, to the furthest Extent it can go; which is is by giving an exact
History of what he has learnt therein by Experience, without vouching upon the
Credit of others, whether Ancients or Moderns, what himself has not proved by a
sufficient number of Trials. Had this Course been hitherto taken, in all the
Arts and Sciences, they had not remained at this Day of the Dwarfish Stature we
find 'em: neither had the World groaned, under the bulky Lumber of an infinite
number of useless Books, which for the most part, are but imperfect, and
mangled Transcriptions, from the Works of others. Had Physicians done so, their
Art had not been still termed Conjectural; nor had the ill Success, and jarring
Opinions of, by far, the greatest number of those, who bear that hounourable
Name, exposed it to contempt, and rendered it so abnoxious to be slighted, even
by the Vulgar.

But to return to our Author, all we will further say of him is, that he is an
unfeigned Lover of Mankind, Conscientious, Sincere, and Communicative of his
Knowledge without Reserve; and all this accompanied with an unusual Modesty:
The Truth of which desirable Character, his Book will abundantly Justify.

We will no longer detain the Reader in the Entry; only it is convenient he
should know, that this Treatise in the Original, is printed with the
Approbations of some of the most eminent Physicians, and Surgeons in France,
which are omitted in this English Impression, that was designedly contrived
into this small Bulk, for the greater Convenience of the Reader: Of whom all we
have to demand in behalf thereof is, that he would Read, Try, and Judge.

THE PREFACE.
I Am sufficiently convinced, of the Truth of what is delivered by Hippocrates
in his Aphorisms, that Life is Short, and Art is Long: And indeed it appears
extremely difficult, for one Man righly to acquit himself, in the Practice of
All the Parts of Surgery: The Capacity of the Mind seems too limited, to be
able entirely to grasp so extensive an Art. Though I have, for these eight and
twenty Years past, practiced Surgery under different Climates, and in diverse
Hospitals of the Army; yet I am so far, from thinking to have attained, unto
the Knowledge necessary in this Art, that I own my self scarce to have had the
time to improve, and make some Remarks on the curing of Wounds, to which
chiefly I applied my self.

However, having had many Opportunities, of discovering the Mischiefs
occasioned by the use of Tents, and by the Long and Painful Manner of Dressing
the Wounded, and often uncovering their Wounds; I was moved to Compassion by
their Sufferings, and thought my self obliged, in Conscience, to give my Advice
herein. Besides, seeing all Men are allowed the Liberty, to speak their Mind,
concerning these Arts they profess; I see not, why I should be abridg'd of that
Priveledge, which others also assume to themselves, possibly on much slighter
Grounds.

It is not to be questioned, but among the great number of Surgeons, wherewith
France abounds, some will applaud the Excellency of my Method; but I am apt to
think it will not please all. I hardly ever knew any that practiced Surgery as
I do, and there are few of all the celebrated Authors we have, that deliver any
such Doctrine; which, being contrary to the Practice of many Surgeons, will
not, from the most Part, meet with the Reception it Merits.

It Is a noble thing, said a Wise Philosopher, to be evil Spoken of, for doing
well: There is no cause then, why any should be ashamed, to communicate to the
Public what he has learned, when the World may reap any Advantage thereby.
Nothing is so inconsistent with Christian Charity, and that Love we owe to our
Neighbor, as to refuse to let him light his Taper at ours. Knowledge, like
Light, may be imparted and not lessened.

It is not my Design, by this Method, that possibly will appear to be new, to
destroy the Foundations, and principal Rules left us by the Ancients,
concerning the Curing of Wounds: I am willing only to make known my
Observations on this Subject, and to point out, what I have perceived to be
pernicious, in the ordinary Practice; and withal to show, what is certain and
useful in that Method, I my self have followed for several Years; which, I
hope, will be found so much the more advantageous and reasonable, that it is
founded on the Principles of the Circulation.

I know, it is a pretty bold Attempt, to go about to suppress Tents, that have
been used for many Ages; and I am not ignorant, that Custom, on many Occasions,
has the Force of a Law. But notwithstanding of all this, I design to maintain
the Privileges of Nature, and to show beyond Contradiction, that Reason, and
Experience are on my Side; though at the same time, I run the Hazard of being
universally censured, for the Newness of my Method.

I don't altogether condemn Those, who were the first Inventers of Tents,
Dilaters, and Setons: they have had their Reasons for using them, as I have
Mine for laying them aside. Many things have formerly been employed in Physic
and Surgery, which now are no more in use. The Received Rules, the Order of
Curing and also the Application of Remedies, have been changed from time to
time. That which is New at this Time, will one Day be Ancient; as what to Day
is Ancient, was once New.

It is true, that the Ancients did lay the Foundations of Surgery: They have
said many Things, but not All; neither was their Knowledge commensurate to the
Subject. They had the Honor of Inventing, but have left that of Bringing to
Perfection, to Posterity. However, it is not to be doubted, that they took all
requisite Care, to avoid being deceived, and to inform themselves of the Truth:
But if they had done All, Nothing had been left us to do.

Add to this, that if that Prepossession in favor of the Ancients, and the
Blind Submission to their Dictates, had not been laid aside; we had not seen
that great number of Skilful Physicians, and Surgeons, which This Age has
produced; who, after having shaken off, the tyranical Yoke of Antiquity, found
out Things no less Necessary than Curious, that, otherwise, would have remained
till now in Obscurity, and had possibly been unknown to Posterity.

Wherefore, it is not impossible, that in the Active Part of Physic also,
which is Surgery, frequent Experiences, and continual Diligence, may have
discovered Abuses, that were crept into Practice, and authorized by Custom.

It cannot be denied, that what belongs to the Fabric and Constitution of the
Body of Man, Always was; but yet it has not Ever been equally known. The New
Discoveries, have made a considerable Change in the Knowledge, the Judgment and
in the Cure of Inward Distempers; and I see no Reason, why there ought not also
to be some Alterations, in the Cure of Outward Diseases, and especially that of
Wounds, which depend upon the same Principles, and have the Advantage of the
same New Inventions.

I suppose it will not be thought Strange, if after I have labored, for the
space of Fifteen or Sixteen Years, in Hospitals of the Army, I have made some
Discoveries, in the Curing of Wounds: for Usage we know compleats a Workman. I
have formerly seen the most Part of France, I have traveled over a Part of
Germany, and all Italy, but have hardly found any Place, where Tents were not
in Use: Several there are, who find fault with them; but few will give
themselves the Trouble to lay them aside. Some before me have written against
'em; but I believe, I have been the first my Self, who has had the boldness,
entirely to suppress 'em in Practice; excepting only in case of excessive
Bleeding, and in some First Dressings.

Hippocrates, Galen, Celsus, Fabricius ab Aquapendente, and many others cited
in this Treatise, have been very near of my Opinion; and I have adduc'd some
Passages of these famous Authors, that countenance my Method. I have alleged
some Places, out of Ambrosius Pareus, being a well known Author, and celebrated
for the Cure of Wounds; but it appears, by the Remarks I have made, that he is
inconsistent with himself, in many Places of his Works; which cannot choose, but
perplex the Mind of the young Surgeon.

Jacobus Marcus in his Preface to the Summary of Bandages, quotes Septalius, a
famous Physician of Milan, and Caesar Magatus, a renoun'd Professor in the
University of Ferrara, who, as he says, condemned, the Use of Tents, and the
too Frequent Dressing of Wounds; and that to this they had suited their
Practice, in these two Cities, for a very considerable time.

I know, it is not Length of Time, that can give a Value to Things; it is only
their own Excellency: And every Thing, must once have a Beginning. I hope,
therefore, if my Reasons are approved, and some Credit given to my Experiences,
none will judge it necessary, to wait yet till an Age is expired, before they
will list themselves upon my Side. I know not, whether my Reasonnings will be
of force enough to persuade; but the Infallible Proofs, I have given, of the
Goodness of my Method, in the Great Number of Cures, I have wrought thereby,
will I hope suffice to convince the Public.

I grant it is difficult, at first to come over to the Opinion of another, when
it is contrary to our Own: But when the Life of Men is concerned, we ought not
to delay one Minute, to free our selves from Error; and to put off these
Prejudices, that often hinder us, thoroughly to penetrate into the Truth of
things. The Opinions we receive in our younger Days, and the most part of the
Maxims, we take upon trust from the Ancients, are ordinarily the Cause of the
False Steps we make, in the chief Obligations of our Calling. The Life of the
Wounded, is indeed in the Hands of the Surgeon, who has him under his Care:
wherefore, he ought to give all Diligence, not only to attain a competent
Measure of Skill; but also to find out the most Sure, and the most Speedy Way
of curing Wounds.

It will be objected to me, that a great number of wounded Persons have been,
and yet are every Day cured, with the Use of Tents, and also by following the
Ancient Method in all its Circumstances. I answer it is true: And indeed if all
those who are dressed after this manner, were in certain Danger of being lost, it
would be downright Malice, and Cruelty to use it; neither had my Endeavors,
been at this time needful to suppress it, since it would have been rejected
long e're now: But this I affirm, after I have made Trial of both the One and
the Other Method, and have carefully considered the Difference between 'em,
that those who are cured by that of the Ancients, have need of a healthful and
vigorous Constitution; besides that it is never without Danger, much Pain, and
requires a tedious Length of Time: All which Inconveniences are avoided, by
embracing that which I propose.

In this Hospital, we have by this Method happily cured Wounds of diverse Sorts,
yea of as many Various Kinds, as there are Different Parts of the Body; having
had Wounds of all these under our Care: Wherefore, this Happy Success, cannot in
Reason be ascribed to the Temper of the Air, which in some Places is favorable
to certain Parts of the Body, as has been observed, by Guy de Chauliat, who
speaking of Wounds in the Head, averrs that they are more easily cured at
Avignion, than at Paris, and that these of the Legs, on the contrary, are cured
sooner at Paris than at Avignion. The Air, I confess, where I am, because of
the Situation of the Place, is not so replenisht with gross Parts, as in Plain
and Low Grounds; yet is it, notwithstanding, ever hurtful to Wounds, both by
Reason of the Niter, wherewith it is stored, and also because of its Activity,
and Penetraction: But I have never yet been able to remark, that it was either
more beneficial or hurtful to one Part, than to another; and I have always used
all possible Precaution, to hinder its Access to all Wounds whatsoever; as will
appear by the Sequel.

I shall not in this Treatise, discourse of the Natures, and Differences of the
Diseases, that belong to Surgery: This is already sufficiently done to my Hands
by others; And the learned M. Verduc, Doctor of Physic, has lately obliged
the Public, with a complete Piece of Surgery. I will, therefore, concern my
self only with my own Practice; and if any thing else, chance to fall from my
Pen, it will be only what I thought necessary for understanding my Subject.

Though in many Places of this Book, I advise the use of general Remedies, and a
suitable course of Diet, among the Diversions necessary in the curing of
Wounds; yet I don't pretend to assume to my self, what peculiarly belongs to
Physicians, whose part it is to order these things, and according to whose
Directions, they ought to be used. But I wrote in an Hospital, where the whole
ordering of the Wounded, was altogether committed to me. It shall ever be Law
to me, especially when the Occasion will allow, to keep my self within the
Bounds of my Profession. That Man, who would acquit himself in his Employment,
as becomes him, will find enough to do, though he keep himself, to what properly
belongs to Surgery: And those who pretend to know all things, most commonly
know nothing at all. But after all, I judge it highly advantageous for a
Surgeon, to know on certain Occasions, how to make a seasonable use of General
Remedies, as well as of Topics, Vulnerary Drinks etc. For Opening of a Vein, a
Potion, or a Clyster, when seasonably ordered, and timously administrated, may
save the Life of a wounded Person; or at least prevent a great many Accidents.

I have divided this little Treatise, into three Parts: In the First, I treat
of Tents, and of the Mischiefs, that continually accompany the use of 'em: And
after I have made it appear, that the Air is pernicious to Wounds; I add on
that Occasion, a Dissertation on Uncovered Bones: And then I describe my way of
Dressing, after performing the Operation of the Trepan, with a New Instrument,
of my own Invention.

The second Part, contains a Collection of some Cures that I have done,
according to my Method, with a Reflection after each; which I justify by
Authority, adducing some Citations. There would be Reason, indeed, to think,
that I had accommodated Nature, to my own Sentiments, and the Success of my
Practice, might justly be called in question; if I had not related many very
important Experiences, and such as were publicly performed: For without doubt,
the establishing of a new Method, as I have already said, is a pretty bold
Attempt, especially in a Time, when France seems to have advanced Surgery to
the highest pitch of Splendour; but particularly Paris, to which I owe my Birth
and Education: Knowing therefore that Experience is, for the most part, much
more convincing than Reason, I have quoted several Cases, and given a Brief,
but very Particular Account, of several Cures, which I have related in a Manner
as Natural as possible.

The third and last Part, will be no less useful to the young Surgeon, than the
two others: It Is a general Idea of my Practice, with some Observations, and a
Description of the simple Remedies that I use in the Cure of Wounds, and other
Diseases belonging to the Province of Surgery: Their Goodness is sufficiently
attested, by the advantageous Effects which they produce; and the great number
of Patients, cured by their Means, ought to gain them some Repute.

I have done what I could to give this Book a Plain and Easy Style: If the
Language is not Fluent, nor the Expressions inviting, and agreeably ordered, it
ought not to be surprising: Simplicity and Plainness best becomes the Truth. A
Book written in an Hospital, in the middle of the Alps, without any Assistance
or Advice, and which is bottomed only upon Practice; neither can, nor possibly
ought to be attended, with the vain Embellishments of Eloquence. In a Word, I
expect to persuade, not so much by what I can say, as by what I have done. I
hope the Reader will take in good Part this Essay, and will not condemn a
Design, whose only Aim is; The Glory of God, The Comfort of the Afflicted, and
the Perfection of Surgery.

THE CONTENTS.
PART I. Plainly showing, by Reason and Authority, the Advantages of this Way,
and Mischiefs of a contrary Practice; with a Discourse upon Discovered Bones,
and a Way to dress with a New Instrument of the Author's Invention, after
Trepanning.
Chap. 1. OF the four Ends proposed in the using of Tents. Page 1 Chap. 2. Of
the first End of Tents. p. 2 Chap. 3. Of the second End of Tents. p. 4 Chap. 4.
Of the third End of Tents. p. 6 Chap. 5. Of the fourth End of Tents. p. 9 Chap.
6. Consequences deduced from the preceding Chapters. p. 10 Chap. 7. Reasons to
demonstrate the Mischief of Tents. p. 21 Chap. 8. The Reasons of the Author's
Practice, with the Motives that induced him thereto. p. 33 Chap. 9. That it is
necessary to Dress Wounds Gently. p. 44 Chap. 10. That it is necessary to Dress
Wounds Speedily, in order to prevent the Access of the Air. p. 46 Chap. 11.
That Wounds ought to be Dressed Seldom. p. 57 Chap. 12. A Discourse upon
Discovered Bones; with the Way to prevent Exfoliation. p. 66 Chap. 13. How to
dress with a New Instrument, after Trepanning; or other like Accidents. p. 72
PART II. Further evincing the Excellency of this Way, by a Faithful, and
particular Account of Wounds of all Kinds, and in all Parts of the Body,
thereby brought to a quick and happy Cure; together with useful and practical
Reflections.
Chap. 1. THE Reasons of writing this Second Part: With a general Proposal of
what it contains. p. 79 Chap. 2. Of the Head. Observation 1. p. 81 Reflection
p. 82
Chap. 3. Of the Head. Oeservation 2. p. 83 Reflection. p. 85
Chap. 4. Of the Head. Observation 3. p. 90 Reflection. p. 91
Chap. 5. Of the Face. Observation 4. p. 93 Chap. 6. Of the Face. Observation.
5. p. 94 Reflection. p. 95
Chap. 7. Of the Tongue. Observation. 6 p. 96 Reflection. p. 97
Chap. 8. Of the Neck. Observation. 7 p. 98 Reflection. p. 99
Chap. 9. Of the Breast. Observation. 8 p. 101 Reflection. p. 105
Chap. 10. Of the Breast. Observation. 9 p. 111 Chap. 11. Of the Breast.
Observation. 10 p. 113 Reflection. p. 114
Chap. 12. Of the Breast. Observation. 11. p. 115 Reflection. p. 117
Chap. 13. Of the Breast. Observation. 12 p. 119 Reflection. p. 120
Chap. 14. A Remark on one that was wounded in the Breast. Observation 13. p.
121 Chap. 15. Of the Lower Belly and Reins. Observation 14. p. 123 Reflection.
p. 124
Chap. 16. Of the Ventricle. Observation 15. p. 126 Reflection. p. 128
Chap. 17. Of the Perinaeum. Observation 16. p. 131 Reflection. p. 132
Chap. 18. Of the Fundament. Observation 17. p. 135 Reflection. p. 137
Chap. 19. Of the upper Part of the Shoulder. Observation. 18. p. 139
Reflection. p. 141
Chap. 20. Of the Shoulder. Observation 19. p. 142 Reflection. p. 143
Chap. 21. Of the Arm. Observation 20. p. 144 Reflection. p. 146
Chap. 22. Of another Wound in the Arm. Observation 21. p. 147 Reflection. p.
149
Chap. 23. Of the Fore-Arm or Cubit. Observation 22. p. 150 Reflection. p. 151
Chap. 24. Of another Wound in the Fore-Arm. Observation 23. p. 152 Reflection.
p. 155
Chap. 25. Of the Hands. Observation 24. p. 156 Chap. 26. Of the Thigh.
Observation 25. p. 160 Reflection. p. 164
Chap. 27. Of the Knees. Observation 26. p. 168 Reflection. p. 171
Chap. 28. Of the Leg. Observation 27 p. 175 Reflection. p. 179
Chap. 29. Of another Hurt in the Leg. Observation 28. p. 181 Reflection. p. 183
Chap. 30. Of a third Wound in the Leg. Observation 29. p. 184 Reflection. p.
185
Chap. 31. Another Case, whereby the Way of Dressing complicated Fractures of
the Legs is confirmed. Observation 30. p. 186 Reflection. p. 188
Chap. 32. Of the Feet. Observation 31. p. 191 Reflection. p. 192
Chap. 33. Of the Feet. Observation 32 p. 194 Reflection. p. 195
Chap. 34. The Conclusion of the Second Part. p. 196
PART. III. Exhibiting a general Veiw of the Author's New Way of Practice, not
only with Respect to Wounds, but in other Cases belonging to Surgery; and a
Description of the Simple Remedies he uses: With some Observations.
Chap. 1. THE Design of this Part: And what it contains. 199 Chap. 2. Of Tumors
and Abscesses. p. 201* Chap. 3. Of a Gangrene. p. 206. Chap. 4. Of Ruptures. p.
210 Chap. 5. Of Wounds. p. 212 Chap. 6. An Observation of a very considerable
Case. p. 230 Chap. 7. An Observation of another Case. p. 234 Reflection. p. 247
Chap. 8. Of Gunshot Wounds. p. 254 Chap. 9. Of Burns. p. 257 Chap. 10. Of
Ulcers. p. 259 Chap. 11. Of Simple Fractures. p. 263 Chap. 12. Of Compound
Fractures. p. 269 Chap. 13. Of Dislocations. p. 274 Chap. 14. Of the Relaxation
of the Joints. p. 276 Chap. 15. The Conclusion of the Third Part, with some
very useful Remarks. p. 279
THE Hospital-Surgeon: OR, A New, Gentle, and Easy Way, to Cure speedily all
sorts of WOUNDS.
PART I.
Plainly showing by Reason and Authority the Advantages of this Way, and
Mischiefs of a contrary Practice: With a Discourse upon Discovered Bones; and a
Way to Dress, with a new Instrument of the Author's Invention, after the Use of
the Trepan.

CHAP. I. Of the Four Ends proposed in the Using of Tents.
THE Use of Tents in Wounds, being reputed of so long standing in Surgery, and
but too much approved on, by the Universal Practice, at this Day; it will be
necessary for us, before we deliver our own Method, to give our Thoughts
thereon; which also we will confirm by Reason and Authority.

Fabricius ab Aquapendente in his Eighth Chapter Of Wounds, reckons up only
three Uses of Tents; but many after him make mention of Four. One is to keep
open the Orifice of the Wounds: Another to carry the required Medicines to
their Bottom: A third to further the coming away of Extraneous Bodies: And a
fourth is to drink in as it were, and to contain the Filth and Excrements
therein generated.

Our Design is at present to consider, whether these Ends, so far as they are
expedient, may not be obtained without the Assistance of Tents: For I would not
be thought without Reason, to make any Change of the Order received in managing
of Wounds; nor rashly to lay aside any thing that might conduce to the Relief
of the Wounded, or facilitate and shorten the Cure.

CHAP. II. Of the First End of Tents.
IT is unquestionably certain, that Nature's Endeavors are ever bent toward
the supplying of what has been taken away by violent means from our Bodies, and
uniting the Divisions made therein: We ought not therefore to keep open the
Orifice of a Wound; but if needful, it may be widened at the first Dressing;
and thereby what is designed in the first Use, will be sufficiently attained.
However I don't altogether disapprove of the Use of Dilaters, and sometimes of
Tents, when they are required to contain and support Astingents, to stop the
Bleeding, or to hinder the Reunion of fresh Incisions, that sometimes are
necessary in the first Dressing of Gunshot Wounds: Especially when there is any
Suspicion that Extraneous Bodies are lodged in the Wound, or some Splinter of a
Bone that Nature is not able to reunite. But if once the first two or three
Days are over, Tents are not only useless, but extremely hurtful, particularly
in Gunshot Wounds, that of themselves are oftentimes sufficiently enlarged by
the coming away of the bruised Flesh, commonly called the Escar, before which
we need not fear the closing up of the Wound.

It was seldom ever known that a Wound did fill up, while any foreign Body
remained within it. Now the Escar is an Extraneous Body in regard of those
parts to which it immediately adheres, and must therefore of necessiy be
separated from them: Moreover Nature cannot effect a Reunion of the flesh, till
first she have freed her self of what keeps asunder the Parts to be joined.

Fabricius ab Aquapendente, is of the same Opinion, Part I. Book 4. Chap. 9.
where he says, that Nature never cures a Wound, so long as any thing is in it
that offends her.

I do believe there is no Body but will grant that the Separation of the Escar
is a Work of Nature, that is most spedily performed, where the Natural Heat is
most vigorous. Now seeing new Flesh is bred easiliest at the Bottom of the
Wound, it is there also where it first begins to fill up; and therefore the
Orifice is last of all freed from the Escar, and supplied with new Flesh: for
which Cause we have no Reason to fear its too sudden closing; neither does
there appear any necessity of using Tents, to avoid that Inconveniency.

As for Wounds made by sharp Instruments, they have no need of Tents, seeing
they don't want to be dilated, but only to be closed up: Now what thwarts
Nature's Intention not only may, but ought to be laid aside.

Finally, Contused Wounds cannot be united, till first what is bruised is
removed, either by the force of the Natural Heat, or the Application of
Dissolving Medicines, or by Suppuration: and consequently it appears that in
this Case also, as well as the others, Tents may be forborne, and so the first
End proposed in using them is not to be allowed.

CHAP. III. Of the second End of Tents.
THere will be no need of a great many Reasons to demonstrate, that it is an
easy matter, to make the Remedies pass to the Bottom of a Wound, without the
Assistance of Tents: for to this Purpose nothing more is required, than to give
a pretty soft and thin Consistence, to these Ointments, Balsams, and other such
like Remedies, as are commonly used in curing of Wounds.

When a simple Division is made in a healthful and well tempered Body, Nature
stands not in need of any thing else, but the Natural Balsam of the Parts, or
the Nutricious Juice, in order to procure a Reunion, especially if it is in
fleshy Parts: in which Case the Tents and Ointments do only irritate the Parts,
cause Fluxion of Humors, putrify the Flesh, alter the Nutricious Juice; and so
occasion long and very great Suppurations, which rather hinder than promote the
Cure.

CHAP. IV. Of the third End of Tents
THat the Discharge of Extraneous Bodies is at all furthered by Tents, is a
thing not to be imagined: Yea on the contrary, we have more Reason to believe
that they conduce very much to retain them. For supposing that any thing
remains in a Wound, as a Bullet, Pieces of Bone, of Clothes, or Wad, etc. it is
almost impossible ever to draw it forth at the same Place by which it entered,
unless it be at the first or second Dressing: And this happens very seldom,
though never without great Pain, and much Time or Trouble.

There is no Probability that a Body so heavy as Lead, can remain for any
considerable time in one Place, unless it stick in some Bone or Joint. The
Flesh has not solidity sufficient to detain the Bullet, but gradually yields to
its descending Weight: and supposing it did not stir of it self, yet so far
would a Tent be from furthering its coming out, that it would rather fix it
faster, and push it deeper into the Wound: Now the Matter ever follows the
Bullet, and makes to it self one or more Cavities; it gathers together,
increases, ferments, and commonly brings on a Fever; the Part is weakened, the
Body wasted, and in fine the wounded Person frequently is brought to an
untimely End. The like Accidents may also be produced, by the Splinter of a
Bone, or some such other thing, after the same manner. Hence it is, that on the
least Suspicion, whether from the Complaint of the Wounded, or any other
Appearance, of a foreign Body remaining in the Wound, Search is made thereinto
with Instruments, and with the Fingers, but for the most part to no purpose, as
I have often seen: And all this to satisfy themselves, and to show to the
Bystanders and to the Patient, that no Diligence has been spared to further
the Cure. This Method is no less hurtful than cruel, and by exasperating the
Parts, causes Fluxions, and brings on Putrefaction, yea oftentimes incurable
Fistula's. But when all these foresaid Means fall short of Success, then a
lower Part is sought out, therein to make a counter-opening, which sometimes
when the Patient is of a strong Constitution, effects the Cure.

Pieces of Garments, of Wad, of Linen, etc. are often carried by the Bullet
into the Wound, and there remain after it is drawn out, being deeper lodged:
These things are but too capable of occasioning troublesome Accidents; and
Tents conduce not a little to keep them there, obstructing the Passage whereby
they might be expelled. It is certain that a Tent always swells in the Wound,
and filling up the Orifice, keeps in the Matter, which not being longer to be
contained within the narrow Bounds of the Wound, spreads it self into the
neighboring Parts, glides between the Muscles, and carries along with it the
Extraneous Bodies, which are there corrupted and putrified, and infecting the
Wound, occasion Mortifications, or Abscesses very hard to be cured.

I say then, to conclude this Chapter, that it is altogether in vain to use
Tents with a Design thereby to facilitate the Discharge of Foreign Bodies; and
that they rather conduce to keep them in, than assist in furthering their
Passage. But if by Chance it should fall out, as sometimes it does, that the
Wound close up, when there is some Extraneous Body within; it will occasion an
Abscess either under the Ancient Escar, or somewhere else, more convenient for
Nature, by the opening of which only whatever is hurtful and improfitable will
be discharged.

As for leaden Bullets that have not been drawn out at the first Dressing,
their remaining in the Parts can do no great hurt, because they are friendly to
Nature; and in process of Time, by their own Weight, slip down between the
Muscles, and often appear under the Skin, from whence they may be taken out,
without either Trouble or Danger. The most Part of Surgeons are convinced of
the Truth of what I say: Only this I must acknowledge, that we ought to
endeavor to draw forth such Bullets, as are either lodged in a Joint, or in
hazard of falling into some Cavity of the Body; as that of the Scull, of the
Thorax, or of the lower Belly, where they might be irrecoverably lost.

CHAP. V. Of the Fourth End of Tents.
AS for the fourth pretended Use of Tents, I grant that they are always soaked
with the Moisture of the Wound; but as they retain that Humidity, not suffering
it to pass out; so they are thereby swelled up, and enabled to intercept the
Passage of all the other Matter that is generated: Now I would willingly hear a
Reason for keeping in a Wound Excrements, which Nature is so sollicitous to
throw out; for being corrupted by their Abode, they alter and destroy the
Constitution of the Parts that contain 'em. Seeing then the longer the Matter
is detained, the more it is depraved; I am persuaded it is much better to give
it a free Passage, not interrupting its Course, than to shut it up with Tents,
and force it to take other ways.

Having therefore demonstrated that the Ends that have been designed by the Use
of Tents, in so far as they are for the Advantage of the Wounded, may not only
be attained without 'em, but are really hindered thereby; I will endeavor in
the following Chapter to take the part of Oppressed Nature, and to assert her
Liberty by Reasons founded on the Circulation of the Blood, and supported by
the Authority of many Authors.

CHAP. VI. Consequences deduced from the preceding Chapters,
NAture has been diversely defined by Authors who have treated therein. Julius
Alexandrinus calls it The Author, the Principle and Efficient Cause of natural
Beings. In this Sense it is regarded in Physic as the Cause of Health, and the
Physician of Distempers; and is by Van Helmont considered in three different
States; to wit, either in its full Strength and Vigor, or as impaired and
weakened, or as altogether oppressed and prostrate.

These things might be applied to our present Purpose; however that I may give
a more clear and intelligible Idea of Nature, which may better suit with
outward Diseases, I shall look upon her as the Chief Worker of whatsoever
concerns our Health: and I am persuaded, seeing she has framed every thing
according to the Law of its being, she will also maintain them in their
necessary Union, unite them when divided, and in a Word, restore them to their
first Estate, when any way fallen from it.

This Union is so necessary for maintaining Health, and preserving Life, that
all, or at least the most part of Diseases, proceed from a Defect therein: For
things of a foreign Quality are one Way or other mixed with the Humors of the
Body, which disordering and interrupting the Union of their Parts, change and
deprave the good Temperament and Qualities of the natural Balsam, called
Radical Moisture; and from hence come Diseases and Death.

In outward Maladies also, and in Divisions of the harder or softer Parts of
the Body manifest to the external Senses, it is plain that Nature suffers, and
consequently must strive with all her Might to reunite the divided Parts. The
Surgeon as her faithful Minister in curing Wounds, ought to employ his utmost
Care to assist her, while she labors to effect that so necessary Union. To
this End he should not only leave her at Liberty, putting no Hindrance in her
Way, but also free her from whatever may thwart her Design. Finally, he must
assist and imitate her, mind her Inclinations, observe her Proceedings, and
follow her as it were step by step, that he may be ever ready to lend her his
required Help.

The Art of Physic turns upon this Principle, that Nature has the chief Hand
in curing Diseases: it is with her the Physician ought to consult, and without
her Consent as it were he ought never to do or undertake any thing: and in a
Word, he only is the ablest Physician, who has most earnestly applied himself
to the study of Nature.

I acknowledge there are many Cases, wherein Nature alone is not sufficient,
and in these she must be helped out by the Hand of Art: as in the drawing out of
Extraneous Bodies from Wounds, cutting off mortified Parts, opening Abscesses,
restoring broken or disjoynted Bones, and other like Operations belonging to
the Province of Surgery. But let a Surgeon be never so superficially acquainted
with Nature, he may easily perceive that by Tents and Dilaters she is
oppressed, deprived of Liberty of acting, and directly opposed in her Design,
which is to reunite the divided Parts.

Fabricius ab Aquapendente, whom I mentioned before, asserts, that Nature never
cures a Wound, so long as any thing is in it which she cannot retain: For in
this he is agreed with the most Judicious, that it is Nature that works the
Cure; and at the same time shows, that a Tent is such an Enemy to her, as
neither ought nor can be kept within, but to her hurt and destruction. Galen
also in his third Book of Method, says, that it is not the Remedies, but Nature
that closes up Wounds.

Wherefore, Experience having convinced me of this Truth, I set my self to
consider Nature's Designs, her Inclinations, and the Way she takes to effect
the Cure of Wounds; and have observed that Tents do ever oppose, and prove a
Hindrance to her. It Is every Day to be seen that Nature can suffer nothing
foreign to abide with her; she endeavors with all her might, to free her self
from Tents and Dossels with which Wounds are ordinarily crammed up: For though
they did not occasion pain, as we may well assured they do, yet being
Extraneous Bodies, Nature cannot endure them without trouble: and let them be
never so small or soft, they must necessarily press always upon some Vessels,
of which the Body is nothing else but a Contexture.

According to their bigness and hardness, Tents do more or less disturb the
course and order of the Circulation of the Blood, so far as the Wound reaches:
They squeeze out the most subtle part of that, or other Liquors contained in
the Vessels they press upon, which by the Matter already in the Wound, is
converted into its own Nature, and becomes a Ferment, that being retained,
grows hot and corrupt, and so alters the containing and neighboring Parts, and
oftentimes imparts its vicious qualities to the Mass of Blood, by Vapors sent
into the Veins; yea the Matter it self is sucked up by the Veins, their
Orifices being dilated by its Fermentation, Moisture, and stay; and this
circulating with the Blood, entirely corrupts it, and causes Fevers that end in
Death, unless Nature by some critical and healthful Motion, throw out the
Corruption.

Ambrosius Pareus in his ninth Book, treating of Wounds, Chap. 5. forbids the
Use of Tents in few words, being therein supported by the Authority of Galen,
who in the fourth Chapter of his Method, affirms it to be necessary in all
Wounds whither simple or compound, that nothing be between their Lips that may
hinder Reunion. The same Pareus in his ninth Book, Chap. 7. recommends the Use
of long and thick Tents in the Beginning, and afterward advises to make 'em
more thin and short; but does not here forbid their Use. In the same Book,
Chap. 15. he takes the part of Tents in opposition to a certain Physician, that
had written against his Method.

These differing and contradictory Opinions in one and the same Author, must of
necessity throw the young Surgeon into perplexing doubts, so that often he
cannot know, what is best, or what way is most secure. It Is certain however,
that the mischief of Tents was known to Galen, because he forbids their Use;
and also to that Physician who found fault with the Practice of Pareus; his
name I know not, but by the acknowledgment of the same Author, he altogether
lays aside the use of Tents, and orders to dress a Wound but once in four Days.
This Method therefore is not so new as at first I thought with my self, for I
had formed my design ere ever I was aware of what I have here quoted; and it
was Experience only that opened my Eyes.

Galen Justifies further my Opinion, in his third Book of Method, and ninth
Chapter, when he says, that in every Wound there are two sorts of Excrements, a
gross and a subtle, which as he affirms, hinder the generation of Flesh. Now if
this be so, it is very preposterous to keep them in the Wound with Tents. If it
be said, that the Tents may be made so little, as not altogether to fill up the
Orifice, nor hinder the passage of the Matter: I answer, that though they be made
never so small, yet will they fill up the Mouth of the Wound; because they ever
swell up to the bigness of the Space they are in: but supposing the most subtle
matter to escape, yet the more gross and clammy is by them retained, and is
enough to occasion grievous Accidents. Now if small Tents prove such a
hindrance to the curing of Wounds, what may be expected from these that are
long and hard, and pass to the very Bottom? However these also are used by many
Surgeons, who for want of applying themselves to the consideration of Nature,
and her Intentions in curing of Wounds, continue to follow a Method that is
both cruel and destructive.

Tents, Dilaters, and Setons always occasion Disorders in the Places where they
are applied; if they touch the Nerves, they cause extremity of Pain, that is
often the Original of many Evils, and followed by many grievous Accidents; such
as Convulsions, loss of Sense, etc. If they bear upon a Tendon, its Action is
hurt; and motion ceases: if they press the Vessels, as they almost ever do, the
Circulation of the Blood is disturbed.

But suppose a Tent should only press together the Mamellons fibrenx.
fibrous Papillae that compose the Skin, which are of a quick sense, being the
Instrument of touching; this alone were enough to disturb the Order and
Distribution of the Spirits; which now moving in a tumultuary way among these
fibrous Papillae of the Skin, contract them by the Irritation and pricking
which they cause. Now the Fibers being shortened, and the Skin contracted, the
Vessels must of necessity be doubled or squeezed together, and consequently the
Circulation diminished, or entirely suppressed. In these Cases there is not so
much Blood carried back by the Veins, as was brought by the Arteries: Now if
the Circulation is altogether stopped, a Mortification ensues; if considerably
diminisht, an Abscess; but if the Humors ouze into the Wound from the
Capellary Vessels, large and tedious Suppurations are occasioned.

The Hardness and Swelling are caused by the Matter that is stopped, and diffused
about the Place; and therefore all the Accidents are more or less grievous, and
alter according to the force of the Compression, and quantity of the diffused
Matter, the good or bad Disposition of the Blood, of the Humors, or of the Part
affected, and the different Degrees of the Natural Heat, which hastens or keeps
back the Fermentation and Putrefaction.

From what has been said it appears, that the Blood and Humors are not
carried, or drawn (as some Authors love to speak) to the afflicted Part more
abundantly than at other times, although the Spirits run thither in much greater
Plenty: But as for the Blood, it is evident enough that it circulates less in
the wounded, than in the sound Parts, because it moves with greatest Ease in
these latter: And it is a Law of Nature, that a Body in motion always moves
toward these places where it finds least Opposition.

The truth of this is clearly demonstrated by the Accidents, which some time
ago followed on certain Malignant Fevers in places not far distant from hence.
They caused an Obstruction, and swelling in the lower Belly so considerable,
that the Circulation was stopped, and a Gangreen ensued. But on the contrary, the
Blood was violently, and in too great quantity carried upwards; it could not be
contained within the Vessels, broke through all Obstacles, and caused sharp
Pains, Abscesses, Deliriums, and Death.

I have considered the Accidents that most commonly attend Wounds, and do
believe, that for the most part they proceed from the Disorder of the
Circulation of the Blood, occasioned by broken pieces of Bones, Bullets, or
some other Foreign thing remaining in the Wound: These things are not of such a
Figure as to cause an Irritation, nor can they of themselves produce any
putrefaction, and yet they commonly bring on Abscesses. We ought not then to
ascribe these Accidents to Pain; for sometimes they come without it; and this
often is present where those don't happen. But I am of Opinion, that these
extraneous Bodies press the Vessels that are dispersed through the place where
they are, and stop the Blood, which slipping into the Pores and Spaces of the
Flesh, by its stay and Fermentation, is there corrupted, and changed unto the
Matter of an Abscess.

It Is true, Leaden Bullets, or other things of a like Nature, have been long in
the Body, and yet no Abscess has followed; but this may be attributed to the
largeness of the Place wherein they happened to be lodged so, as not to
occasion any Disorder; or because sliding between the Muscles, it did not
hinder the Course of the Humors. The other Accidents that ordinarily attend
Gunshot Wounds, are also occasioned by the Defect of the Circulation, as I
shall observe in the Sequel of this Discourse; where it shall be made to
appear, that Tents and Dilaters used in this sort of Wounds hinder the fall of
the Escar, the Dissolution of what is bruised, and the passing out of whatever
ought to be brought away.

This will without difficulty be granted by those, who well understand the
Course of the Blood and Humors, and the Union and Order of the Parts that
compose the Body. All the Parts are so united one to another, that the least
Separation cannot be made without Pain, Effusion of some Humor, or some other
Disorder. Experience shows, that it is not only the Air that rots the Bones, but
also the Nourishment of the Nervous Parts when it is altered by a malignant
Acid; and generally any Matter that has Acidity enough to cause a Fermentation
and Corruption in the place of its Abode, when kept in by Tents, or other such
Obstacle.

Though Doleus in his Surgery is not altogether against the using of Tents, yet
he shows that we ought to do it with great Caution; from whence it appears he
Judged them dangerous.

Etmullerus is of the same mind, in his Physical Surgery, where he Joins such
Accidents with the Use of Tents, as ought to fright those who employ 'em: He
advises the using of Pledgets, and quite to lay aside Tents in Wounds of the
Nerves and Tendons, and in these of the Joints. Hence it appears that this
Auther was no great Favourer of Tents; for which Reason he orders the Use of
the vulnerary Balsam in the cure of Wounds, which promotes the generation of
Flesh, and causes a speedy Union, to both which the Use of Tents is directly
contray.

All the famous Physicians, who have treated of Surgery, and the curing of
Wounds, are well nigh of the same Opinion. I could reckon up a great number, if
I thought that these I have adduc'd were not enough. It appears, as I have said
in the Preface, that Septalius and Magatus, both renowned Physicians that
practiced Surgery in Italy, followed this Method for the space of forty years
with very good Success.

M. Caufape Doctor of Physic, in his Observations on the frequent Use of
Bleeding, altogether discards the Use of Tents, without any Reserve. He
supports his opinion with Reasons, which I had conceived before his Book came
to my Hands. But we may be sure that Author did not write on this Subject,
before he was fully convinced by his own Experience of what he advanced. It
would be an unpardonable Rashness for one to write and maintain that, of which
he doubted the Truth, and to establish a Method on false Principles.

I very well know that great Numbers will oppose themselves to what I advance
on this Subject, which is the common Fate of all Opinions that appear new: but
of this Matter Experience only is the most competent Judge; whose Testimony
shall be deduced at large, and with all Faithfulness, in the second Part of
this Work.

In this first part I make account sufficiently to explain the Reasons that
obliged me to lay aside the Use of Tents and Dilaters. I cannot approve their
proceeding, who use them because others have done so, or because the Ancients
have ordered it. The Glory or Blame of the Good or Ill Success, say they,
accrues not to us; we have Custom and Antiquity for our Warrant. But the Arts
and Sciences ought never to be shut up within such narrow and unequal Bounds.
Knowledge, Reason, and Experience would be injured to the highest Degree, if we
should impose upon them such severe Restrictions, and take from them that
Liberty, which should last equally with the World.

CHAP. VII. Reasons to demonstrate the Mischief of Tents.
MAny of the Ancients, and some of the modern Writers, have spoken of Tents as
things indifferent: Such Authors, I mean, as having written of Surgery and the
Cure of Wounds, seem to have brought these things to some Perfection. They
leave it to the Discretion of the Surgeon either to use them or not, according
as they Judged convenient. They did not think this matter of such Moment, as to
require their Attention. They looked on these Means with unconcerned Eyes,
referring themselves therein to the Honesty of those, who first wrote of them.
It Is apparent they had not observed, as I have often done, the mischief
occasioned by Tents, the use of which destroys indifferently the Vulgar with
Persons of Merit, whose loss in a State is always to be regretted.

We need not be surprised at what we see happen every day in the Cure of all
sorts of Wounds: it is not at this time only that one thing has been taken for
another. Our Knowledge is not so great as to reach to all necessary Truths; nor
do we perfectly understand the Causes of all the Accidents and Disorders that
follow upon Wounds. All those who have treated of this Subject have endeavored
to explain them according to their opinions, as I have done my best to
accommodate them to mine. But Occasions are now frequent enough, and therefore
it will be easy for any one to inform himself of the truth, and to distinguish
who are in the Right, and who not.

M. De la Chariere, in his Book of Operations, discoursing of Wounds, advises
carefully to wipe away all the matter of a Wound, and to fill up every the very
least corner with Dilaters or Dossels, to hinder its staying, lest it should be
sucked up by the Veins, and carried by the Circulation to the Heart. The same
Author adds, that the Air is a most powerful Enemy to Wounds: Nevertheless it
is impossible to dry up the Matter with all that exactness he requires, what
diligence soever be used, without taking up some time; during which the Air
will do incomparably more Harm, than the Matter that therein might have
remained; which often is not endu'd with all these ill Qualities one is apt to
imagine, as shall be made to appear in the fourth Chapter of the last Part of
this Treatise.

This Author acknowledges that in Contusions, a little extravasated Blood
squeezes together the Vessels, interrupts the Course of the Blood and Humors,
and causes Fluxions and Inflammations. What then may be expected from a like
quantity of Dossels heaped one upon another? They increase the Division made in
the Body, and oppose the Design that one ought chiefly to have Regard to in
curing of Wounds, which is Reunion. To this may be added, that they are more
hard, painful, and contrary to Nature, than a little Blood of which he speaks.

As for what is alleged by him, that the Matter might otherwise be taken up by
the Veins; it is not to be apprehended, unless it were of so great a Quantity
as to ferment, or made so long a stay in the Part, as to open and dilate the
Orifices of the Vessels. This may indeed fall out in Wounds of the Breast, as
will appear in the second Part of this Book, and in these of the Thorax, where
the capacity and heat of the Part, are sufficient to produce that Effect. This
also may happen in great Abscesses, whereof we will give some Examples at the
End of this Work. Finally this may arrive when the Mouth of a Wound is stopped
up with Tents or Dilaters, which too often keep the Matter shut up from one
Dressing to another: hence it increases, ferments, and ordinarily acquires a
vicious and malignant Quality, which may be communicated to the Heart by means
of the Circulation of the Blood.

Of all those Mischiefs Tents and Dossels may be accounted the chief Occasion.
Now to avoid all these Accidents, and the staying of the Matter in the Wound,
we need only leave open the Orifice, and put nothing into the Cavity which may
increase the Separation of the Parts; to the end they may come together, when
there is nothing to hinder their Reunion, nor any empty Space, where the Matter
may make any considerable stay. These I think are good Reasons, and strong
enough to overthrow an Opinion, that is contrary to my ten or twelve years
Experience.

The same M. De la Charriere, a little further says, that the Orifice of a
Wound must be dilated when it is so little that it will not suffer Dossels to
enter, that so it may be filled therewith: and I on the contrary widen it that
I may avoid the using of them, for Reasons mentioned before. Moreover it is to
be feared that a Dilater may be lost, and fixed in a deep Wound. Of this we have
had sufficient Proof in the Person of one of our Generals, and many others
wounded in the Battle of Marseils.

Wherefore if Tents may be laid aside, as has been done in this Hospital, even
in deep Wounds of the most fleshly parts of the Body; much more ought they to
be forborne in others.

The same Author before mentioned, rejects the use of Tents, excepting in
Wounds of the Breast, and lower Belly that penetrate: Notwithstanding it may be
seen in the second Part of this Treatise, where we discourse of Wounds in the
Breast, in what manner we have cured many such of different Natures without the
Assistance of Tents.

As for those in the lower Belly, I know it may be said to me, that if I have
not used Tents to them, it is long of the difficulty of their Application, and
stay in this Part, where, by reason of the continual motion, they cannot be kept
in, unless with a very strait Bandage. But the matter is otherwise; for indeed
I see not for what Reason Tents are required to this part any more than to
others. Let us suppose now, that the expected Suppuration of the contained
Parts that are wounded, is already begun, it is impossible the Matter can come
away, while the Orifice is stopped up with a Tent, but it must fall down by its
own weight into the lower part of that Cavity: also what Matter or Blood may
there be collected, cannot be discharged by reason of the Tent, which is as a
Dam to keep it in; especially if we wait till the Suppuration of the Teguments,
which is never great, be excited by Irritation or by Tents. Otherwise the
Motion in Breathing, and the lifting up of the Peritonaeum in Inspiration, will
drive out the Matter as it breeds, if a free passage be allowed it.

There is one Case wherein Dilaters, and sometimes Tents, become in a manner
necessary; and that is when a Wound is accompanied with a considerable
Bleeding; then they may be used to carry Astringents to the opening of the
Vessels, and to support and keep them on; chiefly in deep Wounds: For if at
first we should Join the Lips of the Wound, and apply Astringents upon them,
the outward Bleeding might be represt, before that of the Vessels were
restrained; and so the Blood running between the Muscles would there be
corrupted, and would spoil the Parts wherein it is contained, and these that
border upon them, and might also occasion Suffocation, and a Gangrene. This is
what I saw at Turin to befall the Baron de la Serra, a Gentleman of Savoy, who
being wounded with a Sword near the right Arm-pit, had a branch of the Vena
Subclavia opened: he was dressed by a very expert Surgeon, who, whether by
chance, or otherwise, neglected to apply Astringents to the Opening of the
Vessel, though the Bleeding was very great: the Wound was joined, and the Part
loaded with Astringents, which were made fast with Compresses and Bandage. In
the mean time the Blood continued to run from the Vein, and to diffuse it self
between the Muscles of the Breast. Two or three Days past before the first
Dressings were taken off; and then the Thorax was found to be gangrened. The
wounded Person died in a little time after.

The Cause of this Gangrene cannot reasonably be ascribed to any thing else but
the retaining of the Blood and Matter, which finding no Outlet, pressed
together, by reason of their bulk, the Vessels and the Nerves, and hindered the
Circulation of the Blood, and Course of the Spirits and other Liquors, so that
the Blood became quickly corrupted, and caused all these Disorders. These same
Accidents may be occasioned by Matter, shut up in the Cavity of Wounds by Tents
stopping their Orifice; especially if that Matter is considerable for its
Quantity, and very much crowded.

When in my younger Days I frequented Hospitals, and practiced with very able
Surgeons, I have seen at time of dressing, the Tents for the most part expelled
from the Wounds, in spite of the Bolsters and Bandage: Nature then clearly
signifying her Intention. Nevertheless they continued still to use them,
forcibly thrusting them again into the Wounds, though not without much Pain. What
a strange Method is this? How is it possible for a Wound to close up, so long
as a foreign Body is entertained within it? If a Pea, or a litttle Ball, be
kept in an Issue, though for ten Years, it will still remain open: but if you
take it out but for one half Day, you shall find it entirely filled up.

A Tent does the same to a Wound, that the Ball does to an Issue: and Fistula's
that trouble so many People all their Life, are the Effect of Tents that have
been inconsideratly used, in the Cure of their Wounds. The Humors take their
Course through these Places which they find open; this becomes first habitual,
and then natural and necessary, and thereby the Flesh is hardened and becomes
callous. These Impurities which Nature sometimes evacuates by ways surprising
to us, being detained in one Place, became a Bag of Mattet; and that same
Nature, unwilling that any thing superfluous and unprofitable should remain
with her, by a peculiar Sagacity, makes a Virtue of Necessity, and uses these
Passages she finds open, to free herself from the Excrements and Humors that
disturb her; but at the same time a part of the Baume radical
Radical Balsam, which is the Life and support of the Parts, passes out also by
the same ways.

I know not to what I can better compare these Openings in the Body, through
which Humors take their Course, than to these of Trees, whether made by Nature
herself, or the assisting hand of Man, by which the Sap that nourishes both its
Trunk and the other parts passes out. The difference only lies here, that these
help to increase and preserve the Trees, but those to destroy and weaken the
Body.

For certain it is that Fistula's considerably impair the Parts, never leave
those that have them in an entire State of Health, and shorten their Days,
whatever any may allege to the contrary. But that which surprises me most is
to find the afflicted Persons, support the Inconveniences they suffer with a
kind of Satisfaction, fancying that if in time they should permit their Sores
to close up, then Death would undoubtedly soon after follow.

Wherefore when there is nothing to hinder the filling up of a Wound, Art has
nothing else to do but to observe Nature's Proceedings, which sometimes exceeds
in the breeding of Flesh, in soft Parts; and sometimes in generating the Callus
in hard Parts: But it is observable that in curing Wounds, she proves oftener
superfluous than deficient. Thus it appears, that Tents ought not to be used in
Wounds, seeing Nature very frequently throws 'em out; because she cannot bear
the presence of what is foreign. Don't we see, that so soon as she is oppressed
with any thing hurtful, all her Endeavors are used to get rid of it? She has a
thousand means unknown to us, and often takes such secret and singular ways as
are hidden from the most Curious Anatomists. That young Man, under the Care of
Fernelius, who had swallowed an Ear of Grass, that came out some time after by
a little Abscess between two of his Ribs, is a sufficient Demonstration of this
Truth. Ambrosius Pareus also relates that he took from the Groin of a Woman, a
Needle that had entered at the Hip of the same side. In fine, the consideration
of the surprising Ways whereby these extraneous things were cast out of the
Body, obliges us to conclude, that Nature is very wise, and cannot endure the
least thing that is hurtful or disquieting. A little Dust in the Eye disturbs
all her Economy, and no rest is to be expected till it is out. A small Crum of
Bread that goes not the right Way, but is by some motion, or the agitation of a
little Air thrown into the Windpipe, does it not endanger Suffocation? What
endeavors are made to cast it out? The Air breaks forth with Violence from the
Lungs, the whole Body is shaken, all its Parts are in motion, the Face is
inflamed, the Eyes run with Tears, Convulsions follow, and this admirable
Masterpiece of Nature, is all in trouble and Disorder, and all this for a thing
in appearance most inconsiderable. A Stone or a little Sand in the Reins,
Ureters, Bladder or Vrethra will scarce permit a moments rest for the violent
Pain: And indeed our Life may be called an Image of Death, so long as a Stone
is lodged in any of these Parts: so true is it that Nature abhors what disturbs
her.

Now it is to be observed, that according to our Method, the Dilaters and Tents
with which the Wound was filled hitherto, must be taken out, so soon as the
Bleeding is stopped; and that the surest way is for the Surgeon, altogether
hence forth to leave off such dangerous Means: because their use may irritate,
and at the same time by touching the Vessels, may open them and renew the
Bleeding, which by protracting the Cure, occasions new troubles to the Wounded,
as I have often seen.

Fabricius ab Aquapendente, Part I. Book 1. Chap. 2. speaking of transverse
Wounds of the Forehead, advises to apply long and slender Compresses wet with
the White of an Egg, one on each side of the Wound, and to press them together,
so that the Lips may touch without stitching, especially if we would avoid the
Deformity of a Scar. Now I know no Reason, why the same Method may not be put in
practice, in Wounds of other Parts of the Body, made by cutting Instruments:
Nor do I understand why such should be dilated, seeing they require only
Reunion. For my own part, I have practiced this way in many Places, and on
different parts of the Body with the desired Success.

These who are unprejudicated, or will reflect but a little on the common
Method, will be convinced that I don't without Cause reject it. It Is easy
enough to apprehend the Cause of the perpetual Pains suffered by those
miserable Persons, whose Wounds are filled with Tents and Dossils: For having
thrust into the Sore Lint twisted, hard and uneven, and applied thereon
Plasters and Bolsters, all is made fast with a Bandage that passes several
times about the Part: Now though this may seem not to be very strait; yet it is
ever tight enough, to press upon the Tent, and cause it to touch every where
upon lively and sensible Parts. For the inward Parts of our Body are indeed
very sensible, and unaccustomed to the Touch of any extraneous thing; so that
the Wounded cannot move in the least, without great Pain; his wounded Members
are utterly disabled, and by a kind of Necessity he is confined to his Bed as a
lame and impotent Paralitick, and always in one Posture, which is no less, if
not more pernicious than the Wound it self, especially in Hospitals, where the
Beds not being such as are requisite for the Ease and Comfort of the Sick,
cause almost universal Excoriations, and oftentimes Mortifications and
Gangrenes. This is what I have many times seen; and frequently through the
Fault of those who follow the ordinary Method of Dressing.

Not that other Parts of our Body are distitute of Sense, any more than these I
just now spoke of; those that are so charitable as to visit Hospitals, will
attest this: nothing is there to be heard at the Hours of Dressing, but Cries
and Howlings. But we cannot enough recommend to Surgeons on this Occasion, to
use their Patients in the most gentle manner possible: For it must be owned
that there are some among them, that would think they had not acquitted
themselves as they ought, unless they made those under their hands, to roar out
for some considerable Time; which makes many to think that Surgery and Cruelty
are unseparable.

CHAP. VIII. The Reasons of the Authors Practice, with the Motives that induced
him thereto.
FRom what I have already said, I know I shall be accused as if I only writ to
find fault with the Methods now in use. Nevertheless I am not afraid to avow,
that I am inspired with a much Nobler Design: I take no pleasure to trample
upon the Monuments of the Dead, or to carp at the Living; it is Conscience alone
that obliges me to maintain what I have advanced for the Good of the Public.
But as it will be an hard task to persuade some People of what is contrary to
these Maxims they have sucked in as it were with their Milk, it will be
convenient to propose Examples of what ought to be followed, and to point forth
what is to be shunned. For in fine, it is here as in Religions, every one thinks
his own Method the best.

Among the great number of those, who at this Day practice Surgery, there are
very few whose Methods agree. Some, without departing an hair's breadth from
the Opinion of the Ancients, blindly follow their Dictates; and it is enough
that any thing has been advanced by such or such an Author, to make it pass
into an unviolable Law. Others more active and Ingenious, not regarding the
received Custom, bestow liberal Jeers upon whatever is not the Product of their
own Brain, and treading Antiquity under foot, are every day making new Systems
of Surgery. I know not with which party I shall be ranged: But I have done my
best to accommodat, what the Ancients have delivered, to the Opinion of the
Moderns, and Circulation of the Blood; imitating in this the Bees that gather
from every Flower, what is fit for making Honey: And if Experience may have any
Sway, my Practice ought to obtain, as being confir'm'd by it.

These who extol the Cures they have done, have also Reason to support their
Practice; which because of the Progress it has made, passes even at this Day
for the best, and most secure, in many Places. This Error has taken so deep
Root, and gained so many Followers, that notwithstanding all my Experiences, I
doubt not but many will stand out against my Method, reject my feeble
Reasoning, and treat me as a Violater of Custom and received Maxims, and a rash
and inconsiderate Innovator. For with them it is a general Rule, That a deep
Wound ought to be kept long open, in order to a perfect Cure. Yea, the Sick
themselves being prepossessed in favor of this false Opinion, believe that the
Accidents which happen some Months, yea some Years after they have been cured,
proceed from the too speedy closing up of the Wound, alleging the Wolf was
shut up in the Sheepfold. As for my self, I am persuaded, and am able to
maintain it, that almost all such Accidents are caused by keeping the Wound too
long open, whereby the parts being much weakened, are hard to be restored to
their first State, so that the lest motion, or Excess, renews the Sore, and
brings back the Symptoms.

As for Wounds of the Head, where the Scull is laid bare, Exfoliation
infallibly insues, if they are long kept open: If the Cranium is broken, the
alteration, and the Accidents, are yet more considerable, and cause often a
Weakness, a depravation of Sense, Giddiness, Headache, and other like
Distempers, and sometimes a corruption of the Membranes and of the Brain.

It is most certain that a Wound cannot be kept long open, but a great
Suppuration shall follow; and then, in spite of all precaution, the Matter that
is every where diffused, will glide along, and rest upon the Bone; and the most
subtle Parts, as Galen says, passing into the Capacity of the Scull by the
Fracture, will fall upon the Membranes; from whence it cannot be got out, but by
the Operation of the Trepan; and if neglected, will bring on Mortal Symptoms.

Wounds of the Thorax or Breast may be closed up without Danger, as will be
more largely made out by Experience, in some Places of the second Part of this
Work. For those which continue to suppurate for a long time, do infallibly
bring on the Tissick, Asthma's, the Cough, shortness of Breath, and incurable
Fistula's.

Tents cannot be kept in Wounds of the lower Belly, because of the perpetual
Motion of the Guts; and consequently such are secure from the Pains and
Infirmities that follow upon their Use.

Wounds of the Reins, of the Emulgent Veins, and of the Vreters, if not
speedily united, leave behind them incurable Fistula's, with a running of Urine
at the Wound. The same falls out in those of the Bladder.

In these of the Joints, if Tents be used, the Cure is very tedious, difficult
and dangerous; for commonly there follows upon them an Alteration of the
Tendons, of the Nerves, and of all the Part; sometimes a shortening or
lengthening of the Member, with loss of the nutricious Juice, and a Weakness
that endures for Life.

Wounds of the Extremities cause an entire dissolution of the Nerves, and often
the loss of the Members; those of the Bones, Rottenness: Those of the Flesh
moreover, besides a great deal of time spent in vain, occasion much Pain,
Vexation, and Charges.

I have seen Wounds of all these sorts; some of them I have had dressed with
Tents, where powerful Digestives were used to procure great Suppurations. I
have met with others, that were followed by all such Accidents. But this I have
ever observed, that these which were handled according to my Method, were
preserved from all these troublesome Symptoms.

It Is known to every one, that in Wounds made by cutting Instruments, Union is
immediately to be endeavored. In order to this design therefore we ought not to
fill such Wounds with Lint, as we have formerly said, seeing this directly
thwarts it. It is also very hurtful to use Digestives, because disordering the
Contexture of its parts, they corrupt the Blood.

The fall of the Escar in Gunshot Wounds cannot be prevented, whatever
Diligence be used; wherefore Suppuratives are here of no Use, seeing Nature can
do that Work without their Assistance, which only weaken and destroy the
temperament of the Parts to which they are applied. Large Suppurations
therefore are not necessary in the curing of Wounds.

For in fine, I cannot discover any Reason, why it should be Judged requisite
that a Wound should suppurat a long time, in order to be brought to a complete
Cure. And surely before we abandon our selves to such a dangerous Practice, it
is necessary first to understand what Pus or Matter is, whence it comes, and
what is the necessity of it.

We may observe then, that Matter is nothing else but the Blood of ulcerated
Parts, discharged into the Wound from the Orifices of Arteries that are cut or
torn; and this is mixed with the Nutricious Juice, brought to the Parts for
their Sustenance; whereby they are rendered lame as it were and useless. If by
the Compression of Tents or Dilaters, the Blood be squeezed out of the Vessels,
it may fill the Capacity of the Wound, whereas otherwise it would have held on
its ordinary Course. We are not then to be surpised if the Blood and the
Nutricious Juice, are suddenly turned into Matter, seeing they are out of their
natural Place. For even as a small Rivulet may make a great Lake, if its Waters
are kept in with a Dam: just so the little Pipes that are laid open in a (...),
though but small, in comparison with the (...) of its Cavity, being pressed, as
has been said, by a Tent, which divides 'em more, and hinders their Reunion,
continually pour forth such Liquors as they contain; and the Tent serving for a
Bank, a Lake is formed in the Cavity of the Wound. We ought not therefore to
wonder, if Plentiful Suppurations continue, so long as this Method is followed;
and it is an undoubted Error to account such Evacuations profitable. Etmullerus
in his Medicinal Surgery is of Opinion, that a Wound would close up of it self,
if it was not hindered: he says, we ought to endeavor to prevent the marring,
and putrefying of the Natural Balsam of the wounded Part, and to use
Balsamicks, according to the Principles of Helmont, to hinder it from
degenerating into a hurtful Acid, and to preserve it from corrupting.

In fine, he finds Fault with the Surgeons for using first Suppuratives, then
Digestives, and after Mundificatives, Sarcoticks, and Glutinatives, as they
term them: That Way, adds he, is too tedious, delays the Cure, causes
Inflammation of the Part; alters the Nutricious Juice, and often turns the
Wound into a sordid Ulcer.

It is apparent by this Authority, that One Remedy skilfully managed, is
sufficient to answer all the Intentions proposed in the Cure of Wounds; that
great Suppurations are hurtful; and that it is for the great Advantage of the
wounded, to reject the bulky Rubbish of improfitable Druggs.

As for such Divisions in the Body, where many small Vessess are quite cut
asunder, if the Lips of the Wound are brought together, they will unite of
themselves; and this according to the Opinion of many Authors, vouched also by
Experience, providing nothing Extraneous go between.

Now touching Gunshot Wounds, that are so common in the Hospitals of the Army,
I am bold to affirm, that my Practice has given me more Insight into their
Nature, than all the Authors that ever wrote on the Subject. But not to enter
upon a Debate concerning Bullets, it is evident that the Effect they produce in
the Body, do something resemble Cauterizing; yet though sometimes I use this
Word, I can scarcely believe that they really cauterize; but being round,
solid, and compact Bodies, they cause Contusion; they tear and bruise whatever
is in their Way, and occasion a Heaviness in the wounded Part.

It is certain that the Bullet very often stops the Bleeding of the Wound,
whether by the Disorder it causes in the Parts through which it passes, or by
cauterizing with its touch the Arteries and Veins: But be it how it will, the
Course of the Blood is stopped, and the Passage between the Arteries and Veins is
intercepted, so far as the Wound and Contusion reach. The Heart, according to
the Law of Circulation, squeezes the Blood it has received into the Aorta, from
whence passing into all the other Arteries, its Course is stopped at the Wound,
where it cannot as formerly be received by the Veins, and finding no free
passage, it extends the containing Vessels, and forcing its Way, diffuses it
self according to its own Quantity, and the Space it finds: Hence proceeds the
Hardness, Swelling, and Inflammation, so ordinary in Gunshot Wounds. If the
Blood be there corrupted, or spoilt by some Malignant Acid, the Symptoms become
yet more troublesome and obstinate; and after the Fall of the Escar, Abscesses,
or large and grievous Suppurations ensue.

A simple Convulsion only, for like Reasons, is capable (...) produce the same
Accidents; which being nothing, but a disordering of the Fibers and little
Pipes, that changes the Regularity and Situation of the Pores, the Circulation
is rendered uneasy, and the Part choked up. From hence comes the Dullness, and
Absence of the Spirits, which if not speedily recalled, cannot but be attended
with grievous Consequences.

I shall speak a word or two of the Cure of a Contusion, in the last Part of
this Book: Here I shall only show, that Tents are very destructive to Gunshot
Wounds, in regard they hinder the Fall of the Escar, and coming away of
whatever is bruised, which ordinarily is consumed by Suppuration. A Tent
actually hinders the passing out of that Matter, and retains it in the Wound,
where it causes all these Mischiefs of which we have spoken. It may also, after
the Escar is removed, renew the Bleeding; bruising by its rubs, and bringing to
Suppuration, the young Flesh, bred upon the Orifices of the wounded Vessels,
while the Escar was a separating.

The multitude of those that are to be seen maimed, and with wooden Legs, and
Fistula's, can witness to their Sorrow the Pernicious Effects of Tents: yea how
many are there, who by the Loss of their Lives, show their fatal Consequences?
Could they have spoken from the Grave, they would have said more than I can on
this mournful Subject, and the destructive Custom had soon been suppressed.
Nevertheless the Pains suffered by these unfortunate Persons, their Complaints
and Cries, have not yet been able to cause a Method, established and authorized
by Antiquity, to be laid aside: neither has the ill Success of so many Cures in
vain attempted, been hitherto capable to undeceive those who have practiced
Surgery.

However, I thought my self obliged to communicate to the Public, what I knew
upon this Subject; that I might, if possible, procure for afflicted Patients, a
Gentle, Speedy, and Easy Method, for the Comfort and Encouragement of such as
so generously expose their Life for the Glory of their Prince, and the Good of
their Country.

All my Practice is levelled at these Ends, as may be seen by the Sequel. I
abstain from using Tents and Dilaters, as much as I can, and as the Case will
bear: I occasion little or no Pain, save at the first Dressing; and then I
always widen the Wound, especially if it is a Gunshot One, and do my best to
draw out the Extraneous Bodies: Now on this occasion I have three things
further to recommend, which are to dress Gently, Speedily, and Seldom.

There is a Way of Dressing Wounds made with Iron Instruments, usual among the
Soldiers, called the Secret Dressing, wherein they carefully suck the Orifice
of the Wound, in order to draw out the Blood therein contained; then they take
Samaritan Balsam, or Oil and Wine mixed without Boiling, and sometimes either
of them alone, which they squirt into the Wound from their Mouth, and without
any otheir Dressings, cover, and bind it up, muttering some Words between their
Teeth, to make the Method appear mysterous, which causes many People to think
it magical.

But these Words are ineffectual, and their Virtue imaginary, serving only to
palliate and authorize the Ignorance of such People, who know not what they do;
and to deceive the Imagination of the wounded. These Cures though accounted
miraculous, have nothing in them supernatural, and may be performed without
invoking the Assistance of Demons. It Is known to every one, that Blood when it
is out of the Vessels, coagulates, and corrupts in the Wound, if it make any
Stay there: and that by Sucking out the extravasated Blood, Suppuration is
prevented, and also that is removed, which might hinder the Reunion.

CHAP. IX. That it is necessary to Dress Wounds Gently.
GEntleness is one of these things, that are indispensibly required in curing
of Wounds. This Circumstance is so necessary, that without it other things have
seldom the desired Success; yea so much am I possessed in Favor of this
Opinion, that when I see some that are rigorously handled, I often admire how
they ever come to be cured: and indeed they never are, without a great many
Accidents, that fall out in the Progress of the Cure.

It Is ordinary for a wounded Person to be seized with a Fever, which being
symptomatick, must be a consequence of the Pain. The Inflammation that brings
along with it such a numerous Train of troublesome Accidents, is often
occasioned by an Irritation of the sensible Parts. Want of Sleep* proceeds
ordinarily from nothing else, but the Pain that is either over all the Body, or
in one Part only. Now if by Dressing gently, these three Accidents are avoided,
we may quickly hope to see a perfect Cure.

Tents, Dilaters, and Setons, as has been already sufficiently observed, are
the principal Cause of the Pain that the poor Wounded endure, and the Occasion
of so many hurtful Accidents; their remaining in Wounds being infallibly
attended with most destructive Consequences. If then we lay them aside, we may
prevent the Pain, and what follows upon it; and so having the Command of
whatever may give us trouble in Dressing, we may manage the Cure as we please.

Finally we ought to endeavor with all Care, to remove so soon as possible,
what might cause Pain, and by Evacuations and Diversions wisely to withdraw
what would foment it: but if it has already assaulted, we must apply what is
most proper to ease, and overcome it: for in a Word, Pain is a very formidable
Enemy in the Progress of any Disease whatever.

CHAP. X. That it is necessary to Dress Wounds speedily in order to prevent the
Access of the Air.
IN this Chapter I endeavor to show, that the Dressing of Wounds ought to be
performed speedily, because Experience has taught me, that the Air is a mighty
Hindrance of their Cure: And this is one of the chief Reasons that obliged me
to follow this Method: For though some Pain in Dressing is inevitable, yet by
this means it lasts for so short a time, that the Wounded scarce perceive it.
The Air has not time enough to exert its Influence upon the Flesh destitute of
its Coverings; and the nitrous Parts, with which it is thought to abound, cannot
pass to the Bottom of the Wound: for I am of Opinion, it is the nitrous,
clammy, and as some think, arsenical Qualities or Particles of the Air, that
destroy the due Temperament of the Parts, when deprived of their natural Cover,
and that consumes, or at least alters the Natural Balsam or Nutricious Juice,
which is as the Cement that unites the divided Parts.

All the Ancients and the Moderns also are in this agreed, that the Air is an
Enemy to Wounds: And Experience attests, that even the most pure and subtle, is
ever attended with a certain sharp and clammy Acidity, that sticks to Iron and
Steel and makes them rust.

It Is the same Air that also occasions so many Disorders; that alters and
corrupts the Bones, hurts the Nerves, and destroys the Tendons, corrodes the
Flesh, and utterly marrs the Temper of the Parts; wasting the Spirits that
preserve the Radical Moisture, which with a little Help, and often times almost
without any, unites broken Bones by a Callus, fills up Wounds with Flesh,
cleanses Ulcers, and brings them to a Scar.

Hippocrates, Sect. 5. Aphor. 20. says, that the Cold is offensive to ulcerated
Parts; that it hardens the Skin, causes Pain and Hardness, occasions Lividity,
Shiverings, Fevers and Convulsions.

By the Cold here is to be understood the Air, by means of which Disorders are
excited in us; it is corrosive, and therefore exasperates the sensible Parts;
it hardens the Skin, thereby hindering the Transpiration of the Vapors, which
being retained cause Pain, Hardness, and Fluxion, and these produce Shiverings
and Fevers; and oftentimes are followed by Lividity, Convulsion, and a Gangreen.

The Access of the Cold Air is indeed one of the Causes of the Pain, which is
so common in Wounds remaining too long uncovered, because it coagulates the
Humors, and causes the Blood in the small Vessels to become more sharp, and so
to ferment and corrupt.

A little Experience is sufficient to make one agree to these Reasons: We ought
to second the Designs of Nature, that are ever aimed at the preservation of
what is most precious, such as the Spirits: Now we may be assured, that when a
Wound is left uncovered, or often opened, there is occasioned a considerable
Loss of these same Spirits, whereby the Part is so weakened, that being unable
to make the right Use of the Nourishment sent for its Maintenance, it is all
changed unto Matter and Excrements.

That Cold is hurtful to Wounds, no Body doubts: All are likewise agreed, that
the Air is at all times colder than the inward Parts of our Body. Now if the
Touching of the Air only rots the Bones; if it act with such Force and Violence
on Bodies so solid as they are; it will undoubtedly be yet more destructive to
the Nerves and nervous Parts, that are so tender; as also to the Tendons, to
the Flesh, and to all Parts in general, to which it has Access.

The Air moreover produces many other Accidents in Wounds: for as has been
said, the Spirits are dissipated by the long and frequent Attacks of the Air,
whereby its acid Parts being at liberty, and not entangled, easily stick to the
Flesh, and other uncovered Parts, which they corrode and tear with their
Points; hence proceed pricking Pains, whose Cause often many are at a loss to
conjecture.

That same Acidity of the Air, coagulates the Blood in the Mouths of the
Arteries, that open unto the Wound; hinders its Course, and makes it to swell
up the Vessels, and very often also to discharge it self on the Part: Hence are
Tumors, Fluxions, Hardness, and if it Ferment, large Abscesses: For
Fermentation here is only the changing of Blood unto Matter; now the Blood
having neither the same Situation nor Motion as formerly, and its parts being
disjoined, easily corrupts and Ferments in a little time: unless we believe
that the Air cannot congeal the Blood in the Vessels, which yet is beyond
Controversy.

That the Air is very piercing, appears from Chilblains, and Kibes in the
Heels, where it has the Force to congeal the Blood in the Veins, and capillary
Arteries of the Part afflicted. If then it has such Influence on Parts clothed
with the common Teguments; what will it have on such as want 'em? In fine, if
it is able to coagulate the Blood in the Vessels where it may freely circulate;
much more may be feared from its Acidity in Wounds, where the Course of the
Blood being in a manner interrupted, the wounded Part receives but little Aid
from the natural Heat, and the Spirits; and the Blood it self, that precious
Balsam of Nature, being unmoved, and not receiving fresh and vigorous Supplies
from the Heart, is corrupted, as was said formerly, and turned unto Matter: and
indeed if we press the Places about the Wound, we shall perceive a certain
clammy Matter to come out as from so many little pipes, which often also is
corrupt and stinking.

Now if Nature, which is every way admirable and always industrious in
preserving, don't in such a Case exert her utmost Efficacy, the Part must be
mortified, in spite of all the Efforts of the inconsiderat Surgeon: and then
if it is a Member that may be cut off, the next thing is to deliberate whether
this ought, or may be done without danger. Sometimes it is doubted whether the
wounded Person can bear up under the Rigor of so painful an Operation,
considering his ill Temperament and Disposition of Body, which only are
accused, as the Cause of all these Accidents; for the Wound of it self was
inconsiderable, and might have been soon cured, in a Person of a stronger and
better Constitution: or otherwise the blame is laid upon some venereal Venom,
Vice of the Parent, Disorder, etc. In fine, the Patient and his Temperament,
are always found guilty, and fall as Victims to Ignorance.

I have been in many Places my self, where such things have happened, and where
neither the Persons wounded, nor the Surgeons understood the true Cause of the
supervening Accidents. It is however very requisite in this to employ all our
Care; chiefly in Hospitals of the Army, where seldom are to be found, all these
Conveniences that were to be wished, for correcting the Cold and the ill
Quality of the Air, which frequently is infected, and corrupted. It Is in such
Places where we ought to hinder it with all our Power to pass unto the inward
Parts of our Body, or to get access to those that are destitute of their
Coverings, lest at the same time it impart to them its destructive Impressions.

It may possibly be objected to me, that if that acid and nitrous Quality of
the Air, can produce such Disorders in Wounds; we ought much more to be
incommoded, by the frequent and necessary Use thereof in Respiration. But it is
answered, that the Windpipe and Lungs purify the Air, which is in a manner
filtrated and prepared by them, and so becomes Friendly to Nature, that only
uses the purest Parts, driving out by Expiration, together with the hot Vapors
or Exhalations of the Breast, that which is useless and hurtful. But it is not
so in Wounds, that have no Spring. It Is only the Lungs that are fitted, and
appointed for receiving the Air; they alone perform the Office of Bellows to
prepare, purify, or to expel it according to the necessity of our Machine.

Besides it may be said, that when the Air enters unto places that are covered,
and furnished with Membranes, its Acid Parts slide upon them, and take no hold;
but if there chance to be Ulcers in the Lungs, the Air will then cause
considerable Disorders; and the Cough which afflicts such kind of Patients,
proceeds undoubtedly from nothing else, but the Irritation occasioned by the
Air, in parts deprived of their Covering.

Moreover it must not be denied, that the Air abounds with very subtle and
piercing Parts, because it will pass through the Skarfe-Skin, the Skin, and
other Teguments. There are many Examples which show, that Persons have
subsisted by means of the Air passing through the Pores of the Skin, when
Respiration was altother Suppressed, whether by Suffocation, or other such like
Accidents. Some have also been taken down from the Gallows, who were thought to
have been a pretty while Dead, and yet with a little help have recovered:
whence it is easy to infer, that Nature had found the means, to furnish the
Heart and Lungs with a sufficient quantity of Air, to refresh them during that
Interval, by the Pores; seeing it could not pass by the way of the Windpipe. A
like Consequence may be drawn from those that ly in a Lethargy.

We may therefore reasonably infer, that if the Air is so subtle as to pierce,
and pass through Membranes so close and compact; it ought much more to
penetrate considerably beyond the Extent and Cavity of a Wound, where there is
nothing to purify or subtilise it; as there is, when passing through the Pores of
the Skin, it supplies the Place of Respiration: for since here the Skarf-Skin
keeps back the more gross, earthy, and clammy Parts of the Air; we have Reason
to think that it ought not to produce any ill Effects, in the Places to which
it comes. It were to be wished that Wounds were covered with something at the
times of Dressing, which might perform the Office of the Skarf-Skin, and
exclude the Acid and viscous Particles of the Air, together with other noxious
Effluvia with which it is filled. For if these Exhalations floating in the Air
are the Original of so many Diseases, as some modern Philosophers affirm; why
may not they occasion very dangerous Symptoms, when they take hold of, and
cleave to live and sensible Parts? Now seeing these Foreign Particles are
capable of alterations no less than the Air it self, we may be assured that the
ill Qualities which this has contracted in Hospitals by the Breath and
Transpiration of the Sick, are also communicated to those; seeing such Atoms
have a Substance, and a certain Form.

These Carbuncles that are so frequent in Hospitals of the Army, are a
sufficient Proof of what I say. They are occasioned, as some think, by the
arsenical Particles in the Air, which being taken in by Respiration, are thrown
out by the strength of the natural Heat upon some Emunctory. Now seeing this
falls out much oftener in Hospitals than elsewhere; we may infer, that the Air
also is here much more replenished with these subtle and impure Particles; by
reason of which the Wounds here treated, without very great Care, become
sometimes cancerous, always putrid, and often Fistulous and incurable.

I have learned by my long frequenting of Hospitals, that these Places where
the Sick have remained for some Time, retain, long after they are gone, the ill
Smell communicated by them. This I believe is owing to the impure Particles
that stick to the Walls: Whence these who design afterward to live in the
Place, are obliged to Plaster and whiten the Walls, that they may not be hurt
by the pernicious Effluvia proceeding from them.

Clothes, and other Goods, brought from Places where the Plague is, must be
cleans'd and purified from the Pestilential Particles that cleave to 'em;
without which Precaution they might excite a general Pestilence in the Places
to which they are brought. It Is this which inclines me to think, that the
nitrous and viscous Quality of the Air, resides in those Particles or Atoms;
which if they are capable to stick to a Body so smooth and polished as a Wall,
and that for a long time, without losing either their bad Smell, or ill
Qualities; much more will they do so to a Wound uncovered, which is always
moist, and where they may get easier hold, and act more readily, because of the
Tenderness and weakness of the Parts.

The dead Flesh of any Creature, if it is often handled and exposed to the Air,
suddenly putrifies: and a Fatus, a Member, etc. if it be kept in a close Vessel
covered with Spirit of Wine, may be preserved for ever; whereas on the
contrary, a little Air will dissolve it, and reduce it to nothing.

That the Air is a mighty Enemy to Wounds, is a Truth owned by the modern
Practisers of Surgery, no less than by the Ancients: but there are few take
sufficient Care, to hinder its Access to the Wounded Parts. Knowledge is in
vain when not put in Practice. Nevertheless this is a thing so absolutely
necessary, in the Cure of any Wound whatsoever; that without it, nothing that a
Surgeon's Art can perform, is to any purpose, but all is hurtful and
destructive.

From what has been said, Consequences may be deduced very useful in Practice.
All the Regard I have for Antiquity, was not prevalent enough to keep me from
the declaiming against an Abuse, though established by Custom; seeing Truth
depends on the Things themselves, and not on the Opinion the Ancients had of
them. I know many have already expressed themselves on this Subject, much after
the same manner as I have done. Celsus, who ought not to be reckoned among the
Moderns, has written something that looks this Way. In his Book Of Wounds of
the Skull, Chap. 4. he says, that Flesh breeds easily enough in any part of the
Head, except a little above the Space between the Eyebrows, where often there
remains an incurable Ulcer, because in that place there is a Cavity of the Bone
full of Air, bordering upon the Os Cribrosum; which Air hinders the filling up
of the Ulcer.

By all this then it evidently appears, that the Air is a powerful Impediment
to the Cure of Wounds; and that the speedy Method of Dressing ought to be
preferred to that which is yet in use in many places. And to conclude, it is
certain that the Pain caused by the use of a Tent, its remaining in the Wound,
the length of the Time taken up in Dressing, and the frequency thereof, of
which last I shall speak in the following Chapter, are the genuin Sources of
all the Accidents that follow on Wounds. Wherefore we must dress speedily, and
according to our Method, if we would prevent many dangerous Inconveniences.

CHAP. XI. That Wounds ought to be dressed seldom.
GAlen in his Fourth Book Of the Composition of Medicines, Chap. 4. orders to
dress Ulcers but once in three Days. This Method he acknowledges to have come
from Asclepiades; and I cannot but wonder that such a Practice has found so few
Followers, being so necessary and advantageous for the Patient.

If Ulcers require not to be dressed every Day, as this Author thinks, fresh
Wounds do yet much less call for it. Nevertheless it is the Custom in almost
all Hospitals, to dress regularly twice a day; and I believe there is scarce
one to be found, that does otherwise, excepting that of Brianson, where they
dress the wounded, some only once a Day, and others but once in two, three, or
four Days. If I had found this Method hurtful, I would not have been so wicked
as to continue to use it; much less to desire that others also might do the
same.

Pareus, Book 13 Chap. 11. treating of Ulcers, seems to be much inclined to the
Opinion of Galen, when he disapproves often Dressing: and yet in his Eleventh
Book, Chap. 5. speaking of Gunshot Wounds; he orders to dress them twice a
Day, and often once in every eight Hours.

It is surprising, that so famous an Author as Pareus, who believed the Air
extremely prejudicial to Wounds, adducing also many passages from the Ancients
to support that Opinion, should have left behind him Rules altogether repugnant
to it. But it is probable he was so busied in compiling so great a Work, that he
had not time enough to make the necessary Reflections upon this Subject, which
requires a very diligent Application: and this may be the Reason why in many
Places he contradicts himself.

Fabricius ab Aquapendente, Page 1. Book 2. Chap. 7. discoursing of the way to
preserve the Substance of the Parts in simple Wounds, affirms again and again,
that it is enough to take off the Dressings once in three or four Days; which
he confirms by the Authority of Galen, where he treats of the Cure of putrid
Ulcers.

It Is certain, that the seldomer a Wound is dressed, the less it matters;
providing it be not stuffed with Lint or some such thing: the Remedy also has
the more time to communicate its Virtue to the Part, which seems in some sort
to be nourished thereby: And the Nutricious Juice, has more liberty and time to
restore the lost Substance, and reunite the divided Parts. On the other hand,
if it is often dressed, the Strength of the Remedy being destroyed, and its
Virtue diminished; it becomes so weak, that it has no Effect, and its Moisture
running away, like the Sap of a Tree when it is pierced, is mixed with, and
turned into Matter.

What Nature does in uniting broken Bones, may instruct us what we ought to do
in curing of Wounds: we see that a Callus is bred without the Assistance of any
thing, by the wise Contrivance of Nature only, if so be that she is not by
frequent Dressing, or indiscreet motions of the Part, diverted from her Work.

When the little Fibrous Threads begin to be formed in a Wound, in order to
unite the parts that are divided; and the Nutricious Juice is communicated to
the Part, to restore it to its natural State; if then the Part is often
disturbed with frequent dressing, if the Wound is searched with the Fingers, or
with a Probe, or a dry Tent, etc. what Nature has done, will be bruised and
separated; and her Work destroyed as soon as begun: so that if this Method is
continued, the nutricious Juice becomes thick, and hard, and cleaves to the
Sides of the Wound; where it forms a Callosity, and often a Fistula.

Generation then, which is the principal Work of Nature, cannot be accomplished
without Rest; so true it is that Repose is necessary to her in all her
Operations. Hence it is that I cannot apprehend by what Reasons they are
influenced, who by frequent and painful dressing, without any necessity,
exasperate the Wounds; and I protest I could never my self endure so cruel a
Method. Sometimes they search them with their Fingers, sometimes with an
Instrument; and not contented with this, if they fancy they have found any
thing, desire their Friends present, and their Boys to do the same: and in this
miserable Condition is the wretched Patient detained sometimes an hour; and
that most frequently twice a Day. I dare not adventure to name the Places in
France, Italy, and Germany, where I have seen the wounded used on this fashion;
and that by such as held very considerable Posts, where a good Method was
extremely necessary.

Finally, after much time has been spent in taking into the Wound, they think
they are bound in Credit, for the satisfaction of the Wounded, and the
Bystanders, to draw out something, and show it publicly, lest they seem to
have labored in vain. Now if it should chance that at length any little piece
of a corrupted Membrane is found; (which would not be strange in a Wound dressed
in this manner, where Corruption often causes great Disorder:) it is drawn out
with abundance of Ceremony; and the Operater fails not to declare, with great
confidence, that this is it which occasioned the Restlessness and Pain of the
preceding Night. And now, you must think, the wounded Person is half cured.

Heavens! What Abuse? Is it possible that any Man can be so much imposed upon?
I would gladly understand what it is that did separate this shred of a
Membrane, or these Fibers, etc.? It will be answered without doubt that it is
Nature; which endeavoring a Reunion, rejects that which opposes it. I demand
again how it was brought to this Place? By the same Nature, will one say. And
why then will not she go on to drive that extraneous thing quite out of the
Body, seeing she has done so much? She is able to drive out Bullets though
fastened in a Bone, as I shall show in the second Part; to expel Splinters;
yea, to bring them to the Orifice of the Wound; and that a considerable time
after it has been closed up: why should we then apprehend that she will leave
such things within, from which she may so easily free her self; either by the
Orifice of the Wound, or by some other more convenient way? For it is certain
that Nature left to her liberty takes ever the easiest way. Besides, all the
Parts of the Body have an Elasticity, or Spring, whereby any Foreign Thing is
naturally driven from the Center to the Circumference.

Antony Benevent a Physician of Florence relates, that a certain Woman
swallowed a very large Needle, which two Years after came away by her Navel:
And Tarentus a Physician also, reports; that a Maid, who had swallowed a Needle
nigh about four Inches in Length, voided it ten Months after by the Vrinary
Passage.

From hence it appears, that the Industry and Sagacity of Nature, surpasses
that of all the Esculapian Family: She knows what she does; and wants not to be
instructed in the ways she ought to take, in order to drive out of the Body
whatever oppresses, or is foreign and noxious unto her. The Surgeon ought only
to employ his utmost care, to understand and follow her: he must study her
Designs, and take all heed not to divert her from her Enterprises; seeing she
does nothing in vain.

After what I have said concerning Nature; I would not have any to think, that
I am one of those who regard her as a Divinity, and ascribe unto her a Reason,
whereby she diposes all her wonderful Works. Reason I look upon, as a peculiar
Privilege of the Human Soul. Neither am I of the Opinion of Empedocles, that
whatever she does is mysterious: It Is him that Aristotle, in his third Book of
Metaphysics, ridicules for giving no other Reason for many things that were
asked him, but this; that it was Nature's Pleasure. All I will say is, that if
her Operations are mavelous, they are owing to her powerful Author, who has
entrusted her with whatever we have that is most precious.

But to return to my Subject; it is fit I should advertise my Reader, that I
would not have any to follow my Method of seldom dressing, unless first he has
entirely laid aside the Use of Tents, and Dilaters; which by retaining the
Matter, would cause a Fermentation, whereby these same Tents and Dossels would
also be corrupted: This is what fell out not long ago in a Cure to which I was
called: The Dilaters that had been used were carried along with the Matter that
was discharged between the Muscles; and there putrefying, the Corruption was
quickly communicated to the neighboring Parts: Whence it appears that this
Method, has in it Singularities and insparable Circumstances, that must not be
omitted.

M. Verdue in his Pathology, Tom. 1. fol. 439. advises not to do as some
Surgeons, who every minite are opening the Wounds of those who are under their
Care: For, says he, by too often taking off the Dressings, we hinder their
reuniting; and give occasion to the Air to insinuate it self into the Wound,
and to coagulate the nutricious Juice: this indeed is a most just and
reasonable Thought. I remember when I was at Rome in the year 1678, I chanced
to see a little Book written in Italian by the chief Surgeon of the Hospital of
the H. Ghost, whose name I have forgotten: He therein discoursed of Wounds of
the Head only; and proved by very good Reasons, that they ought to be dressed
only once in three or four Days, and sometimes not so often: Moreover in
dressing he did not altogether lay open the Wound, but kept always upon it some
thin Cover, as is done at this day in many Places in dressing of Burnings.

In Fine, he took such great care to hinder the Air from passing into, and
offending the Wounds which he dressed; that we may be assured he Judged it a
grand Impediment to their Cure: Which was also his Opinion of frequent
Dressing. In the same Book he adduc'd many Examples; among which, were several
Accounts of very considerable Cures, accomplished by this Method.

It were much to be desired that every One, without regarding the public
Censure they might incur, had the same Charity to reveal the Knowledge they
have attained by their Care and Experience. For it is very probable that by the
Universality of Mankind, almost an Universality of Knowledge is possessed: One
has a Genius for one thing; and the other has a Genius for another, and each
their different Endowments: and in Civil Life, and particularly in an Art so
necessary for the Preservation of Mankind, every one ought to communicate
without Reservation.

After all, there is no Rule without some Exception; and I freely own that
their are certain Cases, wherein Tents ought sometimes to be used: as in some
Wounds of the Breast, and in an Empyema; when we would hinder the total
Evacuation of the Blood or Matter, to preserve the Strength of the Patient: and
finally, on some other Occasions, where they may be Judged absolutely necessary.

There are other Wounds, to which Dilaters are necessarily required; as when
the Bones being rotten or altered, we wait for their Exfoliation; or when they
must be kept open in order to some further Operation to be performed upon them.

There are also other Wounds, to which of necessity we must occasion some Pain;
whither by drawing forth extraneous Bodies, or by setting broken Bones, or by
dilating their Orifice.

Others there are, that will take up some time in dressing; as in these of the
Head, where we often suspect there may be a fracture of the Scull: Also when
the Scull is broken; when some Operation is to be performed upon the Bones, in
complicated Fractures; and when extraneous Bodies are to be drawn out: in such
Cases we cannot dress so quickly as were to be wished.

To conclude, there are some that must be often looked to, when notwithstanding
our Care, the Suppuration is great: as in Abscesses that are cavernous and
deep, in very hot Seasons, and in Patients of an ill Disposition of Body, who
abound in excrementitious Moisture; or when Phlegmons, Erysipela's, Lividity,
and Gangrenes, or any other unexpected Accident, follow upon a Wound: For it is
the part of a prudent and Skilful Surgeon to accommodate himself to emergent
Occasions, and to correct the Symptoms as they fall out.

CHAP. XII. A Discourse upon Discovered Bones; with the way to prevent
Exfoliation.
IT is almost an Universal Custom, (at least I have seen it put in practice
wherever I have been) so soon as a Bone is uncovered, to widen the Wound by
Tents and Dilaters, and wait for its Exfoliation. This is so superstitiously
observed in many of the King's Hospitals, that it would be Judged a very
heinous Offense, to do otherwise; yea, or to neglect what has been delivered
by the Ancients: As if we were eternally obliged, blindly to follow their
Dictates.

Experience has taught me on many Occasions, that nothing more is required, to
prevent the Spoiling of a Bone, when only uncovered, but to defend it from the
Access of the Air: For this Intent we ought to endeavor to close up the Wound
with all possible speed, by means of proper Bandage, and balsamic Remedies;
without dilating it by Tents and Dossels. Thus the Bone will soon be covered;
and the Exfoliation thereof is avoided, which would infallibly follow, if time
had been given to the Air, to exert its pernicious Efficacy upon it.

Many Authors have enjoined Stiching in such a Case. Hippocrates, and several
others after him, have approved thereof in Wounds of the Head; which
notwithstanding may be united without it, unless they are large and tranverse,
and of the lower Parts; where stiching oftentimes becomes necessary, by reason
of the figure of the Scull.

If any considerable Portion of the Bone is bared, with loss of the covering
Substance, the Wound being large, will take up a long time before it is closed
up: in this Case all our Care, will not be able to hinder the Alteration, and
rotting of the Bone; either by the Air admitted in the numerous Dressings; or
by the Matter running along, or staying upon the Bone. To prevent therefore
this Inconvenience; we must in the first Dressing pierce the Bone, as nimbly as
possible, in many Places, with the Pyramid or Pike of the Trepan: By this means
a way is opened to a Marrowy Juice; which thickning upon it, covers over the
Bone in a little time, without suffering it to lose any of its Substance.

It is well known to Surgeons; that any considerable Portion of the Scull, laid
bare by a Wound, can never again be covered with Flesh, without the Assistance
of Art; because of the Smoothness and Glibness of its Surface: Upon this
Consideration it was that many of the Ancients thought fit to rasp it, that it
might become rough and unequal; and also to make way for the Orifices of the
little Vessels, with which its inward Substance abounds, to supply it with
Blood, necessary to breed a new Flesh wherewith it may be covered.

But the Operation which I have made upon it on many Occasions, and which I
here propose; appears to me to be more speedy, safe and profitable, than
Rasping; wherein, the Instrument passing to and fro many times, on the whole
Surface of the discovered Bone; heats it, and alters it much more, than the Pin
of the Trepan; which only slightly touches it at certain Distancces; and yet
pierces so far, as to approach the middle Pith, from which we must fetch the
required Assistance. Moreover the Rasp lessens much the thickness of the Bone;
whereby those that have undergone that Operation, are subject to Pains in the
Head: add to this, that it also leaves after it an unseemly Scar.

This Operation may be used, when the first, yea or both Tables of the Scull
are broken; providing no inequality be left on the inward Surface thereof; that
may occasion Accidents, which will appear in a small time: For if we delay to
procure a covering to the Bone, the most subtle Part of the Matter may slide
into the Fracture, and there cause some Alteration, or Inflammation, (for
according to Galen and Celsus, the Bone is liable to this Inconvenience) and
also yet more troublesome Accidents. Now seeing the first Operation of this
Nature which I performed, was on the Scull; I shall begin to Justify this
Practice, by showing how it is nourisht.

The Scull, according to the Opinion of many, has its Nourishment from three
different Sources: First, by Vessels proceeding from those of the Dura Matter,
and passing into the Cranium, through its internal Surface, or that which is
nearest the Brain: Secondly, from the Diploe or middle Pith, a medullary Juice
is imparted to both Tables, whereby they are nourisht and sustained: And
thirdly, by its external Part, it receives Nourishment from the Pericranium,
wherewith it is every where covered and defended.

When therefore by some external violence the Bone is deprived of that
Membrane, and remains uncovered; it is certain that the Air by its Acid and
Nitrous Points, takes hold on its outward Surface; and in a little time alters
and rots it: and then it must needs exfoliate, because it is bereft both of its
Nourishment, and Defense.

It becomes necessary then to make an Amends, and to draw Nourishment from the
neighboring Parts instead of that which is lost; that at the same time by
covering it anew, may shelter it from external Injuries. Now this we can have
from no nearer Place than the Diploe; but in order to that we must give it an
easy Passage, and open to it a Way to fulfill at once the Intention of Nature,
and that of the Surgeon. This is accomplished by piercing the Bone, as we have
said; whereby the Diploe sends forth at these little Holes the most subtle Part
of the marrowy Juice; which congealing upon the Bone in three, four or five
Days, sometimes sooner, sometimes later, entirely covers it.

Other Bones that have Marrow, are nourished from within, by the Vessels of the
Membrane which cover that Substance; and from without, by the Penostrum, or
Membrane wherewith they are invested: For this Reason we may perform this
Operation, when there is occasion, on the Bones of the Shoulder, Thigh, and
Leg; and these who doubt of this, may be convinced by a Trial.

That which ought to recommend this Method, and procure it an easy Reception;
is that thereby the Cure is accomplished in twelve or fifteen Days, or so;
whereas otherwise it will take up near sixty; for about forty Days are required
to the Exfoliation of the Bone, and twenty more to fill up and cicatrize the
Ulcer. Our Way is so exceedingly advantageous to the Wounded, that it ought not
to be rejected; nor can it, without offending against that Charity, we owe our
afflicted Neighbor, who by the Delay in such Cases, is extremely endangered,
especially in an Hospital, where the corrupt and infected Air ruins in time the
strongest Constitutions. I have often seen, and it is but too ordinary, that
the Wounded Persons being cured, and just ready to depart from the Hospital,
have been suddenly seized by Malignant Fevers, Looseness, Bloody Flux, etc.
occasioned by their tedious stay in such dismal Place^ and Death often has been
the first thing that delivered them from all their Miseries. Therefore we ought
to endeavor a speedy Cure, and to spare no Pains to prevent that tedious
Exfoliation. But if the Wounded are sent to us with the Bone altered, or if we
cannot avoid this Accident with all our Care, we must endeavor to help on the
Separation with all Speed: for as a Gangreen in Fleshy Parts wants the
Assistance of Art to put a stop to it; so also does Rottenness, which is a
Gangreen of the Bone; wherefore Exfoliation must be hastened by external
Remedies, that it may go no further; for sometimes it extends from one End of
the Bone to the other.

It is the Surgeon's Province, to pick out such Remedies as are proper for this
Intention. The Ancients and Moderns have left us good store of this kind; but
above all, we must avoid the use of Acid Spirits, which increase the
Rottenness, and have the same Effrct on a Bone, as Aqua fortis on Iron. The
actual Cautery is a great Help on these Occasions; as also Euphorbium infused
in Spirit of Wine.

The Rules I have proposed to prevent Exfoliation, are inconsistent with the
Opinion of many Italian Surgeons, who maintain, that the Bone, so far as has
been touched by the Air, will infallibly exfoliate. I have heretofore had great
Debates on this Subject with some People, who through a Stiffness of Opinion,
without any Ground, would neither yield to Reason, nor Experience; not being
able to bear what was contrary to their own Principles and Practice.

CHAP. XIII. How to Dress with a New Instrument, after Trepanning, or Accidents
of that Nature.
WOunds of the Head accompanied with a Fracture of the Skull, are such as
require an expert Surgeon: I am convinced, and I suppose none will deny it,
that the Air is hurtful to them: in this both Ancients and Moderns are agreed.

It Is certain notwithstanding that a great Part of the Accidents that follow
upon them, proceeds only from the little Care that is taken, to hinder the
Access of the Air into the Wounds, whether the Scull be only bared, or broken,
or also trepanned. I have discoursed of discovered Bones in the foregoing
Chapter; I have only two or three Words more to speak, of such Wounds, where
the Scull has lost some of its Substance.

When the Dura Matter is uncovered, I prepare a Plate of Lead very thin, and
very smooth, pierced with Holes in several Places, without any Inequality, cut
and fitted to the Bigness of the Opening; and to make it more exact, I sketch
it out with the Crown of the Trepan, that I have used, or am to use in this
Operation: or its Measure may be taken from the Piece of the Scull cut out by
the Trepan. On each side of this Plate is left a little Ear, somewhat longer
than the thickness of the Scull; these little Ears I bend both one way, so as
they may be perpendicular to the Plate; and so much of them as exceeds the
thickness of the Scull, I bend outward again, that thereby they may rest upon
the Scull, and by which, as by two little Handles, I may lift them up with
Pincers, if need be, at each Dressing; these two little Handles may be cut
something broader, than the two pieces that join them to the Plate, which must
be of an equal Breadth. When I use it, I dip it in some proper Medicine pretty
Warm, and apply upon it a very soft Pledget of fine Lint.

I have found very much Good by this Method, and have observed a five-fold
Advantage in the Use of this Plate. First, the Matter or Blood contained within
the Scull, passes out at the Holes of the Plate, and is imbibed by the soft
Lint that I put over it: and if it has acquired any mischievous Quality by
staying there, which often falls out, the Lint by which it is soaked up,
detains it from touching the Dura Matter, and imparting the Contagion thereto;
and consequently, there is less Hazard of its Alteration.

In the Second Place, this Plate, by lightly pressing upon the Dura Matter,
facilitates the coming out of the Matter or Blood extravasated under the Scull.

Thirdly, It hinders the breeding of a Fungus, and the bunching out of the Dura
Matter beyond the Scull, which otherwise often comes to pass; obliging us either
to cut off, or to consume with Cathecreticks that which so stands out;
whereupon very grievous Accidents sometimes ensue.

A Fourth Advantage is, that it hinders by its slight Pressure, the Dura Matter,
in its continual Motion, to strike against the Inequalities and pointed Parts
of the Scull; that remain after a Piece has been raised by the Operation of the
Trepan, or entirely separated by some external Violence.

And Finally, it protects the Brain and its Membranes from the Assaults of the
Air, performing in some sort the Part of that Piece of the Scull that was taken
away.

When we are assured that there is, or are in Doubt that there may be some
coagulated Blood under the Scull, we may for some time omit the Use of the
Plate, that we may leave it a free Passage; and afterward we may use it, until
the danger of the Accidents is over; and then we must use it no longer:
otherwise it may prove an Hinderance to the Reunion, and the Generation of the
Callus.

When the Operation of the Trepan is performed on the Basis of the Scull, as is
usual now to be done without Scruple, the bunching out of the Dura Matter is
more to be feared; and of consequence this Plate is absolutely necessary to
support it, and keep it in: but for the Operation on this Place, as well as for
that on others, we must endeavor, as far as the Case will bear, to choose the
highest Part; that the Plate may have the less weight to sustain. We may safely
use it for fourteen or fifteen Days, if we Judge it needful; and it may be made
of Gold, Silver, etc. according to the Desire and Ability of the Patient: but
for my self I always use a leaden one; for every Body knows that this Metal is
freindly to Nature, and is vulnerary and drying.

Though there were no other Advantage to be reaped from the Use of this Plate,
but only that it defends the Brain, and its Membranes, from the Insults of the
Air, this were enough to recommend it to our Esteem. It is certain that the Air
acts not with that Force, when its Acid Parts find a hindrance in their way, or
when they must pass through such little holes as these of this Instrument: and
sometimes I don't lift it up but in two or three Days, when it Matters freely,
and the Accidents abate.

M. Verdue affirms, that the Fungus that breeds on the Dura Matter, is caused by
the Attacks of the Air: in a word, all the Ancients and Moderns are of one Mind
in this, that the Air is exceeding destructive to the Membranes, and to the
Brain.

It is not then without Cause that Nature as a good and provident Mother, has
taken Care to encompass the Brain with two Membranes, the Scull, the
Pericranium, the Teguments and the Hairs, on every Side, to cover it from the
Impresions of the Air, which of all the Elements is most hurtful to it: and the
most part of those that have been trepaned, or by a Fracture of the Scull have
lost some part of its Substance, without having the Brain or its Membranes
hurt, are subject to a number of very troublesome Acccidents.

The Reason of this may be easily conceived: for the Air, at certain Seasons,
and in certain constitutions thereof, being endowed with more piercing and
subtle Parts, or the Skin being more relaxed; finds nothing sufficient to stop
its Course, and passes, notwithstanding the Callus, which is never so solid as
a Bone, to the Membranes, which are extremely sensible of Cold, and there
occasions these Pains that such kind of People are subject to.

That the Description of the Plate, may be the Better understood, we have here
subjoyned its Figure.

The Figure of a Plate with Nine Holes, to be used when the Crown of the Trepan
is large.


A little Plate with Five Holes.


The Figure of a Plate ready for Use, with the little Ears bent.


THE Hospital-Surgeon: OR, A New, Gentle, and Easy Way, to Cure speedily all
sorts of WOUNDS.
PART II.
Further evincing the Excellency of this Way, by a faithful and particular
Account of Wounds of all Kinds, and in all Parts of the Body, thereby brought
to a quick and happy Cure; together with Useful and Practical Reflections.

CHAP. I. The Reasons of Writing this Second Part; with a general Proposal of
what it contains.
THOUGH Sound Reason, supported by Authority, may appear to be a Proof of the
Goodness of any Thing, convincing enough, and capable to sustain the Weight of
what Consequences might thence be deduced; yet does there oftentimes still
remain an Uneasiness and Hesitation in the Mind, no otherwise to be removed,
but by Ocular Demonstration, as it were, and Experience: for nothing so
infallibly shows the Possibility of Things, as their having already come to
pass; nor can any Thing so well assure us, what will follow upon them, as a
multitude of Trials. It Is this Consideration that induced me in this second
Part, to give a History of some Wounds handled according to my Method, that
Justify my manner of Practice.

Had I thought it requisite, I could have filled a great Volume with Cures that
I have done these ten or twelve years, which were all brought to a happy
Conclusion, and completed in a very small time. But to avoid tediousness, I
resolved to set down as few as possible. Yet in spite of my Design to relate
only one of each sort, and each Part, I found my self necessitated to exhibit
many; of which though some at first may appear altogether alike, yet if they be
more narrowly scanned, they will be found to differ in some very material
Circumstances.

As for the Order observed in these Relations, I have followed that of the
Dignity of the Parts, beginning at the Head, and ending with the Extremities;
not minding the Series of time wherein they happened. I have described all
things Just as they were, without either adding or diminishing; having no other
Design, but to make the Easyness and Expedition of this Method appear, by the
Examples I here relate.

CHAP. II. Of the Head.
OBSERVATION I.
AFter the War broke out in Savoy, there was brought to the King's Hospital at
Luserne, where I was then Surgeon Major, in July 1690, a Soldier called La
Grandeur of the Regiment of Poudenx, which is now that of Gatinois. He had
received a Wound on the right Side of his Head with a pretty large Bullet;
which grazing upon the most unequal part of the Bone of the Sinciput; had only
carried away the common Teguments, not hurting the Scull; but the Membrane that
immediately invests it was so bruised, that it appeared livid. I know, if time
had been given, it would have come to Suppuration; whereupon the Alteration and
Exfoliation of the Bone must needs have ensued: to prevent which, I tear'd off
with my Nails the Pericranium so far as it was bruised, being something more
than the bigness of a Silver Shilling; and forthwith I struck the uncovered
Bone, in several Places, as nimbly as I could with the Pyramid of the Trepan;
and then covered it with some Lint wet with Spirit of Wine: the rest of the
Dressing was charged with a simple Digestive, upon which I put Emplastrum de
Botemea, and above all the Cap.

After two Days I took off the Dressings, and found the Bone covered with a
lively Red, from whence I conjectured that it would soon be clothed with
Flesh: two Days after this it was dressed in like manner as before, and then the
Bone was half covered over; for which Cause I let it alone for three Days more;
so that in seven Days time the Bone was altogether hid with new Flesh, which
was instead of a Membrane to it; and now nothing more was required, but by
dressing it every other Day to attend the Fall of the Escar. Finally, in the
Space of eighteen Days, the Wound was filled up and completely cured.

REFLECTION.
If this Wound had been managed after the ordinary Method, I leave it to
consideration, whither the Cure would have been so speedily accomplished. From
that time forward, I ever kept to this Method, which I have used in many
Occasions, and never found that the Wounds opened again, yea, or that
Exfoliation, or any other evil Accident ensued.

This and the following Example I Judged sufficient to establish our Way of
Dressing: And indeed seeing it has been attended with Success in such Cases, we
ought to remain assured, that it will prove no less effectual in incised
Wounds, and others also where the Bone is laid bare, whither by that which
inflicts them, or by the Suppuration of the Pericranium. But we must observe,
if the Pericranium is bruised or discolored, as in the preceding Case, and
Suppuration appear unavoidable; that the securest way is to tear it off, and
speedily to uncover the Bone, that the foresaid Operation may take Place;
whereby the Corruption of the Bone will be prevented, which might be occasioned
by the lodging of the corrupt Matter thereupon; and then the Operation would be
too late.

CHAP. III. Of the Head.
OBSERVATION II.
A Certain Soldier named Chasteau-montague, of Aligny's Company in Villars his
Regiment, together with a Companion of his in the same Company, was, during the
Campaign in the Year 1694. brought to the Hospital established for the King's
Army at Brianson.

The first had received a Cut on the middle of the Os Sincipitis of the left
Side, whereby the Bone was uncovered, to the bigness of a Silver Crown Piece.
At the second Dressing I made eight or ten little Holes with the Piercer upon
the discovered Bone, not reaching so deep as the middle Pith or Diploe, that I
might make Trial, if I could accomplish my Design, without piercing through the
first Table. I applied upon the Bone so far as it was laid bare, Lint dipped in
Spirit of Wine, dressing the rest of the Wourd, with the simple Digestive,
Emplastrum de Betonica, and the Kerchief.

I waited two Days before I dressed it again, and then found that my Operation
had not been without Effect. The Bone was become reddish, and the Holes made by
the Piercer, to which this Effect was owing, began as it were to sprout forth;
which made me conclude, that Nature would accomplish the Work she had already
begun. For the first eight Days he was dressed but four times, after which the
Bone was wholly covered: and in eight or ten Days more, wherein he was dressed
but every third Day, the Wound was filled up, and a good and firm Cicatrix
formed. He came into the Hospital on the 25th of May, and upon the 11th of June
he went out perfectly cured; all that were therein being Witnesses of the
Operation, and the Speediness of the Cure.

His Companion had several Cuts over all his Head, which he had received in the
same Occasion, but especially a deep one upon the upper and middle part of the
Forehead-Bone. Finding that in none of them the Scull was fractur'd, I judged
it sufficient to join together their Lips; only in the last, during the first
Days, I left two small Threads of Lint dipped in Spirit of Wine, with the Ends
hanging a little out of the Wound. Four Days after, I caused to be removed
whatever might hinder the reuniting thereof, dressing only once in three Days,
because no Accident appeared.

The Suppuration in this last Wound was but very inconsiderable; and no Bones
came away, neither was there any Exfoliation: So this Man also was cured, and
returned unto the Regiment with his Companion.

REFLECTION.
Had I only recounted one Cure of this Nature, done in a place at a great
Distance from Paris, the Truth thereof might readily enough have been called in
Question: But these, with many others of the like kind, having been publicly
performed in an Hospital, to which every one had free Aceess, and as it were in
view of the World, ought not only to remove all Scruple as to the Truth of the
Matter of Fact, but also to establish the Reputation of a Method, attended with
Expedition and Security. The Excellency and Usefulness of the little Operation
performed upon the uncovered Scull off the first Man, may be easily made
apparent to every one; being founded on Reason and Experience. M. Jouve, a very
expert Physician belonging to this Hospital, was an Eyewitness of the happy
Success of these last Cures; he having been present from the Beginning to the
End.

I should but weary my Reader, and my self also, if I should go about to reckon
up the number of those, who in three Years time, with a surprising Quicknss,
have in this Hospital been cured of Wounds of the Head; as well such wherein
the Scull was cut more or less, as those wherein it had lost of its Substance.

I am not the only Person, who has conquered Scruples commonly enough
entertained about Wounds of the Head. Ambrosius Paraeus reports, that he cured
in a small time a certain Person, that with an edged Instrument, had a large
piece of the Forehead-bone entirely separated, and hanging over upon the Face
by the Skin only; which yet was easily enough reunited.

In the Scull, as in other Bones of the Body, when a Piece is separated,
whether by a Cut, or Fracture, so as yet to adhere to the encompassing
Membrane; it is sufficient artfully to restore it to its natural Place, in such
a manner, that it may have the same Situation and Disposition as formerly; that
so the Pores may answer, and the Nutricious Juice necessary to form the
reuniting Callus, may be freely admitted; which could not be done without
extreme Difficulty, if it were placed either to high, too low, or aside; in
which Cases, the natural Order and Situation of the Part being altered; it is
impossible it can sit so close to the Bone from whence it was divided, but that
many little Distances must interveen, that are liable to be filled with Lympha,
Blood, or Matter, or all three together; which alter the wounded Part, corrupt
its Aliment, and bring that Membrane to Suppuration, by which only the divided
Part was tied: So that Nature must now of Necessity throw it off, as an
Extraneous Body.

From hence we may readily conclude, that it is not at all necessary, to permit
Wounds of this kind to come to Suppuration, or to keep them open in Expectation
of the coming away of Bones, which, without Danger, may be avoided.

This our Method is also confirmed, by the Authority of Rhasis, and Serapion,
Authors celebrated by Antiquity; who treating of Wounds of the Head accompanied
with a Fracture of the Scull, tell us that it was their Custom to stitch them,
even when the Fracture passed through both Tables. M. Verdue also in his first
Volume, Chap. 18. Of Wounds in the Head, makes mention of a Fracture of one of
the Ossa Sincipitis, that reached from the Sagittal to the Lambdoidal Suture,
which was cured without the Assistance of Operation.

The Diploe or middle Pith, plentifully supplies the Scull with Nutricious
Juice; from whence it is, that when broken it is more easily united, than any
of the other Bones, though yet its Callus is less firm: And providing the Brain
with its Membranes are safe, we need not fear any Danger from the Fractures of
the surrounding Bone: But though this may sometimes fall out; yet is it scarce to
be expected, but that the violence that occasions a Fracture in the Scull,
should by the sudden Jolt or Concussion, produce some Disorder in such a soft
glandulous Body as is the Brain. Great Carefulness therefore and Attention is
here required: for a Rupture of the Vessels, or a Dilatation of their Mouths,
that are frequent enough in such Cases, and cause Effusion of Blood, don't
appear at first; as I have oftentimes observed: but so soon as the Accidents
begin to show themselves, Operation must not be neglected.

It will possibly be objected, to what I have said, concerning carefully
placing the broken piece of Bone, in the same Situation it had formerly; that
the Bones of other Parts of the Body may be reunited by Means of a Callus, even
when so ill placed, that there is a necessity of breaking them anew, in order
to restore them to their natural Figure. But the Answer is easy; for there is a
Difference between the former Case, wherein a Piece or Splinter of Bone is
separated from the whole; and this, where the Nutricious Juice, that comes from
the One as well as the other Part, meets, diffuses it self, and coagulates
about the Fracture, and so forms that which we term a Callus: but in the other
Case, the Alimentary Liquor proceeds, and is communicated from one of the Parts
only; and if it find no Pores rightly disposed to receive it, there being
nothing to which it can Join it self, it is altered and corrupted; and the
loosened Piece shares with it in the same Fate.

As for the Operation of Trepanning* which I have often performed, seeing
nothing extraordinary has therein occurred, I will pass it over in Silence.

CHAP. IV. Of the Head.
OBSERVATION III.
ABout the Conclusion of the Year 1689, a little time before the War of Savoy,
the Vaudois cut off almost all the Inhabitants of Pramol, which depends on the
Valley of St. Martin. I was at that time Surgeon Major to the Hospital of the
Army of his Royal Highness the Duke of Savoy: Thither were brought a great
number of Men, Women, Maids and Children in a most deplorable Condition; and
among others a young Girl about nine or ten years of Age, who besides others in
the Body and Arms, had received eighteen or nineteen blows on the Head with a
Cutlass, each whereof had pierced the Scull, some even to the Dura Matter; some
Pieces of the first Table were carried away, and some of both Tables entirely
separated.

I caused in the first place, such Parts to be shaved as would bear it; and
afterward I gently rubbed the whole Head, with a Liniment made of Vnguentum de
Betonica, the Yelk of an Egg, and Spirit of Wine, mixed together: in this
mixture also I dipped large Pledgets, with which I covered all the Head, without
either Tents or Dilaters; above these I put Emplastrum de Betonica, and over
all the ordinary Cap.

What her Age and Strength would allow, was done for diverting the Humors; and
the first Dressings were left untouched for two Days; which Method was
continued for fifteen Days: when we took off the Plaster, almost at every
Dressing we found Pieces of Bone sticking to the Pledgets: What was altogether
separated, came away with Eease: And in fine, such Bones as yet adhered to the
Pericranium were reunited, and what was wanting in the Cranium was speedily
supplied. When I perceived the Suppuration to diminish, I dressed but once in
three days. This Course I found so successful, that in the space of about five
weeks the Cure was perfectly accomplished. This poor wounded Girl, was known to
almost all Pignerol; being very remarkable by the loss of one of her Ears,
which she had sustained in this afflicting Occasion.

REFLECTION.
This Cure is altogether to be ascribed to Nature, as being entirely her Work:
and had not great Circumspection been used, in prohibiting the access of the
Air, in this Case, where the very Membranes of the Brain in several Places were
discovered, it could not have had so speedy, easy, and successful an Upshot;
especially had it been managed in the ordinary Way: For besides that the Cure
would have been unsufferably tedious; a thousand dangerous Accidents might have
arrived chiefly in an Hospital, where long-winded Cures are seldom attended
with success. In fine, notwithstanding the Novelty that may be charged upon
this Method, it is supported by the Authority of Hippocrates; who, B. 5. Aph.
17. affirms that the Air is an Enemy to the Brain, the Bones, the Nerves, and
to our Nature in General. Galen in his Book De usu Partium, chapter 1. says, that
the Air is prejudicial to Ulcers, by which word he understands all Sores; and
adds, that in trepanning we ought to take special care not to cool the Brain as
well during the Operation, as when it is over.

The Access of the Air, is not only hurtful to the Wounds of the Scull and
Brain; but also to those of the other parts of the Body; in which the Accidents
are neither so sudden, nor so violent; yet ought they to be regarded with all
necessary Care: for if you ever so little neglect the Conservation of the
Natural Heat and Spirits, the wounded Member must needs fail, and frequently
the Owner also shares in the same Destiny.

CHAP. V. Of the Face.
OBSERVATION IV.
IN the year 1689. I being in the same Post, and at the Place before mentioned,
when the Vaudois were driven from the Valleys of Luserne: A certain Officer,
whose name civility obliges me to conceal, was wounded with a broken Sword in
the left Cheek, toward the corner of the nether Jaw, about an Inch below the
Ear; and the Ductus Salivales were torn.

He was at first dressed by a Surgeon, who according to his usual manner,
dilated the Wound, by thrusting into it as much lint as it could contain. A
considerable time passed, without any appearance of a Cure, and by little and
little it became fistulous. I was called by the wounded Person to give him my
Advice and Assistance: and forthwith I consumed the Callosity, by touching it
nimbly with Tents dipped in dissolved Causticks: I caused him to be fed with
Jelly-broth to be taken with a Quill, that there might be no occasion to move
the lower Jaw; ordering him also to keep himself very quiet, without either
speaking or moving: and when all the Callosity was taken off, I applied to the
Wound the Balsam of Peru, and pressing together the Lips with long slender
Boisters, I covered it with the Styptick Plaster of Crollius. Thus he was
cured, not without difficulty; though at first it might have been done with great
Ease.

CHAP. VI. Of the Face.
OBSERVATION V.
BEing in Pignerol in the year 1691, the Chevalier Vauban, a Captain in the
Regiment of Beaujolois, sent for me to see his Brother; who was run with a
Sword into the Cheek: The Wound had been dressed by a Surgeon, who at first
thrust into it a Tent both thick and long, which passed into his Mouth; and
continuing the same Method for six or seven Days, the Patient was thereby
thrown into a violent Fever; and his Head and Face were exceedingly swelled, by
reason of the great Flux of Humors.

After we had laid aside the Tent, we found it necessary to have recourse to
such Means as might divert the Humors; but the Accidents, which so great an
Irritation of the Parts had occasioned, could not be easily removed;
nevertheless they were at length conquered, though not without difficulty; and by
means of Sarcoticks we completed the Cure: but an ugly Scar remained behind,
occasioned by the inconsiderate use of the Tent.

REFLECTION.
The Face being the Image of God, and as it were an Abridgment of all the
Beauties of Nature; which as a little World representing in Miniature, what is
more voluminously displayed in the great bulk of the vastly-extended Universe;
ought doubtless to enjoy some privilege over the other parts of the Body: Hence
it is that all the Authors both Ancient and Modern, though for the most part they
have allowed the use of Tents in all other Wounds, yet have they unanimously
condemned it in those of this Part; which nevertheless have been cured with
wonderful Facility, and by the use of the very weakest of Sarcoticks.

Fabritius ab Aquapendente, in Wounds of the Face recommends the use of the dry
Stitch, to avoid the deformity of a Scar: and indeed, seeing we are to preserve
the Beauty of the Countenance as much as possible, they are to be accounted
very unskilful Surgeons, and but ill instructed in what belongs to their
Business, who employ Tents in such occasions: The Saliva seems to be that
Balsam which is peculiar to the Face, assigned thereto by Nature, that has also
granted to all the other Parts one proper to them.

CHAP. VII. Of the Tongue.
OBSERVATION VI.
IN the Year 1689. A Lieutenant of the Militia of Mondevis, having his Mouth
open, as he gave orders to his Soldiers, in an Encounter, received a Bullet
that broke and tore all his Tongue into five or six pieces, which were not
altogether separated, but stuck together on the upper part. He was carried to
the Hospital of Luserne, and forthwith there dressed by M. de la Ramee, Master
Surgeon at Turin, and skilled in his Employ: But finding that with all his
Care, he was not able to stop the Flux of Blood, which was considerable, he
desired my Advice in this affair.

Having searched his Mouth, in order to discover from whence the Blood came, I
found the Bullet lodged under one of the corners of the lower Jaw Bone, having
only fretted the Skin of that part; and finding no other Place from whence the
Blood could come, but these Veins under the Tongue, called Ranulares, I
proposed to heat red hot three of these small cauterising Irons, which are used
for the Teeth, and to apply them to the Ranulares; which being accordingly
done, the Bleeding was stopped, and the wounded Person speedily cured.

REFLECTION.
The Ancients have ordered to stitch the Wounds of the Tongue, unless the
pieces be altogether separated, in which Case the Operation is to no purpose,
and the Reunion impossible: Fabricius ab Aquapendente is of the same Opinion:
but as for my self, I can see no manner of necessity for such Stitching; seeing
Nature alone, when left in Repose to her self, does excellently accomplish the
Uniting of the divided Parts without it. Every body knows, that the Tongue is
situated in the Mouth under the arched Palate, and made up of innumerable
little nipple-like Bodies, encompassed on all sides by the Teeth, and supported
in such a manner that its parts are kept together, and cannot fall asunder. The
Spittle is its Balsam, and oftentimes the only Remedy necessary to cure its
Wounds. This is what I have observed in the preceding Cure; for this
Gentleman's Tongue was, after some small time, altogether so well, that scarce
any Signs of the Division of its Substance could be discerned: but whereas it
had been torn by the Bullet, and scorcht with the Cautery, it must of necessity
have lost of its Substance; nevertheless Nature found the way to make up what
was wanting, and to effect a complete Union of the divided Parts: from whence I
have Reason to conclude, that what the Ancients have left us in Writing is not
always true.

I have dressed a great many with Fractures of the lower Jaw Bone, but chiefly
two Soldiers who were wounded in that part at the Battle of Marseils, One of
whom had more than half of the Bone broken to pieces; who nevertheless were
perfectly cured, as others had been: they are at this time amongst the
Invalids, being disabled, and much deformed. Of these I will not speak more
particularly, having observed nothing Extraordinary in their Case.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Neck.
OBSERVATION VII.
IT would be both tedious, and unprofitable, here to relate Examples of Wounds
in the Neck, of which I have cured a great number, in very little time, and
with Simple Remedies only. I have also several times taken out Bullets, which
have been lodged there for some time, yea many Years. I shall content my self
therefore to give my Thoughts of what I judge necessary to the speedy Cure of
Wounds of this part, in the following Chapter.

REFLECTION.
All the Ancients agree in this, that Wounds of the Neck, though passing quite
through, are easily enough cured, provided the great Vessels, and Spinal Marrow
be not hurt: But they give no sufficient Reason for their Opinion. I know not
if I have hit the Matter aright; but in my Opinion it proceeds from this, that
the use of Tents has been laid aside, which in the Wounds of this Part cannot
be employed, because of the necessary Uses of the Windpipe and Gullet, that
would be hindered by so hard a Bandage as is required to keep in a Tent.

It is therefore, according to my Opinion, Nature her self, who being freed
from Impediments, speedily heals up the Wounds of the Neck: and this greatly
confirms the Reasonableness of my Method; for those who fear, lest the Omission
of Tents, should bring on Abscesses, Bags, and Sinuses; have more Reason to
apprehend such Accidents in the Wounds of this, than in these of any other part.

It Is well known that this part is obnoxious not only to the Bronchocele,
Afflux of cold Humors, and Quinsie; but also to Phlegmons, St. Anthonies Fire,
and all other Indispositions in general that afflict the whole Body: for this
Part, by reason of the Glands, that here are very numerous, is always charged
with abundance of Humors, which render it subject to all such Disorders as
proceed from these thrown out upon the parts.

It must also be owned, that there is not any Part in all the Body, which in
proportion to its bigness, contains any thing nigh so great a Number of
Blood Vessels as are here to be found.

And in fine, if it were true that the use of Tents would prevent Fluxions,
Collections of Matter, Bags, and Sinuses; I know no other place of the Body,
that when wounded, would be in more need of them, than the Neck; which is
extremely subject to such Accidents.

Wherefore, since Wounds of the Neck, that of all the Parts is most liable to
dangerous Symptoms, may not only without Tents be cured, but even much more
safely and speedily than with 'em; we may conclude that these of other Parts,
ought to be treated also with the same Gentleness, and set at Liberty from the
Tyranny of Tents.

CHAP. IX. Of the Breast.
OBSERVATION VIII.
BEing at Pignerol in the Month of April, 1692. M. de Fontaniere, Commander of
the King's Battalion, received a Thrust with a Sword, about two Inches above
the right Nipple, and in the Side thereof toward the Arm-pit, which entered
the Body between the third and fourth Rib.

He was dressed by one of the Surgeons in Pignerol; before which he had lost,
according to conjecture, about between seven and eight Pounds of Blood; and
notwithstanding of the Dressings, the Flux of Blood did still continue; for
which Reason I was sent for by the Wounded Person and his Friends. I searched
the Wound in presence of him that had formerly dressed it, and drew from it
between eight and nine Ounces of Blood: And lest at first I should appear
ridiculous, I permitted it to be dressed with a Tent, and immediately after
caused him to be let Blood; and advised his Friends to dispose him, to set his
Affairs in Order. All the signs were dangerous; his Pulse was weak and
convulsive, he had frequent Swoonings, and Pains over all his Body. A Clyster
was given him, and some weak Cordials in good Broth. A little after the
Bleeding, he was seized with a Fever: and all these Accidents concurring, made
us question whether he could outlive that night; which yet he did in great
pains over all the Breast, and perpetual restlesness.

In the morning, which was the end of the first Day of his Wound, we took off
the Dressings; and found that it had bled all night; between six and seven
Ounces of Blood half corrupted issuing from the Wound, which was dressed as the
Day before. The Clyster was repeated: we gave him Aperitives and Vulneraries in
Syrup of Violets: And in his Broths a Diaphoretick made up of some grains of
Vitriol calcined, and the powder of a Human Scull, which gave no small Relief,
being a Specific in such sort of Wounds.

After the Dressing, the Blood yet run from the Wound into the Bed; and as we
were preparing to Bleed him again, news were brought him, that he behooved to
change his Lodgings; and for his greater security, to some Place at a
considerable distance from that where he was. In this occasion, his Removal
threatened no less than Death; for this was but the beginning of the second Day
of the Wound. I was willing to see it before his Departure, though it had been
dressed but a little time before: but having perceived, at the last Dressing,
that some Blood run from one of these Arteries that pass along the lower part
of each Rib; and having only out of complaisance continued the Tent, I designed
to use one of another sort than had been yet done, seeing there was now no time
to loose.

I prepared therefore a soft Tent, indifferently thick, and blunt at the end,
that it might rest upon the Rib, without touching the Pleura, or passing into
the Cavity of the Breast: This being dipped in a simple Digestive, and roul'd in
Vitriol finely pulverized, I applied with a broad head as is usual, together
with the rest of the Dressings, and the Plaster of Andreas a Cruce. After
having taken some Broth, he was put into a Chair and carried to his new
Lodgings, where he might remain more conveniently: By the way he only lost a
little Blood, though many had been of Opinion, he could never come alive to the
end thereof.

He rested a little that night; and in the Morning, which was the end of the
second Day, the Fever was still pretty violent; the Wound was without Moisture
or Blood; the Pleura was reunited: he felt a Heaviness, and breathed with some
difficulty. The Wound we dressed now with a small Dilater only, to which for more
security a long thread was tied, applying the other things as before. I bled
him in the Arm; and increasing the Dose of the Diuretics with the Syrup of
Maidenhair, ordered an Emulsion to be taken at night with two Grains of
Laudanum.

All these things succeeded so well, that the next Day, which was the end of
the third since he was wounded, I found the Fever diminished: He breathed more
freely; felt little or no heaviness; and in the Night time had voided such
abundance of Urine, that we may reasonably enough suppose this to have been a
critical Evacuation; he had also spit store of bloody Matter. The Wound being
now in a very good condition, from this time forward I dressed it with a
Plaster only.

At night I observed a Moisture upon him; which made me believe, that Nature
might accomplish the rest of her work by Sweat. Wherefore, that I might not let
slip so favorable an Occasion, and to assist Nature, I caused prepare for him a
Potion with the distilled Waters of Carduus benedictus and of Scabious, four
Grains of Diaphoretick Antimony, half a Dram of the Confection of Hyacinth and
of Alkermes, a little of the Powder of Vipers, and two or three drops of the
Spirit of Sal-armoniac. This Remedy being given so seasonably procured a
thorough Sweat; and in the Morning, which was the end of the fourth Day of the
Wound, the Fever was gone; the weight upon the Diaphragm removed; and he
breathed without difficulty: and finally, all these Symptoms being evanish'd,
the Wound was only dressed with a Sarcotick Plaster, as if it had been a simple
Excoriation.

The Day after, which was the fifth of his Wound, he mounted his Horse without
help, and went to Diblon for a more pure and temperate Air, where he no longer
kept his Bed, though he found not thereby the least Inconveniency. There I purged
him twice, which was done not out of any absolute necessity thereof, but as an
expedient precaution: I advised him also for a time to live somewhat moderatly.
Thus that Wound which appeared to us at first Mortal, and was attended with a
numerous train of dangerous Symptoms, was in five Days time completely cured,
to the Amazement of all Pignerol.

REFLECTION.
This Method of Practice, will appear at first to be ridiculous, and rash, to
those who have not considered so much as I have done, the surprising Works of
Nature; nor these secret Passages she finds out, to discharge her self of what
is troublesome to her in like Cases; nor how in particular she oftentimes
effects a Crisis by the way of Urine.

But seeing experience has frequently taught us, that an Empyema in the Breast,
has been carried off by means of Diuretics, the Matter, as the Ancients
thought passing to the Urinary Vessels through the Vena azygos, but much more
probably through Ways to us yet unknown; why may not a little extravasated
Blood contained in the cavity of the Breast, or lying upon the Diaphragm, be
discharged by the same Ways, or by those of Sweat, especially if Nature be
therein assisted by the use of Diaphoreticks?

By these Ways then, now mentioned, the Breast may be sufficiently freed from
Humors that Oppress it; chiefly in a young and vigorous Body: neither is there
now Place for any to doubt of this, of which so many People in our Days have
been Eyewitnesses, who can yet testify the same.

Wherefore, there is no Reason to be so obstinately bent, for using Tents in
Wounds of the Breast; unless it be to carry Astringents to some place, whether
otherwise they could not reach; or to support and keep them on: But in all
other Cases they ought entirely to be laid aside: For by exasperating such
parts as they touch, they are apt to renew the Flux of Blood; they hinder the
closing up of the Wound; and by widening the Division of the Pleura, occasion
an Inflammation thereof.

It also frequently falls out, when a Tent is something long, that it touches
the Lungs, and bruises 'em by reason of their continutl Motion, and beating
against its Point; yea oftentimes it enters into, and divides their Substance
making its way through the investing Membrane, now brought to Suppuration. In
Wounds also where the Lungs are not spoiled, there being only a simple Division
of their Substance with a sharp Instrument, a Tent may increase the Separation,
and by iritating the Parts, cause a discharge of Humors thereupon, and great
Suppurations, which end ordinarily in incurable Fistula's.

Moreover a Tent presses upon the Muscules of Respiration, and permits not the
Patient either to cough, spit, or breath freely: It hinders the Circulation of
the Blood, by bearing on the Vessels; so that the wounded is in danger of
Suffocation, by the collection of Blood, Matter, or Phlegm, and oftentimes of
all three together; unless they are by some Means discharged: But if there is
not a sufficient quantity of one or all of these, to produce such an Effect;
and if the Lungs are yet at liberty to perform their wonted motions, yet these
Humors will there ferment, and corrupt; and occasion putrefaction in the parts
that contain 'em.

But after all, this Accident may sometimes have an happy Event; and a bad
Cause may by chance produce a good Effect. For our Body, as we are informed by
Anatomy, being nothing else but a Contexture of Vessels; it may happen in
Wounds of the Breast, that the Blood or Matter collected in the Substance of
the Lungs, or upon the Midriff, may there undergo a Fermentation, and thereby,
together with the Heat and Moisture of the part, open and dilate the Pores of
the Veins; whereby these Humors being taken into and mixed with the Blood,
rarify, subtilise, and dispose it to throw off the Offending Matter, either by
Sweat, Urine, or other Crises of alike Nature, according to the Disposition of
the Body.

And surely we need make no great difficulty, to believe that such a thing
might happen in a Wound of the Breast, if we will consider what befell M. de la
Place, a Captain in the Regiment of Barrois, who voided by Stool the Matter of
a great Abscess in his Arm, occasioned by a Wound he had received in that Part;
of which we will give you a particular account in the last Chapter of this
Book; as also of another wounded in the last Campaign, from whom the Matter,
that was contained within the Breast, was drawn away by opening the Vena
Mediana, with a design only to let Blood.

In fine we may say; though the ways by which these Crises were effected are not
altogether known to us; yet it is very certain that there are such: and seeing
Nature is not ignorant of them; we ought to leave to her conduct, the Success
of a Work, whereof she ought to have all the Honor, and which she alone brings
to pass; our part being only to wait upon her, and assist her in her Design.

Galen in his 5 Book de locis, has observed that Matter contained in the
Breast, is oftentimes carried off by Urine, the same thing also he affirms in
his 6th Book de partium Morbis.

Andreas a Cruce, a famous Physician of Venice, in the first Section of his
fourth Book of Surgery, in express terms forbids the use of Tents and Pipes in
the Wounds of the Breast; he advises only to use a Plaster, the Advantage of
which I have thoroughly experienced.

Fabricius ab Aquapendente, Part I. Book 2. Chap. 42. says, that he has often
seen the Matter contained in the Breast in a Pleurisy, or Peripneumonia,
discharged by Urine. He relates an Authentic History of a Wound piercing into
the Cavity of the Breast, which having been dressed as a simple One of the
common Teguments, the Patient was on a sudden surpised with such Symptoms, as
plainly discovered the Nature of the Wound. That he might be relieved with as
much ease as possible, and not put to the torment of a Counter-opening, it was
thought expedient to dilate the Wound; but it was so well closed up, that the
Operation of the Empyema was resolved on next Day. But during the Night sage
Nature had accomplished the Work; a Glass full of Blood being voided by the
Urinary Passages, whereby the Spitting of Blood, difficulty of Breathing, and
all the other Accidents were completely removed.

The same Author, recommends on such Occasions, the use of strong Diuretics,
unless a Fever hinder: and in the above cited Chapter, he says, that there are
some, who will not allow Wounds of the Breast to be kept open, but suffer them
to close; lest otherwise the Natural Heat might be dispersed, and the cold Air
should enter in, and spoil the neighboring Parts: He adds, that the Use of
Tents occasions Fistula's.

Ambrosius Pareus, Book 10. Chap. 32. approves the Practice of those, who make
use of Tents in Wounds of the Breast; and elsewhere commends such as employ
them not: so that as to this Point he seems to have been undetermined, and
inconsistent with himself.

In the same Chapter also, he speaks of a Cure done by himself without Tents;
and afterward he affirms, that Fistula's, which follow upon Wounds of the
Breast, are oftentimes occasioned only by the Use of them. The same Author, in
the 51th Chapter of the 17th Book of his Treatise of Matter and Blood that may
be carried off by the Veins, demonstrates by many Reasons that such an
Evacuation may be; and shows that Galen was of the same Mind.

Hollerius in his Commentaries, is of the same Opinion; and M. Verdue, Tom. 2.
chap. 28. affirms that Wounds of the Breast, the more they are exposed to the
Air, are so much the more dangerous.

It would be a very tedious task to recount all the Authors, that have approved
of this Method, although it is but little put in Practice: And it would be a very
easy Matter to bring many Examples, of Cures wrought by Nature through secret
and occult passages conveying Humors and Matter, into other Parts than what
were first affected.

CHAP. X. Of the Breast.
OBSERVATION. IX.
ABout the end of the Year 1693, there was brought to the Hospital of the King
at Brainson, a Granadeer of the Regiment of Touraine; together with a Servant
of M. De Lesseraine formerly Commissary at Pignerol.

The first, was run into the side-part of the Breast, between the third and
fourth Ribs, with a Sword, which past into the capacity of the Thorax, and
pierced the Lungs. The usual Symptoms appeared at first; and Diversions were
made. The first and second Day, some Blood came from the Wound; which was only
dressed with the Plaster of Andreas a Cruce, without either Tent or Dilater.
Diuretics also and Diaphoreticks were used; and upon the fourth Day he voided
great abundance of Urine: by which critical Evacuation, he was freed from the
Fever, Difficulty of Breathing, weight upon the Midriff, and spitting of Blood:
and on the fourteenth Day he was completely cured.

The Other had received just such another Wound, piercing in like manner; only
higher by one Rib: The Symptoms, were so violent, that though it was immediately
dressed, yet was there no hope of Cure. He was treated after the same manner as
the former: But he was much more speedily cured, by means of an universal
Sweat; whereby that very Day all the Accidents were removed. In eight Days
time, he went out from the Hospital entirely cured.

Were I to give a particular account of the numerous Cures of alike nature,
that have been done according to this Method, there would be enough to fill a
great Volume; all which were neither attended with any evil Accidents during
the time of the Cure, nor followed by any after it; nor did they ever leave
Fistula's behind 'em. I shall speak of Gunshot-Wounds, in the following Chapter.

CHAP. XI. Of the Breast.
OBSERVATION X.
IN the Year 1692. there was brought to the foresaid Hospital of Brianson, a
Prisoner of the Army of Savoy; who was wounded with a Bullet, that entered near
the right Pap toward the Arm-pit; and passed out of the Body four Finger's
breadth from the sixth Vertebre of the Back; having in its way broken asunder
the fourth Rib.

I enlarged both the Orifices, but a little more that of the Back, which was
somewhat lower than the other. We dressed him only once a Day at first, without
either Tents or Dilaters; and from the hinder Orifice came forth a certain thin
watery Humor; which Evacuation continued till the falling of the Escar; after
which time he was dressed only once in two Days. I kept the last mentioned
Orifice open from time to time by means of a piece of prepared Sponge;
conjecturing, that there were some Splinters of Bone to be discharged; which
accordingly came to pass without any pain, about the eighteenth Day of the
Wound: from that time forth I endeavored to heal it up, applying between the
Orifices Compresses, dipped in warm Wine. During this Cure, I could observe no
sensible Crises; nor did any Accident happen: It was finished in thirty Days.

REFLECTION.
In this Wound the Lungs were untouched, for any thing that appeared; a Rib
only being broken, and the Pleura hurt: which indeed had been sufficient to
produce fatal Accidents; had any other Method been followed: for if in this
Case, Tents had been used; or had the Wound been crammed full of Dossils, as has
been often done on such occasions; the Matter proceeding from the Dissolution
of the Escar and the Contusion, being pent up between the two Orifices, and
still increasing, and finding no Vent; would infallibly have broken into the
Cavity of the Breast; from whence it could not have been drawn forth, but by
the Operation of the Empyema.

An Ancident like unto this, happened this Year to a famous Officer of our Army
in Savoy; who having received a Wound which was thought to peneteate, and
really did so, was dressed with Tents; but the Matter finding the Way, by which
it should have been discharged from the Body, altogether intercepted; and
passing among the broken pieces of a fractur'd Rib, diffused it self into the
Capacity of the Thorax: And in this Condition he dyed, having his Breast full
of Matter.

CHAP. XII. Of the Breast.
OBSERVATION XI.
UPon the twelfth Day of June, 1693. The Marquess De Larray, Lieutenant
General, took by Storm a Post in the Valley of Barcelonetta; and in this
Occasion, had five and twenty, or thirty Men wounded; who were brought to our
Hospital of Brianson: and among others there was one called Simon Contaut, of
the Regiment of Vendosme, and Company of Berole. This Man had received a
Bullet, which went in hard by the sixth Vertebra of the Back; breaking in its
Passage the transverse Process on the right side; and came out on the fore part
of the Thorax, between the second and third Rib toward the left side.

This Wound was attended, with all the most dangerous Symptoms, that use to
appear when the Lungs are wounded; being one of the most considerable that had
been under Cure in this Hospital.

There was not here any need of dilating the Orifices; the largeness of the
size of the Bullet, having done it to some purpose: The Wounds were dressed
without any Tent, but only with large Pledgets, and a good agglutinative
Plaster; the Compresses and Bandage being such as is usual. Diversions were
made without delay; and a course of Diet appointed: He was dressed but once a
Day, and that with all possible Speed.

The hinder Orifice of the Wound did blow with such force, that all the
Bystanders were surpised thereat; and such a prodigious quantity of Water did
issue from it, that oftentimes it was necessary to change the Linnens twice a
Day. Diuretic and vulnerary Potions were given.

This large Evacuation, continued for about twelve or fourteen Days; after
which the wounded Person was dressed but once in two Days. The twentieth and
first or twentieth and second Day, the Opening of the Pleura on the Back was
perfectly closed up; that before having preceeded it some Days. There was
nothing came away that we could observe, either from the broken Process, or the
Ribs that had been touched in the passage of the Bullet: and in thirty five
Days, or thereabout, the Orifices were both entirely filled up.

REFLECTION.
This wounded Man was sent to the Hospital, as one of whom all hopes had been
laid aside: for the Surgeon Major of the Regiment, who at first dressed him with
great Care, told his Captain that his Death was inevitable.

This same Captain, about a Month after coming to Brianzon, with the Lieutenant
Colonel of his Regiment, who had been wounded with a Sword; was much surpised
when he was visited at his Lodgings by this Soldier, who was at that time as
vigorous, as before he had received his Wounds; at which he now had only a
Plaster. The Surgeon also testified to me his Amazement; and enquired, after
what manner I had proceeded, to accomplish that Cure in so small a time.

This Cure is of it self sufficent to evince, that in Wounds of the Breast,
there is no need of Tents; and moreover does demonstrate; that the Operation of
the Empyema, is attended with much better Success, when performed on the
hinder, than on the lateral Parts of the Thorax: For this Operation is done,
with design to give a Passage, to the extravasated Blood; and to evacuat the
Matter contained in the Cavity of the Breast; for which purposes this Place, is
much more convenient than the others; the Humors being thereby by discharged so
soon as bred, unless they be retained by Tents: The wounded are not troubled
with violent Agitations; but enjoy a profound Quiet: The Parts have liberty to
perform the necessary Motions; and Nature acts without constraint; finding
always the ways open, by which she may deliver her self from what is contrary,
and hurtful unto her; so that nothing is now to hinder her from closing up the
Wound, when ever she shall find her self disposed so to do.

If then Gunshot-Wounds of this Nature, notwithstanding the Havoc that the
Bullet makes in the Places through which it passes, are so easily and speedily
cured, by this Method; we have all the Reason in the World to believe, that the
Wounds, made by sharp Instruments, where there is ordinarily only a simple
Solution of Continuity, may be cured with much greater facility.

But we must observe, that in this Way of Dressing, great Care is to be had, of
covering such Wounds with good substantial Pledgets of such bigness, that there
may be no danger of their being pushed into the cavity of the Breast, by the
weight of the incumbent Air* And upon the Pledgets we must apply a strong and
agglutinative Plaster; such as that of Andreas a Cruce; which also must be
sustained with a Compress of four doubles, and all kept on with the Napkin and
Scapulary; all which Precaution is necessary to withstand the entry of the Air,
which otherwise, the use of Tents being laid aside, might pass into the Thorax,
and there produce fatal Accidents.

M. Verdue, Tom. 1. Chap. 14. advises not to use Tents in Wounds of the Breast,
for too long a time; lest thereby incurable Fistula's be occasioned.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Breast.
OBSERVATION XII.
WHen I was at Liserne, there was brought to the Hospital, in the Year 1688. a
Soldier of the Regiment of Saluce, who was wounded with a (...), (which is a
Weapon made in form of a Poniard) on the side of the Cartilago ensiformis; the
Wound, as was evidently to be seen, when it was dilated, passing upwards by the
short Ribs, and piercing the Midriff in its fleshly part.

He was dressed with a Pledget only, covered with an Incarnative that was
pretty liquid. The necessary Diversions were performed, and such a Diet was
ordered, as suited best with the greatness of the Wound, and the Strength and
Constitution of the Patient. He was dressed only once in two Days. The
Suppuration was but very small; and in the space of eight or nine Days, he was
completely cured.

REFLECTION.
If this Wound had been dressed with Tents, after the ordinary Manner; I leave
it to be Judged by every one, if such a desirable Success could have been
expected; seeing the Tent would unquestionably have caused fearful Irritations
of the Diaphragma, which without it is with great difficulty brought to
reunite, because of its perpetual and necessary Motion. In fine, this Wound,
how inconsiderable soever it might appear, had certainly proved Mortal, if it
had been stuffed with an Extraneous Body; which by increasing the division of
the Midriff, would have proved an Impediment to its Action: For every Body
knows, that Wounds in its nervous Part are deadly; and that these in the
fleshly Part, may become so, when exasperated by ill Treatment, or neglected.

CHAP. XIV. A Remark on One that was wounded in the Breast.
OBSERRVATION XIII.
IN the last mentioned Year, and in the same Hospital; one of the wounded died
on the fifth or sixth Day of his Wound: And because it had not at all appeared
to be mortal, the Bullet having but glanced upon him, whereby the fifth Rib,
was only broken, and the Pleura slightly hurt, I opened him, that I might
discover the Cause of his Death. At first I was of Opinion, that an Asthma,
with which he was afflicted when alive; and which had almost quite disabled him
for Service; had conduced much to the shortning of his Days: But I was
convinced of my mistake, when I perceived all the Parts in the Breast in a very
good Condition; only the Heart had its Ventricles filled with Polypuses of the
thickness of a large writing Quill, and about the length of the little Finger;
there being four in the right, and two in the left Ventricle.

If we may give credit to Dr. Lower of Oxford, in his Treatise on the Motion of
the Heart; we may easily enough account for the Death of this Man. He says,
that in order to continue the Circulation of the Blood, and to send a
convenient quantity thereof through the Vessels; the two Ventricles of the
Heart must be of an equal Capacity, and moreover that they must have alike
Strength, to undergo this Labor. Now this Equality not being to be found, in
the Heart of him of whom we speak; its motion must needs have been depraved by
the Disproportion of the weight of the Polypuses; and by the Inequality of the
capacity of the Ventricles: or because the Heart being overcharged, could not
contract it self without much difficulty; so that remittting much of its
Motion, it became weak and languishing* and the Midriff also, to which it is
always tied, did loose its necessary vigor; especially after his receiving the
Wound; by Reason of which, the Breast could not be dilated, without trouble and
Pain, because of the broken Rib, and of the Solution of continuity of the
Pleura, Intercostal Muscles, and Muscles of Respiration: Wherefore the Heart
and Lungs being deprived of their necessary Relief; Suffocation and Death were
unavoidable.

Though this is a Subject foreign to our present Design; yet we Judged it would
not be amiss, here to take notice of it, for Caution, and Advice to others in a
like Occasion.

CHAP. XV. Of the lower Belly and Loins.
OBSERVATION XIV.
IN the same Year 1688. a Soldier of the Regiment of Montferrat, called Sans
Soucy, was wounded by a Bullet; which entering before at the Region of the
Navel, came out behind at that of the Reins, piercing the right Vreter, as it
passed along. He was at first dressed by one of the Master-Surgeons of Turin,
who used to assist us; which he performed after his own Way.

The Orifice which was in the Belly, notwithstanding the Tents which he used,
was closed up, after the falling off of the Escar of the Teguments; but it
fared otherwise with that in the Back; for that Surgeon being careful to keep
it open with a thick and long Tent, hindered also the Re-uniting of the Vreter,
which occasioned the Urine to come forth at the Wound. I having seen him one
Day, advised the Surgeon speedily to take away the Tent, if he would avoid an
incurable Fistula: but my Words were to no purpose; for had he complied with
'em, he would have thought he had offended against the Rules of Art, and
ancient received Maxims; with which my Advice was inconsistent.

Some Days after, seeing this Wound in a very bad Condition; being covered with
a whitish Flesh almost without Sense, and ready to become a Callus; I was
willing to prevent the fatal Consequences of that indiscreet Dressing:
wherefore, with a dissolved Caustic, I consumed all that appeared callous
about the lips of the Wound; causing also some of it to pass into the Cavity
thereof: and leaving out the Tent, I expected the Discharge, of what the
Caustic had mortified: When the Flesh had regained its usual Color, without
loss of time, I syring'd into the Wound some Balsamic Water. I also used the
Balsam of Peru, alone for some Days; and after that, the Styptick Plaster of
Crollius, with little longish Compresses that were placed on the two Sides of
the Wound, to press together the Brims. Thus the Wound begun to be filled up;
and the Urine did by little and little resume it is former Course; and in about
18 or 20 Days, the Wounded Person was perfectly cured.

REFLECTION.
In the Progress of this Cure, may evidently be perceived the difference,
between the Method used by many Surgeons, fondly conceited of their own
Opinions; and that which I practice: for if in this Case, the first had been
continued but for eight Days time, the Wound had become either extremely
difficult, or impossible to be cured. This is confirmed by the Wound in the
Belly; the speedy Cure whereof, is to be attributed to the Motion of the
Intestines; which, contrary to the Design and Desire of the Surgeon, expelled
the Tent so soon as applied, in such sort that it was completely cured, a
little after the falling of the Escar.

Wherefore we can never too much blame those, who are so obstinately wedded to
the Use of Tents, in Wounds of the lower Belly: they ought altogether to be
laid aside, in spite of all the Objections that may be made on their behalf,
for which undoubtedly there is no Real Ground. Experience gained by Practice,
has so undeceived me touching the Use of Tents, that I have left off the Use of
them, not only in the lower Belly, but even in all other places of the Body,
unless upon a very pressing Necessity: But in Wounds of the Emulgent Vessels of
the Reins, of the Vreters, and of the Bladder; as also in those of the Joints,
they occasion Accidents which oftentimes prove mortal: or otherwise leave
behind them Infirmities, that ever after render Life miserable.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Ventricle.
OBSERVATION XV.
ONe of the principal Deputies of the Hospital of Brianzon, in the Spring of
the Year 1695. received a Wound in the upper and middle part of the right
Hypochondrium; piercing in appearance to the Ventricle, or to the Pylorus. I
could not find out the depth of the Wound with the Probe; notwithstanding of
all the Postures I could put the Patient in. But an Accident that immediately
fell out discovered the truth of the matter: for though he had supped very
slightly, he vomited up again all he had taken, mixed with pure Blood. I
immediately dilated moderately the Wound; that a free Passage might be left to
the Blood, that, possibly, was extravasated in the lower Belly, or to the
Matter, that might afterward breed there. I dressed him with a Pledget only,
upon which I applied a suitable Plaster and Bandage. I bled him a little
after, and ordered a very exact Course of Diet: the Blood was thin, muddy, and
corrupted; whereby I perceived the ill Habit and sickly Disposition of his
Body. He spent the Night in Restlesness, because of Pains over all the lower
Belly, and a violent Fever, which kept him from Sleep. In the Morning I
repeated the bleeding: He had several Motions to vomit, but could not; and
nothing at all came from the Wound, which was dressed as before.

There being two Enemies to be grappled with, I proposed to continue the
Diversions without Interruption; which was also approved of by our Physicians.
We used Potions, Juleps and Ptisanes, such as were most proper for purifying
the Mass of Blood, and blunting the Points of the Acids; to which I added some
Vulneraries: Suppositories were used, to procure Stools, but to no purpose;
which obliged us to give him from time to time half a pound of Decoction in a
Clyster, but with small success. This Method we continued for seven Days,
without being able to observe any considerable change, either as to the Fever,
or the Pain; in which time he was let Blood six or seven times. In fine toward
the seventh or eighth Day of the Wound, his Bellly was opened, and at first he
had a kind of a bloody Flix, but afterward, he voided pure Blood, though in no
great quantity. I caused boil some vulnerary Plants with his Broth; and made
him take for some Days fasting, a little spoonful of our Samaritan Balsam,
called that of the Scripture. The Fever and Pains abated a little, which gave
me some hopes of recovery. The voiding of Blood by Stool continued till the
fourteenth Day; and then all the dangerous Symptoms disappeared, and the Wound
was completely cured, without having afforded any considerable store of Matter.

REFLECTION.
It was only the Situation of the Wound, together with the Accidents which
followed, that made me conclude, that either the Ventricle or the Pylorus was
wounded. Having therefore no certain sign, to direct my Judgment in this
Affair; I tried if the Sword that had given the Wound, could make any
discovery; and found it was marked with Blood, the length of ten inches or
thereabouts: There needed no more to assure me of the Nature of the Wound: But
that which altogether convinced me, was the Blood voided by Stool, the seventh
Day of the Wound: This having been collected in such a quantity, as was
sufficient to press and push forward the Excrements contained in the Guts; at
length made way for it self: And if we had delayed to bleed him, or done it
more seldom, he would certainly have had a great and very dangerous Flux of
Blood, besides a number of other Accidents that infalliby had followed.

It appears then, that the true Knowledge of Wounds, which pierce into any
Cavity o^ the Body, and hurt the inward Parts, depends upon the Accidents: and
it is of high concern to a young Surgeon, not to confide too much in his Probe,
or thereby to give his Opinion: he ought also to make all requisite Diversions;
and to endeavor with all necessary Care, to avoid and prevent Accidents; which
too often, when arrived to a certain height, become Proof against all our
Endeavors.

A great many wounded Persons, have been sent to me, dressed at first as if
their Wounds had been but slight; which nevertheless I have found to be deep,
and very considerable. It is sometimes not possible, to put the Pati^nt in the
same Posture he was in, when he received the Wound: So that it is an easy
matter to be deceived, if we trust to such uncertain Trials, as those made with
the Probe: The Parts may have changed their Situation, or they may be swelled;
or clotted Blood gathered together in the Wound, may oppose the Probe's
Passage; or, when it cannot trace the Way of the Instrument that made the Wound,
it may slide along, between the Interstices of the Muscles. Oftentimes the
Wounded either know not in what Posture they were, or are mistaken therein; or
they are not in a Condition to give an Account. Finally, it is much better to
exceed in Exactness, which cannot prejudice the Patient; than to take up with an
Uncertainty, which may cost the wounded his Life, and the Surgeon his
Reputation.

Moreover, it appears by the Success of this Cure, that the Orifices of
penetrating Wounds, afford but very small Assistance, to the Cure of the inward
wounded Parts: For it is next to impossible, to convey, through them, Remedies
to those Parts, that want 'em, and for which they are designed: This I am bold
to affirm, contrary to the sentiments of the Ancients, and of Fabricius ab
Aquapendente, and some Moderns. It is also scarcely to be expected, that the
Blood which flows from these Parts, should come forth by the external Orifice;
as we have observed: Unless the lower Belly be quite filled up with Blood. And
in fine, the keeping open of the Wounds, is more pernicious than profitable;
serving only to inintroduce the Air into Places, where it almost never fails to
occasion Irritations, disquieting Pains, Coagulations, Obstructions or
Corruptions, and oftentimes all these Evils together.

Galen affirms, that Wounds in the Bottom of the Ventricle, if not great, are
curable: But Celsus is of Opinion that they are mortal: Now, how to reconcile
such opposite Sentiments, I know not. However that they are not absolutely
Mortal, this Cure is a sufficient Proof: But it is nevertheless true, that they
are very dangerous, and their Cure uncertain; being atttended with many
Accidents, the least of which may prove fatal: Such as Vomiting, a Disorder
peculiar to this Part; or a Flux of Blood from the branches of the Arteria
caeliaca, the Vena Gastrica and Gaffrepiploica; whether scarce any Astringents
can reach, and where they cannot be kept on: also Convulsions may be occasioned
by the wounding of the Nerves that proceed from the Recurrents: Add to these,
that by Wounds of this part, the Chyle may be evacuated, so soon as made.

CAAP. XVII. Of the Perinaeum.
OBSERVATION XVI.
DUring the Campaign of the forementioned Year 1688, a Soldier in the Regiment
of the Duke of Savoy, and Company of St. George called La Couleur, was sent to
me, having an Abscess which covered all the Perinaeum and part of the Scrotum.

After I had opened it on the left side, at that Place where ordinarily the
Operation for extracting the Stone is performed; there came forth a great deal
of corrupt Matter, with much Urine, whereby I understood that by the long stay
of the Matter, the Membranes of the Bladder were vitiated and corroded.

I used neither Tent nor Dilater to the Sore, but judged it sufficient, to drop
into it a Medicine for cleansing the Ulcer. The Suppuration lasted for the
space of fifteen Days; which yet hindered me not, from the very first to use
little long and slender Bolsters, for bringing together the divided Parts,
which I kept fast with a strong Bandage, fitted to the Figure of the Part.

After this, perceiving the Matter came away in a moderate quantity, and of a
laudable consistence, though mixed with some Urine; I used more powerful
Incarnatives, Balsamic Water, and the Balsam of Peru, and upon these
Crollius's Plaster: I straightened the Bandage, obliging the Patient to keep his
Thighs close together: Thus by degrees the Urine resumed its former Course, and
in five or six Weeks time the Cure was finished.

REFLECTION.
This Cure is inconsistent with the Opinion of Galen, who Aphor. 18. says, that
divisions of the Blader, cannot be united, because it is a Part without Blood.

I have had many under my Hands, that were wounded in the Bladder, which were
all happily cured by the same Method: And indeed if loss of Substance
occasioned by the corrupting Matter of an Abscess, has been readily enough made
up; it is easy to believe, that simple Divisions thereof by external Causes,
may with much more Ease and Expedition be united. This is sufficiently
demonstrated, by the great number of those which have recovered after Cutting
for the Stone: And if sometimes Fistula's were left after this Operation; they
have been occasioned, by keeping Tents in the Wound without any necessity: I
know M. Verdue imputes this to the sharpness of the Urine; but that I cannot be
persuaded of; having observed in many Places of my Travels, that the country
People have used nothing else, but their Urine, to cure their Wounds.

But if we reflect a little on the Effects produced by Tents, which many People
use in the Divisions of this Part; we may soon be convinced, that they are the
Cause of this Accident, by keeping open a way for the passage of the Urine:
which though it cannot run in a full Stream, so long as it is hindered by the
Tent; yet this being penetrated by the Urine, dulls the Sense of the place, and
turns the Flesh Callous.

When a Wound abounds in Moisture, be the Humor what it will, it is of
difficult Cure: this is sufficiently confirmed by the Fistula's which happen in
the Breast or Joints, tho the Urine have no hand in the Matter. Moreover, to
convince us that the Humors, wherewith Wounds and Ulcers are watered, are an
hindrance to their Joining and filling up; we need only to consider, these
Openings in the Thighs and Legs of Hydropick Persons, that are made by Nature,
or that we are necessitated to make by Art. Every body knows that the Cure of
these, is extremely difficult to be effected, because of the Humidity wherewith
they are continually soaked; which is sufficient to support what we have
advanced on this Subject; and to persuade such as are of a contrary Opinion.

Moreover, the Breaking, or Fretting of the Lymphatick Vessels, which occasions
the perpetual running of watery Humors in Sores, hinders their Reunion; in
regard that this Serosity dilutes and carries away the Nutricious Juice, and
brings them to a Fistula. Great Suppurations also have the same mischievous
Effects; but these being not so obstinate, are more easily conquered, than a
Running of the Lympha.

Finally, if we would effect a speedy Cure in Wounds of the Bladder, we must
carefully shun whatsoever may widen them, or hinder their Reunion; we must
apply some powerful Incarnative, such as the Balsam of Peru; a substantial
Agglutinative Plaster, as that of Crollius, with small longish Compresses, and
a sufficient Bandage, as has been said: but above all, we must take Care that
the Patient be altogether at Rest, without any Disturbance. These are the
Means, which I have found most effectual, and most successful, in bringing such
kind of Ulcers to a perfect Cure.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Fundament.
OBSERVATION XVII.
MOnsiue de Monrodon, Captain of a Battalion of the King's Regement, commanded
by M. Desbordes, having been four Years ago cured of an Abscess in the Anus,
there remained still some Fistulous Sinuses, from which there was always
discharged a great deal of Matter: This Inconvenience obliged him, in the Year
1695, to demand my Advice. Having observed several Callosities about the Anus
with deep and winding Cavities, I proposed to him, to lay open the Fistula, in
order to consume these Hardnesses, and cleanse the Bottom thereof, without
which there was no Hope of a perfect Cure. But he calling to Mind the Torments,
he had endured in the first Cure, put it off for some time; till falling into
an Indispotion occasioned by his ill habit of Body, the Fistula opened of it
self, about a Month after I had seen him, with an extraordinary Running, and
great abundance of Matter, accompanied with a quick and insupportable Pain.

I was at that time, in a Place at some distance from our Hospital; wherefore
he caused himself to be dressed by a Mate of the Regiment, who having nothing
but the common Remedies, and understanding only the ordinary Method, filled up
that large Cavity with a great quantity of Lint, armed with suppurative and
putrefying Medicines, which made a terrible Corruption, and great Havoc in the
Part; increasing the Suppuration, and the Pain. He then sent me an Account, of
the deplorable Condition to which he was reduced; praying me to come and see
him. When I came I advised him to cause himself to be removed unto a Place,
where I might take care of him my self; which also was done that same Day. The
Matter that was retained, and the continual Exasperation of the Parts, had made
a Hole, big enough to admit ones Fist, which passed with a winding course even
to the Os sacrum; there was also another Sinus that reached to the neck of the
Bladder: so that the sick Person could no ways go to Stool, or enjoy one Minute
of Repose.

Having taken him under my Care, I dressed him only with the Red Balsam melted
with an equal quantity of the Samaritan Balsam; which I poured warm, into the
Sinuses; and after having filled them therewith, I covered the Orifice with a
large Pledget dipped in the same, over which I put a Plaster, and upon this a
Compress; making all fast with a convenient Bandage. I caused him use some
absorbing Medicines to dull the Points of the Acids, and Ptisanes to putrify
the Blood, and also some gentle Purgatives. This Method succeeded so well, that
the Matter which was thin, putrid, and corrosive, became laudable; the Flesh
which was loose and wasted, by degrees recovered its firmness; the Patient went
to Stool every Day without any Pain; at Night also he enjoyed the Repose which
was so necessary for him: and finally, in one Month's time he was completely
cured; the Sores being brought to a firm and laudable Scar, to the amazement
not only of the Patient himself, but of all those also who knew, to what a
deplorable Condition he was formerly reduced; being without all Hope of being
cured.

REFLECTION.
These kinds of Distempers, are extremely ^roublesome, that affect parts, on
which, by Reason of their necessary Use, it is very difficult to keep the
Dressings: such a Part is the Anus, that is often afflicted with great
Suppurations, and dismal Putrefactions, which delay and protract a Cure to a
formidable length. The Person we have been just now speaking of, is a clear
demonstration of this. In the first Cure, six Months time were spent; he
endured much Pain and Trouble, and after all it was not brought to Perfection:
From whence I infer, that it is evident, that the Gentleness and Easiness of
our Method, was the genuine Cause, of the perfect and speedy Cure that ensued:
For that Organ which serves for the Common-shore of the Body, being left at
Liberty, and not straightened by an Extraneous Body; the Excrements were neither
pressed nor retained, but were discharged with Ease, and without Pain: whereas
on the contrary, when Wounds in this Part, are crammed up with Lint, it is
impossible that Evacuations can be made by the Anus, but the Excrements must
press and squeeze the crowded Lint against the Sides of the Sore; which must
needs occasion insufferable Pains, and oftentimes also a Flux of Blood: And
indeed Monsieur de Monrodon affirmed to me, that he never went to Stool all the
time of his first Cure; but he was still troubled with these two Symptoms.

Finally we may see, that when Putrefying and Suppurating Medicines are laid
aside; the Parts are by the means of unctuous Balsamicks, gradually restored to
their former Temperature; and that when the Points of the Acids are broken, and
the Mass of Blood purifyed by proper Remedies, the natural Balsam of the Parts,
does cleanse, fill up with Flesh, and cicatrize, when ever the Occasion
requires.

CHAP. XIX. Of the upper Part of the Shoulder.
OBSERVATION XVIII.
IN the Year 1678. as I traveled from Turin toward Rome and Venice, there was
brought to me, the Son of an Inhabitant of a certain place called La Rose,
having an Abscess that covered all the Acromion, and the upper part of the
Shoulder Bone of the right Side, with a great Defluxion of Humor upon the
Joint. I showed his Father the urgent necessity there was of opening it, and the
Accidents that otherwise might ensue: but the fond Love he had for his Son,
made him withstand the Proposal. Some time after this it opened of its self;
and the thinnest part of the Matter, made its way through several Holes, into
which so many Tents were put by a Surgeon of the Place, who dressed him, at his
Father's Desire. This Method was followed for two or three Months without any
Prospect of a Cure.

At my Return, he was committed to my Care, in a very bad Condition: he was
altogether deprived of the Motion of his Arm; several Cavities were formed
about the Joint; there was a perpetual Flux of Matter; and the Ligament were
relaxed; which made me fear the falling out of the Head of the Humerus. I was
persuaded that the Distemper was past Cure; considering the Weakness of the
Patient, and of the part affected, and the ill Disposition of his Body; which
yet was but a Symptom of the Disease, occasioned by the great Irritations, and
continual Discharge of Humors, as I knew by the Sequel. I made however a
pretty large Opening in that which I judged the most depending part, and
straightway took away the Tents, though at that time I was not altogether
convinced of their pernicious Effects.

From that time forth the Flux of Matter begun to diminish, which made me
endeavor, with all possible speed, thoroughly to cleanse the bottom of the
Ulcer, and the Sinuses, with a Lotion of Birthwort, Myrrh, Sugar Candy, and
Vitriol, in White Wind; which had very good Success: I did my best, also, to
strengthen the Joint. Finally the Cavities were filled up by degrees; the
higher Orifices were first closed up, and the others afterward. He was cured
in two Months time; but his Arm was something more than other two, before it
recovered its Strength.

REFLECTION.
This sudden good Success, falling out so unexpectedly, and at a time when I
had casually, though very seasonably, laid aside the use of Tents, began to open
my Eyes and to make me entertain an ill Opinion of them: For I could blame
nothing on this occasion, save the Tents, which had been so long kept in the
Sore, for having caused all these Accidents, by the Irritation and compression
of the Parts: And moreover by hindering the Discharge of the Matter, from one
dressing to another; whereby it had time to gather, and to ferment, to increase
the Cavities, and Waste of the Substance, to moisten the Tendons, slacken the
Ligaments, and to weaken and entirely ruin the Part. Finally, the most part of
the Symptoms, ceasing with the leaving out of the Tents; does sufficiently
evince, that they proceeded from them: and had the first Method been continued
in for a Month or two, a complete dislocation of the Head of the Shoulder Bone,
the corruption of the Ligaments, and incurable Fistula's, had certainly ensued;
and the Patient would have thereby been made lame during his Life.

CHAP. XX. Of the Shoulder.
OBSERVATION XIX.
IN the Year 1692. a Soldier of the Regiment of Sourche, whose name I have
forgotten, was brought to the Hospital at Brianzon. He was wounded with a
Bullet, which entered at the foremost and middle part of the Acromion, and came
out on the upper part of the Shoulder Blade; breaking the Acromion, with a part
of the Scapula, as it went along.

The Orifices were straitway dilated, and dressed only with Pledgets and the
Digestive: Diversions were speedily made, and his Diet ordered. In the first
Dressings, several pieces of Bone, that could not be reunited, having been
almost wholly separated, came away; several others that were yet tied by a
small piece of the Periosteum, though in appearance shaking and ready to fall
off, were yet joined again.

Finally, all the adhering Splinters being again united, the Wound began to
fill up; and in two Months time, or thereabout, was brought to a firm and
laudable Cicatrix; to the great Surprise of all who had been present at the
Dressings: no Accident having happened all the time of the Cure.

REFLECTION.
It will certainly be thought strange, that I permitted the Orifices to be
closed up, without expecting the Discharge of the Bones: And it will possibly
be said that I dressed not according to Art.

But to me it appears much more reasonable and advantageous, to have preserved
them, than occasioned their Loss; seeing a Callus has never the becoming
Convenience of a Natural Part: And the Excellency of Art consists, in curing
speedily, if possible, and without Pain; and in preserving the Figure,
Substance and Disposition of the wounded Parts. It Is certain, that Health being
the End of the Surgeon's Art, the principal Design is attained, when the Cure
is performed.

If that Intention which ought to be the Scope of the Artist, can, by this
Method, be Gently, Easily and Speedily accomplished; there is no Controversy
but that it ought to be preferred to all others that are contrary to it.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Arm.
OBSERVATION XX.
THE following Year, a Granadeer of the Regiment of Navarre, called Belle
Humeur, was brought to the same Hospital, wounded with a Shot on the upper Part
of the left Shoulder Bone, about an Inch, or two Fingers breadth below the
Joint: The Bullet entered on the fore Part, and went out behind, making a
terrible havoc. Three or four Days passed, wherein he was not dressed, but
only slightly at first, and without making any Diversion. The whole Arm was
distended like a Football, the Orifices were choked up, inflamed, and
disposed to Gangrene.

I made Incisions in the Orifices, to give breath unto the Wound, and
Scarifications over all the Arm; and having dressed with a Digestive only,
without Tents or Dilaters, I let a good quantity of Blood run from the Part, by
the Incisions, to empty it somewhat; and afterward fomented it with Spirit of
Wine and a little Sal-armoniack: I applied over all the Arm Diapalma dissolved
in Oil of Roses and Vinegar, which in a little time abated the Inflammation of
the Part, and lessened the Swelling.

Diversions were not omitted; but in spite of all could be done, three
Abscesses were formed; one at the bending of the Elbow inwardly, another on the
outward and middle part of the Arm, and the third on the hinder and almost
lowest part of the Humerus: They were all three opened, and by their plentiful
Suppuration, the whole afflicted Member was eased. After three or four
Splinters of the Bone, that stuck by their upper part only to the Periostium,
were again Joined, I bent all my Endeavors to bring together, and unite the
Lips of the Wound: And when the Escar was entirely fallen, and the Symptoms
vanished, I used only a simple Incarnative, dressing but once in two Days: The
Suppuration was but small, and the Orifices begun apparently to fill up, and in
thirty Days were quite skinned over: So that from thenceforth I used the rolling
Bandage and Plasters, in order to fortify the Callus; And now his Diet is
increased, and he is able to rise from his Bed. Finally he departed to return
to his Regiment, forty four Days after he had received the Wound.

REFLECTION.
The delaying of the Diversions, as evidently appears, was one of the chief
Causes of the Accidents that followed upon this Wound; and it is plain that if
Tents, Dilaters, or other exasperating things had been used in dressing, they
had infallibly proved an Impediment to the Discharging of the Part, and
ripening of the Abscesses, for Reasons adduc'd in the first Part, when we
discoursed of their fatal Effects.

Nature is, in such Cases, sufficiently perplexed, without the additional
Oppression of the most grievous of all her Enemies: She is, as it were,
fettered, and cannot act: And when by a healthful and critical Motion, she
endeavors to deliver her self, as in the Abscesses of the former Cure; she is
unable to produce any desirable Effect, so long as the Wound is crammed full of
Lint: and the most frequent Consequence of this, is a Stifling of the Natural
Heat, after which follows a Gangrene.

There have but few Accidents followed upon Wounds, treated after our Method;
and I am bold to affirm, that scarce any have miscarried under our Care, though
more dangerously wounded than this Soldier of whom we have been speaking; all
which is owing to the Gentleness of this Way, and the Use of Diversions.

CHAP. XXII. Of another Wound in the Arm.
OBSERVATION XXI.
IN the Year 1690. a little time after the War was declared in Savoy; a Soldier
of the Regiment of Pondenx, named La Montague, was sent to the Hospital at
Brianson, who had got a violent Blow with the Handle of an Halberd, on the
middle and outward Part of the left Humerus, whereby the Bone was broken to
pieces, with a Wound, and gteat Contusion.

Several portions of the Bone stuck out at the Wound, which did still adhere to
the Periosteum. I placed them one by another, as gently and nimbly as possibly
I could; endeavoring to give them their natural Position. I rubbed the Part
with a powerfully dissolving Balsam very warm, which I had caused to be
prepared for Contusions. I joined the Lips of the Wound, and applied an
Incarnative. I gently rolled the part with a Band about three Fingers breadth
above the Wound, and with another as much below it; applying a Plaster made of
Diapalma dissolved in Oil of Roses, and Vinegar, between the Bands, the middle
part whereof being opposite to the Wound, the Ends met upon it, and covered it:
Upon this I put a Compress, of the same figure and bigness, folded into three
or four doubles, and dipped in warm Wine: And then a piece of Past-board, which
resting with its ends upon the two Roulers, and embracing and keeping fast all
the Wound-apparel; came together, and was tied on the hinder part of the Arm.

In this Past-board there was a Hole cut out, where it covered the Wound, to
which a piece of the same was fitted, to be taken off at each dressing, and
afterward put on: This was made fast with a little Band, which I rolled about
all the Past-board after I had applied my Dressings, in such fashion, that
without disturbing either the Arm, or the Past-board, I had nothing to do, but
when there was Occasion, to unty the Band, take off the piece, and lift up the
two ends of the Compress and of the Plaster; and so to embrocate the Wound,
and then to dress it with a Pledget only, and do it up again.

In this manner, it was dressed once a Day, for five or six Days: after which I
gently took off all the Dressings, save the Rollers; and changing the Plaster
and Compress, I dressed but once in two Days. No Accident happened; for the
Contusion was quickly dissolved, no Bones were discharged, and the Suppuration
was but little; Diversions having been made from the very first. The Wound was
filled up, and completely skinned, about the twenty second Day of the Wound:
wherefore I thenceforth dressed it only with Rollers, the Plaster pro
Fracturis, and the necessary Splents. Since that time I have not seen him,
because then we parted from Luserne; but it is certain he was past all Danger.

REFLECTION.
If this Way of Dressing, be compared with that of many Surgeons, who not only
fill up the Sores with Lint, but also at each Dressing move to and fro the
broken Pieces of Bone, in order to promote their Separation, it may be seen how
different the Success will prove. Had I treated this Wound in a rigorous
manner, such Accidents had undoubtedly happened as would have baffled my Care.
The Suppuration would have been great; and thus the Pieces of the Bone, thereby
quite separated, and carried into some Cavity, had caused many Abscesses and
Sinuses: which Disorders, oftentimes cause a necessity of Amputation; and when
the Strength is decayed, they bring on Death. After this I made use of a Piece
of white Iron, formed in the same Fashion as the Past-board, with a Window
opening upon the Wound, which being lift up, I dressed it without moving the
Body of the Machine. But seeing in those Places where Hospitals are, we have
not every thing requisite at hand, the Surgeon must supply that Defect by his
own Ingenuity.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Fore-Arm, or Cubit.
OBSERVATION XXII.
IN the same place, a Soldier in the foresaid Regiment, received a Shot in the
Fore-Arm, on the middle and hinder part; which broke the Radius, and carried
away a Part of the Cubitus.

He was dressed after our Method; but the Cavity of the Wound was filled with a
Pledget of very fine Lint, dipped in a Mixture of our Balsam, and a little
Linimentum Arcaei, which eases Pain, promotes the fall of the Escar, and
resists Fluxion of Humors. Diversions were made, and his Diet ordered.

We dressed him after two Days, and found two or three pices of Bone sticking
to the Lint. In the second Dressing, I set the Radius, keeping it firm with
little Compresses stiffned with Past-board: One of these I put on the forepart
of the Arm upon the broken Bone, another on the inward, and a third on the
outward part; making them all fast, with two Rollers, one above, and the other
below the Fracture: this Apparatus kept the Arm straight, and served instead of
a Defensive. Over all we applied the Past-board, and supported the Arm with a
Sling. The Suppuration was very moderate, and another piece of Bone came
afterward away: We dressed but once in two Days; and on the twelfth or
fifteenth of the Wound, the Flesh begun to cover the Bone; for which Cause, we
dressed him only once in three Days, and that very gently and speedily. Toward
the twentieth Day, the Wound began to be filled up. The defect of the Cubitus
was made up with a Callus, and the Radius recovered without Exfoliation; and
all in four Weeks time: after which I only used a Roller on the fractur'd
place. About this time we parted from Luserne, and I have not seen him since.

REFLECTION.
The good Success, the Expedition, and the Gentleness of these Cures, ought, in
my Opinion, to give some Reputation to this way of Dressing. I have not seen,
since first I entered upon Practice, any Method followed that has been either so
short, so easy for the Patient, or so certain in the Consequence. Hereby these
Pains are prevented, which ordinarily bring Fevers, that are attended with many
other Accidents: Abscesses, Fluxions, and Inflammations are avoided: the Matter
is but little, and that laudable: the Wounded can take solid Nourishment, and
necessary Rest; whereby all the Faculties become more vigorous, and Nature more
active, Flesh is more easily generated, and a Callus more speedily formed: and
in fine, every thing with more facility reestablished, and reduced to its
former State.

CHAP. XXIV. Of another Wound in the Fore-Arm.
OBSERVATION XXIII.
ABout the End of the Year 1695. I being in the same Post in the Hospital of
the Abbey of Oulx, wherein I was in that of Bri^^^on, there was brought to us
one called Beau^^^^, belonging to the King's Battalion commanded by M.
Des-bordes, and of the Company of M. du Mont. He was run with a Sword into the
middle and inward Part of the left Arm, whereby the Artery between the Radius
and Cubitus was opened.

He had remained eight or nine Days in his Quarters, being dressed by one of
the Mates; who, without making any Diversion, only shut up the Wound with a
strong Stopple, which restrained the great Flux of Blood between Dressings: But
at the time of Dressing he bled excessively. The Blood which was extravasated
in the Member, did there corrupt, and caused Abscesses in several Places. But
at last, his Surgeon, seeing that his Strength was daily diminished, and
fearing some fatal Accident, caused him to be sent to Oulx.

His Weakness was advantageous to him: for whereas Amputation was chiefly
indicated, his loss of Strength was a contrary Indication that prevailed over
the former. I dilated the Wound that I might discover the Artery, and empty the
Part, of that Matter and clotted Blood, wherewith it was filled. But being then
unfurnished with such things as were necessary for my Design, I applied a
Button of Vitriol to the Opening of the Artery; and having filled the Wound
with Lint, and applied the other Dressings necessary on such Occasions, I let
him Blood twice, but in small quantities; and gave him certain Emulsions,
wherein were mixed some Anodyne Medicines, to retard the Motion of the Blood. I
let two Days pass without Dressing; but on the third, I found all I had done,
was to no purpose. At the Place where the Artery was opened, there was a
considerable and painful Swelling; the Lint that filled the Wound, was heaved
up with the Pulsation, and a Bloody Water came out, which presaged the sudden
return of the Bleeding. I caused prepare my Troches of Rose Water, Gum-Dragant
and Vitriol, with some good Styptick Water, and two Days after I took out all
that which filled the Wound: I also took away the Escar made by the Vitriol,
and the Fungus that was grown in the Wound; which I further dilated to give
vent to the Blood, that had diffused it self through the Flesh, beyond the
extent of the Wound. All this time I repressed the Bleeding by the Turnkey,
which I caused to be slackned, to discover again the Opening of the Artery, to
which I applied two little Troches, supported by a small Compress, dipped in the
Styptick Water: I filled the Cavity of the Wound with Dossels pretty hard; and
moistened in the same Liquor; then I took a large Compress of three Fingers
breadth; thick, and a Foot in length, covered only with Bole dissolved in
Vinegar; this I applied along the Artery, even to the Arm-pit; and lastly an
astringent Plaster, which I made fast with Compresses, and strong Bandage. I
caused the Arm to be laid on a Pillow, with the Hand higher than the Elbow. Two
Days after, I untied the Rollers, and took off the Compresses and the Plaster;
and seeing things in a good Condition, I applied new Astringents, without
touching the Wound. This Method I continued two or three Days: afterward I
begun to remove the Dossels that were outmost, sustaining always the others
with new ones, hindering also those which were next to the Artery to fall off
until the Suppuration were begun, that time might be given to the Flesh, to
cover the Artery; the Bleeding being very well stopped. In effect about ten or
eleven Days after the Application of these Dressings, all came off of its own
Accord, not one drop of Blood following; for the Artery was pretty well
covered. All this was done in presence of M. Davejan, one of the Physicians of
the Hospital, a Man of Integrity, Merit, and great Skill. Finally the Wound was
in a little time completely cured.

REFLECTION.
These kinds of Wounds, where Arteries are opened, are of all others the most
ticklish; they give a great deal of Trouble; and but little Reputation is
gained by their Cure. Every one knows, that there was no place for the
Operation of the Aneurisma, where this Artery was opened; and that it was
necessary either to cut off the Member, or to let the wounded Person perish, or
to stop the Bleeding by such means as I used. By this we may see, that it is
not good to be too hasty in cutting off a Member, where Arteries are opened
that admit not the Aneurisma; that we ought not to dispond, though our first
Attempts to stop the Flux of Blood, prove unsuccessful; and that the Troches
which I use, are upon many accounts better than Vitriol. This is not the only
time, that I have experienced the Success of this Method, in a like Occasion: I
made some Trials of the same at Luserne in the Year 1686. and in particular,
upon a certain Soldier, who had the Artery that is between the Tibia and Fibula
opened: After much trouble, before I would condescend to the cutting off of the
Member, I was willing to try this Method, which had also a very happy Success.
That we may preserve a Member, we are to leave nothing undone; neither ought we
to consent to its Amputation, until first all other Means have been in vain
assayed.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Hands.
OBSERVATION XXIV.
SInce the beginning of the War, I have had under Cure very many, whose Hands
were pierced, torn, or half carried away by such Firearms as burst asunder,
which is a thing very ordinary in Armies. Many others also have I dressed, that
had their Hands shot through with Bullets, and cut with sharp Instruments, of
which I shall not speak in particular.

But I may say, that all those I have dressed, in these latter times, though by
the Wounds, the part has been very much shattered and torn, have been always
cured, without losing what remained of the Member, and with little or no
discharge of Splinters of the Bones, or loss of Fingers, or their Joints.

In this kind of Wounds, as well as in others, I have avoided frequent
Dressing, and the Use of putrefying Medicines: and I own that I have ever found
the Spirit of Wine, a very successful Remedy in Wounds of the Extremities, and
in those of Nervous Parts. I have used (...) it chiefly in Hospitals, where it
brought always a speedy Relief.

Many of the Ancients, have ordered to keep open for some considerable time,
the Wounds of the Nerves and Tendons; to give vent to such Matter, as by its
Stay, might corrupt the Substance of the Parts.

But Experience has taught me, that it is much more benificial to the wounded in
such Cases, to hinder, than to promote the Suppuration; by doing betimes what
is necessary to prevent Fluxions upon the Part: sometimes applying good
Defensives to the superior Parts, to repress the activity of the Blood; and
some times using resolving Anodines to the Place afflicted, if there is need,
to prevent or take off the Pain, from which most commonly the Accidents proceed
that attend such Wounds; and to stave off at the same time the Attempts of the
Air, which is the greatest Enemy of the nervous Parts.

I can aver, that by using this Method, I have cured such Wounds much more
suddenly, than I could any other Way. I believe also, seeing all are agreed
that the Air is pernicious to Wounds in general, that none will question but
these of the Nerves, receive thereby a more notable prejudice, than those of
any other Parts of the Body; considering their Tenderness, the Nature of their
Substance, and their Temperament. I leave it then to Consideration, whether
Wounds of this kind, could be defended from the Injuries of the Air, if they
were kept open, according to the Opinion of the Ancients.

But it will be said, that it is extremely difficult, after all possible
Precaution, to avoid the use of putrefying and irritating Medicines, and of
Dilaters, in Cures that are tedious: For if such things as breed Flesh, and are
balsamic be used, when the Wound at the same time must be keept open, there
will be a necessity of consuming incessantly the Flesh with Cathereticks; which
are very apt by the Pain they cause, to produce Accidents, especially in parts
so sensible as these.

Now to this I say, that if Suppurating and Putrefying Medicines are used,
there almost ever infallibly follows a great Suppuration; and sometimes a total
Dissolution of the nervous and tendinous Parts: Especially if Tents or Dilaters
be also employed; which, if but for a small time they touch such Parts, do
oftentimes draw on Incurable, and sometimes Mortal Symptoms.

Wherefore, I have ever judged it best, to close up the Wound so soon as
possible, on such Occasions; chiefly when there is no extraneous Body, which of
necessity must be drawn forth; or if all requisite Diligence, has been already
at first Dressing used to that intent. In fine, though I have ever, not only
avoided with all possible Care, the using of putrefying Things; but also have
endeavored to dress as Seldom as might be; I dare affirm, that in this way of
practice, there never happened even the least Accident, to all that great
number of wounded Persons, dressed according to it, in our Hospital at Brianson.

Pareus, Book 10. Chapter 9. shows, that by this Method he successfully cured the
Pricking of a Tendon, which King Charles the ninth, had received in
Blood-letting: Though in another Place, he exceedingly finds fault with those,
who use the Stitch to wounded Tendons: He would undoubtedly have been of
another Mind, had he lived, and seen, as I and many others have done, how often
the deceased M. Bien-aise, an expert Surgeon, has performed the same with
Success in his House at Paris. But after all, we may maintain, that he is not
the first, who has practiced the Stitching of a Tendon: For in former times it
was ordinary, and many of the Ancients have done it.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Thigh.
OBSERVATION XXV.
IN the Year 1686. when the Vaudois were driven from the Valleys of Luserne;
one Le Grand, a Frenchman by Birth, Sergeant in the Regiment of Guards, and at
present an Officer in a Regiment of Fusileers belonging to His Royal Highness,
being wounded by a Bullet in the upper and outward part of the right Thigh, and
the Ball not to be found, was brought to the Hospital at Luserne.

He had lain a Day and a Night helpless upon the Ground; which occasioned a
considerable Fluxion, and an Inflammation of the Part. I made large Incisions,
and spared no Pains to find the Bullet, but all in vain.

He was forthwith let Blood, and had a Clyster given him; an exact Course of
Diet being ordered. The Bleedings were repeated, with the other Remedies for
withdrawing the Humors from the Part. The Swelling and Inflammation were
lessened; and I began to think, that things were in a pretty good Condition: I
kept in the Wound only a little Tent, about the length of two Fingers Breadth,
very soft, and of pretty fine Lint.

Thus the first Accidents were vanquished; but, others more troublesome and
more obstinate yet remained* for the Suppuration and Flux of Humors was so
prodigiously great, that I verily believed, his whole Body would thereby have
been dissolved. At every time we opened the Wound to dress it, which was twice
a Day, more than a Pint of Matter came away, besides what was discharged
between Dressings, which might be judged as much: In the mean time the Strength
of the Wounded Person was more and more impaired, and his Body insensibly
wasted away.

I could ascribe all these Accidents, to nothing else but the Bullet, which
remained in the Member: and this I the rather inclined to think, in regard that
almost all the Bullets, that were drawn from Wounds during this Campaign, were
full of Sublimat, or Glass; and many others of other Metals, and Tin.

I advised with M. Conte, then at Luserne, Surgeon in Ordinary to his Royal
Highness; who being acquainted with the Order of Cure, and the Symptoms, was of
Opinion, that by Purging the Moisture might be dried up; this was accordingly
put in practice.

I was so eagerly desirous to effect this Cure, as if all my Reputation had
depended upon the Success: and indeed it appeared, as if Providence had thereby
designed to open my Eyes, and to make use of me for the Relief of many others
being qualified for that end, by the Experience I therein attained.

The Wounded Part was greatly disordered by the Purging, yea in such sort that
I feared a Gangreen: the Fever was increased, and the Patient had quitted all
his Hopes, notwithstanding the Assurance he had conceived, of being cured under
my Hands.

As for my self, I began to despair; although it is my Humor never to give
over my Wounded Patient, so long as Life continues: For his Thigh was all over
livid, and the spaces between the Muscles, yea all the Member, was filled and
soaked with Matter, which every Day increased, the Wound being as it were an
inexhaustible Fountain. I considered with my self a thousand times, if there
was any thing more I could do, or any thing further to be used. I had performed
all that Art prescribes, to dry up that Matter wherewith the Part was ever
filled; having used not only hard Bandge with expulsive Compresses, to hinder
its gathering together and abode in the part; but also sudorifick Decoctions,
though all in vain. I was also thinking, to make a Counter-Opening under the
Thigh, to give a more free course to the Matter, and to hinder its Stay; but on
second thoughts, I believed it would be to no purpose.

M. Conte, and generally all who saw the Man, despaired of his being cured; and
told me, that I vexed my self in vain, as if all my Reputation had depended
upon the Cure.

Although I had hitherto assayed all sorts of Means in Vain, yet I was
obstinatly bent to find out some other Way, by my own Consideration; seeing the
wounded Person himself was also desperate.

As I have formerly said, I had hitherto kept in the Wound a little Tent, about
two Finger's breadth long, and very soft: This I resolved altogether to lay
aside, and to dress the Wound with a Pledget and Plaster only, and such a
Bandage, as might be sufficient to keep 'em on.

This affrighted the poor dying Man; and it was with great difficulty that now
I could obtain his Consent, to have that power over him which of right belonged
to me, and what formerly he had so freely granted.

In the Evening to my great Surprise, I found him in a much better Condition:
The Matter came not away in so great a quantity: That night he slept much
better than ever yet he had done, since he received his Wound; and in the
Morning I found him yet better: This Evening the Matter began to be of a good
Consistence, and to be discharged in moderate quantity. Henceforth I dressed
but once a Day.

His Fever, which had continued from the beginning, left him altogether, the
second Day after the leaving out of the Tent; and from the fourth, he was dressed
only once every other Day; he also began to eat, and to recocover his Strength:
from the eighth Day nothing further came from the Wound, and on the twelfth
after the disuse of the Tent, he was entirely cured; to the Truth of which I
call God to witness.

REFLECTION.
This is the Cure, as I sincerely protest, to which I have been most obliged.
It was this which made me embrace that Method, which now I expose to public
View; and which from this time forth succeeded so happily with me: and it is
certain, that I had infallibly cured my Patient at once of all his distempers,
if I had continued but only for seven or eight Days, to use a Tent, though never
so small and soft.

From this time forward, I resolved to abandon the use of Tents, and to give my
Advice in this Affair to the Public, when once an opportinuty should present
it self. I communicated my Design to M. Thouvenot, Physician in ordinary, and
Chief Surgeon to their Royal Highnesses, a Man of great Learning and
Experience, to be esteemed, as well for his profound Knowledge, as his eminent
Virtue: And having related to him a description of the Cure, he confirmed me in
my Opinion.

It was here therefore, in the King's Hospital settled at Brianson, that I drew
out several Observations which I had made, and some Accounts I had kept of many
Cures, done in different Times and Places; in order to make up a Collection of
them, together with some others done in this Hospital.

But to return to the preceding Cure; it is convenient to observe, that though
the Bullet was lodged in the Member, yet no Disadvantage did thereupon ensue to
the Patient: which made me think for a time, that the Bullet, hitting upon the
Belly of some large Muscle, might have rebounded the same way by which it
entered. But I found my self out in my Calculation: for being at Turin about a
Year and half after this Cure; I was sent for, from the Citadel where I
stayed; and when I came, I found this same Person whom I had cured of his
Wound, who showed me a a little Abscess that was formed upon the old Scar. I
opened it without Difficulty, and perceiving something white and hard, with my
Instrument I drew out the Bullet, which was flat, with a piece of the
Thigh Bone sticking to it: The Ulcer was quickly cured without any
Inconvenience, and never more returned.

Had I at first Dressing found out the Bullet, to the Misfortune of the Wounded
Person, I should have been obliged by Custom, and the Rules of our Art, to draw
it forth; though it had been, as indeed it was, sticking in such a part of the
Bone, as was encompassed with greatest Depth of Flesh. But for certain, it
could not have been got out with such Ease; or without Pain, and griveous
Irritations: Besides I question if the Patient, who was of a bilious
Constitution, could have born up, under so tedious, and painful an Operation;
seeing an infinite number of Accidents had been occasioned, only by the touches
of a little and very soft Tent. Wherefore I am persuaded, and am bold to
affirm, that it is not always necessary, to draw forth the Bullet, when it is
lodged in a Bone, that lies deep under the Flesh: Nature, that is much wiser
than we, has more gentle and easy ways; and best knows the time to free her
self of what is hurtful to her.

Hippocrates in the fifth of his Epidemicks relates, that he drew forth the
Head of an Arrow; from the Groin of a Man, after it remained six Years in his
Body, without any Accident happening during all that Time.

Alexander Benedictus reports, that a certain Man was wounded in the Back with
an Arrow, the Head whereof could not be got out, being bearded, and two
Finger's breadth in length: which yet two Months after the Wound was cured, the
Patient voided by Stool.

Hildanus in his 6th Observation tells us, that he took out the point of a
Knife, which had remained two years, among the acute Processes of the
Verterbrae of the Loins, without producing any Accident there.

Let us now therefore acknowledge that Nature is wonderful in her Operations!
These Examples, together with my own Experience, and Reason, have made me very
cautious in drawing forth of Bullets, when they are not lodged in Places where
they may mar, or quite destroy the Action of any Part; nor in danger of
falling into some Cavity.

This Cure, is of it self enough to convince any one of the Advantage, and to
establish the Credit of my Practice; it having been publicly performed, yea
authorized and approved by many learned Physicians, and skillful Surgeons of
the Court of Savoy.

Since that time, I have in several Places, and in diverse Hospitals, cured
many, who have had their Thighs pierced quite through, without either Tents or
Dilaters; save only in the first Dressing, for supporting and containing the
Astringents necessary to stop the Bleeding. This is contrary to Pareus his
Method, who in the thirty seventh Chapter of his tenth Book of Wounds affirms,
that Wounds of the Thighs and Legs ought to be kept long open, that the
corrupted Membranes may have time to suppurate and come away: as if, indeed,
Nature that has brought solid Bodies, such as Iron, Bullets, Bones, etc. to the
Orifice of Wounds, even after they have been a considerable time cicatriz'd, as
has been formerly observed, were not of sufficient Power and Sagacity, to
expel some Shreds of corrupted Membranes.

But to avoid corrupting of the Part, the Wounds must be speedily closed up;
Tents and Dilaters laid aside; the Air must be carefully excluded from the
wounded Parts, great Suppuratives must be cashiered; and we must dress as
quickly, and as seldom as possible.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Knees.
OBSERVATION XXVI.
IN the Year 1691. when I was at Pignerol, a Captain of a Battalion of the
King's Regiment, commanded by M. de Launay, was wounded in the right Knee with
a Bullet, which went in at the outward and middle, and came out at the inward
and upper part thereof. He was dressed for four whole Months by a Surgeon of the
Army, very well skilled in his Employment, but who followed the common Method:
He had also advised with the Surgeon Major of Pignerol, who had given over
hopes of the Cure. The Surgeon that had him under Cure, not thinking to make
any long stay in this City, proposed to me, after so long a time, to undertake
the Care of dressing him; which I also did.

I found five or six Holes in his Knee, all of them filled with Tents that were
hard, and long enough to reach to the Bottom. His Leg and Foot were swelled,
his Body very thin, and he had a slight Fever, which had never left him from
the first time he received his Wound, with perpetual Watchings, and a Loathing
of all kind of Food.

I began to leave out all the Tents, and with a small Incision at the lowest
Part ^hereof, I dilated the Wound: I laid aside the Aromatic Wine, that had
been so long used ^o no purpose; and left off the use of a certain ^njection,
which being applied twice a Day, ^y the Intolerable Pains it occasioned, had
^angled all the Joint, and caused a communi^ation amongst all the Holes, which
were ex^ctly stopped with the Fingers, every time that Medicine was employed,
that it might make some Stay in the Part.

I dressed him indeed with the Remedies, that had been formerly used; but I
took Care to apply them more conveniently, and to accommodate 'em better to the
Nature of the Part, and of the Wound.

When I came to see him the Day following, so soon as he saw me he embraced me,
and swore in the presence of many Officers, that he was inexpressibly obliged
to me: And, which was no less surprising than true, he told me, that he had
slept all Night, though he had not done so, since the first Day of his Wound:
that he felt no more Pain in his Knee, and believed his Fever was gone.

He was so encouraged with this good Success, that from that time forth he
thought himself cured. For five or six Days, he was dressed after the same
manner once a Day; and after that once every other Day; neither did I change
the Ointments and Plasters, which had been so long used before without any
Advantage. The Cure was completed in less than a Month: After which I advised
him to go into his own Country, there to use the Waters, in order to strengthen
the Part that was weakened by the frequent Dressing, and if possible to enable
him freely to extend it.

REFLECTION.
It appears by this Cure, that a good Method is the most effectual Remedy, and
the principal Instrument in healing Wounds. If any Man will but be at the
Pains, to ponder this Case, I doubt not but he will be convinced, that the
Tents, the Injection, and the other humid things wherewith the Part was
perpetually moistened, were the Cause of the deplorable Condition of the Wound.
Now if such a thing, as it often falls out, had happened to a common Soldier,
under necessity of being sent to an Hospital, and treated in the common Way; he
must have endured twenty Deaths by the tedious and painful Dressings: yea, it
is certain, that he could never have held up under them; being at the same time
deprived of all necessary Conveniences, breathing in an unhealthful and
corrupted Air, and having Food, neither so nourishing, nor given him at such
seasonable times, as a Captain might, who was willing to spare nothing, that
might conduce to the Preservation of his Life.

The Account I have given of this Cure, has nothing in it which is not exactly
conformable to the Truth. The Gentleman who was wounded himself made the same
Relation to M. Goiffons, a very learned and experienced Physician of Lion, and
Chief Physician of the King's Armies in Italy.

It Is true, the Wounds of the Joints require very great Care, there being few
that are obnoxious to more troublesome Accidents: and when the Part is much
shattered, they are judged mortal. However I am very certain that great Abuse
is committed, in the manner of Dressing them; and this I judged my self obliged
not to conceal.

The Joints moreover, are nervous or tendinous Parts, and are known to be of a
cold and moist Temperament: wherefore they must be guarded from the Attacks of
the Air; they must not be exasperated by the Touches of Tents and Dilaters;
putrefying Medicines must be suppressed, because they weaken the Parts to which
they are applied, and ruin these that are nervous and tendinous.

All these liquid things which are commonly used, are also hurtful to the
Joints; such as Aromatic Wine, Fomentations, and Injections, etc. Such things
as are heating and drying are profitable: We must endeavor to hinder the Waste
of the Spirits, and seasonably to perform the necessary Diversions; observing a
drying and slender Diet, and using to the Wound Sarcotick Medicines, such as
Balsams, or Spirit off Wine; avoiding also long and frequent Dressings. If this
Method is followed, all these Accidents, which ordinarily accompany Wounds of
this Nature, will be prevented.

Fabricius ab Aquapend^nte, in his first Part, Book I. Chap. 49. treating of
Wounds in the Joints, says, That they are not only extremely hard to be cured,
but also dangerous and mortal; and he adds, that the Cure is dangerous and
difficult, both in regard of their own Essence, and also of that of the Joints:
for Nature being the Cause that produces Flesh, and fills up Wounds, is less
vigorous in the Joints, which are cold in Temper, and destitute of Blood and
Flesh, than elsewhere; especially when weakened yet further by a Wound.

Afterward in the same Chapter, being supported by the Authority of Galen, in
his third Book Of Fractures, he affirms, That whatever lies under the Skin, is
advantaged by being covered therewith: and considering that the Joints are
cold, without Blood, and without Flesh, he says that their natural Heat is soon
extinguished, especially when exposed to the Cold of the Air. These were the
Thoughts of this Author, who was accustomed to use the Stitch on such
Occasions, to protect this kind of Wounds, from the Injuries of the Air.

He further adds in the same Chapter, that Wounds in the Joints ought not to be
left open, or exposed to the cold Air, because thereby we run the hazard of
quenching the Natural Heat, and of a Gangrene; or if this should not fall out,
yet is there seldom seen any Digestion in the Wound, when so treated.

These Parts then, as has been said, are naturally very weak, destitute of
Heat, and plentifully watered with Moisture; which by reason of the abounding
Salts, is apt to contract an Acrimony and Malignity; especially when it is
retained in the Part with Tents: Now this same Moisture, insinuating it self
into the Pores of the nervous Fibers, fails not to harden them, and render them
callous; from whence it comes, that these Wounds often end in Fistula's. It Is
observable also, that if there happen any Change or Disorder in the Blood, this
Humor becomes so corrosive, that it rots the Bones, and destroys the Parts
where it comes. Long and frequent Dressing moreover, occasion the like
Accidents, because of the Admission of the Air, that increases the force of the
Acids, and easily destroys that small Portion of Spirits and Heat, with which
these Parts are furnished.

All these things are of the greatest Importance, and well deserve our serious
Consideration: and if Reason in any thing ought to prevail over Custom, it is
chiefly here, where the Life of Mankind is concerned, which is a thing so
precious, that it very well Merits our most particular Care.

After all, I am of the Mind, that the Authority of so famous a Person as
Fabricius ab Aquapendente, ought to give some Reputation to my Opinion. But
before I conclude this Chapter I will moreover affirm, that if Wounds in the
Joints are hard to be cured, and often degenerate into Fistula's; this is not
so much owing to the weakness of these Parts, as to to the Manner, used by most
part of Surgeons, in dressing them.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Leg.
OBSERVATION XXVII.
ONe La Grandeur, who was of the Guards of the Marshall de Catinat; General of
the King's Forces in Italy, being at the Siege of Luxemburg in the Year 1684.
had received a Wound, with the Shiver of a Granade, in the left Leg, which left
behind it an Ulcer near the inward Ankle, that had baffled the Care of the
Surgeons.

This Man being at Pignerol, about the beginning of the Year 1692. took a
Resolution to have his Ulcer cured, though it had been of a pretty long standing,
and was to him instead of an Issue. Here he finds a Surgeon pliant enough; who,
without foreseeing what Accidents might follow, or considering the Evil
Disposition of Body, and the bad Constitution of the Patient, takes bim in
Hand, dresses him, and heals up this Ulcer.

But in a little time after, he had ample Occasion to repent the rashness of
his undertaking: For the impure Humors of that unwholsom Body, which had taken
their Course that Way, not finding any Outgate, were by degrees gathered
together in the Member, and by their Stay, arrived at a pitch of Malignity
sufficient to cause a Gangrene.

On the middle and inward Part of the Leg there arose a Tumor, or swelling,
which was forthwith taken by his Surgeon, who had very little understanding in
such Cases, for a Phlegmon; whereupon without further Deliberation, he begins
with Bleeding, which he repeated five or six Times.

The Humor retained in the Part, not being able to come to a perfect
Concoction, because of the defect of Heat and Spirits, made its malignity
appear, and corrupted a great Part of the Leg. The Gangrene appeared: And the
Surgeon made an opening in the highest part of the Tumor, from whence came
forth a little foetial Lympha. But the Disease increasing every Moment, both
the Patient and the Surgeon were alarmed, and sought out for some Body to
advise with, about cutting off the Member.

I was ordered by the Marquess of Chamlay, who was then at Pignerol, to go see
him, and to employ my utmost Care to retrieve him if possible, from that
miserable Condition. I made incisions in his Leg, from the Knee to the Ancle on
the inside, and touched it with a very piercing Spirit so far as the Gangrene
reached: I ordered for the Patient the strongest Cordials, not forgetting
Oriental Bezoar, and generous Wine, which I caused to be given him from time to
time.

Three Days passed over, in spite of all I could do, before a Stop was put to
the progress of the Gangrene: The unseasonable Bleedings, his Diet, his Fever,
and the other Evils with which he was oppressed, had so impaired his Strength,
that nothing could be hoped therefrom. Nevertheless, I judged no Way would be
more compendious and effectual, than that of Sweat, to withstand the Evil ^n
its Principle, and to ease Nature overwhelmed with a World of Impurities:
Wherefore (...) did my Endeavor to procure it; and for that Purpose made him
take one Evening a ^entle Sudorifick.

This Remedy had all the success I could ex^ect; the Patient sweated a little
that Night, which forthwith put a stop to the Course of (...) Gangrene. The
Escar came away but very slowly, because of the weakness of the Patient. But
when this was entirely separated, another Accident superven'd, which threw us
into a new perplexity: For a large Tendon that had been altered by the
Gangrene, and was wasted by the Suppuration, being joined to its Original by a
small Portion only, drew after it the Matter; and notwithstanding all our Care,
formed a very considerable Abscess under the Joint of the Knee, which by
increasing by little and little overspread all the hinder Part of the Thigh.

I dilated the Wound, making a fresh Incision, wherein I put a very small
Dilater, to hinder its closing up: I used the Dilater for seven or eight Days,
in which time the Matter increased, the Sinus was enlarged, and the Thigh
swelled and became painful.

I resolved then, to find the most depending Part, that I might there make a
Counter-Opening, whereby to give a passage to the Humors, and to hinder their
Abode in the Part: so I made a mark without, upon the Place I destined for that
Operation.

Nevertheless, I was willing first, to try all other means I could think on: I
begun to leave out the Dilater, which I had only kept between the Lips of the
Wound, not suffering it to pass into the Cavity of the Ulcer: so I dressed the
Wound only with a Pledget, and a Plaster, and such a Bandage as might keep
them on.

The next Day, very little Matter came away; and the Day after that, yet less:
The swelling, and Pain of the Thigh were diminisht; the large and deep Sinus
was filled up in four or five Days; thus the Operation I designed was
prevented, and the Patient cured in ten or twelve Days after.

REFLECTION.
It Is no wonder, that very many able Surgeons, have been deceived, without
perceiving it, in the too frequent use of Tents, and Dilaters, these fatal
Instruments; seeing I, who had bid them open difiance* could not keep my self
from a Surprise: And indeed he must be a capital Enemy to 'em, and have
experienced their pernicious consequences, who can imagine that a thing so
small, as this Tent was, could occasion such considerable Accidents.

I was much amazed at this Event, and confirmed thereby in my Aversion for
Tents and Dilaters; resolving now to use more Caution than ever, if I should at
any Time be necessitated to use them.

I willingly own, that the Collection of Matter under the Thigh was not
occasioned by Tents: They are not always the Cause of Impostumations, nor of
the Accidents that follow. Notwithstanding their Use contributes much to delay
the Cure, and to render the Symptoms were obstinate, as may be seen by the
preceding Cure: For after the widening of the Sore, a free passage being
given, the Matter would have been discharged insensibly, and without
Intermission, if it had not been hindered by the Dilater; which, how little
soever, was yet sufficient to obstruct its passage.

I hope then, I shall not be thought without good Reason, to have done my
endeavor to put down the use of Tents, seeing it is attended with such
pernicious Consequences. It Is easy to judge, that if a little Dilater, about
the bigness of a middle-siz'd Bean, was able to occasion such troublesome
Symptoms; a long and thick one, must have caused much more Irritation and
Disorder. If I had continued to use that Extraneous Body yet eight Days longer,
it would have brought on a new Mortification, which at that Time, might have
laid the Patient in his Grave, considering the deplorable Estate he was reduced
to by his former Distempers.

CHAP. XXIX. Of another Hurt in the Leg.
OBSERVATION XXVIII.
IN that same Year, when I was in the Hospital of Brianson, there was brought
thither a Soldier of the Colonel's Company in Catinat's Regiment of Foot, who
had both the Bones of his left Leg broken together with a Wound, two Fingers
breadth below the Garter: This Accident befell him upon the Works of the
foresaid City.

The lower part of the Tibia, came out at the Wound, and passed over its upper
Part two Fingers breadth; wherefore we were necessitated to make a vigorous
Extension, before we could put all things in their right Place: We joined the
Lips of the Wound, and dressed with Pledgets only; having made an Embrocation,
to dissolve a very considerable Bruise, to which we applied our Diapalma
dissolved: Two or three Fingers breadth above the Fracture, we encompassed the
Member with a little Roller, using another in like manner below it; the space
between we filled up with double Compresses, dipped in Wine or Brandy: under the
Leg we used a Past-board, to hinder its bending at the Fracture, and over this
the Bandage with eighteen tails; Finally, having made all fast with the Juncks,
and their furniture; Diversions were made in due time, and a Course of Diet
ordered.

By reason of the Contusion, we were forced to dress once a Day; which we did
without undoing the Rollers, or giving any trouble to the Member; and when I
saw the Bruise, begin to be dissipated, from which I had feared some Accidents,
he was dressed but once in two Days: On the twelfth Day, we took off the
Rollers, that we might straiten them a little; which we did in such a manner,
that the Bones remained straight and unmoved; the Wound then had begun to fill
up; and there was not the least Exfoliation, nor Separation of any Bone.

The Wound was completely cured in nineteen or twenty Days; after which we used
the Rollers, with Splents and the Juncks upon the Place of the Fracture.

This Patient was pretty fortunate in this, that during the Cure he had not
felt the least Disturbance, or Inconvenience; notwithstanding of the
Unwholsomness of the Beds in the Hospitals of the Army: After forty Days the
Juncks were laid aside, and he began to walk with Crutches; and in a Month
after he returned to the Regiment.

REFLECTION.
By this Cure, which was publicly performed, it appears; that it is not
absolutely necessary, to widen the Wound in complicated Fractures, as some are
of Opinion; for so soon as it is dilated, the Cavity is filled with Matter,
that slides in between the broken Bones; and being once there, it is impossible
to bring it away, or hinder its Stay; and thus it alters and rots the Bone
which it touches; it dilutes and depraves the nutricious Juice thereof, mixing
with it, and rendering it unfit for breeding a Callus: Finally, it causes
Exfoliations and Separations of Bones from the Extremities of the Fracture; and
oftentimes sliding along the Bone upon the Periosteum, produces Abscesses, and
Sinusses very hard to be cured.

The Patient all this time, is in very great danger; chiefly in an Hospital,
where he is every day tormented once, and often twice, with long and painful
Dressing. The Part is weakened, and the whole Body wasted away. Besides it is
observable that but few Fractures that are accompanied with a Wound, are ever
cured in Hospitals, especially when dressed according to the ordinary Method;
and above all, these of the Thighs and Legs, where the Wounded is confined to
his Bed, are most seldom cured.

Among all the Ancients that I have read, I find none that more favors my
Method of treating complicated Fractures, than Fabricius ab Aquapendente; for
in his first Part, Book 4. Chap. 9. and in many other Places of his Works, he
is not for dilating such kind of Wounds; but leaves the Separation of Bones to
Nature's conduct: And though he expect, that some Splinters of Bones are to come
away, yet he fails not to stitch up the Wound: For, says he, Nature will never
cure a Wound, in that Place where a Bone is to be excluded; wherefore we ought
to endeavor, to heal up such Wounds; which we shall not be able to effect,
unless Nature Judge it convenient, and find that their remaining open would be
unprofitable.

CHAP. XXX. Of a third Wound in the Leg.
OBSERVATION XXIX.
ON the fifteenth of June, School. a Mason called La pierre, was sent from Mont
Dauphin, to the Hospital at Brainson, who laboring on the Fortifications of
that Place, had the inner Bone of his right Leg broken about the middle, with a
Wound six Fingers breadth long, and two in width. This was one of the most
considerable Fractures that had come under our Care in this Hospital, and yet
one of these that were soonest cured.

After we had reduced the Fracture, we joined the Wound, and dressed it with a
good incarnative; we fomented where it was necessary, and put on the Dressings
in the manner above described, we performed the usual Diversions, and left all
untouched for three Days. We dressed it a second time after the same manner,
letting it alone again other three Days: In fine, at the fourth dressing, that
is upon the twelfth Day from the first dressing, the Wound was quite filled up,
and more than half skinned over; wherefore straightway, as gently as was
possible, we took off the Bandage with eighteeen tails, using instead thereof
Rollers, with light and easy Splents upon the Fracture: no Accident happened
during all the time. In forty Days space he was able to walk with Sticks,
which also he laid aside soon after.

REFLECTION.
This wounded Man was showed as a Prodigy, to all who came to the Hospital.
Though this Cure had been the only one, I had ever performed this way; yet the
Success I had therein, had been sufficient to convince me of the Excellency of
this Method; and to engage me to follow it during my Life. But seeing it is
moreover supported and approved by Authors, and confirmed by many other Cures
of a like Nature; all the pretended Reasons that may be brought against it,
will prove too weak to overthrow it, and will be slighted by all Men of good
Sense, and Lovers of the Truth: And whatsoever may be said in order to censure
it, will be so far from lessening its Merit, that it will rather heighten the
Esteem taereof.

In the last Part of this Work, where I treat of Fractures that are attended
with a Wound, I give some Reasons, further to justify this way of Practice.

CHAP. XXXI. Another Case, whereby this Way of Dressing complicated Fractures
of the Legs; is confirmed.
OBSERVATION XXX.
A Soldier called La Violette, of the Regiment of Nivernois, and Company of
Bonal, was brought to the Kings Hospital, settled at the Abbey of Oulx, on the
first of May 1696. He had two Wounds upon the Os sincipitis of the ^ight side
with the Bone uncovered; all his Face was bruised; three of the true Ribs on
the same Side, were forced inwards; he had many Bruises on his Body; his right
Arm was out of Joint; and the Hand all torn; both his Legs were broken and
shattered, the Right one without a Wound, and the Left with one: All which
Havoc was caused by a Fall from a very high Rock, near the Barrier of the Fort
d' Exille.

All his Wounds were dressed, but these of his Head, which were not observed
till the next Day. His Arm was reduced; his right Leg, which was broken about
three Fingers breadth above the Ancle, was dressed with the circular Bandage; the
left with that of eighteen tails; the Tibia was broken to pieces in the middle;
many of the Splinters were out of their Places, being unloos'd from the Bone at
one End; and so could not he brought together, and altogether set right in the
first Dressings; the Orifice of the Wound was not large, and we did not dilate
it: It bled indifferent much for the three or four first Days. I let the
bleeding stay of it self, without using Astringents. I let him Blood many
Times, both in regard of the Contusions and Fractures, and also because of the
forcing in of the Ribs, which occasioned a great difficulty of breathing. I
caused a hole to be made in the Straw-Bed and Clothes, which was sowed round,
to afford him the convenience of going to Stool, without being removed; it
being impossible to touch him, without putting him to grievous Torments. The
Wounds in the Head were soon filled up, without any apparent Exfoliation; the
Bruises in his Face were removed; his Ribs were restored by means of sticking
Plasters; and the difficulty of breathing, continued but for six or seven
Days: The Dislocation of his Arm, and the Wounds of his Hand gave us no
trouble: The simple Fracture, though the Bone was shattered, was not followed
with any Accident: the Wound of the compound one, was completely healed in
eight or nine Days; after which, we put little Bolsters upon the protuberant
pieces of the shattered Bone, tying them on with Rollers; which had so good
success, that at the next Dressing, no inequality was to be seen. About the
fortieth Day after the receiving his Fall he was able to stand up with
Crutches; and his left Leg that had the complicated Fracture, was stronger and
more clever, than the Right, that had the simple one only; which was much
admired by many.

REFLECTION.
This Cure may be of excellent Use, to establish the Credit of the others, if
there is any need thereof. That which makes it remarkable, is, the two
Fractures of a different Kind, in the same Person, one of them being
complicated, which yet was soonest cured; and the Patient was able to use the
Leg wherein it was, before the other. M. Davejan, and M. Michellet, the King's
Physicians in this Hospital, knowing Men, and beyond all Exception, were
Witnesses of what I have here related; and know that I have added nothing to
the Truth: it is thought also, that this is the first time, that a complicated
Fracture was dressed after this manner in this Hospital, though it be of a pretty
long standing. These same Gentlemen have oftentimes seen, Wounds no less
considerable then these, brought by the same Method to a speedy and happy Cure.

I believe indeed, that the strong Constitution of the Patient, conduced much
to the good Success of the Cure; but it is no less true, that the requisite
Diversions were not delayed, whereby whatever might have occasioned troublesome
Accidents, was removed: moreover* he was gently treated in dressing, and the
Sores were not exasperated, so that in the first Days he felt but a very slight
Pain: He rested well, and was able to take with much ease, such Food as was
proper for him.

You will very seldom see, a wounded Person in so deplorable a Condition, as
this Man was: All the Parts of his Body, were either wounded, or bruised: Had
but any Accident followed, Death had been unavoidable, and our Care in vain:
and if the Dissolvents and Diaphoreticks, had not unloaded the Parts, promoting
the Circulation of the Blood, and Course of the Humors by a gentle and
insensible Transpiration, I doubt the Event had neither been so sudden, nor so
desirable.

It Is well known, that in Practice, there is a great difference made between
Fractures not accompanied with a Wound, and those that are: in many Places, the
latter are accounted very hard to be cured, and often are Judged incurable;
especially those of the lower Extremities, that indispensibly oblige the
Patient to keep his Bed.

I don't question but very many, especially the Admirers of Antiquity, will
find fault with this Method, and reject my Rules; but let them, with all my
Heart, charitably oblige the Public, with more easy and more sure Ways, and
confirm them with unquestionable Experience, and I promise them, to be among
the first that shall embrace their Party.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Feet.
OBSERVATION XXXI.
UPON the 25th of June of the same Year 1696, an Irish Gentleman, called John
Donoughal, Nephew to Lieutenant Colonel Athlone, was brought to the Hospital of
Brianson, having been wounded at an Action in the Valley of Barcelonetta. He
was shot into the right Foot: and the Bullet entering on the upper and foremost
part of the Metatarsus toward the Side, was lodged between two Bones of the
same Part.

A Surgeon, upon the Spot, did whatever he could, to draw out the Bullet, by
the same way it entered; but his Endeavors proved fruitless.

The first Day that I dressed it, after I had considered the Wound, and observed
the Way of the Bullet, I found it could not be got out, unless a
Counter-Opening were made; which accordingly was done, at the middle and hinder
Part of the Metatarsus, and the Bullet was drawn out with very little Pain.

The Wounds were dressed according to our Method, with Embrocations over all the
Part; Diversions were not omitted, and he was dressed but once a Day with our
simple Remedies, and the Plaster of dissolved Diapalma.

The Escar being separated, no great Suppuration ensued; no Bones came away, at
least that we could observe: henceforth he was dressed but every other Day, and
was cured in thirty Days, or thereabouts; after which time he returned on Foot
to his Regiment.

REFLECTION.
It Is almost universally known, that Wounds of the Extremities, accompanied
with a Fracture, are tedious and troublesome to be cured: the Tendons and Nerves
that here abound, make these Parts of a quick Sense, and render the Wounds
therein, obnoxious to grievous Accidents: therefore it is that they require to
be dressed with much Gentleness, and Remedies particularly suited to 'em. I
have elsewhere remarked, that Tents, and putrefying Medicines, are extremely
hurtful to Nervous and Tendinous Parts, wherefore I shall speak no more of
them. I shall only here take notice, that some prepossest Persons have had the
confidence to say, that this Way of Dressing, so gentle and so easy, has
something of Rashness in it; that it is very dangerous to omit the
Circumstances observed by the Ancients; that their Rules, were not laid down
without good Reason; and that their Method, in Fine, ought to be put in
Practice among the Soldiers. Though Reason and Experience are both on my Side;
yet I am ready further to maintain, that this Method has nothing of Temerity in
it, seeing it follows the Footsteps of Nature, which ought ever to be our Guide
in the Curing of Wounds. We can never go astray, if we follow her Conduct; and
if we swerve from her Paths, we cannot but fall headlong into Dangers.

Mereover, it is no less necessary, to be an able Surgeon, and expert in
Practice, in order to manage a Cure according to this Method, that appears so
easy; than according to the common way of Practice, which is full of so many
Circumstances that are ever unprofitable, and oftentimes pernicious. And we may
reasonably presume, if our Method has been so successful, when practiced on
Soldiers dieted and dressed in an Hospital, where the Air is oftentimes
infected; that it will yet be much more so when used toward Patients, who have
all the Conveniences of Life, and who breath in a pure Air.

CAAP. XXXIII. Of the Feet.
OBSERVATION XXXII.
WHen I was at Luserne, in the Year 1688. a Soldier of the Trained-Bands, was
brought to the Hospital there; who had received a shot in his right Foot, that
was pretty remarkable for the way of the Bullet; which was of a very small
Size. It entered at the inward and middle part of the great Toe, and came out
at the end of the little one; no Excoriation appearing either above or below.

The first and second Bones of the great Toe were broken: the second of the
three next, were entirely crushed to pieces; and the last of the little Toe in
like manner.

When we parted the Toes one from another, a great many little pieces of Bones
were to be seen, which seemed only to hang by a Thread. I first set to rights
every Bone by it self; and afterward set them in order one with another:
between every Toe and its fellow, I gently slipped in a little piece of Linen,
dipped in Spirit of Wine; and I made small Compresses pretty hard and longish,
which I put above, and under the Toes, in form of Splents, being wet also with
Spirit of Wine: I wrapped all up in Linen, without Ointments or Plasters; and
supported the Foot with a Sole, sustaining all with an easy Bandage.

I took off the Dressings after two Days, and without removing the little
pieces of Linen between the Toes, I fomented all the Part with Spirit of Wine,
and dressed it as before: the Suppuration was but very small; and indeed it was
with Design to prevent it that I used nothing but the Spirit of Wine; which was
the only Remedy I employed to complete the Cure: this was effected in about
three Weeks time, without the coming away of the least bit of the Bones, though
they had been entirely shattered to Pieces.

REFLECTION.
All Experience assures us, that it is Nature and a good Method that effect the
Cure, and not at all either the great Labor, or vast Charges bestowed upon it.
If I had used in this Case the ordinary Ointments and putrefying Medicines,
they would have occasioned a plentiful Suppuration, whereby the Splinters of
the Bones had been loosened, and brought away, the Cure had been delayed, and
possibly the Toes lost; which had been enough to render the Patient lame for
all his Life.

Though this Cure is not of great Consequence, yet the Conduct therein used, may
suffice to show, that the Bones do easily enough reunite, when they enjoy the
necessary Repose; when the Air has no time to alter them, or to exert its
Efficacy in the Wound; and when the use of Suppurative Remedies is laid aside,
which are ever hurtful, as has been above observed: and I will here add, as to
the last mentioned Medicines, I know no kind of Wound, in what part of the Body
soever, that does absolutely stand in need of them.

But lest I should weary my Reader, with unprofitable Repetitions, I shall
content my self, with having described the two preceding Cures of Wounds in the
Feet: though in this Hospital, we have had a great number of this Nature through
our Hands, that have had a most Happy and comfortable Event.

CHAP. XXXIV. The Conclusion of the Second Part.
IF my weak Reasonings, and the Authorities I have adduc'd, together with the
Experiences, which I have faithfully related, shall not prove sufficient, to
convince some Persons of the Excellency of my Method; I have only one Request
to make, to such as shall withold their Approbation, which is, that they
would make a Trial thereof themselves.

I could have recited, a very great number of Cures, like unto these contained
in this second Part: I could have described the Cures I have performed on
wounded Persons in my Travels; or in the Army, where Occasions of this Nature
daily present themselves, because of the Actions that ordinarily fall out: such
are those of the Valley of Barcelonetta, and the Battle of Marseills, fought
Oct. 4. 1693. But this would have been, for the most part, to say the same
things over and over again; all these Cures being managed well nigh after the
same Way.

I suppose, it will be easily enough believed, that I could have enlarged the
bulk of this Volume, with many other Observations; seeing it is a Truth, that
in four Years time, wherein I have been in this Place, more than three Thousand
Persons have gone from it completely cured.

Some there are, who, not being able to discover the genuin Cause, of the
desirable Success, that has attended the Cures, done in this Hospital; and
willing to blast the Reputation of a Method, to which only they were owing;
have attributed all to Chance, and have given out that we have been accompanied
with an Extraordinary Good Fortune: as if forsooth, the Curing of Wounds were
like a Game at Cards, or throwing of Dice; or as if blind Chance had any thing
to do, where Experience and good Conduct are so indispensibly necessary.

I have hitherto only treated of such Wounds, as were very considerable, and
were almost all somewhat complicated: from whence I hope it will be believed,
that simple Wounds, wherewith I was unwilling to fill up this Part, were cured,
after this Method, with much more Speed and Ease, than those here related.

It may possible be thought strange, that in certain Cures of single Sentinels,
described in this second Part, I have declared that I used, on different
Occasions, the Balsam of Peru; which is scarcely probable, considering the
Place, and the Condition of the Persons. This I own; and do nevertheless aver,
that I have said nothing but the Truth: But when it is considered, that his
Royal Highness the Duke of Savoy, sent his Apothecary to Luserne, with Orders
to supply himself from thence, with whatever was most precious; and to furnish
a most complete Shop of Medicines, for the Hospital of that Place, what I have
said will easily be believed; seeing not only that Remedy, but also Pearls,
Bezoar, and the most costly Cordials, were bought up, and used freely, and
without Distinction.

THE Hospital-Surgeon: OR, A New, Gentle, and Easy Way, to Cure speedily all
sorts of WOUNDS.
PART III.
Exhibiting a General View of the Author's new Way of Practice, not only with
respect to Wounds, but in other Cases belonging to Surgery; and a Description
of the simple Remedies he uses: With some Observations.

CHAP. I. The Design of this Part: And what it contains.
Although in the preceding Parts of this Book, where I declare the Advantages,
and Excellency of this Way, confirming the same by Reason, Authority, and
manifold Experiences, I have sufficiently made known my Practice, with Relation
to Wounds; yet, because it is there delivered without any Method, and with
frequent Interruptions, being interwoven with my Reasonings and Observations, I
shall for the Ease, and Advantage of my Reader, but especially of the young
Surgeon, in this third Part give a general Prospect, as it were at once, of all
the Parts of my Practice; and that not only in what concerns Wounds, to which I
principally confined my self in the two former Parts, but also in other Cases,
that fall under the Surgeon's Care.

I will likewise here, ingenuously and without Reserve, give a Description of
the simple and easy Remedies which I have used as well in the Cure of Wounds,
as in that of other Distempers that come within the Jurisdiction of Surgery;
the happy and comfortable Effects that I have so frequently seen produced by
them, is enough in my Opinion, to recommend them to the Esteem and Use of the
Wise and unprejudicated Artist, and who heartily designs the Good of such of
his fellow Creatures, as fly to him for a Refuge in their Distress.

Finally, I will as I go along, deliver some Observations very instructive, and
useful to illustrat and confirm the Subjects, for the sake of which they are
adduc'd: to which, when necessary, Reflections shall be subjoined. I shall
begin with Tumors and Abscesses.

CHAP. II. Of Tumors and Abscesses,
MOnsieur Bertrand, a Physician of Marseils, in his New Reflections upon Acid
and Alkali; gives, in few Words, a very clear, and exact Notion of the Nature
of Tumors. But seeing I am confined, by my proposed Design, only to declare my
Practice with respect to them; those who desire to search into their Causes,
and examine their Differences, must consult such Authors as have written upon
them.

The Moderns, are not well agreed with the Ancients, in this Matter; for since
the Circulation of the Blood has been found out, the true Causes of many
Accidents, that fall out in the Cure of Tumors, have been discovered, which the
Ancients explained, in a manner altogether different.

Wherefore, seeing a Disease, after its Nature is understood, is easy to be
cured, if one brings but a little Application of Mind; the young Surgeon, will
do well to search into the Causes of Tumors, in the Works of the Moderns, where
also he will find suitable Remedies. Etmullerus in his Medicinal Surgery,
describes a great number of very proper Medicines; as also M. Verdue in his
Book called Pathalogie de Chirurgie.

This only I will say by the by; that the Tumors that are accompanied with
Inflammation, such as a Phlegmon, and an Erysipelas, have more need of
Dissolving than Repercussive Medicines: I was confirmed by Experience in his
Opinion, and the Truth thereof at this Day is not doubted; though yet it is
contrary to the Rules of the Ancients: For a Phlegmon proceeding from an
internal Cause, according to the Moderns, is nothing else but an Obstruction of
the Vessels; and that from an external Cause may be accounted of the same
Nature. This Accident does very commonly happen in Gunshot-Wounds: Under which
Head, we will speak a Word or two thereof.

According to these Principles, Resolvents are absolutely necessary in order to
fulfill the first Intention, which is to dissolve or to cause transpire the
accumulated Humor.

An Erysipelas, according to these same Moderns, is caused by a subtle and
Volatile Acid, diffused over the Skin, or the Muscles: Dissolving Medicines are
also proper in this Disease: Spirit of Wine prepared with Camphire, the Sugar
of Lead, or Elder-Vinegar may be used.

The Accidents that follow upon a great Erysipelas, are frightful and violent.
I remember, that when I was at Luserne, a certain Person who had a Fever, was
seized with a like Distemper; it reached from the middle of the Thigh to the
Heel: He was not so wise, as to give us notice of it in time, but kept the
whole Part out of the Bed for a whole Night, in a pretty cold Season; which
caused such a Repercussion, that on the Morrow all the Part was gangrened, and
all our Care and Diligence could not prevent its entire Mortification; for in a
very little time the Gangrene turned to a Sphacelus. Before he died the one
half of his Body was entirely corrupted and putrified: I never saw so dreadful
a Sight, or smelt so intolerable a Smell: For not only the Hospital, but even
the whole City was in danger of being infected thereby, when he was yet alive.

When an Erysipelas, will not yield to dissolving Remedies, we ought without
delay to have recourse to Scarification of the whole Part, to give a passage to
the Blood; and moreover we should foment the whole Part with Spirit of Wine
prepared with Camphire, or some other Spirituous and piercing Liquor: Vinegar,
wherein Sal ammoniac is dissolved, or common Salt when that is wanting, may
also be used. Notwithstanding it is not to be thought that Repelling Medicines,
are altogether to be laid aside; only it is fit we know how to use them in
suitable Occasions.

In the Year 1693. M. Dechamp, then Commander of the third Battallion of Sault,
but now Lieutenant Colonel of the same Regiment, having an Erysipelas in his
Leg, had been treatted, with the Dissolving Remedies prescribed by the Moderns,
for three Weeks time, without perceiving any advantage thereby: whereupon he
caused himself to be brought to this Town, that he might be under my Care; and
being informed by him of what Remedies had been used, I thought fit to apply
Repercussives; and in eight Days after he departed, being entirely cured. In
order to a prudent Use of Remedies, the Age, and the Constitution of the
Patient, the Season of the Year, and the Nature of the Part affected are duly
to be considered. But I shall not further insist upon a Subject, from which I
hasten.

Now as for Abscesses of all sorts, which have come under our Hands in this
Hospital, and have been cured with an Expedition that may appear incredible, I
will only say this; that judging it sufficient, to make a large opening in
them, I left the rest to the sage conduct of Nature; not forgetting however
general Remedies, and the ordering of Diet. But as for the dressing of the
Ulcer, I only used a simple Pledget, covered with the most common Medicines;
and sometimes in case of a Cavity small Compresses for expelling the Humor;
also a Plaster, with a Bandage sufficient to keep it on.

The great number of those, who have been treated, in this Hospital, according
to this Method, and cured in a very small time, is almost wholly beyond Belief.

When the Orifice is not stopped up with an Extraneous Body, it is evident that
the Matter can make no Stay in the Parts, but will come away without
Intermission; and the Parts, that were thereby kept at some distance from one
another, come together, and at the same time, do altogether expel what may
there be contained; and leave no empty Space, for the Collection or Abode of
what is useless and inconvenient: Hence the Parts are united, Nature acts at
her Freedom, whose Balsam generates Flesh better than all the Remedies in
Pharmacy.

I hope I may presume, that none will think, I would have continued in the Use
of this Method, for so long time, had I not experienced its desirable Effects,
in a thousand Occasions: and I could safely take my Oath, that never any the
least Accident, happened to any of those, who were dressed after this manner:
Every one may believe as he thinks good of what I say; but I dare aver, that I
am much more careful that what I say should be True, than that it should be
Persuasive.

As for Scrophulous Tumors, or a Bronchocele, I have not found any Remedy so
successful as Mercury; and I believe, in the Opinion I have of it, I am not
singular: the many Experiences I have had thereof, make me much to value it. He
that well understands the Cause and Nature of these Evils, and withal the
Virtues and Uses of the Remedy whereof I speak, will agree with me, that this
only can effect a Complete Cure. But all consists in the discreet Using
thereof: the best of Remedies and the most exquisite Instruments, are ever
dangerous, when managed by Surgeons that are void of Knowledge and Experience.
I may possibly, one Day make known to the Public, the Way which I have
successfully used, to bring to a perfect Cure, a great number of such Maladies
as I now speak of, and these the most obstinate and inveterate of their Kind.

CHAP. III. Of a Gangrene.
A Gangrene is an Accident, that occasions very much Trouble in the Hospitals
of the Army. I shall say nothing of its Causes. M. Thevenin has fully treated
of this Matter; and M. Causape, in his Book Of Fevers, has given a brief
Discourse thereon upon different Principles. Young Surgeons may betake
themselves to the reading of them, for their Instruction herein.

Wherefore omitting this, I say, that here we have no time to lose, but must
immediately apply our selves to stop its Progress, and to avoid the fatal
Consequences. When the great Vessels are thereby entirely intercepted, in a
Member that may be cut off; the best Way is to come speedily to Operation,
without attending a Sphacelus; for the Gangrene goes on so swiftly in a small
time, that the sound Parts care assaulted, before ever we can well know what we
are a doing.

A Gangrene often happens in Gunshot Wounds, if it is not prevented; as also in
Bruises; in Wounds made by cutting, or bruising Instruments; and also after a
great Phlegmon, or an Erysipelas; and sometimes by an Extremity of Cold: This
last kind is very frequent about the End of Campains: The Remedy we used was
Spirit of Niter, or Aqua fortis, wherein Crude Mercury to half the quantity is
dissolved: with this we have easily enough stopped Mortifications in the Feet or
Hands, applying over all the Extent of the Gaegrene a little piece of Linen
wet in this Liquor: and when this cannot be had, other Spirits may be used that
are near of the same Quality.

This Remedy I have found to be so gentle, and so quick in its Operation, that
I never use any other, in any sort of Gangrene. It admirably well separates
what is dead from what is alive, without scarifying or cutting; unless when the
Mischief lies very deep, where these violent Remedies are absolutely necessary.

Cordials and Wine, ought never to be omitmitted in such Cases, to fortify and
defend the natural Heat, from an Enemy, that oftentimes assaults it in its very
Principle. When the Body is plethorick, Bleeding and Clysters are no small
Help. In the beginning of a Gangrene, to Topical Remedies, Diversions may be
added, without forgetting to order the course of Diet, which also demands our
particular Care. So soon as I have discovered a Disposition to Mortification, I
have sometimes used Cataplasms, and Emplasticks when the Inflammation would
allow, to recall the Spirits, and to give Nature time and Strength, to resist
and to overcome, by the force of the Heat concentrated, the Matter already
endowed with a malignant Quality, or just ready to become such; and I have
often seen such kind of Maladies, to end happily in an Abscess, with a laudable
Concoction*

When a Phlegmon that follows on a Wound, is violent and Obstinate, and will
not yield to Diversions, and dissolving Medicines, we must without delay
scarifie the Part, so far as the Tumor reaches, to give an Outlet to the Blood
that is extravasated, and often also corrupted; and to discharge, and relieve
the Part, that otherwise might be suffocated by the Fullness and Obstruction,
bathing is afterward with Spirit of Wine and Sal ammoniac: for if we be remiss
in our Care, the Enemy that is concealed within, is privately at Work; and when
the outward Signs of the Gangrene appear, all that is under the Teguments, is
often found already corrupted, and in irremedible disorder.

An Erysipelas is yet more formidable; for it is more sudden, and more nimble
in its Operation: It is the part of a prudent Surgeon, to take heed to it in
time. A Fomentation with Spirit of Wine, Vnguentum Egyptiacum and Sal ammoniac,
may be used.

Many Authors, have described a great number of Remedies, very proper in the
Cure of Gangrenes: But in the Hospitals of the Army, there is not always the
convenience of making a Choice; wherefore it is good to know how to use such as
are simple, and easy to be found: it is not always the most pompous
Compositions, that are of greatest Efficacy.

In this sort of Distempers, it is very necessary to make use of Inward
Remedies, as well as Topical ones; such as strong Cordials, Venice Treacle,
Confection of Hyacinth and Alkermes, and Alexpharmicks, to which a little
Camphire may be added. Wine ought to be numbered amongst the Cordials; it is
one of these, which I very frequently use in Hospitals. Germander taken
inwardly, and applied outwardly upon the Grangrene, is a Remedy not to be
dispis'd.

A great many Remedies, very proper for a Grangrene, may be seen in Etmullerus:
He has also given an account of the way used by the Germans, to separate the
mortified from the sound Parts, which is done with the Butter of Antimony: This
is the Remedy they use in the Amputation of Members, to avoid the use of the
dismembring Knife, and of Astringents that burn and cauterize.

This Remedy might be used, with the same Success as the Spirit of Nitre, which
I have spoken of before; there is no Difference, providing we have regard to
their Nature, in using 'em: But whither the one or 'tother be used, to stop a
Gangrene, a simple Digestive will afterward be sufficient to hasten the falling
of the Escar, and finish the Cure.

CHAP. IV. Of Ruptures.
RVptures are very frequent amongst the Soldiers. The Toil they undergo, and
their Manner of Life, do alike conduce to bring them to that miserable
Condition; by reason of which there is often a necessity, to send them to
Hospitals.

My Design in this Place, is only to give an account of the way I use to help
this sort of Distemper: For I am convinced, and no Body doubts of it, that a
Truss is the most sure and most infallible Remedy, to hinder the Falling down
of the Guts: But, as there is no Convenience for making of them in Hospitals,
so Accidents must be quickly provided for that come oftentimes all of a sudden;
such as the Descent of the Intestins into the Scrotum; for the Pains are then
extremely violent, and so grievous that they resemble those of the Passio
Iliaca.

Wherefore, in such an Occasion, I apply a Cataplasm of OxDung; or else when I
may have it so, I use it fried in Oil of Hemp Seed, or in that of Violets. This
Remedy eases the Pain, by dispelling the Wind, and so gives Liberty to restore
the Gut unto its Place, providing the Intestine is without Excrementitious
Matter in it. Astringents of the first Rank may also be used as Common Bole,
etc. mixed with the Glair of an Egg or Vinegar. Some use Emollients, but their
Operation is to slow, in a case requiring such have.

I have often found much advantage from a Fomentation made up of Pomgranate
Flowers, Nut-Galls, Cypress Nuts, Pomegranate-Rind, Allom, Camomil and Melilot
Flowers, with common Salt, all bruised and beaten, and boiled in Forge-water,
or in rough Wine; I use it very warm all together, without straining the
Liquor: with this Remedy, I have restored Prtients, who seemed to be upon the
very Blink of Death. Moreover the Emplastrum pro Hernia ought to be applied,
upon the Dilatation of the Peritonaeum; which without a Truss, the best of all
Remedies, will do no great Feats.

CHAP. V. Of Wounds.
I Have sufficiently explained my Method, as to what concerns Wounds, in the
Account of Cures contained in my second Part. My Design is here, (for Reasons
mentioned at the beginning of this Part) to entertain my Reader with a General
and comprehensive Idea of my Way of Practice, that may quadrat to all the
different sorts of Wounds that occur.

Perhaps this Method may seem to swerve a little from that of the Ancients, or
may not agree so much with that in use amongst the most Part of the Moderns, as
some could desire: But I would entreat those who shall read this Treatise, not
to condemn it, before they have thoroughly examined the Truth of the Matters of
Fact, and the Reasonableness of the Rules therein laid down; for our usual
Rashness in judging of what we don't altogether understand, is often the Cause
of our Error: However I am in good Hopes, that e're it be long this Way shall
be acknowledged to be the Product of Experience; and its Evidence to be an
infallible Mark of its Truth.

Moreover; I dare confidently affirm, that this Method, howsoever new it may
appear to many, ought not to be numbered among these things that are more
curious than profitable. Reason speaks for it: Nature vouches it: Experience
confirms it; putting it beyond all doubt; and about three thousand Wounded
Persons happily cured by it, may warrant any one in the Use thereof. In the
first and second Part of this Work, I explain at length the Reasons that
Justify my Practice, and support them with several Authorities both of the
Ancients and Moderns.

If I condemn Tents as Instruments unprofitable and destructive, 'twas
Experience that convinced me of their Mischief: and I hope, henceforward very
many Surgeons shall range themselves on my Side.

If I recommend in a special Manner, a Gentle and Speedy Way of Dressing; I
must herein be justified, by all Men of a sound Understanding: And indeed I
don't question, but every reasonable Person, after he has been rightly
informed, will sufficiently approve what I have advanced in this Matter.

Finally, in asserting that the Air is hurtful to Wounds, I have said nothing
but what Hippocrates, Galen, and many others were sufficiently convinced of.
It Is known to all that the cold piercing Air, is very pernicious to our Nature:
On this I have enlarged a little, in the seventh Chapter of the first Part,
suitable to that little Measure of Understanding, wherewith I am endowed.

I suppress frequent Dressing, that Nature may be allowed Time to act, and to
restore the wounded Parts, unto their first Condition; which she cannot do, when
she is so often interrupted in her Work.

I have ever observed this as a general Rule; to dilate by making Incisions
Gunshot Wounds at the first Dressing; as also all other penetrating Wounds,
and such as have a narrow Orifice: This is the true Way to keep off, and to
avoid the most part of Accidents that happen in Practice; and to prevent being
reproached, when any troublesome Symptom falls out: I sometimes use Dilaters,
in the first Dressing, to hinder the Union of new Incisions; to keep their
Brims asunder, and to leave an open Passage for Matter, or any thing else to
come away, when Nature shall be disposed to expel 'em; otherwise I use them
not, lest I should hinder the closing up of the Wound.

When the Bleeding is Obstinate, I use calcined Vitriol, astringent Pouders,
Powder of the Vine, Styptick Waters, etc. It Is only in desperate Cases that I
have recourse to Roman Vitriol, Aqua fortis, and the Actual Cautery.

I have ever in the first Dressings, found much Advantage from Defensives,
which I applied above, and sometimes below the Wound, to allay the Heat of the
Blood, to moderate its Activity, and resist Fluxions; observing always to make
them somewhat Emplastick.

I am always careful, to empty the lower Belly by Clysters; having found that
the Retaining of the Excrements, is ever a mighty Hindrance to the Good
Disposition of the Body.

When the Bleeding has been great, I don't take off the first Dressings, till
the second or third Day after they are applied; that the Wounded Vessels may
have time to unite: and, providing the Season, and the Pain, or other Accidents
don't hinder, I every Day take off the Roulers during that time; and leaving
only that which supports and keeps on the Astringents, I make Embrocations when
needful, and renew the Defensives: by this means, I often avoid the Suffocation
that may happen, if the Astringent and Emplastick Medicines are too long kept
on the Parts; which by stopping up the Pores of the Skin, and retaining the
Vapors that ought perpetually to pass out thereby, are the Occasion of many
very grievous Accidents that happen to Wounds. Too great a quantity of Bands
and Compresses, has often the same Effect.

I use only Pledgets after the first, and sometimes after the second Dressing;
and continue the Embrocations, till the Contusion is dissolved; which may be in
five or six Days more or less, according to the Bigness and Condition thereof,
or to the Nature of the affected Part.

When a Phlegmon, or an Erysipelas, etc. happens to a Wound, I avoid the Use of
Unctuous Things, which are hurtful here; employing only such Cataplasms as are
proper for easing Pain, and sometimes also dissolving Medicines, which together
with Diversions, and a proper Course of Diet, resist, and overcome these
Accidents.

I find it very profitable, when I dress the Wound, to cover it with a Linen
Cloth wet with warm Wine or Brandy, immediately after I have taken off the
Dressings: this defends, strengthens, quickens and unites the Spirits; and
hinders the Particles of the Air, and the Effluvia therein, to stick to the
Wounds, or pass to their Bottom.

After the first Dressing is over, I never search the Wound either with my
Finger or Probe, unless there is an absolute Necessity thereof. I also disallow
the use of dry Tents, so commonly employed for drying up the Matter from the
very Bottom of Wounds; and and generally every Thing that may irritate, or
occasion Pain, or may oppose the Design of Nature, which is the Healing up of
the Wound.

I don't, as some do, take up a deal of Time, in striving exactly to empty the
Wound, of all the Matter that is in it; but as quickly as can be, I apply the
Dressings, to hinder, as has been said, the Action of the Acid Parts of the
Air, and the Dissipation of the Spirits; that the Strength of the afflicted
Parts may be preserved as much as possible; which is very requisite, in order
to enable them to bear up against them any Evils, wherewith they are assaulted
on all Hands.

When, I say, in the fifth Chapter of the first Part, that the Matter ought not
to be retained in Wounds; and that Nature would not be at such Pains to drive
it out, if she could have any Advantage by its Stay; this is to be understood
of such Matter, as is kept in by Means of Tents, which becomes hot, and
ferments, and by its Abode acquires an evil Quality, and might be sucked up by
the Veins: for that which is Laudable, is hurtful only by Accident; being of
its own Nature Balsamic, because it is ever mixed with good store of the
Natural Balsam, or Nutri^ious Juice, which without Intermission flows into the
Wounded Parts. What I say, is confirmed by that which is done, in some Places
of Holland; where of the Laudable Matter that runs from Wounds, they make a
Balsam that is of great Use in their Cure.

It is not at all improbable, that the Sound Matter that comes from Wounds may
promote their Cure, when by the Hand and Diligence of a skilful Artist it is
purified, and separated from its Excrementitions Parts; for what remains, is
only the Balsam of the Blood. This will be more easily conceived by those that
consider, that there are some learned and Ingenious Italians, who cure the
Bludy-Flux, with a Salt drawn from the Excrements of the Patient; and also such
as have a Dropsy, with the Salt of the Waters, that are drawn from their Belly.
Etmullerus also, very much commends the Excrement of the Ears, for curing
Wounds.

All these things, contain less balsamic Juice, than the Matter that runs from
Wounds, when it is not altered by the Heat of an essential or Symptomatick
Fever, when it has not remained long in the Wound, being detained there by
Tents, etc. or in fine, when it is not depraved, by the use of putrefying
Medicines, or others of a like sort, that destroy its natural Temperament.

M. Verdue, Tom. 1. Page 440. speaks very patly to this Purpose, when he says,
that Matter is the Chilous Part of the Blood: Wherefore it is against all
manner of Reason, that some Moderns require, that the Wound be accuratly wiped
dry; seeing thereby it is deprived of that, which only can effect the Cure.

When I know, or am in doubt that there is some Extraneous Body in a Wound,
which Nature would exclude by the Orifice, or that any Splinter is separated
from a Bone; without having to do with Tents, I sufficiently dilate the Wound
with Prepared Sponge, or the Pith of Elder, or Gentian Root fitted for that
purpose, that a free Passage may be given to any thing that must come away:
This way is understood by every Surgeon; and there is no Difficulty therein,
providing one be careful to use it Seasonably.

I cannot restrain my self from highly blaming those, who very patiently marshal
up in Order, a great number of Dossels or Dilaters, of which they make three or
four Lays in Wounds that are any thing large, observing a certain Symmetry and
Proportion, which exposes to the View of Assistants a Method, no less
pernicious, than contrary to Common Sense and Reason. As for the Decency and
Seemliness, which adorn and set off that Way, it will be no less conspicuous,
in making large Pledgets of long and pretty fine Lint, that may at once reach
over all the Extent of the Wound.

I my self have experienced, what a fond Opinion is commonly entertained of
that Cruel Method: for the greatest part of Wounded Persons, believe themselves
neglected, if an Hour is not spent in searching their Wounds, and as much in
Applying the Dressings: but Charity obliges us to free them from their Error.

When a Wound is deep with much Loss of Substance, I fill it only with Pledgets
of fine Lint; left leaving an empty Space, it should be filled up with Air: I
apply them very slightly covered, or moistened with some Medicine, agreeable to
the Nature, and Quality of the Wound: these are not so hard as Dossels, and
consequently occasion less Pain; and don't so much hinder the closing up of the
Wound, being not so compact as to hinder the breeding of Flesh; neither are
they so apt as Tents to be lost in the Wound, or fixed in some Corner of its
Cavity.

I am no less careful, to suppress Injections than Tents; having observed their
Effects to be no less pernicious: for they liquefy and dissolve the Blood,
enlarge the Wound, cause Pain, and make proud Flesh to grow.

I disallow the Use of Aromatic Wines in dressing, as also of Fomentations,
that are frequently used by some, which conduce very much to the protracting of
the Cure.

It Is very sure that these Parts drink up the Moisture, which softens, relaxes
and puffs up the Skin; and passing through it, fills them like Spunges: the
Natural Heat of the afflicted Parts, is thereby suffocated and extinguished, no
perfect Concoction can be performed; but all is turned to Matter and
Corruption: and if this Method is long continued, as it too often falls out,
the Ligaments are relaxed, and the Patient is in Danger of being lame for all
the rest of his Life.

This way of Practice, is in a particular manner pernicious in Hospitals of the
Army, where that which is necessary, to give Remedies all the required
Qualities, is not always to be had: For Instance, how can they be kept warm,
without a sufficient number of Clothes to preserve the Patient from the Cold?
Hence it is that in a Moment after Application, all the Dressings become cold
and frozen, which occasions Oedema's very hard to be cured; and oftentimes also
Symptoms that are yet more troublesome.

A right Course of Diet, is so neeessary in curing of Wounds, that without it,
an infinite number of Accidents, cannot be prevented: But it is necessary to
have respect to the Age and Constitution of the Patient, to his Habit of Body,
to the Season of the Year, and the Nature of the Wound.

It Is to be observed, that a very exact Diet is a mighty hindrance to the Cure
of Wounds in Soldiers, who ordinarily feel more the Inconveniences of a too
scanty, than those of a too plentiful Table. Wherefore I don't altogether
deprive 'em of the use of substantial Food, unless when Necessity requires
otherwise; and this keeps up their Strength: For Broths though good, are not so
nourishing in Hospitals, as to be sufficient of themselves for Food: and yet
this is no prejudice to the necessary Diversions. Wine also ought not to be
kept from them, being allayed a little, unless in some very important Cases: It
resists the ill Quality and Malignity of the Air, which is always impure in
Hospitals; and in a Word Wine is their Cordial and Counter-poison.

It is very necessary also, especially in Hospitals of the Army, to have Regard
to the Situation of the wounded Part, which ought to be such, as to give
liberty to the Circulation of the Blood, and a Descent to the Matter, and Ease
to the Patient; I have known the neglect of this Point, occasion very
troublesome Symptoms.

If a Surgeon is not so charitable, as to give Instructions, to those that
attend the wounded, how to make their Beds suitable to the Quality and Nature
of their Wounds; the miserable Patients, are ever in Pain by the Inconvenient
Position; which is enough of it self to deprive them of the Rest, that is so
necessary for 'em, and to render their Sufferings and our Cares to no purpose.

The Head ought to be placed indifferently high, and laid upon something that is
soft, without Feathers, if it may be had, with a Descent to promote the
Discharge of the Matter: When the Neck is wounded, it must be in a manner
slightly supported by the Pillow: or, by Linen folded into several Doubles, we
must fill up the empty Space between the Head and Shoulders.

Wounds of the Breast require an easy and unstrain'd Posture, rather high than
low. But in this we must have most Regard, to the Convenience of the wounded
Person.

These of the lower Belly and Loins, demand almost the same Situation: To these
of the Bladder and Genital Parts, an undisturbed Repose, a convenient Bandage,
which is a Suspensory, and a Position somewhat raised, are very needful.

Every Body knows that the Arm, when wounded, must be supported by a Sling that
passes over the Neck; and that in Wounds and Fractures of the Shoulder Bone, a
Pillow is necessary to keep it almost as high as the Breast, in which posture
it is most at ease: In Wounds or Fractures of the Wrist, Metacarpus and
Fingers, we must keep the Hand extended with a piece of Board.

Wounds of the Thighs, require that the Member be placed straight, neither too
high nor too low. These of the Legs and Feet, do necessarily demand that the
Part be something high, that so the courser Blood may freely circulate; for
otherwise, the Blood, by its Weight, might be stopped in the Veins, and corrupted
there; and thus the Circulation being suppressed, many grievous Accidents would
ensue. This hanging or low Position of the Legs, not being minded by many
Surgeons, exceedingly conduces to render Wounds of these and the Feet very
uneasy to be cured, and makes 'em degenerate into Ulcers.

It is also very necessary to stretch out the Legs, and keep them straight
during the Cure; otherwise it will be difficult, to restore them to their
natural Figure, after it is over, chiefly if it has been of some Continuance;
as, supposing the Leg had been kept bent, when under Cure of a complicated or
simple Fracture. This is what I have often observed, and to which young
Surgeons would do well to take heed. Fractures of the Tibia and Fibula, and
simple Wounds in the Legs, if any thing considerable, stand in need of a Sole
to sustain the Foot, as well as these of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Toes.

Too strait Bandage, especially in Gunshot-wounds, occasions troublesome
Accidents; it hinders the Circulation, and causes frequently Mortifications:
Wherefore I use only such as may keep on the Dressings, chiefly in the first
Days: Many have been brought wounded to this Hospital, with the Parts half
Gangrened, by too tight Tying; for in Gunshot Wounds the wounded Members, ever
swell some more some less, whereby the Bandage, though but moderatly strait,
becomes intolerable before the next Dressing. Rest also is of no less
Consequence to the Patient. Now where all these things meet together, and are
rightly ordered, they are commonly of very great Advanto the wounded.

I use Purgatives with great Caution, and after the time of the most dangerous
Symptoms is over, beginning ever with the slightest, that only loosen, such as
Cassia and Manna, etc. during which time Clysters, together with the use of
Prunes, give no small Relief; Oats and cleansed Barley being easily digested,
and yiedling a moderate Nourishment, qualify the preternatural Heat of the
Blood, and keep open the Belly.

As for the Topical Remedies, which I commonly employ in Dressing of Wounds,
they have nothing singular in them, which is not pretty well known to the most
part of Surgeons.

I avoid as much as possible the use of Putrefying Medicines, and of Powerful
Suppuratives; because they destroy the Temperament of the Parts, disunite the
Particles of the Blood, corrupt and deprave the Nutricious Juice, which ought
carefully to be preserved in a good Condition. It Is this which moved the
Ancients so often to recommend to us, to maintain the wounded Parts in their
Natural Temper.

Hippocrates affirms, that all Contused Wounds ought to be brought to
Suppuration, in order to a speedy Cure, whereby he seems to patronize and allow
the use of Putrefying Medicines, which commonly are employed to bring a Wound
to Suppuration. But me thinks, this ought not to take place in the Hospitals of
the Army, where the Air is ordinarily infected by the Breath, and abode of the
Sick; and which are almost ever encompassed with the Graves of the Dead, whose
number is but too great.

It Is very certain, that this nearness of the Place of Burying, chiefly in hot
Seasons, imparts to the Air, by the Steams that rise from thence, a
Complication of Corruption and ill Qualities, that occasions Rottenness in
Wounds, Alteration and great Suppuration; and often causes great Mortality, in
the Hospitals, and Places adjacent. Now according to this Maxim of that Author,
Gunshot Wounds must be dressed with these same Medicines, seeing they are of the
number of contused ones.

I don't absolutely deny, but there may be some Occasions, wherein such may be
used: However I may be allowed to say, with all the Respect I owe so celebrated
an Author, that in Hospitals, we ought to shun as much as possible, Putrefying
and Suppurative Remedies, and others of a like Nature; even where the Escar may
require a considerable time before its Falling: For by the seasonable ordering
of Diversions, and the Course of Diet, all these Accidents are often prevented,
which the delay of the Suppuration might cause: and one may without scruple
use, as I have done, such Remedies as have a Virtue to resist Corruption; as
the Spirit of Wine, which Etmullerus prescribes even in Gunshot Wounds, and
which I used at the first Dressing, on the Day of the Battle of Marseils,
without having observed any evil consequence of my so doing: for besides a Good
Method, which may be called the Strength and chief Instrument of a Workman, it
is of high concern to understand, and to know how to choose Remedies, that
agree with the Temper of the Parts to which they are applied, and to maintain
them in that State wherein God has created them: But it proves often a very
difficulty Task, to satisfy this Intention.

As there is an admirable variety of Constitutions, so it would seem, that it
were necessary to use different Remedies to Wounds of the same Nature, and of
the same Parts, in different Subjects: The Sex, Age, and Season must also be
considered: I have likewise observed in my Travels, by People of different
Nations that have been under my Hands, that diverse Climates require particular
Applications, in certain Circumstances, necessary to the Cure of Wounds: For
the Constitutions of Men, depend chiefly on the Countries they inhabit; on
their Situation, high or low, dry or moist, the Winds that rule, the Food and
Water that they take: So that they differ among themselves, according as the
Heavens look upon them with different Aspects.

But not to search any further into these things, which cannot be contained
within the Limits, prescribed to this little Work, and don't properly belong to
my Subject; I will only say, that it is easy enough to distinguish a proper
Remedy, from one that is not so: That which corrupts and depraves the Natural
Balsam, is known by looking into the Wound; from which, if there proceeds a
strong and Stinking Vapor; it is a sign that the Matter is not concocted, seeing
it is thin, blackish, too plentiful, watery, and of an offensive Smell.

The Flesh likewise has its peculiar Signs; it is dull of feeling, and
sometimes is covered with another proud Flesh: Oftentimes there is to be seen
over all the Wound, a certain black or white Filth, which some, as I have often
known, scrape or cut off at every Dressing; whereby the Wound is enlarged, and
the Cure delayed: Others imputing it to the vicious Temperament, and ill
Disposition of the Patients Body, have recourse to Purgatives, which occasion
still more new Accidents, such as Fevers, etc.

But be this as it will, it is certain that we ought not always to delay till
the last, before we change the Remedy; our Smell and our Sight only are
sufficient to direct us in this Occasion: Hippocrates orders a Medicine to be
changed, when it does not what it ought, or was designed for.

But we must not on the other Hand, fall into the contrary Extremity, of
changing the Ointments sometimes once, and often twice every Day; not giving
time to a Remedy to act, and exert its Virtue, on the Part to which it is
applied: It Is necessary, that the wounded Part draw as it were Nourishment from
the Medecin, and therefore it must have a requisite Time, allowed it for that
Purpose: it must, if I may be allowed so to speak, amalgamate with the
Nutricious Juice of the Part; or at least, if it don't increase its Quantity,
it ought to preserve it in the natural State, and when fallen therefrom,
restore it again. To be capable of these Effects, it must be endowed with a
Volatile and Oily Spirit, viscous also and temperate, as Balsams and Vulneraries
are, which I have used with very good Success.

I have often experienced on many Occasions, in several Hospitals, and chiefly
in this, and in very considerable Cases, that after I had in vain used many
Remedies authorized by Custom, the Balsam described in the Sacred Writings, has
had surprising Effects; and that Members at the Point of being cut off, have
been thereby cured with much Ease. This Hospital of Brianson, might afford many
Instances of the Truth hereof; but I shall content my self with the two
following.

CHAP. VI. An Observation of a very considerable Case.
A Surgeon of this Hospital, being one of those who was most employed in
dressing the wounded, by Accident had a Thorn run into the middle Finger of his
right Hand, which pierced the Tendon of the Muscle that bends it: his whole
Hand and Arm were attacked with very troublesome Symptoms, accompanied with a
continual Fever extremely violent, and an unsufferable Pain.

Five or six Days past over, before I had notice of this Accident; and all the
Symptoms were at the very worst: I found all things in a deplorable Condition,
the Arm swelled as big as the Leg, the Hand of a Monstrous Size, and the Finger
as great as ones Arm; many Cavities were in the inward Part thereof, and some
in the outward, from which issued a serous Matter; there was another large
Sinus under the Musculas palmaris, with an Orifice near the Roots of the
Fingers.

I straitway laid open the Finger, on the inward Part, from one End to the
other, and found the Tendon swelled and corrupted; I did not enlarge the
Orifices on the outward Part, nor that of the Palm, hoping that all these would
he well, if I could but overcome the Accidents.

He was Let Blood, and had a Clyster given him, though somewhat too late; he
observed an exact Course of Diet, and was dressed with the Balsam of Arcaeus. On
the Morrow when I took off the Dressings, I was surpised, as I had been the
Day preceding, with a Vapor of an intolerable Smell; the Lips of the Wound
were turned outward, which made me despair of a Cure, and judge it would be
necessary to cut off the Hand: The Matter remained undigested, the Fever, the
Pain, and the Swelling continued as before: he was dressed in the same manner as
the Day before, with addition only of a little Spirit of Wine. The Bleeding was
repeated, and also the Clyster.

The Day following, the Wound was in the same Condition, save that the
Corruption appeared to increase: We were of Opinion, that nothing but
Amputation could save his Life. But for as much as Art and Reason dictate, that
the preservation of the Members ought to be endeavored so much as possible;
and as we are obliged in Conscience to try all Remedies before we come to that
Extremity: I resolved, forthwith, to change the Medicines; judging rightly that
what had been used, might have occasioned, this depravation of the Salts;
whence it was to be feared, a total Corruption of the Nutricious Juice might
follow.

Wherefore now I used the Balsam of the Scriptures, mixed with a third Part of
that of Arcaeus, in this I wetted the Pledgets, which I applied very warm over
all the Wound, and upon the Sinusses: I poured some of it also into the Sinus
of the Musculus palmaris, and upon it I put a Plaster of Dipalma dissolved in
Oil of Roses and good Vinegar.

On the next Day after this, we found all things much changed to the better:
The Fever and Pain were lessened, and there was nothing so ill a Smell as
before.

I question not, but the Fever is a Symptom troublesome enough, and able to
cause all these Effects; and that by the Motion it excites in the Blood, it
seperates saline and sulphurous Juices, that by irritating the Fibers may
occasion that turning out of the Lips of the Wound, their Swelling, and that
insupportable Smell: But it cannot, on the other side, be denied, that outward
Remedies conduce much, to procure that Fermentation and Corruption in the
wounded Part, when they are such as putrify; because they dissolve the Blood
and other Liquors, causing Irritations, Corruptions, and great Suppurations;
and destroy the Temperament of the Parts, to which they are applied. Whereas
when Balsamic, and Spirituous Medicines are used, they produce quite contrary
Effects: For by allaying the Sharpness of the Humors, and making the Blood
fluid, they resist Corruption, dry up the Moisture, and in the Place where they
are applied, abate the Commotion of the Humors, caused by the Fever.

In fine, whither it was by this, or any other Way, it is certain that the
Change of the Medicine here, produced a notable Alteration on our Patient: for
though the Fever appeared but very little abated, by all that I had formerly
done; the very next Day after this the Lips begun to come nearer together, the
Pain and Defluxion ceased; and which is most of all, the ill Smell was quite
evanisht; so that in five or six Days he was past all Danger, and the Cure was
completed in a little time after.

M. Le Clerk, Physician to the King, in his Complete Surgery, commends much the
Samaritan Balsam, to which we have given the Title of The Balsam of the Holy
Scriptures: and the Approbation of such a Man is sufficient to justify its
Use. I thought it not unfit likewise here to subjoyn the Description of another
compound Samaritan Balsam of an admirable Virtue. It is made up of equal Parts
of Spanish Wine and Oil of Roses, to each Pound of which Mixture two Ounces of
Sugar Candy, and as much Honey of Violets must be added, and all boiled on a
gentle Fire, and skim'd till the Wine is consumed. This may be called the
Balsam of Balsams, or the Compound Samaritan Balsam.

CHAP. VII. An Observation of another Case.
M. Vert the Younger, an Ensign of the Company of M. de Beauvet, Lieutenant of
the King at Brianson, and Commander of the Second Battalion of Sault, had no
less Reason to applaud my Method, and the good Effects of my Remedy, than him
we discoursed of in the preceding Chapter.

He was wounded with a Sword, at Pragelas, in the outward Part of the left Arm,
near the bending of the Elbow. The Wound was at first neglected, being not well
dressed: for without dilating it in any Manner, a Tent was thrust into it as
long as it could possibly receive; which occasioned such frightful Accidents,
that the Patient thought of nothing but losing both his Arm and his Life. In
the inward part of the Arm, opposite to the Wound, Matter was collected, and
Abscesses formed; which obliged him to consult the principal Surgeons of the
Regiments, who thought it convenient, to make an Opening in that Part, which
accordingly was done. By the large and deep Incisions that were made, the
Artery was opened; so that they were obliged to use the Actual Cautery to stop
the Bleeding: By this means the Wound was enlarged, and the Pain and the
Accidents increased.

The first Wound, was still dressed, as before, with Tents: but the Wounded
Person having kept his Bed for fifty Days, and his Wounds being still in a very
wretched Condition, he was advised by the abovementioned Gentleman M. de
Beauvet, to cause himself be transported to Brianson, to try if there he might
find any Help. He was committed to my Care, and I found the inward or lower
Wound, the length of a large Span, and four or five Fingers breadth wide: The
Artery and Tendons were uncovered, the ancient or outward Wound, whose Orifice
was very strait, had in it a pretty long Tent, which shut up the passage of
three or four Sinusses, that took up all the Joint.

The Arm and Hand were Oedematous, being much swelled, and painful; I began by
making an Incision in the Wound on the outward Part, whereby I discovered the
Orifices of the Sinusses, into which I dropped a little of our Balsam, mixed as I
formerly said, with some of that of Arcaeus.

The large and lower Wound was dressed with the same Remedy: We used expulsive
Cmpresses, to press together the Sides of the Cavities, which we kept on with a
proper Bandage: Moreover we laid aside the Aromatic Wines that had been before
used upon all the Part, to its great Detriment.

Three Days after it had been dressed in this Fashion, the most Part of the
Accidents disappeared: he begun to rise up from his Bed, to take his Victuals,
and to gather Strength; all the deep Cavities were filled up; the Artery, the
Nerve, and the Tendons were covered over; the Pain, the Fluxion and the
Oedemaetous Swelling were 'quite gone; and by this powerful Incarnative the
Cure was completed in a Fortnight, with the assistance of a little Vnguentum
Apostolorum, wherewith we sometimes use to consume the Flesh: After this he
mounted his Horse, and went for the Air into his own Country.

This I may confidently affirm, as a certain Truth, that when the Balsam we
speak of is genuin and unsophisticated, it may serve at the same time both for
Food and Medicine, being made up only of sweet Oil and Wine: And that it may be
used not only for curing Wounds of the Mouth, of the Tongue, of the Gullet and
Windpipe, and generally of all the Breast; but likewise in obstinate
Dysenteries, in Relaxations of the Fibers of the Ventricle, in Ulcers thereof,
and in these of the Guts, and of all the lower Belly. For if we consider its
Nature, we shall find it of a friendly Quality, and extremely agreeable to our
Constitution; being compounded of such things as serve us daily for Food. Sweet
Oil softens, loosens, sweetens and penetrates; and when it is boiled with Wine,
which it devours as it were and consumes, retaining with its self all the
Virtue thereof, it is enabled to perform all these Operations with much more
Ease: It cuts, dissolves, strengthens, restores the Spirits, breeds Flesh, and
is Astringent; all which our Balsam performs, being endowed with the most
useful Virtues of these Remedies, and containing a Volatile, Oily, and Temperate
Salt, that is Astringent and Sarcotick: And if a little Sugar is boiled with
it, it becomes yet more excellent, is more Vulnerary and Balsamic, has no
Acrimony, and is without either Smell or Taste.

Had this Remedy, how simple soever it may appear, produced such Effects, in
the Hands of any other but my self; they would without question have made a
great Secret of its Composition: and though this had been known to many, yet they
would never have published its Virtues.

It were greatly to be wished, that there were only one Remedy, which might be
able to answer all Intentions; so we should not be always obliged to have in
the Patients Chamber, a whole Apothecary's Shop; which is often no less
prjudicial to the Purse, than offensive to the Smell.

Being about six Years ago at Turin, I cured a Gentleman of an inveterate
Ulcer, that encompassed all the Bottom of the Uvula: Many Surgeons had to no
purpose used a great many Remedies: And I in like manner after the use of some
more with no better Success, bethought my self at length of my Anodin Balsam:
In this I dipped a Linen Rag tied to the end of a Probe, and therewith touched
the Ulcer twice a Day: By this Means, as I solemnly protest, in twelve or
fifteen Days, the Ulcer was completely cured.

This Remedy, how ancient soever it is, will appear new to many. However it is
certain that Hippocrates in complicated Fractures, used little Linen Rags dipped
in Oil and Wine mixed together, to allay the Pain, and prevent Convulsions,
which is a Precedent sufficient to invite our Imitation.

It has been the Policy of almost all who ever wrote of Medicine, still to
reserve something undiscovered to themselves. I could name a great number of
Authors, who have published the Virtues of certain Remedies, whereof they have
never given the Composition; or if they have, it has been in such Ambiguous and
Aenigmatical Terms, that it is hard to understand any thing of it. And indeed I
must acknowledge that a Remedy, when it becomes common, how good soever it may
be, loses much of its Esteem.

I have formerly said, that the Variety of Constitutions, and Diversity of
wounded Parts, require sometimes a Difference of Remedies; to this we must have
all due Regard: For it often falls out, that even the most excellent Medicines,
are not capable to answer all our Expectations; especially when the Patient is
of an ill Constitution, and the Distemper obstinate, and troublesome.

However it is not good, to put too much Confidence in this single Composition,
as if it were an Universal Remedy, if at any Time the Success prove not
answerable to our Desires: I own that I have been obliged my self in such
Cases, to boil in our Balsam, the Greater Consound, Bugle, Sanicle, some
Lavender, Clary, St. John's Wort, and the Lesser Moon-Wort, which is a powerful
Vulnerary, and very common in these Parts; and afterward to give it some
Consistence, with about a third Part of the Balsam of Arcaeus: This
Composition, has done surprising things; it has consumed and removed
Fungusses, from Feet that had been entirely Frozen, and also from Amputations,
which had withstood all other Remedies: It procures a good and moderate
Suppuration, eases the Pain of Wounds in the Nerves, allays and resolves
powerfully, fills up with Flesh in a small time, in fine, an Embrocation
therewith, cures speedily Bruises of all sorts.

Although I have these Remedies in great Esteem, and am confirmed in my Opinion
of their Excellency by a multitude of Experiences that I have had; Yet I don't
pretend to lay aside the Ointments, Cerats, and Plasters of Pharmacy; which
may be of very great use, and are every Day employed with Success, by very
skillful Persons in curing Wounds.

This only I will affirm, by the way; that the most Part of Ointments have a
strong smell, that is not only disagreeable to the Wounded; but is also no less
hurtful to the Wounds, than offensive to the Smell; and very much conduces to
render them putrid, sanious and Virulent.

There are also several Places, where they very unadvisedly use Corrosive
Sublimat, Arsenick, and other things of a like Nature, in the Cure of Wounds,
not foreseeing their fatal Effects. Nevertheless we cannot here be too cautious:
All the Parts of our Body, are made up of Veins, Arteries, Nerves, Lymphatick
Vessels and Glands, that are easily affected by whatever touches them, and that
by means of the Circulation convey to the large Vessels, and the Original of
the Nerves, the good or ill Qualities that have been imparted to 'em. The
Contagion, that is communicated to the Sheets of a Bed, wherein one that has
the Pox or itch has lain for a Night only, will imprint its Characters on a
sound Person, that after lies in 'em; though the impure Matter touch only the
Scarf-skin, and is to Appearance much less active than Arsenic or Sublimat.

The unfaithfulness used, in making up certain Compositions, which I have
experienced on some Occasions, has obliged me, to resolve to make up my self,
some that are more simple, and much more Effectual.

Etmullerus in his Medicinal Surgery, and many others before him, have
complained of the prodigious number of Medicines used in Practice; and of the
great many Plasters, Ointments, Cerats, and a thousand other useless things,
good for nothing, but to perplex the Mind of young Surgeons. That great
Magazine of Pharmacy, might be reduced to much narrower Bounds. Experience has
convinced me of the truth of this; and there are at this time many Persons,
very expert in Chirurgical Practice, that are herein of my Opinion; some of
whom think, that one Remedy only may answer all: It were well if such a Method
might be established, for the good of the Wounded, and the Convenience of
Surgery.

But I am inclined to think, that no Man has yet gained that Point; which is
extremely hard to be attained, because of the Diversity of the Parts of which
we are composed, and the Variety of Constitutions in different Persons. It Is
this Considetation, that hinders me to give Credit, to that universal Remedy
which a certain Modern, otherwise a very able Surgeon, and at some distance
from these Parts, has endeavored to establish. But if I am not altogether of
this last Opinion, I am yet much further from that of the Ancients, who have
left us such a Numerous List of Remedies, as cannot be either committed to the
Memory, or retained therein. A great deal of Study, and diligent Application is
necessarily required, in order to know their Virtues and Properties: For to
make the right use of a Medicine, we must know its Nature and Effects, not
abandoning the Success to uncertain Chance, and the Fidelity of another, as is
often done.

Moreover, it is very hard to believe, that all these mighty Compositions, are
answerable in their Effects, to the Expectations had of 'em: the numerous and
differing Ingredients do oppose, alter, and destroy one another. The most
Simple Things are most agreeable, and sympathize most with our Nature.

I could never yet learn, that Solomon, who had an Universal Knowledge of all
things, left behind him for the Cure of Wounds, Compositions so perplexing, and
stuffed with such a number of Ingredients, as these, which some use at this
Day: In his time, two or three Simples, sufficed to make a Balsam, which was
nothing inferior to many others, that are now cried up as Infallible Remedies.

Balsams are recommended, in the curing of Wounds, by the most Part of the
Ancients, and almost all the Moderns, contrary to the Opinion of some that
Practice Surgery, Enemies to Antiquity; who therein act, as the Quacks do,
contrary to all manner of Reason: But an undiscreet Passion, ought never to
prevail over that, which is justified and supported by Experience.

Though I don't approve of Medicines, made up of numerous Ingredients, yet I have
often used the Styptick Plaster of Crollius; which, though it may be accounted
of this number, ought not at all to be laid aside: For when it is faithfully
made up, it has Virtues too effectual to be neglected, and not sought after.
When I have a Mind to give it a softer Consistence, and reduce it to the form
of an Ointment, that I may make use of it in dressing of Wounds, I melt it with
the Balsam which I have described; and sometimes with the Oil of St. John's
Wort, prepared with Gum-Elemy.

It will answer all the Expectations, may be had of it, in curing Wounds and
Ulcers: It allays Pain, cleanses, and breeds Flesh: those who will give
themselves the trouble to exaamine its Composition, and Ingredients, will agree
with me, that it is not impossible, but it may have all these Virtues.

I have sometimes used, and also in this Hospital, a Red Balsam made with an
Ounce of Red Saunders, and White Wax; two Ounces of Venice Turpentine, Oil of
Roses, and Rose Water, and a Dram of Sal ammoniac; all mixed together, and
hastily boiled, and kept for use: It resists Putrefaction, and lessens
Suppuration.

The Simple digestive, is a Remedy that I commonly use, to bring away the Escar
in Gunshot Wounds; mixing always therewith a little of the Yolk of an Egg, and
some Spirit of Wine: I renew it every Day, because it soon corrupts, by Reason
of the Yolk of the Egg.

Turpentine is a simple Balsam, which is excellent for curing of Wounds: The
Country People about Brianson, who gather a great quantity thereof from the
Wood of the Larch-Tree, use nothing else, but this Single Remedy, without any
mixture, for the Cure of their Wounds: Certain it is, that they who are
accustomed to mix with it, a great number of Ingredients, and Catagmatick
Powders, spoil its Virtue, and can expect nothing from it, but bad Succes.

Arceus his Balsam used in so many Places, is not to be despised when rightly
composed: But it is convenient to remark, that it agrees not to all Distempers,
nor all Parts of the Body, as was observed in the first Remark of this third
Part: Which I have also experienced since, in many other Occasions.

Basilicon, is one of the most common Ointments, and most used: I sometimes
employ it to receive the Pouders, that I think necessary, either to Irritate,
or procure Suppuration when I judge it convenient: Otherwise I don't much deal
with it.

It sometimes falls out, by the use of Sarcotick Balsams, that the Flesh grows
so fast, as to oblige us to consume it; and also the Orifices of the Lymphatick
Vessels, oftentimes raise up certain Protuberances, that together with the
superfluous Flesh, forms as it were a resemblance of Mushrooms, which some
endeavor to remove with Cathereticks, but to no purpose.

I have observed, that to touch the Excrescence all over, with a Dissolution of
the Caustic Stone, is much better, than any other means, that can be used, for
this Intention; providing the Application be renewed, so often as is needful. I
have in eight or ten Days, consumed Mushrooms as big as my Fist; which the
ordinary Powders could not have done in two Months. It may be seen, in several
Places of the second Part of this Book, that I have used it, with a quick and
happy Success, when there was Occasion to take off the Callosity, happening to
Wounds, in order to procure a Reunion: and when these kind of Protuberances,
have but a dull Sense, I don't scruple to sprinkle upon them, the foresaid
Caustic pulverized, or to apply Pledgets dipped in a Dissolution thereof, till I
have procured such Smoothness, as is requisite in order to a laudable Cicatrix,
and have restored the Feeling of the Part.

When I only intended to bring to an Equality, the luxuriant Flesh; and procure
a firm and handsome Scar, I have used with good Success Vnguentum Apostolorum,
mixed with a little Vnguentum Egyptiacum: This destroys proud Flesh, and is an
excellent Medicine for Ulcers, to be applied before the use of powerful
Sarcoticks: For it quickens the Flesh, consumes superfluous Moisture, and
resists Putrefaction.

I have always mightily approved, the use of the Spirit of Wine, and have often
caused dress Wounds of the Extremities, with this Remedy only: It Is true it
delays Suppuration, and protracts, the coming away of the Slough in Gunshot
Wounds; but it powerfully resists Putrefaction, corroborates and quickens,
hinders Excessive Suppuration, and the Dissolution of the Nerves, to which
putrefying Medicines are very hurtful.

The Emplastrum Tripharmacum Juberti, made of Litharge, Oil, and Vinegar, to
which I add a little scraped Lint, is admirably good to digest a Wound, and
bring it to Suppuration, without occasioning great Putrefaction: It mightily
dissolves Contusions, and its use is of great benefit.

It is certainly very convenient, that a Surgeon have some peculiar Remedy, the
Virtues whereof he is well acquainted with, to which he may have recourse in
obstinate and troublesome Accidents, that sometimes follow upon Wounds, and will
not yield to the Common Remedies. It is often also expedient to change the
Medicines, as I have formerly said, and not always to be confined to one thing:
For the Fondness one may have for a Balsam, or an Ointment, that, possibly, may
have done very good Service on many Occasions, ought not to prevail so, as to
make us employ it in all Times and Places: The best and most Approved Remedies,
have not always the same Effects, or the same Success: For certain it is that
not meeting with the same Constitution in all Persons, it is impossible they can
have the same Operations.

REFLECTION.
I have often observed, and it daily falls out* that Quacks, who have neither
Skill nor Experience, have succeeded in the Curing several Distempers, after
they were given over by Professed Surgeons, who had bestowed much time, and
used many Romedies to no purpose: But I don't at all think it strange; for
Those, leave Nature to her Self, in such Occasions; and it is she only that
works these Miracles, that are unjustly attributed to them, and give such
Repute to their Remedies.

Not, but that acting without any Rule, they commit very gross Blunders; being
unable, with all their Balsams, to correct, overcome, yea or foresee the
Accidents, that often follow upon Wounds: For all their Skill, extends no
further, than to the making up of their Remedies; and that which cannot be cured
by these, passes with them for incurable. It is not so with regular Surgeons;
they know the Causes of Accidents, and apply thereto the necessary Remedies,
without abandoning the wretched Patient to his ill Fate.

It is indeed a notable Shame, that a wounded Person should go from under their
Hands, to be cured by a Quack, a Clown, or a simple Woman. I have known, in
several Places such, who by the Sale of their Remedies, have acquired great
Reputation; whether by the Confidence, that wounded People had, of the Virtue
of their Balsams; or for a Reason that appeared very convincing; to wit, that
though they neither used Tents nor Dilaters, yea in very express terms discharged
them, yet they often succeeded in their Cures, to the Disgrace of Surgery.
However, it must needs be, that the Inventers of these Balsams, did discover
some Inconveniences in the use of Tents, seeing they have altogether forbidden
to employ 'em: Now, I suppose it will easily be believed, that these Men or
Women, who are employed in selling them, are not the first Authors; and that
these who first used 'em, were not altogether destitute of Knowledge.

Diapalma, is one of the Plasters, most commonly used in Hospitals of the
Army: When it is rightly made up, and dissolved, as was said before, it is not
to be despised: And I add to it, when the Case requires, a little of Emplastrum
de Betonica.

Emplastrum divinum, Manus Dei, Gratia Dei, etc. are Plasters of a singular
Virtue; but very seldom to be found made up, with all the requsiite Fidelity.

I have nothing in particular to say, concerning Cataplasms, according to the
ordinary Method: It belongs to the prudent Surgeon, to give them what Form and
Qualities, he thinks fittest for the present Occasion.

I have often faund much more Advantage, from the Use of Emplastrum
Tripharmacum spoken of before, and Diapalma dissolved, which don't so much clog
the Parts, to which they are appply'd, nor at all hinder Transpiration. Anodine
Cataplasms, such as that of the Crum of Bread, and others of that Nature, are
very useful in great Inflammations of Wounds, after the necessary Diversions
have been performed; they allay the Heat of the Blood, extinguish the Acrimony
of Salts, and relax the Skin. Vnguentum Santalinum may also be used to good
Purpose: And when the Pain is partly removed, I use Dissolving Medicines, which
at first would have increased the Inflammation and Fermentation.

Before I put an end to this Discourse, I will remark, that it is very
requisite for a Surgeon of a Field-Hospital, or of an Army, who may sometimes
be shut up in a besieged Place, ill furnished with Medicines for the use of the
Wounded, to understand, how to make up simple, and easy Remedies, with few
Things, such as those before mentioned for Wounds, and these of which I shall
afterward speak for Ulcers; which in time of need may serve for all: Brandy,
which is the ordinary Refuge, in want of other Remedies, may also be lacking.
It is the part of a prudent Surgeon wisely to provide for this necessity, and
to accommodate himself to the time, by dressing the wounded Seldom, and
according to our Method: Thus fewer Medicines shall be used, a little shall go
a great Way, and every one shall have Reason to be satisfied.

A great number of Abscesses, Wounds, Ulcers and Fractures of all sorts, that
have been under our Hands, in this Hospital, have been cured according to this
Method; wherein there is nothing but what is Gentle and Easy. All the
Amputations that we have performed, were dressed only once in two or three Days,
during the whole time of the Cure, with our simple Remedies; and that with very
good Success. Those who have been so happy, as to avoid the malignant
Influence, of the Contagious Steams, that have so long prevailed in the Air,
have experienced the Comfortableness of this Method, by the suddenness of their
Cure, completed without any Exfoliation of the Extremities of the Bones: Which
infallibly had followed on Frequent Dressings.

I commonly use a Button of Vitriol, to cauterize the Vessels, and stop the
Bleeding, which I ever found successful; neither did the Flux of Blood ever
return. The two Stitches with a Needle, made cross-wise upon the Vein or
Artery, are very sure; this is a common Way, which I have sometimes, and yet do
follow: But the Falling of that Suture, is sometimes so tedious, that it
exhausts the Patience, both of the wounded Person, and the Surgeon;
notwithstanding its use is very safe: For the Bleeding is less to be feared
this Way, which is quick and gentle, than any other. The actual Cautery is now
out of use, unless it be in Amputations performed on the Dead.

Though in the Cures of the Penetrating Wounds of the Thorax, spoken of in my
second Part, I was not obliged to perform the Operation of the Empyema; yet I
have had Occasion to use it, on many other wounded Persons, since I embraced
this Method: For take what Way, or what Care you will, it is oftentimes
absolutely necessary. When the Cavity of the Breast is full of Blood, and the
Orifice of the Wound high, it is not then safe, to attempt to empty it, by the
way of Urine, which might be too slow, and is too uncertain; but we must
without delay fall about the Operation.

I will not here, describe the Manner of performing this, or other Operations.
M. Verduc, and M. Chariere, have lately afforded sufficient Means of
Instruction in this Affair. This I will only say on the Subject in hand, that
this Operation, ought always to be performed on that Side, where the Effusion
of the Blood is; and if it is found to have been on both Sides, and one Opening
does not give the Ease that is expected, though the extravasated Blood is
discharged; we must make an Opening also on the other Side, after the first is
carefully closed up, and the Patient has had some time allowed, to recover his
Strength. Sometimes I am obliged to use Tents for the first Day, left the
Division of the Pleura, that was but newly made, should unite again; and so
there would be a necessity of a new Operation the next Day, to let out that
Blood, which being coagulated, could not at first be brought away, and can
hardly be evacuated by any other Means. As for these Openings made in the Body
by Bullets, in Gunshot Wounds, there is no need of Tents to keep them open, for
they cannot be closed up, till the Escar is separated.

I have already said, that in Openings which I make to evacuate the Collections
of Matter, or Abscesses in the Thorax, ocasion'd by a Pleuresy or
Peripneumonia, I use Tents without a Point in the first Days, to keep the
Matter from coming out all at once: Otherwise the Place that was possessed by the
Matter, would soon be filled with Air; which, being ever colder than the inward
Parts of the Body, might occasion Coagulations, Suffocations, and Swoonings.
Moreover, when a great deal of Blood is extravasated, it must also be let out
by Degrees. Now in such Occasions Tents are necessary: But these being once
over, I lay them aside for good and all; that a free Passage may be given to
the Matter, that the Generation of a Callosity, about the Sides of the Opening,
may be prevented, and that nothing may be left to hinder the Reunion.

By this Method, the wretched Patient is delivered from a great deal of
Trouble, Pain and Vexation; being enabled thereby to enjoy a Repose, which
otherwise he could never have expected: And by seeing him thus from Pain, what
inumerable Accidents are avoided?

Had not Charity and Patience prevailed in this Place, and restrained us from
cutting off, without further delay, Members, that were only gangrened by an
Extremity of Cold, as other Surgeons of Hospitals have done; this of Brianson,
would have been full of Invalids. For about the End of the Campain, in the
Years 1692, and 1693. a great number of sick Persons were brought thither from
Pignerol and O^lx, who in passing the Mountain Genevre, were in such manner
seized and penetrated with the Cold, in the Extremities of the Body, that a
total Loss of Sense, and also a Gangrene did ensue; the most part of whom,
notwithstanding, were cured without Amputation; those only excepted, that had
been before, worn out with long Sickness.

CHAP. VIII. Of Gunshot Wounds.
Seeing Wounds are the Principal Subject of this little Treatise, it was not
fitting that those inflicted by Firearms should here be forgotten. Wherefore,
I shall say something of them in this Chapter.

Gunshot Wounds are acknowledged by all to be very troublesome, because of the
Tearing and of the Disordering the Flesh, occasioned by the Bullet, the Stop
put to the Circulation so far as they reach, the Havoc that attends them, and
the Obstructions they occasion; all which are but too too able to produce very
grievous Accidents. Fluxions, Mortifications, and Gangrenes are here very much
to be feared; to prevent which, I at first give Breathing to the Wound with
pretty large and deep Incisions, according as the Nature of the Part, and
bigness of the Wound do require. I do my utmost to draw out the Extraneous
Bodies, if there are any, putting the Wounded Person in the same Posture
wherein he received the Wound: Afterward I dress it according to my Method,
and seasonably perform the requisite Diversions. A Flux of Blood, is almost
never to be feared till the Escar be fallen, unless some great Vessel be
wounded.

Nevertheless, I can truly affirm, that there never happened any Flux of Blood
in Gunshot Wounds, since I laid aside the use of Tents: for according as the
Escar is dissolved and comes away, a new Flesh is bred without any hindrance,
and covers the Wounded Ves^els, which cannot be when it is pressed by Tents. This
is a Truth so evident, that I hope no Man will call it in Question.

Diet ought always to be rightly ordered: and if notwithstanding all our Care
and Precaution, dangerous Symptoms do follow, we must endeavor to ease and
relieve the Part, by making many Scarifications thereon, in order to give a
Vent to the extravasated Blood, and to hinder its Stay and Fermentation. But
seeing the most part of the Accidents that happen, are more or less troublesome,
according to the different Bigness of the Contusion; I do what I can to
dissolve it, as soon as possible, and to restore the Humors to their usual
Motion: For according to the Definition we have laid down in our first Part, A
Contusion is a Disorder of the Fibers and little Vessels, that changes the
Regularity and Situation of the Pores: but this is often accompanied with an
Effusion, or Extravasating of Blood, which pressing upon the Vessels, hinders
the Course and Motion of the Humors and Spirits. The Accidents that follow, in
this last Case, are much more troublesome; wherefore, without expecting the
Effects of dissolving Medicines, I forthwith have recourse to Scarification;
for Mortifications often times surprise of a sudden: however, seeing things
come not always to this Pass, I sometimes use Dissolving Medicines.

We have known, a very warm Embrocation with Oil of Roses, to which was added a
little of that of Turpentine and some Spirit of Wine, produce exceeding good
Effects: it begins the Dissolution, relaxes the Skin, and disposes the Part, to
receive afterward the Impression of the Plasters; such as the Tripharmacum
Juberti, Diapalma dissolved as we have ordered, fresh Cow Dung fried, with
Volatile Salts, as also that of other Animals: the Roots of Briony infused in
Spirit of Wine are in this Case very proper.

Dissolving* Cataplasms are sometimes very seasonable, providing they be not
too emplastick: and if in spite of all our Care a Gangrene should follow, we
must use these Remedies which were described under that Head. But this Accident
never yet fell out in any of these Wounds, whereof we had the first Dressing;
and I can aver, that though simple Gunshot Wounds, are dressed in this Hospital as
Excoriations only, yet are they always cured with a surprising Quickness:
Nevertheless we perform all the necessary Diversions. The Remedies we used may
be seen in the Relation of the Cures.

CHAP. IX. Of Burns.
THE Accidents occasioned by Gunpowder, might afford us Subject of much
Discourse upon Burn; But I design only to speak a Word or two thereof, that I
may thence have Occasion, to point forth the Remedies I use in their Cure.

The Tallow of which they make Candles, melted with the Oil of Walnuts to the
Consistence of an Ointment; will answer to all the Intentions proposed in this
Matter. I have not found any thing either so effectual, or so easy: it will
terminate the Empyeme, and cures generally all sorts of Burns whatever, in very
short time: In fine, this is the Remedy which we ordinarily use. Benjamin,
Vnguentum Populeum, and the Yolks of Eggs, may be used when this cannot be had.
There are but very few Surgeons, who have not always some particular Remedy for
Burnings, some more some less effectual. Etmullerus, and other Authors, have
given a great number of very good ones: and M. Verduc in his Pathology,
explains their Nature and their Differences, in a very clear and unintelligible
way.

A little time after the Declaration of War, an Accident happened in the
Valleys of Luserne, which afforded us many frightful Spectacles. The
Guard-house of the Fort of Tour, called St. Mary's, fell down upon about thirty
Soldiers, as they were warming themselves about a great Fire; of whom twenty,
or thereabouts, were buried with the Ruins, in the Chimney by the Fire. A good
deal of Time was spent before they could clear away the Stones and the Rubbish,
and get out these poor wretched Creatures. Some were found dead, and roasted;
others were brought into the Hospital of Luserne. A Plaster as big as a
Bed-sheet, was scarcely sufficient to dress them. Two or three died; and five
or six were cured by the assistance of Cordials, Diaphoreticks, and absorbing
Medicines, taken inwardly to facilitate the opening of Obstructions; while
outwardly, the most proper Ointments, were used to allay the Pain, and
dissipate the corrupt Matter, to which I caused add a little Camphire and some
Yolks of Eggs mixed together: To conclude, after very frightful Suppurations,
the Cure was completed; but they were for the most part, like so many
Serpents, all obliged to change their Skin.

CHAP. X. Of Ulcers.
ETmullerus is of Opinion, that the Cause of Ulcers, proceeds from an Acid,
whereby the immediate Nourishment, distributed to the Part, is corrupted, and
losing its Oily and Balsamic Nature, becomes sour, and altogether unfriendly
to the Part, that it ought to nourish, and so considerably increases the acid
Ferment, and augments its Activity.

According to this Definition, a Topical Remedy well accommodated to the Kind
of the Disease, and that destroys Acids, and repairs the Balsamic Nature of
the Nutricious Juice, if sufficient to bring this sort of Distemper to a
perfect Cure. I have often in this manner cured, many poor afflicted Creatures,
without the use of General Remedies. But not to make any change in the manner
of Dressing, I say in the first Place, that Ulcers are but too common in the
Hospitals of the Army: Tbe ill Diet of the Soldiers, their Irregularities,
their Fatigues, and their unavoidable Nastiness, are more than enough to
occasion such as are very obstinate, and difficult to be cured. Secondly, we
have in this Hospital followed a Method, whereby in a little time, a great
number of Ulcers were cured: For after General Remedies, and some slight
Diversions, I used a Decoction of Walnut Leaves with a little Sugar; in this I
dipped Pledgets, which I applied moderately hot, letting often three Days pass
over without taking off that Dressing.

Many Persons in France, I know, have kept this Composition as a great Secret;
but I thought it would have been inconsistent with Charity, not to publish its
Virtues, and the manner of making it.

I have experienced on a thousand Occasions, that it mightily cleanses, and
breeds Flesh; mortifies and devours it Acidities, resists Putrefaction; removes
plentiful Suppurations, and consumes the Moisture that hinders Reunion: In
fine, it has Virtues that surpass Belief, and its Effect is more quick than
that of all the Ointments, and Cerats with which Apothecaries Shops are stored,
and which are commonly used in curing of Ulcers, but often to no purpose. In
the mean time I dare affirm, and that truly, that in the Places where I have
used it, all these Ulcers, that were formerly thought Incurable, were thereby
ended in a very short time.

Though I do but very seldom make any use of Injections, nevertheless, I have
been sometimes obliged, to have recourse to this Remedy, from which I have
reaped more advantage, then from all those used in Practice; and especially in
hollow and deep Ulcers: As also in large Abscesses of fleshy Parts, where there
is great Putrefaction, and sometimes a considerable Cavity.

The Scriptural Balsam, spoken of before, which is only an equal Quantity of
Oil and Wine, boiled to the consumption of the latter, is also an excellent
Medicine for Ulcers: With this Remedy only, I have cured great numbers.

Many Authors there are, who have left us an Account of a vast number of
Remedies, which are used in Hospitals; for which Reason, I will say nothing of
them here, where my Design is only to make known those I use in my own Practice.

By what I have said of the seldom dressing of Wounds, it may be easily
guessed, that I am not for frequent Dressing of Ulcers: For if they proceed
from an Acid, as Etmullerus thinks we ought to endeavor not to promote the
Coagulation, by admitting the Acid of the Air, which by insinuating its pointed
Articles into Ulcers, corroborates the Cause, renders them putrid, sanious, and
sometimes incurable.

It Is not without ground, that Galen, as has been declared already in the
first Part, in his Fourth Book, of the Composition of Medicines, Chap. 4. has
ordered, to dress Ulcers, but once in three Days: And I believe that it would
yet be better, to do it more seldom; unless some urgent Cause require it; such
as the Season of the Year, the badness of the Humors, or some other evil
Disposition of Body.

We may observe, that Suppurative Medicines, used in dressing Ulcers, are
extremely pernicious: For the Matter is but too plentiful, and requires to be
lessened, and dried up, if we desire a perfect Cure. The Application of Topical
Remedies, when well chosen, oftentimes performs in this Case, what neither
Diversions, nor Internal Medicines could do; and of such there are good store:
But it depends only on the Prudence, and Skill of him that prescribes 'em, to
use them seasonably; for we can expect no desirable Effects, either from one
kind or another, but according as they are properly applied.

Vnguentum Apostolorum, mixed with Vnguentum Egyptiacum, is not to be despised:
It consumes all the corrupted, and the Superfluous Flesh. I have often applied
this, before I made use of our Lotion.

The Aqua Phagaedenica, or Limewater mixed with Salt of Lead, or Sal Ammoniac
and Aqua Coelestis, have also served us on such Occasions; for if one Remedy
fails, as often falls out, we must have Recourse to another.

CHAP. XI. Of Simple Fractures.
IN the Cure of Simple Fractures, commonly four things are proposed to be done.
First, to set the Bone, or bring it to its natural Figure. Secondly, to keep it
so, with fit Dressings. Thirdly, to take care of the neighboring Parts. And
fourthly, to give the afflicted Member a convenient Posture.

First then, Extension is almost ever necessary, to reduce the Bone to its
natural State, which is to be more or less vigorous, according to the Quality
of the Fracture, the Nature of the Broken Part, or the Age and Sex of the
Patient: but we must observe not to make Extension, when Inflammation, or other
Accidents appear, till they are either removed, or considerably abated.

As to the second thing, which is the necessary Dressings, I have always
observed the Direction of Hippocrates, in using three Bands as he did, in
simple Fractures: Celsus employed six, but these, in my Opinion, were too many
for the Part: wherefore, I chus'd rather to follow the Practice of Hippocrates,
approved of by Galen, in the Fifth Chapter of his Book of Method.

The most Part of those who practice Surgery, differ in the Use of Topical
Remedies. Some apply all Dry: As for my self, who am not confined, to the Way
of the Ancients, in this Matter, I have found that the Glair and Yolk of an
Egg, beat up together with a little Oil of Roses, will answer all Expectations:
It is Astringent, Anodine, and Dissolving: The rest of the Dressings, I use
dry, unless an Inflammation, or some such thing, oblige me to the contrary: For
as it is my Way to dress my Patient as seldom as possible, I apply the Bandage
dry, that it may be the faster, and less apt to slacken.

Plasters, and Emplastick Medicines employed in Fractures, stop up the Pores
of the Skin, keep in the Vapors, that occasion Itching, and so oblige to take
off the Dressings, oftener than is expedient; wherefore I endeavor, to avoid
whatever may cause that Accident.

Hippocrates, used to take off the Dressings, three Days after Application.
Many stay till the seventh; and for my self I delay it as long as ever I can.
Experience has taught me, that it is most advantageous for the Patient not to
be dressed, till the Callus is entirely formed; unless the Bands are loosened,
or some unexpected Accident has fallen out, such as Itching, and Disordering
of the reduced Bones. I could recount a great number of Soldiers, that have
departed from this Hospital, cured of Simple Fractures of all sorts, according
to my Method; but I shall content my self with the Relation of the following
Cure.

A Soldier called La Tulippe, of the Regiment of Conde, was brought to this
Place, having his right Thigh Bone broken about the middle, and shattered: This
unlucky Accident befell him, as he was sleeping upon Mount Genevre, under a
Tree, which at the same time was cut down, and fell upon his Thigh. So soon as
he was committed to my Care, I reduced the Bone by a vigerous Extension, and
applied a linen Cloth, dipped in an entire Egg, beat up with a little Oil of
Roses, and a small quantity of good Vinegar, upon which I put some Compresses,
then three or four pretty long Rollers, with some Splents of Past-board,
encompassing all with a Piece of the same; and last of all the Juncks, with
what belongs to 'em. Diversions were performed, and a moderat Diet ordered. I
let the Dressings stay on for twenty Days; at the end of which time, I found
the Part in its right and natural Disposition: At this Dressing, I used
Emplastrum pro fracturis, and applied the Bandage as before, with Splints of
Wood, and the other things necessary. In twenty Days after, I took off the
Dressings a second time, and found all things to my Satisfaction: and Twenty
Days more passed before I looked to it again; so that in sixty Days, I dressed
him only three times, not reckoning the first: He began now to rise and to walk
on Crutches; and we continued still the Dressings upon his Thigh, omitting the
Junks. In fine, after he had remained sometime in the Hospital, to recover his
Strength, he returned to his Regiment.

It Is convenient to observe, that in Simple Fractures of the Thigh, we ought
always to use on the hinder part, a Splent of the breadth of two or three
Fingers, to sustain the Bone, which without this Precaution would be in Danger
to bend, in Hospitals of the Army, where the loose Straw on which the Soldiers
lie, is apt to slip from under them, and so to make Holes or Furrows, capable
to disorder the joining of the broken Parts, unless they be supported by some
thing, that is sufficiently stiff.

I have no Credit to give, to the inward Remedies, which some use for breeding
a Callus* such as the Juice of Cowslip, of Agrimony, or its Root, taken in
Drink; and many others to be seen in ancient Authors. Nature is the Architect,
and principal Framer of the Callus, when she is allowed that Repose, which is
necessary to her Acting: however I don't disapprove, the use of incrassating
Nourishment, on such Occasions.

In the third Place, as to the Care of the neghbouring Parts, when the Fracture
is much shattered and very painful, it is exceeding advantageous to apply
Defensives to the Superior Parts, and the Emunctories: the Liniment made of an
Egg beat up with Oil of Roses, and sometimes with a little of that of
Turpentine, and some Vinegar; when the Contusion is great, answers also to this
Intention; together with Embrocations with dissolving Oils. Above all,
Diversions are of great Efficacy, to prevent and remove Accidents.

As for the fourth Thing; it is of great Importance to the fractur'd Member, to
be placed in a convenient Situation, upon which very often depends the good or
ill Success of the Cure. In Hospitals of the Army, all the necessary
Conveniences are not to be found; but the Ingenuity of the Surgeon, ought to
make up that Defect. The greatest Part of the Wounded, are only laid upon
Straw, which has not Stability enough, to keep a Member long in the same
Situation: it is this Consideration that obliges me, after applying the three
Bands, spoken of above, to use Splents in the first Dressing, unless the Pain
engage me to defer 'em; and afterward, I make all sure with a fourth Band: I
add also the Juncks; and the Sole with what belongs to 'em; if the Fracture is
in the Thighs or Legs, if in the Arm, I use the Sling; as also, if in the
Fore-Arm, the Case of Past-board: all being well tied on, secures the Part in
such sort, that there is no hazard of its being disordered. This is the Method
I use in Simple Fractures.

CHAP. XII. Of Compound Fractures.
COmplicated Fractures are very hard to be cured. In the second Part of this
Treatise may be seen, the manner how a good number of such, were brought to a
perfect Cure: But we must not always flatter our selves, with Expectations of
the like good Success; chiefly when part of the Substance of the Bone is lost.
The Youth, and good Constitution of the Patient, are great Helps in such
Occasions. The Method of Dressing Gently, Speedily and Seldom, saves a great
deal of Time, and prevents very many Accidents. Nature, when at Liberty, and
acting without Restraint, does things very surprising, and such as we would
have judged to be impossible.

The Generation of a Callus in a Simple Fracture, is undoubtedly more speedy,
than in a complicated one: In the first the Heat is kept in, and united, and
acts with more Strength and Quickness. The Bone being covered by the Teguments,
is sheltered from the injuries of the Air: For according to Fabricius ab
Aquapendente, Part. 1. Bo. 4. Chap. 9. the external Air alters the Bones, and
destroys their Natural Temperament: More over Nature is not diverted, nor
disturbed in her Action by Dissipations or Suppurations. All consists in the
Reducing of the Fracture, or rightly Setting the Bone; as we have taught in the
former Chapter.

From these Reasons a Consequence may be drawn, to justify my Method in respect
of Complicated Fractures: For by Suppressing frequent Dressing, and giving all
Diligence, to hinder the Access of the Air to such Wounds, I prevent all the
Accidents it might occasion; as great Suppurations, Alterations, Rottenness,
Fluxions, Pains, and generally whatever prolongs the Cure, and often makes the
Wounds incurable.

In Complicated Fractures, when there is great Suppuration, the Matter must
undoubtedly be mixed, with the Nutricious Juice of the Bones, which from the
first Moment of the Fracture begins to cover the Ends of the Bone, and form a
Callus. Tents and Dilaters, with which commonly these sorts of Wounds are
filled, by their Touch, hinder this Work, which ought not to by interrupted.
Long and frequent Dressings, give time for the Air to penetrate into the
Wounds, whereby the Nourishment of the Bone, loses what was spirituous in it,
coagulates, breeds obstructions, or is turned into Matter. Moreover this
Method, not only occasions always Irritations and Pains, but also deprives the
Sick of that Rest, which is absolutely necessary to 'em.

Fabricius ab Aquapendente, in the eighth Chapter of the same Book, treating of
Complicated Fractures, where the Bone is not uncovered, Orders the Lips of the
Wound to be joined together, and that it be dressed but once in three Days. And
in the tenth Chapter of the same Book, speaking of Complicated Fractures where
the Bone is laid bare, directs to Join the Lips of the Wound by Stitching or
otherwise; and afterward to go on with the Cure, as in a Simple Wound.

I am not therefore the only Person, that has dressed complicated Fractures after
this Manner. It may be observed also, that Rhasis, and Serapion used this
Method, in the Cure of Wounds of the Head with a Fracture of the Scull; for
they say, that Wounds of the Head must be stitched up, even where the Scull is
broken quite through.

If this may be done on such Occasions, much more in complicated Fractures of
other parts of the Body: now the Stitching used by these Authors in Fractures
of the Scull, was for no other End, but to exclude the Air, which might have
proved hurtful to the Brain, the Membranes, and the Scull.

Galen, and Avicen advise Stitching in such a Case; but Hippocrates forbids it,
in his Book of Wounds of the Head. For my self I very rarely use it, in any
part of the Body, though I don't disapprove it: But in Gunshot Wounds, it cannot
be practiced, for many Reasons known to every Body.

Fractures with a Wound, are in general very troublesome: But these caused by
Firearms more than others; and they are also more or less hard to cure,
according to the Part wherein they are: For the Complicated Fractures of the
Thigh, which we have had under our Care in this Hospital, were not so soon
cured as those of the Leg; nor these, as the Fractures of the Arm, and so of
others; though in all, the same Method was always followed.

As to the difficulty of curing those of the Thighs, it is often occasioned, by
the Inconveniences to be met with, in the Hospitals of the Army: For there is
difficulty in giving Clysters there, where we cannot afford the Accommodations
necessary for voiding the Excrements: because wanting, ordinarily, Servants,
handy and charitable enough to assist the Patients in such Occasions, they ly
in their Nastiness, and are indiscreetly and violently moved; by which means
the Cures become tedious and difficult. For we may be sure, that Nature acts
with no less Diligence and Wisdom upon these, than upon other Parts.

I make no question, but many Persons will condemn this Way of dressing
complicated Fractures, which possibly will appear to be very new; For I own I
never hitherto saw it used by any. But we ought not to be too forward to
affirm, that what we have not seen, is not. There are, without doubt, many
Secrets, both in Nature and in Arts, which would be of notable advantage, were
they known to us.

Those, who will give themselves the Trouble, exactly to follow this Method,
may extricate themselves from the Errors, with which their Minds were
prepossessed against it.

CHAP. XIII. Of Dislocations.
IT IS in the Cure of Dislocations, that Art has the Advantage over Nature;
because that alone accomplishes the Cure, without the Assistance of this: the
Operation of the Hand, Machines and Bands, are the Means, that Surgery imploys
to reduce them.

Though this Subject, would afford an ample Field to Theory; yet I shall remit
the young Surgeons to such Authors, as have designedly treated thereon. I will
only say, that it is necessary to be thoroughly instructed, in the Knowledge of
the Bones, and Bandages; and that, if possible, we must not lose one Minute of
time, to restore the Parts that are dislocated, before the Accidents supervene,
that oftentimes hinders the Operation. For the Head of the Bone, that is out of
its Place, commonly presses on nervous and sensible Parts, and sometimes
squeeses together the Vessels, that carry the Blood for the Nourishment of the
Parts, which occasions a kind of Palsy and Atrophy, and sometimes a Fluxion:
Moreover the Cavity of the receiving Bone, may be filled with the Synovia, or
Humor that moistens the Joints; which, if it be coagulated there by some Acid,
will hinder the Head of the Bone to go into that Place, from whence it came
out; in which case we may reckon the Restoring of the Bone to be impossible.
Wherefore, we ought at first to employ all our Care, to procure its Reduction.

The Instruments necessary to reduce Old Luxations, or such new ones as require
great Force, are not all to be found always in Hospitals of the Army; but the
Hand of Servants, and the Ingenuity of the Operator, ought to make up that want
as much as possible.

Guy de Chauli^e, Fabricius ab Aquapendente, Pareus, and many others, have
sufficiently explained the manner of Reducing Dislocations. A young Surgeon
ought to omit nothing, that may conduce to his Accomplishment herein: For it is
by these simple Operations, that the Vulgar knows to discern the Skilful from
the Ignorant; because these sorts of Performances are altogether Chirurgical,
and require only the Dexterity of the Artist to accomplish 'em.

I have found by Experience, that an Egg, beaten up with Oil of Turpentine and
a little Vinegar, is very profitable to the luxated Parts, to which it is
applied; yea that it is a Remedy sufficient to answer all Intentions: Aromatic
Wine may be used, when this cannot be had. If your design is only to strengthen,
the Plaster Pro Fracturis will do the Business.

Bleeding, Clysters, and a convenient Course of Diet, ought not to be
neglected, in great Luxations attended with Contusion: These sorts of Remedies
oftentimes prevent being surpised with Accidents, and remove them when present.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Relaxation of the Joints.
SOldiers, who commonly ly on the Ground during the Campain, in very severe
Seasons, are liable to have their Bodies stuffed with superfluous Humors,
wherewith all the Parts in general are soaked: but in a special manner they
very often fall upon the Joints, where softning, and relaxing the Ligaments
that kept them fast, they do thereby occasion Luxations of the Parts.

This kind of Distemper, is very hard to be cured, and will scarcely yield to
Remedies: we have had of them under our Hands in this Hospital, which have
occasioned us a great deal of Trouble, and but little Credit. Hippocrates in
such Cases advises the use of the actual Cautery, and Galen after him is also
for the same Operation, in order to drain and consume the slimy and watery
Humors, to strengthen the Skin, and to fasten and fortify the Joint.

Hippocrates, for this purpose uses a Rope of raw Flax, which being set on
fire, yields a Coal, like that of the Match used in Armies; and Aetius,
according to Archigens, did it with the Root of Fullers-Weed and of Birthwort,
probably to render the Operation more gentle: it is performed upon the Place,
where the Head of the Bone bunches out.

This Remedy is rude; and we have never used it in this Hospital, because it
frightens the Patient. Nevertheless these Distempers, are sometimes so painful,
and withal so obstinate, that those who are under 'em, willingly submit to the
most cruel Operations, that they may be released therefrom.

Fabricius ab Aquapendente relates, that after he had in such a Case, to no
purpose, used very many things; the Patient was cured with a Plaster of a
certain Herb, which he believed was Hearts-Ease, that was applied to him by a
Quack.

As for my self, though I don't disapprove the Way used by the Ancients in this
Case, yet I am of Opinion that it ought not to take Place, till more gentle
Methods are first tried: And this is the course we use to take, at first trying
whatevet may heat, cut, dry, and strengthen: The Oil of Lavender, the Fat of
the Mountain-Rat, and Spirit of Wine, or the Queen of Hungaries Water, made up
in form of a Liniment, and applied very warm, give great Assistance in such
Cases; to which may be added a little of the Oil of Turpentine, which cuts, and
opens the Passages, so making way for Dissolving and Drying Medicines.

But when I find these Remedies ineffectual; I use such things as irritate,
Vesicatories, and caustic Herbs, such as Spurge, Celandine, and the like;
which by the exasperation of the Pain, may cause a Fluxion upon the Part
affected, that so the matter being after digested and ripened by a
Fermentation; all may be happily ended by an Abscess, as sometimes fails out.

When we have brought things to this Pass, we must not fail, without delay to
restore the Bones into their Cavity, and to fortify the Joint, with good
Aromatic Wines quickened with Spirit of Wine; or else with Man's Grease, and a
little of the Queen of Hungaries Water, mixed and applied hot: and generally we
may for this purpose use any thing, that may strenghthen the Member, and wast
the Moisture. In the mean time, the Part must always be supported with a good
Bandage, and surrounded with Compresses and Bolsters, to command the Bone, and
keep it fast in its Place: moreover the Patient must be very careful to keep
himself quiet, and must observe a Drying and Attenuating Course of Diet.

CHAP. XV. The Conclusion of the Third Part; with some very useful Remarks.
MY principal Design in this little Treatise, being to introduce for the Relief
of Wounded Persons, a Gentle, Speedy, and Easy Way of curing their Distempers;
I have endeavored to confirm the same, as much as lay in my Power, by Reasons
and Experienees. I am not ignorant, that this Part of Surgery which concerns
Wounds, does not exhaust its Bounds; and that I have only slightly touched on
other Things, that are of no less Importance.

My Intention, was not to transcribe from other Authors; and therefore I
thought it enough, superficially only to declare my Thoughts, of the other
Parts of Surgery; wherein also I have confined my self, to that which is most
common, and most necessary, and was withal most particulurly known to me; not
being willing to speak of many Things, about which I had nothing new to
advance. I think I have done what I designed, and am ambitious of nothing else,
but that my Intention, which I have sincerely declared, may have all the
Success I could wish it.

The Course I take to prevent the Scaling of Bones, explained in the first Part
of this Book, I learnt from Experience; I hope also it will be found very
useful and necessary, in dressing Wounds where the Bone is uncovered.

I drew also from the same Fountain, the manner of Dressing after the Operation
of the Trepan; and yet I doubt not, but it will have the Fate to be condemned
as new: However, I will not spend Time in anticipating the Objections of
others, by answering them before hand: For whatever might be said in
commendation of the Plate, which was never used by any before me, would only
prove an Inducement to excite the Critics to decry it.

Experience, and Reading have informed me, that the Air is a mighty Hinderance
to the Cure of Wounds: and I have endeavored to find out an easy Way to hinder
its Access, especially in Wounds where the Scull is cut: For it is evident, that
the most part of the Accidents that attend such Wounds, are occasioned only,
through the little Care taken, to keep off the Assaults of the Air, which are
promoted by the Custom of long and frequent Dressings.

I have seen Surgeons spend whole Hours, in dressing Wounds of the Head,
accompanied with a Fracture of the Scull, to loosen, break, or cut off the
Splinters, or some Piece of the Bone; which ought never to be done, unless we
are very well assured, that they prick the Dura Matter.

There are many, who think they have spect well, if at each Dressing, they can
but extract some little Bit of broken Bone, which they carefully preserve, to
show to all that come, thinking thereby to gain Credit; and to raise their
Reputaeiou, by that which ought to be condemned, and often costs the Wounded
Person his Life.

A very famous Officer, not long ago experienced, the fatal Effects of this
cruel Method: for having had his Scull broken by a Bullet, whereby he was in a
manner trepanned, without hurting the Brain, or its Membraues; or occasioning
any dangerous Symptom: some Time was unadvisedly spent twice a Day, in
loosening, and pulling away forcibly little Portions of the Bone, which Nature
would easily have separated, supposing that afterward, which yet was
impossible, they might chance to prick the Dura Matter: by this Method the Dura
Matter, and the Brain were altered, and visibly mortified; so that he died on
the Eleventh Day of his Wound. I was indeed called to give my Advice, after his
Condition was desperate; but all I could do in this Case, was to give him
notice of his approaching Death.

Many Surgeons, in a vain Ostentation, spend all their Life, and exhaust their
Diligence, in unravelling all the Secrets of the new Discoveries in Physic,
and in qualifying themselves to discourse accurately thereon; contemning all
the Opinions of the Ancients: while in the mean time, they remain in an entire
Ignorance of the Practice, notwithstanding all their Science. If these Men were
as desirous to be knowing, as ambitious to appear so, they would take another
Course: And not confining themselves only to Reasonning, and to show their Wit
in Consultations, neglect to improve a good Method.

It is not enough to understand the Nature, and Difference of Wounds, and to
know the cause of Accidents that besall them, nor yet quaintly to explain 'em,
by Reasons purely Speculative and Chymerical: We must join to the Theory, that
is indeed very useful and necessary, a Method of Curing and Rooting out
Distempers, which is to be looked on as the most necessary Part of Surgery: But
it is rare for those, who addict themselves wholly to Reasonning, to have such
regard for Practice, as to acquire it to Perfection, and to abandon their own
Maxims, to follow others that are contrary to 'em. Wherefore, I have addressed
this little Discourse to young Surgeons, who may possible reap some Advantage
from it, not being incapable of the good Impressions, one desires to make upon
'em.

I am not desirous, that the Newness of this Method, should either engage them
to follow it, or oblige 'em to reject it; but only wish that they may put it to
a Trial, in order to make a true Judgment: For every reasonable Man, ought
wisely to inform himself of the Truth of Things, and to examine their
Consequences, before he positively give his Judgment. Nothing is more Easy for
one, than to Pass a Verdict; and nothing more Difficult, than to Judge aright.

I am convinced by Experience, that it is dangerous to credit the Testimony of
others. The wrong Judgment made on a Wound, that one of our most famous
Generals received, October 4. 1693. being the Day of the Fight of Marseils, and
my Easiness to rely on the Fidelity of another, and on the Report made to me,
the Day after the first Dressing thereof, had almost cost him his Life. The
Wound was deep, and made by a large Bullet, and was dressed at first, as if it
had been only a simple one, with a great quantity of Lint, whereof a Part was
lost and fixed in the Depth of the Wound: However it happened very fortunately,
that it was driven out by the Matter; but it left behind it, in the Place where
it was hid, a considerable Mortification, which gave occasion to make great and
deep Incisions, whereby a Fracture was discovered. Prudence hinders me to
declare at more length, the Circumstances that accompanied this Cure, to which
M. Dalibour, Master-Surgeon sworn at Paris, and Surgeon Major of the Horse of
the Household, an able and experienced Man, was called to give his Advice. In a
Word, after many Accidents, all was brought to a happy Conclusion.

It is therefore absolutely necessary, for a Surgeon, who is careful of his
Reputation, to search the Wounds himself, which were not dressed by him at first,
in order to discover their Nature, and know their Extent. This was not the only
Person, who in the Day of that Fight, experienced the Inconveniency of being
dressed at first in a Hurry. I have for good Reasons, not mentioned several
other Cases not much differing from the former, that occurred in the same
Occasion, wherein there were many dressed in that Quarter, that was assigned to
the Body of Reserve, belonging to our Army.

In this Book, and particularly in the second Part thereof, may be seen, after
what manner, I have brought to a perfect Cure, a great number of Wounds, of all
Kinds and Qualities, with much Ease, small Charge, and with simple Remedies,
which are no less useful to the Rich, than convenient for the Poor.

The great Charges ordinarily laid out upon the Cure of Wounds, sometimes
involve the Patient, after that cure is perfected, in Evils no less troublesome
than the former: The Wounds are filled, and closed up, but the Pockets are
opened, and drained. That Person, of whom I spoke in the twenty fifth Chapter
of the Second Part, before he came under my Care, had a Bill of Three hundred
and seventy six Livers, brought him by the Apothecary, for Medicines furnished
by him; when yet after all that Expense, there was no Appearance of a Cure.

The Credit of a Surgeon, does not consist in emptying the Shops, to cure his
Patients: On the contrary, we ought rather Christian like to be saving of the
Money of those, who put their very Person and Life in our Hands: And if they
chance to prove so ungrateful, as to deny us what we have deserved; after such
a good Deed, we may expect our Reward from Heaven. We ought not to be bribed,
by the consideration of a Mean Interest, to abandon the Fidelity, wherewith we
ought to endeavor the Speedy Cure of our Patients. If a Patient is destroyed
by unexpected Accidents, when the Cure is delayed on a mercenary Account; the
Surgeon, under whose Care he was, becomes guilty of his Death.

I have seen many Persons of Note, whom I will not name, who passing through
Brianson, eight or nine Months after the Battle of Marseils, wherein they had
been wounded, were either fistulous, or very far from being completely cured.

Nevertheless, that I may not rashly blame those, who had these Persons under
their Care, I am willing to believe, that the Tenderness of their Constitution,
their ill Temperament, or the unwholsom Air, which very much conduces to
continue the Wounds, occasioned that Tediousness of these Cures; which in other
Persons and Circumstances, had been perfectly finished in two or three Months
at most: but I cannot restrain my self from saying, that the Tents, as well as
the frequent, and painful Way of Dressing so much in Use, are sufficient to
cause all these Accidents, and to hinder the Cure of Wounds: and this is what
makes Surgeons hated, and Surgery chargeable.

In this little Work, I have done what I could to show, not so much by
Reasoning, as Examples and Authority, that Nature has the greatest Hand in
curing Wounds; or to speak more truly, that she is the principal Worker
therein: But I leave it to the performance of more delicate Pens, to celebrate
her Praises, and publish her Excellencies; contenting my self to admire her
Wonders, which are no less unaccountable than they are surprising.

The Year 1686. afforded me an Occasion, wherein it appeared, that Nature ever
acts for the Preservation, of the most noble and the most perfect of her Works.
A Soldier of the Fort of Mirabout, which parts the Valleys of Luserne from
Queras, having robbed his Captain, was pursued; and finding no other Way to
escape, he threw himself down from the top of the Walls upon the Rocks, where
falling on his Feet, they were not only put out of Joint, but each of them were
fractur'd with a Wound: He was taken, and brought to the Fort, where there was
no Surgeon, by reason of the Smallness of the Garrison.

He lay four Months on Straw, without any Relief but Bread and Water; during
which time his Feet were gangrened, and soon afterward entirely mortified.

But, which is extremely surprising, around the lower part of both the Legs, a
little above the Ancle, Nature her self formed a certain Wreath or Roll, which
stopped the Progress of the Mortification, so that what was beyond this, was
abandoned to the Fury of the Sphacelus, while whatever was above these Rolls,
was free from Blemish.

He cut off the Right Foot himself by the Joint, with a little Pocket-knife,
without either Pain or Bleeding; and because the Putrefaction, occasioned an
Intolerable Smell over all the Fort, by Reason of the excessive Heat, he was
sent to our Hospital at Luserne.

By the Way he lost a good part of the Other Foot, which came away of its own
accord; and notwithstanding the contagious Smell, which as a Carrion, he
dispersed in all the Places where he passed, and also the extreme Heat of the
Season, the Mortification did not pass over the Bounds that Nature had given
it; only these Wreaths that we mentioned above, were considerably increased in
Bulk by the Way.

After he had recovered his Strength, by the Assistance of good Cordials, some
Wine, and Victuals, I cut off all that appeared to be entirely mortified, not
sparing the highest Places of the Rolls, which cast an insupportable Smell: I
let him rest till to morrow, and then cut off one Leg, and the other the Day
after: For the Ends of the Tibia and Fibula were altogether rotten and
uncovered. Finally, no other Accident hppen'd during the rest of the Cure,
which was completed not long after.

This wonderful Example, is sufficient to evince, that the want of Art, is
oftentimes supplied by Nature. This may further appear also by what follows,
being a very strange thing that happened at Pignerol. M. De la Place, Captain
in the Regiment of Barrois, was wounded with a Bullet at the Battle of
Marseils, that entered at the middle and hinder Part of the Fore-arm, and came
out at the lower and forepart of the same, breaking the Cubitus in its
passage. He was dressed by M. Malinas, a Surgeon-Major belonging to the Army in
Italy, and Master Surgeon of Lion, very skilful in his Employment.

This Wound was attended with some troublesome Accidents: For together with a
Continual Fever, an Abscess was formed by a Collection of Matter, which was
extended over all the Arm and Fore-Arm: But as they were preparing to make an
Opening, the wounded Person was seized with a great Looseness, which all of a
sudden put an End to that Tumor, and restored the Arm and Fore-Arm to their
natural State. This unexpected Accident, being followed by so surprising an
Effect, obliged his Surgeon to cause take a view of that, which the Patient had
voided, and it was found to be the very Matter of the Abscess, without any
thing else, save some little Excrement, which remained altogethr unmixed
therewith: Moreover, according as new Matter was gathered in the same Places,
it was still voided again by Stool, in a little time after. In fine, the Wounds
being completely cured, the Looseness ceased, because that was removed which
occasioned it.

Perhaps the Matter was taken up by the Veins, and by means of the Circulation
carried to the Mesaraicks, and thence emptied into the Guts: but this I only
propose as an uncertain Conjecture, all other Ways being to me unknown: I
willingly leave it to the Learned, to be explained according to their different
Apprehensions. But that which inclines me to think, that this Way has some
Appearance of Truth, is, that this same Surgeon solemnly protested to me, that
at the beginning of the same Campain, he had under his Care a Captain, who had
a Wound in the Thorax, that pierced into the Substance of the Lungs, and was
accompanied with all the Accidents, common to such kind of Wounds; all which,
nevertheless, were removed by Opening a Vein in the Arm, which was done with an
Intention to let Blood, instead of which nothing came out by the Orifice made
in the Vein, but real Matter, that had been sent thither from the Breast. Many
Persons worthy of Credit, who were Eyewitnesses, assured me of the Truth of
this Prodigy.

Fabricius Hildanus, Chapt. 3. Observe. 39. relates, that an Inveterate Ulcer in
the Leg with a Fistula, having been rashly and unseasonably cured, was followed
by a Pleuresie, in which the Patient voided at the Mouth a Matter, like to that
which used to come from the Ulcer of the Leg.

It were an easy Matter, to adduce an infinite number of Examples almost
alike, wherein Nature appears to have surpassed even her self; either in
Preserving Parts afflicted, or in easing such as are Overcharged with Humors,
or finally, in Uniting such as are Divided.

In the Year 1686. one Lansaveche, Quartermaster of the Dragoons of Verue, in
the War against the Vaudois, was wounded by a large Bullet, in the upper and
side-part of the Hypogastrium, and by all the Accidents it appeared, that the
Colon was opened and torn by the Bullet: there came out at the Wound, for more
than the space of two Months, an excrementitious Matter, during which time he
suffered grievous Pains: At length Nature, without any Assistance, closed up
the Wound of the Gut, though the Bullet was lost; and he left Luserne at the
Breaking up of the Hospital, which was three Months after his Receiving the
Wound.

Hildanus, has a like Observation, of a certain Man, who had one of the great
Guts opened, in the Operation of the Bubonocele, which closed up of its own
Accord. In fine, as we are oftentimes surprised by things, that could not be
hoped, but from either the Bounty, or even the Caprice of Nature; so also very
extraordinary things fall out in Wounds, by an Effect of Chance, as well by
reason of the Posture Men are in when they receive their Wounds, as because of
the Figure of these things with which they are wounded.

In the same Year 1686. One wounded with a Shot, was brought to the Hospital at
Luserne: the Bullet entered, on the lower and middle part of the Os Occipitis,
and grazing upon the Temple-Bone, came out under the Right Ear, carrying away a
Part thereof. Though it plainly enough appeared, that the Bullet had touched the
Scull, yet the Wound was dressed as a simple one, because no Accident appeared;
and it was left to the Care of the Servants: thus three Days past; during which
the Patient was troubled with a Restlesness, complaining only that he could nor
put himself in an easy Posture, which was not much minded: Nevertheless, he
died on the fourth Day of his Wound, with all the Symptoms that usually attend
sleepy Distempers.

The unexpected Death of this Man, obliged me to open his Scull: I found he had
been wounded with a little Wedge of Lead, which hitting against the middle
Ridge, on the lower Part of the Os Occipitis, when at the same time his Head
was bowed down, was cut in two by the sharp Edge of the Bone, and one part
thereof had slipped upon the Temple-Bone, as was said, and the other had entered
the Cavity of the Scull of that same Side, and remained fixed between it and
the Membranes, which were cut and pressed thereby. His Fellow-Soldier in the
same Day and Action, had two Wounds by one Shot; the first a little below the
Yoke-Bone of the left Side, and the other in the middle part of the Right
Hypochondre: Yet he was completely cured in twelve Days, with a Moderate
Suppuration, and no Accidents.

I have seen many Wounds, that were no less strange than these: But in order to
make a right Judgment in such like Cases, the Nature and Figure of the wounded
Part, the Posture of the Person when he received the Wound, together with the
Figure of that which made it, must all be very carefully examined beforehand.
Now the ready apprehending of all these Circumstances, with many others also,
very necessary to be known, in order to successful Practice, cannot be attained
by Surgeons, without great Study, continual Exercise, and unwearied Diligence.

The Ascent, whereby we mount unto the Temple of Esculapius, is no less
difficult and steep, than that by which we rise unto Mount Pernassus: It Is
almost impossible to get up, without making some false Steps. However it is but
reasonble to think, that those who were employed in Hospitals and Armies,
during the late War, by the inumerable different cases which it has afforded,
have discovered things very surprising, and no less useful in Practice; and
have often seen the Strange Ways that Nature takes, to throw off what offends
by healthful Evacuations, and to accomplish her Designs.

Such as impart to the Public their Observations and Experiences, which are
the Fruits of their Diligence, and of their Care, have deserved well of
Mankind. Many Surgeons there are, who have not the Advantage of Occasions, to
accomplish themselves in this sort; and of those that have, few are so
charitable as to publish, what they have seen and remarked that is
Extraordinary.

When a Man, does not communicate his Seize, by Writing, to the Public,
let his Endowments, and his Knowledge be never so great, they are for the most
part, if not altogether, buried with himself in the Ground. The Good that a Man
can do, lasts but for a time; but the Excellent Advices, that he leaves in
writing to Posterity, are useful for ever: We had been still in Ignorance, had
not the Writings of the Ancients, come down to our Hands.

Wherefore, I thought my self bound in Conscience, (though at the Hazard of being
condemned by the Envious) to impart to the World my Experiences, That, if
possible, I might procure, to poor wounded Persons, a more speedy Assistance,
than can possibly be afforded, by the Common Method. If I shall have the
Happiness, to succeed in my Design, I shall think my self sufficiently
recompensed for all my Toil, and will praise the Almighty Father of Lights,
who, by small Means, oftentimes brings Mighty Things to pass.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Thomas Cockerill, at the Three Legs and Bible,
in the Poultrey.
GEography Anotamized; or, the Complete Geographical Grammar: Being a short and
exact Analysis of the whole Body of modern Geography, after a new and curious
Method; comprehending, 1. A gneral View of the Terraqueous Globe. Being a
compendious System of the True Fundamentals of of Geography; digested into
various Definitions, Problems, Theorems, and Paradoxes: With a Transient Survey
of the whole Surface of the earthly Ball, as it consists of Land and Water. 2.
A particular View of the Terraqueous Globe: Being a clear and pleasant Prospect
of all remarkable Countries upon the Face of the whole Earth; showing their
Situation, Extent, Division, Subdivision, Cities, Chief Towns, Name, Air,
Soil, Commodities, Rarities, Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities,
Manners, Language, Government, Arms, Religion. Collected from the best Authors,
and Illustrated with Diverse Maps. The Second Edition; much Improved and
Enlarged. By Par. Gorden. M. A. and Fellow of the Royal Society. 2. An Earnest
Persuasive to Personal Reformation, proposing the True Method of making all Men
happy in this World and in the World to come. Published for the Furtherance and
Advancement of the Reformation. Recommended by his Majesty; and carried on by
the Societies in London and elsewhere. Price Ten Pence, eight Shillings the
Dozen, or twenty five for sixteen Shillings. The School of Manners; or, Rules
for Childrens Behavior. By the Author of the English Exercise. The Works of
the late Learned Divine Stephen Charnock B. D. being several Discourses upon
the Existence and Attributes of God; and upon other various Divine Subjects, in
two Volumes. Historical Collections, Part the Third and Fourth, in four
Volumes, containing the principal Matters which happened in the Years 1640,
1641, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. By John Rushworth of Lincoln's Inn, Esquire A Discourse
of the Nature and Necessity of Faith in Jesus Christ, with an Answer to the
Pleas of our Modern Unitarians, for the suffiency of Love, Morality, or mere
Charity. By Nath. Tailor. The Tales of the Faries. By the Countess of Dunois,
the Author of the Voyage into Spain. The History of the Reign of Lewis XIII.
King of France and Navarre. Containing the most Remarkable Occurrences in
France and Europe during the Minority of that Prince. By Mr. Michel le Vassor.
The Interests of the several Princes and States of Europe considered, with
respect to the Succession of the Crown of Spain, and the Titles of the several
Pretenders thereto, Examined. Concio ad Clerum in Gratiam Studiosorum in
Genealogia, Juniorum praecipue. In lucem Edita, ab Authore Anonymo. The Poor
Man's Plea, to all the Proclamations, Declarations, Acts of Parliament, etc.
which have been, or shall be made, or published, for a Reformation of Manners,
and suppressing Immorality in the Nation. The Third Edition.
BOOKS Printed, and Sold by Ralph Smith, at the Bible under the Royal Exchange
in Cornhill.
AN Abridgment of Sir Walter Raleigh's History of the World. In Five Books.
Wherein the particular Chapters and Paragraphs are succinctly abridg'd,
according to his Method in the Larger Volume. To which is added, his
Premonition to Princes. With some Genuine Remains of that Learned Knight, viz.
1. Of the first Invention of Shipping. 2. A Relation of the Action at Cadiz. 3.
A Dialogue between a Jesuit and a Recusant. 4. An Apology for his unlucky
Voyage to Guiana. Published by Philip Raleigh, Esquire the only Grandson to Sir
Walter. Geography Rectified: or, a Description of the World in all its
Kingdoms, Provinces, Countries, Islands, Cities, Towns, Seas, Rivers, Bays,
Capes, Ports, their Ancient and Present Names, Inhabitants, Situations,
Histories, Customs and Governments. As also, their Commodities, Coins, Weights
and Measures compared with these at London. Illustrated with 78 Maps. The
Fourth Edition. To which is added, A Competent Geographical Index to the whole
Alphabetically digested. Contemplations on the State of Man in this Life, and
that which is to come. By Bishop Jer. Tailor. Milton's Paradise lost Imitated
in Ryme, in the 4th, 6th, and 9th Books, containing the Primitive Love, the
Battle of the Angels, the Fall of Man. By Mr. Hopkins. The Constant Couple: or,
a Trip to the Jublee. A Comedy Acted at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane. The
Third Edition, with a New Scene added to the Part of Wildair. Victorious Love:
A Tragedy, Acted at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane. Written by Mr. William
Walker.

