ODES ON SEVERAL Descriptive and Allegoric SUBJECTS.

By WILLIAM COLLINS.

-- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) --
(...) LONDON: Printed for A. MILLAR, in the Strand. M.DCC.XLVII. (Price One
Shilling.)

CONTENTS.
ODE I. To PITY. p. 1 ODE II. To FEAR. p. 5 ODE III. To SIMPLICITY. p. 10 ODE
IV. On the POETICAL CHARACTER. p. 14 ODE V. Written in the beginning of the
Year 1746. p. 19 ODE VI. To MERCY. p. 20 ODE VII. To LIBERTY. p. 22 ODE VIII.
To a Lady on the Death of Colonel ROSS in the Action of Fontenoy. p. 32 ODE IX.
To EVENING. p. 36 ODE X. To PEACE. p. 39 ODE XI. The MANNERS. p. 41 ODE XII.
The PASSIONS, an Ode for Music. p. 46
ERRATA.
Page 11. Line 4. For Love-born, read Love-lorn. Page 43. Line 1. For Alluring
him from, read Alluring from.
ODES ON Several Descriptive and Allegoric SUBJECTS.
ODE to PITY.
O THOU, the Friend of Man assigned,
With balmy Hands his Wounds to bind,
And charm his frantic Woe:
When first Distress with Dagger keen
Broke forth to waste his destined Scene,
His wild unsated Foe!
2.
By Pella's Euripides, of whom Aristotle pronounces, on a Comparison of him
with Sophocles, That he was the greater Master of the tender Passions, (...).
Bard, a magic Name,
By all the Griefs his Thought could frame,
Receive my humble Rite:
Long, Pity, let the Nations view
Thy sky-worn Robes of tenderest Blue,
And Eyes of dewy Light!
3.
But wherefore need I wander wide
To old Ilissus' distant Side,
Deserted Stream, and mute?
Wild Arun The River Arun runs by the Village in Sussex, where Otway had his
Birth.
too has heard thy Strains,
And Echo, 'midst my native Plains,
Been soothed by Pity's Lute.
4.
There first the Wren thy Myrtles shed
On gentlest Otway's infant Head,
To Him thy Cell was shown;
And while He sung the Female Heart,
With Youth's soft Notes unspoil'd by Art,
Thy Turtles mixed their own.
5.
Come, Pity, come, by Fancy's Aid,
Even now my Thoughts, relenting Maid,
Thy Temple's Pride design:
Its Southern Site, its Truth complete
Shall raise a wild Enthusiast Heat,
In all who view the Shrine.
6.
There Picture's Toils shall well relate,
How Chance, or hard involving Fate,
Over mortal Bliss prevail:
The Buskined Muse shall near her stand,
And sighing prompt her tender Hand,
With each disastrous Tale.
7.
There let me often, retired by Day,
In Dreams of Passion melt away,
Allowed with Thee to dwell:
There waste the mournful Lamp of Night,
Till, Virgin, Thou again delight
To hear a British Shell!
ODE to FEAR.
THOU, to whom the World unknown
With all its shadowy Shapes is shown;
Who see appalled the unreal Scene,
While Fancy lifts the Veil between:
Ah Fear! Ah frantic Fear!
I see, I see Thee near.
I know thy hurried Step, thy haggard Eye!
Like Thee I start, like Thee disordered fly,
For lo what Monsters in thy Train appear!
Danger, whose Limbs of Giant Mold
What mortal Eye can fixed behold?
Who stalks his Round, an hideous Form,
Howling amidst the Midnight Storm,
Or throws him on the ridgy Steep
Of some loose hanging Rock to sleep:
And with him thousand Phantoms joined,
Who prompt to Deeds accursed the Mind:
And those, the Fiends, who near allied,
Over Nature's Wounds, and Wrecks preside;
Whilst Vengeance, in the lurid Air,
Lifts her red Arm, exposed and bare:
On whom that rav'ning Alluding to the (...) of Sophocles. See the ELECTRA.
Brood of Fate,
Who lap the Blood of Sorrow, wait;
Who, Fear, this ghastly Train can see,
And look not madly wild, like Thee?
EPODE.
In earliest Greece to Thee with partial Choice,
The Grief-full Muse addressed her infant Tongue;
The Maids and Matrons, on her awful Voice,
Silent and pale in wild Amazement hung.
Yet He the Bard Aeschylus.
who first invoked thy Name,
Disdained in Marathon its Power to feel:
For not alone he nursed the Poet's flame,
But reached from Virtue's Hand the Patriot's Steel.
But who is He whom later Garlands grace,
Who left awhile over Hybla's Dews to rove,
With trembling Eyes thy dreary Steps to trace,
Where Thou and Furies shared the baleful Grove?
Wrapped in thy cloudy Veil the Incestuous Queen Jocasta.

Sighed the sad Call -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
See the Oedip. Colon. of Sophocles.


her Son and Husband heard,
When once alone it broke the silent Scene,
And He the Wretch of Thebes no more appeared.
O Fear, I know Thee by my throbbing Heart,
Thy withering Power inspired each mournful Line,
Though gentle Pity claim her mingled Part,
Yet all the Thunders of the Scene are thine!
ANTISTROPHE.
Thou who such weary Lengths have past,
Where will thou rest, mad Nymph, at last?
Say, will thou shroud in haunted Cell,
Where gloomy Rape and Murder dwell?
Or in some hollowed Seat,
Against which the big Waves beat,
Hear drowning Sea-men's Cries inTempests brought!
Dark Power, with shudd'ring meek submitted Thought
Be mine, to read the Visions old,
Which thy awak'ning Bards have told:
And lest thou meet my blasted View,
Hold each strange Tale devoutly true;
Never be I found, by Thee o'eraw'd,
In that thrice-hallow'd Eve abroad.
When Ghosts, as Cottage-Maids believe,
Their pebbled Beds permitted leave,
And Gobblins haunt from Fire, or Fen,
Or Mine; or Flood, the Walks of Men!
O Thou whose Spirit most possessed
The sacred Seat of Shakespeare's Breast!
By all that from thy Prophet broke,
In thy Divine Emotions spoke:
Hither again thy Fury deal.
Teach me but once like Him to feel:
His Cypress Wreath my Meed decree;
And I, O Fear, will dwell with Thee!
ODE to SIMPLICITY.
1.
O Thou by Nature taught,
To breathe her genuine Thought,
In Numbers warmly pure, and sweetly strong:
Who first on Mountains wild,
In Fancy loveliest Child,
Thy Babe, or Pleasure's, nursed the Powers of Song!
2.
Thou, who with Hermit Heart
Disdain'st the Wealth of Art,
And Gauds, and pageant Weeds, and trailing Pall:
But come a decent Maid
In Attic Robe arrayed,
O chaste unboastful Nymph, to Thee I call!
3.
By all the honey'd Store
On Hybla's Thymy Shore,
By all her Blooms, and mingled Murmurs dear,
By Her The (...), or Nightingale, for which Sophocle seems to have entertained
a peculiar Fondness.
, whose Love-born Woe
In Evening Musings slow
Soothed sweetly sad Electra's Poet's Ear:
4.
By old Cephisus deep,
Who spread his wavy Sweep
In warbled Wand'rings round thy green Retreat,
On whose enameled Side
When holy Freedom died
No equal Haunt allured thy future Feet.
5.
O Sister meek of Truth,
To my admiring Youth,
Thy sober Aid and native Charms infuse!
The Flowers that sweetest breathe,
Though Beauty culled the Wreath,
Still ask thy Hand to range their ordered Hues.
6.
While Rome could none esteem
But Virtue's Patriot Theme,
You loved her Hills, and led her Laureate Band;
But staid to sing alone
To one distinguished Throne,
And turned thy Face, and fled her altered Land.
7.
No more, in Hall or Bower,
The Passions own thy Power,
Love, only Love her forceless Numbers mean:
For Thou have left her Shrine,
Nor Olive more, nor Vine,
shall gain thy Feet to bless the servile Scene.
8.
Though Taste, though Genius bless,
To some divine Excess,
Faints the cold Work till Thou inspire the whole;
What each, what all supply,
May court, may charm our Eye,
Thou, only Thou can raise the meeting Soul!
9.
Of These let others ask,
To aid some mighty Talk,
I only seek to find thy temperate Vale:
Where often my Reed might sound
To Maids and Shepherds round,
And all thy Sons, O Nature, learn my Tale.
ODE on the POETICAL CHARACTER.
AS once, if not with light Regard,
I read aright that gifted Bard,
(Him whose School above the rest
His Loveliest Elfin Queen has blessed.)
One, only One, unrivaled Fair Florimel. See Spenser Leg. 4th.
,
Might hope the magic Girdle wear,
At solemn Turney hung on high,
The Wish of each love-darting Eye;
Lo! to each other Nymph in turn applied,
As if, in Air unseen, some hovering Hand,
Some chaste and Angel-Friend to Virgin-Fame,
With whispered Spell had burst the starting Band,
It left unblest her loathed dishonored Side;
Happier hopeless Fair, if never
Her baffled Hand with vain Endeavor
Had touched that fatal Zone to her denied!
Young Fancy thus, to me Divinest Name,
To whom, prepared and bathed in Heaven,
The Cest of amplest Power is given:
To few the God-like Gift assigns,
To gird their blessed prophetic Loins,
And gaze her Visions wild, and feel unmixed her Flame!
2.
The Band, as Fairy Legends say,
Was wove on that creating Day,
When He, who called with Thought to Birth
Yon tented Sky, this laughing Earth,
And dressed with Springs, and Forests tall,
And poured the Main engirting all,
Long by the loved Enthusiast wooed,
Himself in some Diviner Mood,
Retiring, sat with her alone,
And placed her on his Sapphire Throne,
The whiles, the vaulted Shrine around,
Seraphic Wires were heard to sound,
Now sublimest Triumph swelling,
Now on Love and Mercy dwelling;
And she, from out the veiling Cloud,
Breathed her magic Notes aloud:
And Thou, Thou rich-hair'd Youth of Morn,
And all thy subject Life was born!
The dangerous Passions kept aloof,
Far from the sainted growing Woof:
But near it sat Ecstatic Wonder,
Listening the deep applauding Thunder:
And Truth, in sunny Vest arrayed,
By whose the Tarsel's Eyes were made;
All the shad'wy Tribes of Mind,
In braided Dance their Murmurs joined,
And all the bright uncounted Powers,
Who feed on Heaven's ambrosial Flowers.
Where is the Bard, whose Soul can now
Its high presuming Hopes avow?
Where He who thinks, with Rapture blind,
This hallowed Work for Him designed?
3.
High on some Cliff, to Heaven up-pil'd,
Of rude Access, of Prospect wild.
Where, tangled round the jealous Steep,
Strange Shades o'erbrow the Valleys deep;
And holy Genii guard the Rock,
Its Gloomes embrown, its Springs unlock;
While on its rich ambitious Head,
An Eden, like his own, lies spread.
I view that Oak, the fancied Glades among,
By which as Milton lay, His Evening Ear,
From many a Cloud that dropped Ethereal Dew,
Nigh spher'd in Heaven its native Strains could hear:
On which that ancicnt Trump he reached was hung;
Thither often his Glory greeting,
From Waller's Myrtle Shades retreating,
With many a Vow from Hope's aspiring Tongue,
My trembling Feet his guiding Steps pursue;
In vain -- Such Bliss to One alone,
Of all the Sons of Soul was known,
And Heaven, and Fancy, kindred Powers,
Have now o'erturn'd the inspiring Bowers,
Or curtain'd close such Scene from every future View.
ODE, Written in the beginning of the Year 1746.
HOW sleep the Brave, who sink to Rest,
By all their Country's Wishes blessed!
When Spring, with dewy Fingers cold,
Returns to deck their hallowed Mold,
She there shall dress a sweeter Sod,
Than Fancy's Feet have ever trod.
2.
By Fairy Hands their Knell is rung,
By Forms unseen their Dirge is sung;
There Honor comes, a Pilgrim gray,
To bless the Turf that wraps their Clay,
And Freedom shall awhile repair,
To dwell a weeping Hermit there!
ODE to MERCY.
STROPHE.
O Thou, who sit'st a smiling Bride
By Valor's armed and awful Side,
Gentlest of Sky-born Forms, and best adored:
Who often with Songs, divine to hear,
Win'st from his fatal Grasp the Spear,
And hid'st in Wreaths of Flowers his bloodless Sword!
Thou who, amidst the deathful Field,
By Godlike Chiefs alone beheld,
Often with thy Bosom bare art found,
Pleading for him the Youth who sinks to Ground:
See, Mercy, see, with pure and loaded Hands,
Before thy Shrine my Country's Genius stands,
And decks thy Altar still, though pierced with many a Wound!
ANTISTROPHE.
When he whom even our Joys provoke,
The Fiend of Nature joined his Yoke,
And rushed in Wrath to make our Isle his Prey;
Thy Form, from out thy sweet Abode,
O'ertook Him on his blasted Road,
And stopped his Wheels, and looked his Rage away.
I see recoil his sable Steeds,
That bore Him swift to Salvage Deeds,
Thy tender melting Eyes they own;
O Maid, for all thy Love to Britain shown,
Where Justice bars her Iron Tower,
To Thee we build a roseate Bower,
Thou, Thou shall rule our Queen, and share our Monarch's Throne!
ODE to LIBERTY.
STROPHE.
WHO shall awake the Spartan Fife,
And call in solemn Sounds to Life,
The Youths, whose Locks divinely spreading,
Like vernal Hyacinths in sullen Hue,
At once the Breath of Fear and Virtue shedding,
Applauding Freedom loved of old to view?
What New AIcaeus Alluding to that beautiful Fragment of Alcaeus.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)

, Fancy-blest,
Shall sing the Sword, in Myrtles dressed,
At Wisdom's Shrine awhile its Flame concealing,
(What Place so fit to seal a Deed renowned?)
Till she her brightest Lightnings round revealing,
It leaped in Glory forth, and dealt her prompted Wound!
O Goddess, in that feeling Hour,
When most its Sounds would court thy Ears,
Let not my Shell's misguided Power (...) Callimach. (...).
,
Ever draw thy sad, thy mindful Tears.
No, Freedom, no, I will not tell,
How Rome, before thy weeping Face,
With heaviest Sound, a Giant-statue, fell,
Pushed by a wild and artless Race,
From off its wide ambitious Base,
When Time his Northern Sons of Spoil awoke,
And all the blended Work of Strength and Grace,
With many a rude repeated Stroke,
And many a barbarous Yell, to thousand Fragments broke.
EPODE.
2.
Yet even, wherever the least appeared,
The admiring World thy Hand revered,
Still 'midst the scattered States around,
Some Remnants of Her Strength were found;
They saw by what escaped the Storm,
How wondrous rose her perfect Form;
How in the great the labored Whole,
Each mighty Master poured his Soul!
For sunny Florence, Seat of Art,
Beneath her Vines preserved a part,
Till They The Family of the Medici.
, whom Science loved to name,
(O who could fear it?) quenched her Flame.
And lo, an humbler Relick laid
In jealous Pisa's Olive Shade!
See small Marino The little Republic of San Marino.
joins the Theme,
Though least, not last in thy Esteem:
Strike, louder strike the ennobling Strings
To those The Venetians.
, whose Merchant Sons were Kings;
To Him The Dogs of Venice.
, who decked with pearly Pride,
In Adria weds his green-hair'd Bride;
Hail Port of Glory, Wealth, and Pleasure,
Never let me change this Lydian Measure;
Nor ever her former Pride relate,
To sad Liguria's Genoa.
bleeding State.
Ah no! more pleased thy Haunts I seek,
On wild Helvetia's Switzerland.
Mountains bleak:
(Where, when the favored of thy Choice,
The daring Archer heard thy Voice;
Forth from his Eyrie roused in Dread,
The rav'ning Eagle northward fled.)
Or dwell in willow'd Meads more near,
With Those The Dutch, amongst whom there are very severe Penalties for those
who are convicted of killing this Bird. They are kept tame in almost all their
Towns, and particularly at the Hague, of the Arms of which they make a Part.
The common People of Holland are said to entertain a superstitious Sentiment,
That if the whole Species of them should become extinct, they should lose their
Liberties.
to whom thy Stork is dear:
Those whom the Rod of Alva bruised,
Whose Crown a British Queen Queen Elizabeth.
refused!
The Magic works, Thou feel'st the Strains,
One holier Name alone remains;
The perfect Spell shall then avail,
Hail Nymph, adored by Britain, Hail!
ANTISTROPHE.
Beyond the Measure vast of Thought,
The Works, the Wizzard Time has wrought!
The Gaul, it is held of antique Story,
Saw Britain linked to his now adverse Strand This Tradition is mentioned by
several of our old Historians. Some Naturalists too have endeavored to support
the Probability of the Fact, by Arguments drawn from the correspondent
Disposition of the two opposite Coasts. I don't remember that any Poetical Use
has been hitherto made of it.
,
No Sea between, nor Cliff sublime and hoary,
He passed with unwet Feet through all our Land.
To the blown Baltic then, they say,
The wild Waves found another way,
Where Orcas howls, his wolfish Mountains rounding*
Till all the banded West at once 'gan rise,
A wide wild Storm even Nature's self confounding,
Withering her Giant Sons with strange uncouth Surprise.
This pillar'd Earth so firm and wide,
By Winds and inward Labors torn,
In Thunders dread was pushed aside,
And down the should'ring Billows born,
And see, like Gems, her laughing Train,
The little Isles on every side,
Mona There is a Tradition in the Isle of Man, that a Mermaid becoming
enamored of a young Man of extraordinary Beauty, took an Opportunity of
meeting him one day as he walked on the Shore, and opened her Passion to him,
but was received with a Coldness, occasioned by his Horror and Surprise at her
Appearance. This however was so misconstrued by the Sea-Lady, that in revenge
for his Treatment of her, she punished the whole Island, by covering it with a
Mist, so that all who attempted to carry on any Commerce with it, either never
arrived at it, but wandered up and down the Sea, or were on a sudden wrecked
upon its Cliffs.
, once hid from those who search the Main'
Where thousand Elfin Shapes abide,
And Wight who checks the west'ring Tide,
For Thee consenting Heaven has each bestowed,
A fair Attendant on her sovereign Pride:
To Thee this blessed Divorce she owed,
For thou have made her Vales thy loved, thy last Abode!
SECOND EPODE.
Then too, it is said, an hoary Pile,
'Midst the green Navel of our Isle,
Thy Shrine in some religious Wood,
O Soul-enforcing Goddess stood!
There often the painted Native's Feet,
Were wont thy Form celestial meet:
Though now with hopeless Toil we trace
Time's backward Rolls, to find its place;
Whether the fiery-tressed Dane,
Or Roman's self o'erturn'd the Fane,
Or in what Heav'n-left Age it fell,
'Twere hard for modern Song to tell.
Yet still, if Truth those Beams infuse,
Which guide at once, and charm the Muse,
Beyond yon braided Clouds that lie.
Paving the light-embroider'd Sky:
Amidst the bright pavilion'd Plains,
The beauteous Model still remains.
There happier than in Islands blessed,
Or Bowers by Spring or Hebe dressed,
The Chiefs who fill our Albion's Story,
In warlike Weeds, retired in Glory,
Hear their consorted Druids sing
Their Triumphs to the immortal String.
How may the Poet now unfold,
What never Tongue or Numbers told?
How learn delighted, and amazed,
What Hands unknown that Fabric raised?
Even now before his favored Eyes,
In Gothic Pride it seems to rise!
Yet Graecia's graceful Orders join,
Majestic through the mixed Design;
The secret Builder knew to choose,
Each sphere-found Gem of richest Hues:
Whatever Heaven's purer Mold contains,
When nearer Suns emblaze its Veins;
There on the Walls the Patriot's Sight,
May ever hang with fresh Delight,
And, engraved with some Prophetic Rage,
Read Albion's Fame through every Age.
Ye Forms Divine, ye Laureate Band,
That near her inmost Altar stand!
Now sooth Her, to her blisuful Train
Blithe Concord's social Form to gain:
Concord, whose Myrtle Wand can steep
Even Anger's blood-shot Eyes in Sleep:
Before whose breathing Bosom's Balm,
Rage drops his Steel, and Storms grow calm;
Her let our Sires and Matrons hoar
Welcome to Britain's ravaged Shore,
Our Youths, enamored of the Fair,
Play with the Tangles of her Hair,
Till in one loud applauding Sound,
The Nations shout to Her around,
O how supremely art thou blessed,
Thou, Lady, Thou shall rule the West!
ODE, to a Lady on the Death of Colonel ROSS in the Action of Fontenoy.
1.
WHILE, lost to all his former Mirth,
Britannia's Genius bends to Earth,
And mourns the fatal Day:
While stained with Blood he strives to tear
Unseemly from his Seagreen Hair
The Wreaths of cheerful May:
2.
The Thoughts which musing Pity pays,
And fond Remembrance loves to raise,
Your faithful Hours attend:
Still Fancy to Herself unkind,
Awakes to Grief the softened Mind,
And points the bleeding Friend.
3.
By rapid Scheld's descending Wave
His Country's Vows shall bless the Grave,
Wherever the Youth is laid:
That sacred Spot the Village Hind
With every sweetest Turf shall bind,
And Peace protect the Shade.
4.
Blessed Youth, regardful of thy Doom,
Aerial Hands shall build thy Tomb,
With shadowy Trophies crowned:
Whilst Honor bathed in Tears shall rove
To sigh thy Name through every Grove,
And call his Heroes round.
5.
The warlike Dead of every Age,
Who fill the fair recording Page,
Shall leave their sainted Rest:
And, half-reclining on his Spear,
Each wondering Chief by turns appear,
To hail the blooming Guest.
6.
Old Edward's Sons, unknown to yield,
Shall crowd from Cressy's laurell'd Field,
And gaze with fixed Delight:
Again for Britain's Wrongs they feel,
Again they snatch the gleamy Steel,
And wish the avenging Fight.
7.
But lo where, sunk in deep Despair,
Her Garments torn, her Bosom bare,
Impatient Freedom lies!
Her matted Tresses madly spread,
To every Sod, which wraps the Dead,
She turns her joyless Eyes.
8.
Never shall she leave that lowly Ground,
Till Notes of Triumph bursting round
Proclaim her Reign restored:
Till William seek the sad Retreat,
And bleeding at her sacred Feet,
Present the sated Sword.
9.
If, weak to sooth so soft an Heart,
These pictured Glories naught impart,
To dry thy constant Tear:
If yet, in Sorrow's distant Eye,
Exposed and pale thou see him lie,
Wild War infulting near:
10.
Wherever from Time Thou court'st Relief,
The Muse shall still, with social Grief,
Her gentlest Promise keep:
Even humble Harting's cottag'd Vale
Shall learn the sad repeated Tale,
And bid her Shepherds weep.
ODE to EVENING.
IF ought of Oaten Stop, or Pastoral Song,
May hope, O pensive Eve, to sooth thine Ear,
Like thy own brawling Springs,
Thy Springs, and dying Gales,
O Nymph reserved, while now the bright-hair'd Sun
Sits in yon western Tent, whose cloudy Skirts,
With Bread ethereal wove,
O'erhang his wavy Bed:
Now Air is hushed, save where the weak-ey'd Bat,
With short shrill Shriek flits by on leathern Wing,
Or where the Beetle winds
His small but sullen Horn,
As often he rises 'midst the twilight Path,
Against the Pilgrim born in heedless Hum:
Now teach me, Maid composed,
To breathe some softened Strain,
Whose Numbers stealing through thy darkning Vale,
May not unseemly with its Stillness suit,
As musing slow, I hail
Thy genial loved Return!
For when thy folding Star arising shows
His paly Circlet, at his warning Lamp
The fragrant Hours, and Elves
Who slept in Buds the Day,
And many a Nymph who wreaths her Brows with Sedge,
And sheds the fresh'ning Dew, and lovelier still,
The Pensive Pleasures sweet
Prepare thy shadowy Car.
Then let me rove some wild and heathy Scene,
Or find some Ruin 'midst its dreary Dells,
Whose Walls more awful nod
By thy religious Gleams.
Or if chill blustering Winds, or driving Rain,
Prevent my willing Feet, be mine the Hut,
That from the Mountain's Side,
Views Wilds, and swelling Floods,
And Hamlets brown, and dim-discover'd Spires.
And hears their simple Bell, and marks over all
Thy Dewy Fingers draw
The gradual dusky Veil.
While Spring shall pour his Showers, as often he wont,
And bathe thy breathing Tresses, meekest Eve!
While Summer loves to sport,
Beneath thy lingering Light:
While sallow Autumn fills thy Lap with Leaves,
Or Winter yelling through the troublous Air,
Affrights thy shrinking Train,
And rudely rends thy Robes.
So long regardful of thy quiet Rule,
Shall Fancy, Friendship, Science, smiling Peace,
Thy gentlest Influence own,
And love thy favorite Name!
ODE to PEACE.
O Thou, who bad'st thy Turtles bear
Swift from his Grasp thy golden Hair,
And sought'st thy native Skies:
When War, by Vultures drawn from far,
To Britain bent his Iron Car,
And bad his Storms arise!
2.
Tired of his rude tyrannic Sway,
Our Youth shall fix some festive Day,
His sullen Shrines to burn:
But Thou who hear'st the turning Spheres,
What Sounds may charm thy partial Ears,
And gain thy blessed Return!
3.
O Peace, thy injured Robes up-bind,
O rise, and leave not one behind
Of all thy beamy Train:
The British Lion, Goddess sweet,
Lies stretched on Earth to kiss thy Feet,
And own thy holier Reign.
4.
Let others court thy transient Smile,
But come to grace thy western Isle,
By warlike Honor led!
And, while around her Ports rejoice,
While all her Sons adore thy Choice,
With Him for ever wed!
The MANNERS. An ODE.
FAREWELL, for clearer Ken designed,
The dim-discover'd Tracts of Mind:
Truths which, from Action's Paths retired,
My silent Search in vain required!
No more my Sail that Deep explores,
No more I search those magic Shores,
What Regions part the World of Soul,
Or whence thy Streams, Opinion, roll:
If ever I round such Fairy Field,
Some Power impart the Spear and Shield,
At which the Wizzard Passions fly,
By which the Giant Follies die!
Farewell the Porch, whose Roof is seen,
Arched with the enlivening Olive's Green:
Where Science, prank'd in tissued Vest,
By Reason, Pride, and Fancy dressed,
Comes like a Bride so trim arrayed,
To wed with Doubt in Plato's Shade!
Youth of the quick uncheated Sight,
Thy Walks, Observance, more invite!
O Thou, who love that ampler Range,
Where Life's wide Prospects round thee change,
And with her mingling Sons allied,
Throw'st the prattling Page aside:
To me in Converse sweet impart,
To read in Man the native Heart,
To learn, where Science sure is found,
From Nature as she lives around:
And gazing often her Mirror true,
By turns each shifting Image view!
Till meddling Art's officious Lore,
Reverse the Lessons taught before,
Alluring him from a safer Rule,
To dream in her enchanted School;
Thou Heaven, whatever of Great we boast,
Have blessed this social Science most.
Retiring hence to thoughtful Cell,
As Fancy breathes her potent Spell,
Not vain she finds the charmful Task,
In Pageant quaint, in motley Mask,
Behold before her musing Eyes,
The countless Manners round her rise;
While ever varying as they pass,
To some Contempt applies her Glass:
With these the white-rob'd Maids combine.
And those the laughing Satyrs join!
But who is He whom now she views,
In Robe of wild contending Hues?
Thou by the Passions nursed, I greet
The comic Sock that binds thy Feet!
O Humor, Thou whose Name is known,
To Britain's favored Isle alone:
Me too amidst thy Band admit,
There where the young-eyed healthful Wit,
(Whose Jewels in his crisped Hair
Are placed each other's Beams to share,
Whom no Delights from Thee divide)
In Laughter loosed attends thy Side!
By old Miletus Alluding to the Milesian Tales, some of the earliest Romances.
who so long
Has ceased his Love-inwoven Song:
By all you taught the Tuscan Maids,
In changed Italia's modern Shades;
By Him Cervantes.
, whose Knight's distinguished Name
Refined a Nation's Lust of Fame;
Whose Tales even now, with Echos sweet,
Castilia's Moorish Hills repeat:
Or Him Monsieur Le Sage, Author of the incomparable Adventures of Gil Blas de
Santillane, who died in Paris in the Year 1745.
, whom Seine's blue Nymphs deplore,
In watchet Weeds on Gallia's Shore,
Who drew the sad Sicilian Maid,
By Virtues in her Sire betrayed:
O Nature boon, from whom proceed
Each forceful Thought, each prompted Deed;
If but from Thee I hope to feel,
On all my Heart imprint thy Seal!
Let some retreating Cynic find,
Those oft-turn'd Scrolls I leave behind,
The Sports and I this Hour agree,
To rove thy Scene-full World with Thee!
The PASSIONS. An ODE for Music.
WHEN Music, Heavenly Maid, was young,
While yet ia early Greece she sung,
The Passions often to hear her Shell,
Thronged around her magic Cell,
Exulting, trembling, raging, fainting,
Possessed beyond the Muse's Painting;
By turns they felt the glowing Mind,
Disturbed, delighted, raised, refined.
Till once, it is said, when all were fired,
Filled with Fury, rapt, inspired,
From the supporting Myrtles round,
They snatched her Instruments of Sound,
And as they often had heard apart
Sweet Lessons of her forceful Art,
Each, for Madness ruled the Hour,
Would prove his own expressive Power.
First Fear his Hand, its Skill to try,
Amid the Chords bewildered laid,
And back recoiled he knew not why,
Even at the Sound himself had made.
Next Anger rushed, his Eyes on fire,
In Lightnings owned his secret Stings,
In one rude Clash he struck the Lyre,
And swept with hurried Hand the Strings.
With woeful Measures wan Despair
Low sullen Sounds his Grief beguiled,
A solemn, strange, and mingled Air,
'Twas sad by Fits, by Starts 'twas wild.
But Thou, O Hope, with Eyes so fair,
What was thy delightful Measure?
Still it whispered promised Pleasure,
And bad the lovely Scenes at distance hail!
Still would Her Touch the Strain prolong,
And from the Rocks, the Woods, the Vale,
She called on Echo still through all the Song;
And where Her sweetest Theme She chose,
A soft responslve Voice was heard at every Close,
And Hope enchanted smiled, and waved Her golden Hair.
And longer had She sung, -- but with a Frown,
Revenge impatient rose,
He threw his blood-stained Sword in Thunder down,
And with a withering Look,
The War-denouncing Trumpet took,
And blew a Blast so loud and dread,
Were never Prophetic Sounds so full of Woe.
And ever and anon he beat
The doubling Drum with furious Heat;
And though fometimes each dreary Pause between,
Dejected Pity at his Side,
Her Soul-subduing Voice applied,
Yet still He kept his wild unaltered Mien,
While each strained Ball of Sight seemed bursting from his Head.
Thy Numbers, Jealousy, to naught were fixed,
Sad Proof of thy distressful State,
Of differing Themes the veering Song was mixed,
And now it courted Love, now raving called on Hate.
With Eyes up-rais'd, as one inspired,
Pale Melancholy sat retired,
And from her wild sequestered Seat,
In Notes by Distance made more sweet,
Poured through the mellow Horn her pensive Soul:
And dashing soft from Rocks around,
Bubbling Runnels joined the Sound;
Through Glades and Glooms the mingled Measure stole,
Or over some haunted Stream with fond Delay,
Round an holy Calm diffusing,
Love of Peace, and lonely Musing,
In hollow Murmurs died away.
But O how altered was its sprightlier Tone!
When Cheerfulness, a Nymph of healthiest Hue,
Her Bow across her Shoulder flung,
Her Buskins gem'd with Morning Dew,
Blew an inspiring Air, that Dale and Thicket rung,
The Hunter's Call to Faun and Dryad known!
The Oak-crown'd Sisters, and their chast-eye'd Queen,
Satyrs and sylvan Boys were seen,
Peeping from forth their Alleys green;
Brown Exercise rejoiced to hear,
And Sport leapt up, and seized his Beechen Spear.
Last came Joy's Ecstatic Trial,
lie With viny Crown advancing,
First to the lively Pipe his Hand addressed,
But soon he saw the brisk awak'ning Viol,
Whose sweet entrancing Voice he loved the best.
They would have thought who heard the Strain,
They saw in Tempe's Vale her native Maids,
Amidst the festal sounding Shades,
To some unwearied Minstrel dancing,
While as his flying Fingers kissed the Strings,
LOVE framed with Mirth, a gay fantastic Round,
Loose were Her Tresses seen, her Zone unbound,
And HE amidst his frolic Play,
As if he would the charming Air repay,
Shook thousand Odours from his dewy Wings.
O Music, Sphere-descended Maid,
Friend of Pleasure, Wisdom's Aid,
Why, Goddess, why to us denied?
Lay'st Thou thy ancient Lyre aside?
As in that loved Athenian Bower,
You learned an all-commanding Power,
Thy mimic Soul, O Nymph endeared,
Can well recall what then it heard.
Where is thy native simple Heart,
Devote to Virtue, Fancy, Art?
Arise as in that elder Time,
Warm, Energic, Chaste, Sublime!
Thy Wonders in that God-like Age,
Fill thy recording Sister's Page --
It Is said, and I believe the Tale,
Thy humblest Reed could more prevail,
Had more of Strength, diviner Rage,
Than all which charms this laggard Age,
Even all at once together found,
Caecilia's mingled World of Sound --
O bid our vain Endeavors cease,
Revive the just Designs of Greece,
Return in all thy simple State!
Confirm the Tales Her Sons relate!
FINIS.

